NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES

SHAREHOLDER TRADING PRACTICES

AND
CORPORATE INVESTMENT HORIZONS

Kenneth A. Froot
Andre F. Perold
Jeremy C. Stein

Working Paper No. 3638

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1991

Prepared for the Time Horizons of American Management Project,

aponsored by Harvard Business School end the Council on
Competitiveness. We thank the Division of Research at MBS and the
International Financial Services Research Center at MIT's Sloan
School for generous research support. This paper is part of NBER's
research programs in International Studies and Financial Markets
and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3638
Februaxy 1991
SHAREHOLDER TRADING PRACTICES AND CORPORATE
INVESTMENT HORIZONS

ABSTRACT
We investigate how shareholder trading practices might be linked to corporate investment

horizons. We examine two possible linkages and analyze a range of data relevant to them. The first
is excess volatility, which occurs when stock prices react not only to news about economic
fundamentals, but also to trades based on non-fundamental factors. Excess volatility could lead to a
higher cost of capital, and thereby reduce long-term corporate investment.

The second linkage derives from an information ea between management and outside
shareholders. In the presence of such a gap, maximizing short-ron and long-run stock prices are not
the same thing. Management may be able to raise current stock prices by undertaking certain actions
that will reduce long-run value. In such a case, management faces the dilemma of which shareholders

to please: those who do not plan to hold the stock for the long-run versus those who do. As
shareholder horizons shorten, it can become more difficult to focus exclusively on maximizing
long-mn value.
With respect to excess volatility, our basic conclusions are that neither changes in trading practices
over time nor differences in trading practices across countries contribute significantly to any
undcrinvestment problem. There is no evidence to indicate that measures to reduce trading volume
(such as transactions taxes) would lower stock-price volatility in a way that would stimulate
investment.

With respect to the information gap hypothesis, we find "circumstantial' evidence consistent with
certain preconditions for underinvestment. This is not, however, evidence of underinvestment itself.
In addition, many of the forces that can lead to underinvestment - - such as hostile takeovers - - are
also related to other, positive aspects of economic performance. Policy responses therefore involve a
difficult set of tradeoffs.
Kenneth A. Prod
Sloan School of Management
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
50 Memorial Drive
Room E52-449
Cambridge, MA 02139

Andre F. Perold
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138

Jeremy C. Stein
Massachusetts Institute
of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139

ardo1ir Tradinj Practices aria Opcrath Investuit Thiz
1. Intrcxiuction

In rent years, the manner in tich corporate uities are bight arid
sold has teen dramatically transforma. Fueled j daiea in the ccsosition
of share-cinership, advares in imru.inications tethnolisy, arri a rldwide
treed tcaiards market dereulation, trading volurars have skyrocketed. For

exarple, in 1974, just prior to the derepilation of broker cxamriissions, the
rate of turnover of the average share on the Ne'l York Stock Exdrare was 16%.
NYSE turnover sore than quadrupled tr 1987, readiin a rate of 73%, before

fa11iri back to 52% in 1989. Other ntries have fo1led the U.S. exasple
with only a slight delay: during the 1980s, average turnover on the major
exchanges in Japan, the U. K., arid West Germany increased sore than threefold.

In adtition to reduced transactional costs arid heightened activity in the

uivierlyir eiuities, there has been an explosion in the use of derivative
instrunents sudi as index futures arid options. Since their introduction in the
early 19805, S&P 500 futures contracts alone have achieved a tradirrj volures

roihly uiva1ent to that of the entire U.S. stock market. The ni
instrunents have facilitated the deve1cItEnt of a variety of soç*iisticated
trading aed risk-managesont strategies: iridexin, portfolio insurarxs, index

arbitrage, etc.
There is sharp disagreeiarnt over the emxriic effocts of these changes in

tradirq practices. Business leaders in partiwlar have expressed onrrn that
2

have raises volatility in a way that might cc*rpraiiise corporate investment.
Section 3 elabz)rates the inforeation oap view, and analyzes a range of data

relevant to it. Section 4 coecluies and offers policy inplications.
2. n "Excess Volatility' Link Between Pradino arid Investment?

Ideally, fluctuations in stock prices shcuid be driven solely by news
about fundamental econcanic factors. Ikzever, it is unolear whether real—world

markets actually live up to this ideal. Many practitioners, as well as a large
number of researcthers, have argued that stock prices also reflect "irrational'
investor sentiment — waves of excessive cptimima or pessimism. 1 Because

investor sentiment varies over time and often seena unrelated to furdairentals,

this view isplies that stock prices are mere variable than they would be if
only furidairentals mattered.

Suck excess volatility ofld inpose real econcanic costs, arid one place

where these costs are most likely to manifest theneelves is in the area of

corporate investment. All else beir onual, an increase in volatility leads
investors to demand higher returns fran their shares, as csnçensation for the
adied risk.2 Fran the perspective of the cxmperation, this translates into a
higher cxait of capital that mast be aliad when evaluating prospective

See iller (1984) and Black (1986) for early disaissions of hca noise
traders sight affect stock prices. Ilong, ileifer, Sumurers and Waldrran

(1990) shcM hca less-than-fully-rational noise traders can survive economically
when trading with rational bly-lcM-sell-high traders.

2 This presunans that investor sentiment induces "systematic" volatility
(i.e. volatility shared by many different scanirities), or that investors denard
higher returns even for bearing unsystematic risk.
5

investmants, thereby reducin the aggregate level of irivestmant. See Figure 1

for a sdeaatic depiction of this argument.
A substantial bcxy of eapirical evideece has been asseablad whicth siests
that stock prices are iridesi "excessively" volatile relative to funamanta1s —
that is, investor sentiiint

also

appears to play sa role in onvin stock

prices. The eviderx is controversial, lver, in part because exs
volatility is hard to detect with statistical confidence.3
Because

stateaEnts of ha,.i si.id volatility c*ht to be generatad by

furamantais are so open to question, we do sot atteapt to maasure excess

volatility here. Ikever, for onr present pJrpones, the overall annt of
excess volatility may be irrelevant. For even if one acoepts that a laxe
caiponent of volatility is attribitable to investor sentinnt, it in no sense
follows that lower tradirj costs ani sore tradir volume make thirs worse.
¶I urxierstarxi this critical point, it is useful to think of stock prices
as being determined by the interaction of two types of traders—"smart noney"

traders who acarately assess the furansntal value of stocks; ar "noise"
traders who are subject to irrational waves of optimism airl pessimism. When

noise traders are excessively bearish, their sellir activity exerts a dinward
influence on prices. Th sc extent this is ntersi by the smart noney
traders, who, soticirj that stocks are uedervalued relative to fuedamentals,
increase their desars. However, because this form of arbitrage can be very
back to furdasontal values, ani may

risky (stocks may take a lornj time to

3 See West (1988) for a survey of the literature whidi asks whether stock
prices are too volatile. Fama ard Frendi (1988), Poterba ard Summers (1988),
ard Cutler, Poterba, arxi Summers (1990) fled evidence that is consistent with

exs volatility, ard Froot (1990) firds a cxiiponent of exs volatility that
is systesatic. None of these results are decisive. See SunnerS (1986), for
the argument that excess volatility is likely to be very hard to detect in
prices, even if it is an inportant scnlrce of volatility.
6

actually get further away fros then before they get closer) the offset ' the
smart noney traders is only partial. Thus noise traders have a real ijact, and

prices are exsively volatile.
Nc,q let us ask what happens if trading casts are reduced. On the one

hand, this might lead noise traders to respoed sore aggressively to ron-

fundamental factors, whidi vould teed to increase volatility. On the other

hand, it can also make it easier for smart noney traders to engage in Isiy l,

sell high, arbitrage, whid-i exerts a stabilizir influence on prices. Thus
while the effect of reduced tradin costs on trading volios is likely to be
positive, the effect on volatility is, as a matter of theory, ashiguous.
Given this theoretical asbiguity, the ostainder of this section is devoted

to an pirical investigation of a wide range of asset price data, to see what
can be learned axot the actual relationship between trading lavior and

volatility.
Pirical Evidence
Satie obeervers ild claim that it is quite obvicas that recent increases
in trading intensity have raised volatility in a way that is damaging to
inveshnent. Proponents of sudi a view might start by pointing to the rash of
"big days" seen in the past few years, nclxthg the October 1987 crash, the
October 1989 "minicrash", and a handful of other days when prices roved very

subetantially. ?.s Figure 2 documents, there have indeed been sore big days
(where "big" is defined as a percentage price novement of 5% or sore) in the

last few years than in any other peried since the end of World War II. (Note,
however — and

this is true of every other measure of risk that we look at
7

telci — that the Great Depression is associated with by far the imt drasatic
fluctuations In stock prices yet seen.)

While the recent irsirease in the freuenoy of big days is certainly

striidng, it needs to be interpreted very carefully, partin.ilarly with respect

to its nplications for cerporate investrent ani pthlic policy. A few big days
in aed of theeeelves need not raise the risks to eguity holders in sudi a way
as to make then deaiaod higher returns on their shares. What should setter to

Investors is the total risk they expect to bear over their holding period.
Since big days are very rare ard since even quite short-horizon investors hold

stocks for several soothe or sore (recall that the average holding period of a
share on the NYSE is about 2 years), the dars are that the big days sey

sily "wash out" In terse of the risks they create for seat investors.
Figure 3 helps to illustrate this point. It is analogous to Figure 2,
except that it foc,jses on "big soothe" rather than on big days - As can be
seen, a quite different conclusion extorges: fran the perspective of an investor

with a one-nonth holding period, the potential for the seat extreme axtcanes is

not noticeably different i than at many other tin in the past. For
exarple, there were seven soothe featuring noves of over 10% in the 1970s, bet

only three sixth sonths in the 1980s.

Think of an investor who adjusts his

portfolio on the first day of every sooth. On October 2, 1989 (the first
trading day of that sooth), the t Jones average stood at 2714. On November

1, it was at 2646, a not atypical a-sonth thange of 2.5%. The fact that the
market experienced a single very turbulent day during the sooth turns out to be

not very relevant for our hypothetical investor.

None of this is meant to claim that the potential for rare bit abrupt
market itovements should be of no policy concern. Pa the events of October 1987

8

have taiht us, enc*h trading volune x.znpressed into a short pericx of tis
can severely omprasise the market's liquidity, price discovery, clearir aed
settlesnt funotions. It is clearly desirable to take suasures that protsct
the market's infrastructure against such shocks.4 (kir point is rot that big

days are unisportant, bit siirly that a few big days are unlikely, in the
atseroe of other deve1cinents, to have a significant effsct on the cost of
capital aed on corporate investsunt.

Of irse, looking at just the few suet extreso days or sooths in a dscade
gives a very limited picture of the risk b3rne ' an investor. Figure 4
displays a sore broad-based soasure of risk, the staedard deviation of all (not

just the bigest) stock price changes. This suasure is the one nost cttnonly
used to quantify volatility, ard ied the terce "stardard deviation" ard
"volatility" are often used interchangeably.

In Figure 4, this calcjlation of volatility is done usir stock price
damjes over nonth-long intervals. This is in keepir with the logic sketched
ahove—that what natters for investors is risk over a holding perici of a

reasonable length. As the figure illustrates, other than the data point for
1987 (which is strongly dcxninated ' the events of a few days in Octoter of

that year) it is hard to see any significant long-run treed in the volatility
of nonthly returns. In spite of such lcMer average tradir intensity, ard a
ccsplete lack of instruments such as irdex futures ard cptions, many years in

the l960s ard l970s were characterized 1r' sore volatility than, say, 1988 ard
1989. Thus Figure 4, using a very different measure of risk than Figure 3,
For a discossion of such policy measures see, for exasple, The Report
of the Presidential Task Force on Market Mechanisims (1988), the Interim Report
of the Working Grcup on Finarthal Markets (1988), ard the NYSE Market

Volatility ard Investor Confiderce Report (1990). For sore detailed analysis
of sara of these measures see Greenwald ant Stein (1988).
9

to a similar cenclusion — at holdir peris of reasonable lemth, there
is not nuth evidence that the risk horma by equity investors has increased with
recent innovations in trading behavior.

1hat atcut volatility over shorter holdir pericxis? The evidence on big
days sean above suggests that there has been sai increased tar1ency for

extrese stock price sovenEnts to be xrçressed into short perias of time. We

might also expect that there has n scit tpression of price mevesents even
on sore typical days when price danea are sore sojest. In that case, short
horizon volatility should rise relative to loner horizon volatility.
Irxjeed, this is exactly the cenclusion that emerges when we caloilate

volatility at an extremely short horizon, ard cxltpare it to the sort of longerhorizon volatility used in Figure 4. This is done in Figure 5, whidi loden at

the ratio of the volatility of 15—minute price darqes to the volatility of
one-week price dares over the period 1983—1989 (15—minute data is sot

available goimj back further into the past). There is a clear uard trend in
the ratio—15-ininute volatility has been ireasirg significantly relative to
loeqer-horizon volatility. Over the tima period stirlied, the ratio went frczn
aroxisately .7 to 1. This means that even if long-horizon volatility has
remaii stable over time (as sested by Figure 4) there may have been a
trend increase in very short-horizon volatility on the order of 40%.

it is perhaps this very short-horizon volatility—the potential for large
price adjusthnts in a matter of minutes—that market participants and
oheervers are thinking of when they express onrrns about the develcnents of

the past several years. However, many of these crns soy be misplaced. As
we have already argued, a cthange in the nature of minute-to-minute volatility

withcut a correspording cthange in sonth-to-sonth volatility should not affect
10

the returns that investors raguire for holdinj stocks, are! hence shaild not

affect corporations' cost of capital or inveatsent incentives.
Furthentore, it appears that the relative increase in very short-horizon
volatility actually reflects for the nost part a desirable inprovuient in the
market'a ability to process infonnation rapidly. In the past, there had teen
a tenierxcy for the market as a whole to incorporate information sluggishly—
market-wide news wculd be ref lected. quickly in the prices of large—

capitalization stocks, bit wild only werk its way into the prices of smallcapitalization stocks with a bit of a lag. Thus aggregate market indices such
as the S&P 500 did not adjust instantanecusly to new developrents.

With the developtont of futures contracts on these indices, the sluggish
adjusbient property seema to have disappeared. Ncw all stocks teed to react

with egual speed to econany-wide news. This is not really surprising, given
that traders in any individual stock can naq look to futures prices as a
concrete baranieter of such news. The net result is that when news arrives, the
S&P' a

entire reaction is concentrated in a very short period of tine, rather

than spread cut over several hairs or even days. Consegoently, the volatility
of S&P price irovenents over very short periods tends to go up, even if longer-

horizon volatility is unchanged. There is nothing inherently trebling stout
this expression Iternsanon, as it just represents a technolcgical enhancenont

to the market's ability to digest inforration rapidly.5
One can censure the short—run sluggishness of the S&P 500 index directly,
by carçutirng the correlation between stock price novennento over adjacent 15-

minute intervals. A positive correlation is a syaptan of sluggishness. It
indicates that news ripples throagh the market only slady, causing the index
See Froot and Perold (1990) for a detailed treatnent of these issues.
11

to nova in the sama direction for several 15—minute intervals in 5 1W.
Figure 6 plots index sltggishness (as seasured by the serial correlation of 15

minute returns), alorq with futures market voluse, over the pericxl since the
inception of tradin in S&P 500 futures, 1982—1989. The figure shcMs a

dramatic decline in sltishness, whicth coincides closely with the g1Wth in

index futures volurre. By 1986, slugishness is virtually eliminated.6 Figures
4 through 6 therefore reinforce the point we have been makir: that the

primary consuence of innovations in tradir trnolmy has been a redtion
in short-ron elugishness, and not an increase in lorg—horizon volatility.
The notion that trading voluire can increase dramatically over tirre withc*.it

mush of a diange in volatility may seem to fly in the face of many studies that
doasrent a pmuitive association between osasures of voluire and volatility.7

Hciever, these strxlies typically do net foces on absolute voluire per se, bet

rather on volurre relative to its recent average — that is, volurre relative to

the market's cerrent capacity for ac dating tracle.8 It makes sense to
think that lbrday will be mare volatile than Tuesday if trading voluire is

bier on rday. It makes much less sense to believe that 1990 will
necessarily be mare volatile than 1970 if average trading volunE is higher in

6 Since 15-minute data are not available prior to 1983, it is interesting
to note that sluggishness, as ireasurad by the autocorrelation of jy returns,
declines steadily fros the early 1970s until 1986, when it also read-ies
approxisstely zero. This decline coincides closely with the surge in grith
of stock market turnover which occurred over this pericd.

For a survey of this large literature, see Karpoff (1987).
8 For exarrple, French and Poll (1986) dcxnsrient that volatility is 1mr
in weeks when the market is closed on one besiness day. In other words,

volatility is lcr when there is only fcor fifths the usual current trading

volume. Schwert (1989) finds that volatility is correlated with divergences in
volume frau recent trend levels.
12

1990. After all, the market's capacity is such greater in 1990—what i1d
have been a big volune day (with significant c seguenoes for volatility) in
1970 is a hunthum day in 1990.

Understanding the role of changing market capacity is inportant when

thindng about policy neasures designed to reduce volatility. At first glamoe,
the statistical eviderce on the relationship between trading voluma and

volatility might lead one to believe that volatility o1d be 1iered kry making

trading acre tly (e.g., through the use of transactions taxes, higher margin
reguirnts, etc.) However, this belief weild be mistaken, because it
implicitly disrngards adjustacnts in trading capacity. Figure 6 suggests that
if trading costs were raised even to levels seen in the 1960s, average
volatility would probably not change. The aret likely outcru would be a

reduction over tins in the market's capacity. That is, while higher trading
costs would likely discourage noise trades, they would also discourage the

provision of "liquidity1' tq tuy-lcM, sell-high smart noney traders. The net

effect on volatility is likely to be close th zero.
Similar coeclusions stout the relationship between average rates of

turnover and volatility follow fran an exemination of other ountries and other

asset markets. Figure 7 contains a scatter plot that canpares rates of turnover

in different countries' stock markets to the volatility in these markets over
the period 1986-88 . mere does not apoar to be any noticeable correlation
between the two. For example, both Germany and Switzerland have very high

turnover—over 100% per year—tot below average volatility. In fact, neither
country's volatility is higher than that of Sweden, where there is a
9 Although this sample period includes the world-wide stock market crash
of October 1987, the results are representative of those obtained for other
sample periods.
13

sutctantial transactions tax ani relatively 1CM turnover.10 It is Interesting

to note that volatility in the U.S. is 1CM in cxiiçarison not only to the sasple

average, bit also to the volatility of its sajor cxrpetitors, Japan, the U.K.,
ani West cennany.

Our discssion of the relationship betn volatility ani turnover has not
singlad out those classes of institutional shareholders, such as pension furds,
which have grown in irportance aver the last decade ani which are often aosusai

of rapidly "churning" their portf csl1 HcMever, with the cnection between
total turnover ani volatility so weak in the first place, the case for a link
between pension-furd trading and volatility sees even weaker. Inierd, there
is no evidence that volatility terds to be higher for stocks with larger
institutional or pension holdings than for others.
The lack of correlation between average turnover and volatility that
characterizes stock markets can also be found in asset markets as diverse as
those for foreign exchange and real estate. Figure 8 shows the number of

exchange rate futures contracts tradei on foir major oirrencies: the pound,
Deutsche mark, Swiss franc, and yen. Futures volune has clearly grown at a

dramatic pace (voluos of trade data in the nuch larger spot market for foreign
exchange is not as reliable, bit shows a similar upward trend) since the mid-

10 In 1988, SIen raisad its roundtrip transactions tax to 2%, the
highest of any major world te,urse. This tax was ait in half in lipril 1990,
largely in response to a loss of dc*stic trading volune to caipeting foreign
exchanges.

11 iigi-it and Perold (1987) and Brancato (1990) dcaiment the grting
importance of institutional investors in U.S. capital markets.

u

Jones,

Lehn, and Wilherin (1990) examine the correlation between

volatility and institutional ownership ant find that volatility is lower for
stocks with greater institutional holdings. While institutional ownership is
doubtless proxying for a variety of funiamantal factors, their finiirqs do not
support the view that institutional investors tent to destabilize prices.
14

1970s. Figure 9 shows the ctrrespording annualizaf nonthiy volatilities for

these ease fair airrex-cies. ?bile the rate of turnover in foreign exchange has
grown astrornnically in recent years, there are no discernable trenis in
currency market volatility.
Itereas the foreign exchange market is one of the meet liquid in the world

(currently, over $430 billion changes hands fly), the real estate market
probably lies at the other end of the liquidity spectrum. This market is
d-saractarizei by suh.etantial transactions ctets and relatively laj turnover.

Yet casual aipiricien saggests that reel estate prices can be extrearly
,

at times withcut any obvious connection to underlying ectnanic

furdanentals)-3
In sum, the evidence we have examined thus far does not provide nuch

suççort for the view that innovations in trading technology and practices have

adversely affected cerprate investment incentives thrcnh a volatility/cast of
capital channel. It remains possible, however, that there are other erative
linkages between equity trading arid invuatnent, arid that ore needs to go beyond

statistics on trading volune and volatility to understand them.
3. An "Infonration Gap" Link Between Thadinm end Investment?

Althwgh we have argued that changes in trading practices do not apçear to

have had a significant impact on stork price volatility, volatility is not the
only measure of stock market performance that may be relevant for corporate

investnent.

Managers may feel that the market sceehow does not "understand"

13 For a discussion of the efficiency and volatility prcçerties of the
single-family hone market, see Case and iller (1939).
15

certain investmnt decisions because it does not possess the right information

If it is the market's lack of
about corporate strategy ard prospects.
information that is the priroipal cause of uederinvestnent, then volatility
statistics need not be a useful irdicator of the probla. After all, sudi
statistics may rot tell us anything about the annt and diversity of
information that is reflected in market prices.14
While differeroes in the quality of information available to shareholders

may rot leave a trace in volatility statistics, they can nonetheless have
isiportant inplications for corporate investmant. Suppose that the managers of
Cpanies A and B are beth considering raising their BAD Jsnqets by $100

million. Both managers figure that this inveatsent will eventually yield $300

million in added profits, for a net benefit of $200 million. oilpany A's
shareholders urderstard the nature of the investsent as wall as managosent
does. Conseguently, the mnvestsent will be greeted with an ismodiate increase

of $200 million in the csxlpany's stock price. (This is ectly the sama
scenario as that descritel in the Intrmuction.)
Things are mare axplicated with Caipany B. Here, shareholders are not as
well-infornof as nonagenant. They see that oirrent earnings have been reduced

14p exasple may help to illustrate this point. Imagine that there are

two biotecthnoloy catpanies, X and Y, whidi are alike in every respect except
one—Caipany X stock is held by well-infornof investors, and Catpany Y stock is
held by rational, bit less well-informad investors. When Qilpany X undertakes
a new researdi project, its stockholders have en3h data to isineijately assess
the project s ecnnanic value, aid Qrpany X's stock price adjusts axxrdingly.
In contrast, when Catpany Y undertakes a no project, nothing happens to its
stock right away, sirxa its stockholders have no good advance information a}xit
the project's value, li-deed, they may not even be aware that a new project has
been undertaken. H<sever, once the project readies maturity and its value is

plain for everytxxly to see, the stock does eventually adjust. it is clear in
this exanple that the two stock-price paths will be sisiilar, except that X's
stock will lead Y s stock. This sisply reflects the fact that the market gets
information alxxit X sooner. Therefore, if one ware to calcslate volatility
statistics for the two price series, they .ild be the mama.
16

by $100 million, hit do not krne for sure that this earniegs drcç represents a
valuable ecxsnnic investment. Instead, shareholders say reason, it cxxild are

frau an eronion in the profitability of oegoieg tusiness, due, for exsnple, ft
risieg mists. Given their lack of information, it can be perfectly rational
for Ccrpany B shareholders ft draw a negative inference frau the decline in
earnings, and ft push dcisn the price of the stock.
Thus ipany B's sanagatent faces saiathirg of a dilajina in deciding
whether or not ft

make

the investment. On the ae hand, fran their better-

inforsed perspective, the investsent increases beg—run value. On the other
hard, because shareholders are not as satll-inforsnd, the investsent may lead

ft

a short-run decline in

the stock price. The investment decision will

therefore turn on hcw intensely managatent is oDncerned with airrent stock

prices as opposed ft lorg-run value.
Thaigh obviaisly oversimplified, the example illustrates the "information
gap" hypothesis and is helpful in identifying the forces which can lead to
underinveabtent. At the heart of this hypothesis are three preconditions which
imist hold if there is to be a stock-price-driven underinvesttent problem:

i) Managers mast place sate enpiasis on arrent stock prices (as cppoeed
ft lorq-ntn stock prices) when evaluating investments.
ii) The investhent expenditure in question mast suffer fran an information
gap — shareholders mast be less able than managaxent to distinguish an

expenditure that will yield future returns fran ore that will not.
15 This logic is spelled mit in sore detail in Stein (1989) and Myers
(1989).
17

iii) Stodc prices nijst be sensitive to seasures of profitability—sud as
after—tax earnixs—that are redu1 by the investeent expenditure in question.

In the rnaixder of this section, we disa.iss ead of these preoc1itions

in sore detail. In eadi case, we atbeipt to identify the specific unic
factors that affect these preconditions, and to evaluate the extent to whith
eadi precondition is likely to hold. For exasple, we argue that managerial

fooja on airrent stock prices will be driven by sutth factors as: the horizon of

"influential" shareholders; the threat of hostile takeovers; the degree to
hid equity fi anciz is usnd; and the nature of managenent cxzipensation.
The infortion gap between managenent and shareholders will be influenced by

the quality of acxriuntieq and disclosure, as well as by the researth strategies
axxl tradii horizons of shareholders.
A scthematic depiction of the information-gap view of corporate

urx5erinvesbnent is contained in Figure 10. The figure underscores that while

shareholder tradin practices may be

irredient in a theory of stock-price-

driven unierinvesbnent, they are far frcin the only one—a point that is
isportant to bear in mind when weighirg policy alternatives.

Preccrdjtion 1: Naraqerial Foais on O.irrent Stock Pric

at is the aprcpriate goal for corporate managers to be persuixx? Many
managers ild answer that they are in the b.isiness of creatieg "loeq-run
shareholder wealth." Yet many of these sama managers might balk at the sotion

that they shonid do whatever they can to get tnday's stock price as high as
18

poesinle. In other wuds, there se to be an cperational distinction drawn
between the goals of maxinizing au-rent V. long-term stock prices.

As suggested atove, such a diatirction probably steiw fran aitsiders not
being able to understand certain aspects of the ccripany as well as manageient.
Withait such an information gap between shareholders and managentnt, the

efficient markets paradigm tells us that short— and long-ron stock price

maxinization wcnld be one and the sane thirq: anything that manageint did that
was good for long-run value wcnld have an izmnediata positive ispact on the

stock price. And ctnversely, anything that managexent did that was not in the

interests of long-run value waild have an mediate nagative effect on the
stock price.
When sanagenent is better inforned than aitside stockholders, ha,ever,

they nay be able to increase au-rent stock prices by undertaking certain

actions that they view as "myopic", in the sense that these actions actually
hurt the long-run value of the catpany. Fcanples include skinping on needed
maintenance or R&D expenditures, in the expectation that lesser-inforned

cctsiders will interpret the resulting increases in reported earnings as good
news alxnt raipany profitability. (Of onirse, the existsnce of an information

gap does not nean that all efforts to raise au-rent stock prices are
detrinental to long—run value. In many, or even nret cases, the two goals may

still be congruent. Furthernore, maxinization of stock prices at any horizon
can be mare desirable than many other potential managerial objectives, such as

expire biilding, perquisite consumption, etc.)
If there is indeed a neanirngful distinction between maxinizirng short vs.
long-run stock prices — as there will be in the presence of an information gap
— what

factors work to tilt managers' focus in the formar direction? We first
19

try to shed light on this question by exaininir the tracUr patterns of
shareholders, and varicxls aspects of the institutional structure of the agu.ity
market.

Horizons of "Influential" areholders
Managers' preferences for short—term vs. lon—terni stock price

maximization are likely to be shaped in a very direct way by the preferences of
their shareholders.
can imagine that if all the shareholders in a given

oitpany are planning to sell their stock in the next week, they will be sore
concerned with near-term price performance, and will do their Lest to

ccssunicate this asrn to managatient. To the extent that managenent is

responsive to the shareholders, they too will rie sore oriented taards the
short term.
Hi can one gauge the preferences of shareholders? One crizie way might be

to lock at the sort of turnover statistica tcodied on in the previcos section.
For exaxiple, a turnover of 50%—correnporKth to an average holdirq period of

two years—night be interpreted as evidence that shareholder preferences will
posh managenient in the direction of focosin on (loosely speakirg) a two year
horizon.

Hjever, such turnover statistica can paint a misleadir picture in terum
of the influex of shareholder preferer on managerial behavior. For one

thir, sinply calcolatir the average holdirg period leaves cot a lot of
potentially relevant information at the overall ccziiposition of
share.nership. It may be that what matters in terma of influencir managers

20

is not the average holding pericxl, tot the distribition of holding periods
across shareholders.
A simple example helps to clarify this point. Suppoee we have a cxmpany

there 10% of the stock cthanges hands extreaely fraguently, say 5 tines a year.
The

other 90% of the stock is cMned by investors who never trade it. The

average turnover will thus be 50%. But the pressures on management to maximize

short-term stock prices are likely to be substantially weaker than in a arpany
where eacth irdividual shareholder expects to turn over his holdings oar every

other year. In the former case, the majority of shareholders have a very long

horizon, and it is the wishes of this majority that are meet likely to be
transmitted to management.

This example is sore than an idle a]:straction. It captures an imprtant
aspect of the Japanese and German systaam that are hidden in average turnover

figures. As was noted in the previous section, turnover in Japan is arparable
in magnitode to that in the U. 5., while turnover in Germany is substantially
higher. But it would be wrong to orclcz5e fran this that managecent in Japan
and Germany is subject to the same pressures fran shareholders as management in

the U.S.

The available evidence suggests that the distrihition of share trading in
Japan is highly skewed: the average turnover numbers encczcpass a relatively

email group of extremely active traders (suck as the so-called "Tokkin" funds)

and a large group of very stable long-term investors.16 Analogously, in
Germany, a large fraction of equity tvting rights (and hence influence over

l6 stable shareholders module financial intermediaries and other

corparations whicth cain significant shares of their custrzers, suppliers, and
business partners. See, e.g., Abeglen and Stalk (1985).
21

managesnt) has 1or residad with a few large banks.17 Therefore, it is likely

to be the preferenc of these lon—term shareholders that are relevant for
shaping managerial behavior in Germany ar Japan.

In onntrast, there is no large category of shareholders in the Unitad
States that can be intad on to hold shares for the lorw run. Evidenoe on

this point is provid in Table 1, whic± breaks cait the aproxisate
distribjtion of U.S. share cMnership an3. trading voluna as of the erd of 1989.

As can be seen fros the table, large finanoial intermadiaries in the U.S. are

not typically long-run investors. If anythin, these institutional investors
tens to turn over their eguity portfolios sore rapidly than do inuividuals.
For exaeple, pension ari sotual furds tegether ocmprise atxs.it 31% of equity
cMnership, bit alxait 41% of non-mamber-f inn trading voluse.18 The bilk of this

trading is attriLvtable to pension funis with "actively managed" portfolios.
These portfolioe have an average turnover of aroxiinate1y 53 percent.

This turnover figure is only naerately higher than the overall ri—

masher-fins average of alxait 36 percent. 19 Hever, sisle turnover statistics
nay teed to urderstate the intensity of professional soney managers' orrn
with short-term performance. Bause of the agery relationship between annoy
managers aed the beneficial osners of the stock, there can be a distinction
is true even thcuh German shares are thesnalves widely held,
because voting rights are regularly delegated to banks. Aw'rdinj to Yallfass
(1988) at the eril of 1984, the three big German banks centrolled the voting
rights of 43% of all portfolios.

the Table shoss, aroxiinate1y 25 percent of total trading voluma is
aorcented for by mamber finns (i.e., spialists, flonr traders, anf brokerage
honses). Muth of this trading volis represents market making activities,
whidi by their nature involve a large anonnt of turnover.

19Irljing the high-frequency trading of nariher firma, the average
overall turnover rises to 47 percent.
22

between the lerth of the actual holdir perioi aed the length of the
"performance horizon." Clearly, if an Inlividual investor plans on sellin his

stock at the erx of t years, he will be nt interested in the stock price
beir rraxirnized over a t year horizon. &it a coney manager who is subject to
ragular performance evaluation may be nuth fore interested in the stock's
lmDvenents over the nearer term, even if he is aJ.so planning on holdir it for
twe years.

Ainrist all active investnent managnt in the United States is delegated
to c*itside investnent advisors, who are closely nonitorad by pension staffs an
their censultants. Even thcxgh accc*mts tenI to be terminated only after
relatively 10mg periode of poor performance (3 to 5 years is typical),
evaluation is freguent (usually quarterly). Short-term investctent performance

can weigh heavily in these evaluations. Freguent nonitorirg is not only
rational — short-term performance is cerrelated with long-run performance —

bit in the case of pension funds it may be seen as implicitly required under
the fiduciary standards of ERISA. Thus, even thongh professional noney
managers do net apocar to trade such core frequently than does the average

investor, their interests as agents may be considerably core skewed toeard
short-term stock price performance.20

In fairness to professional noney managers, it is hard to
up with
systesatic evidence to support the notion of a shortened performance horizon.
20Th Japan, where corporate pension assets are still relatively small,
accounts are just n beginning to be awarded on the basis of investnent
performance. Until pril 1990, pension funds cc*ild only be managed by trust
tanks and life insurance crsanies, and aon.ints were awarded on the basis of
tsiness relationshipa. Qhile performance is beginning to he sore closely
scrutinize:I, termination of ao1nts for reasons of poor performance has thus
far been rare. I-Joeever, such terminations are expected to increase in the

fe.

23

nd it uld be even sore difficilt to draw an unambiguons link between their
horizons anf any adverse influezs on cerporate investisent. Indead, one might
well argue that ntidi of the "pressure" that nonay managers place on

corporations is for the better—as notad earlier, an ackad fo.is on stock price
maximization at any horizon can be healthy when it leads to a reduced anasis

on other value-reducir objectives. Still, the abeve loic does suggest that
there is far mare to uederstamuiri the effects of delagataf noney managenant on
corporate invesbient than sisply maasurirq turnover.

In sum, it is difficolt to say whether institutional investors in the U.S.
cczisunicate mare damagir short-horizon preferences to corporate managers than

do individuals. Hever, what is protobJy mast relevant for international
cosparisons is not the distirx±ion betwoen individuals arid institutions in the
U. S., lait rather the fact that so influential U.S. investors exhibit the kinis
of stable shartho1din practices which are characteristic of Japan arid
Germany.

Takeover Threats

nother obvioss influence on managers' horizons for nexiinizin stock

prices is the threat of hostile takeover. A high probability of a takeover can
increase the inportance of cnrrent stock prices to managers for a cosple of

reasons. First, if managers are sisply acting on behalf of existing
shareholders, they mast roscgnize that there is a good chance that these

shareholders will be fori to sell their holdings to a binder in the near
future. The higher is the near-temu stock price, the higher is the likely
level of the takeover bid, and hence the better of f are the shareholders.
24

Secord, if managers are to sate degree self-interested ant corcerned with

their jots, they may also hope to deter a potential bimier by raisinj
the stock price to a level that makes the aoiuisition unattractive.21
keepirq

The ircideire of hostile takeovers varies dramatically between the U.S.

ard its major catpetitors. Hostile takeovers have teen quite cxnion in the
U.S. In the 1980s alone, rahly 10% of the Fortune 500 were acrauired in
transactions

that initially started as hostile. tile bids have also teen

seen in the U.K. In contrast, there has to this date been virtually
no hostile activity in Cennany ant very little in Japan.22 This is consistent
with the presence of the large grcxips of "stable" beg-term shareholders, ant
points to a similar conclusion—there is likely to be less pressure on Japanese
freguently

ant Gensn managers to maximize short-term stock prices.
The hypothesis that Japanese managers are less concerned with current

stock prices than their U.S. cainterparta is conf lined by survey evidence. In
ore survey of a}xnt 500 major corporations, U.S. executives ranked share price

increases as their second mast ixportant objective cut of nine thoices, tle
Japanese executives ranked this as the least important of the nine
objectives.23
These oteervations about the potential underinvesteent conseguences of

takeovers shaild, hceever, be taken with a nuzber of caveats. Even if takeover
pressure really does have an adverse impact on certain types of investment, (an

issue that is far fran teirnj empirically resolved, as we discuss bolos) one
2lsjy axgtments are discussed by Stein (1988).
22 For a discussion of hostile takeovers in the U.S., see, for example,

m-ileifer ant Viahny (1988). The &ircçean ant Japanese experiences are examined
by Franks and Mayer (1990), aid I(ester (1991), respectively.

23 Abeglen aid Stalk (1985).
25

aksolutely cannot oncliie that takeovers are no not harmful, or that Japan ani
West Germany are sasehi sore cxrpetitive than the U.S. because of an absence
of hostile takeovers.
Seen in a broader context, hostile takeovers are noe of many possimle

instruments of corporate governan. Many analysts have argued that the

prosinonce of hostile activity in the U.S. reflects a funamantal failin of
other governance nedani (e.g., the beard of directors). If this is the
case, then the U.S. nay be better of f with takeovers than witluit, even if
takeovers exact sos costs in terma of umierinvestsnt—wjthcjut an active
takeover market, there sight be few d-iecks no noi—value-saximizii behavior b,'

corporate management. Similarly, a lack of takeovers in other ccontries will
only be beneficial to the extent that alternative fonim of governarios sucoesi
in exertir a measure of discipline ard control over management.

A oiprthensive analysis of the structure of corporate governai is
beyord the scope of this paper. (See the contrihition by Kester in this
voluos.) Oir point here is sisply that when thinkia alxs.it policy
isplications, any linkage between takeovers arki unierinvestsent cannot be

considered in a vacuum. Rather, if ref amos are to be urdertaken, these
ref ores shcxild be broad-based ard dirscted at achievirg an overall system of

corporate governance that does a better job in terms of both managerial

disciplins ard invesbiont incentives.
As noted above, there is a paucity of concrete enpirical evidence linkirij

takeover pressure to urderinvestnent. A few stidies can be cited as providir

sa support far the urderinvesthnt hypothesis, bit these stidies generally do

26

not lead to unambiguals conclusions.24

fli the ore hard this sajgests further

caution in fornulatirq policies that take as their pranise an intinate link
between takeovers aid unierinvestnent. C*t the other hard, one si-nild probably

not take the lack of positive evidence for unierinvesttent as a strong signal

that there is no problea. As disaissal above, the infornetion gap view isplies
that urderinvestaent is nest likely to be associated with "invisinle"
investments—e.g., the costs associated with penetrating a market aid
develcping custcater loyalty. Since these invisible investuents do not show up
anywhere on a ccupany' a balance sheet, açirical researdi that uses acxssinting

data will fail to turn up a probles even if there is a seriais ore.
psliance on &juity Financing

&-iareholder preferences aid takeovers are not the only factors that can

lead management to foals sore heavily on airrent stock prices. A strong

reliance on new issues of equity as a scurce of financing can have a similar

effect. If a oruparly is likely to turn to the equity market for furds scretime
in the near future, airrent stock prices bscnte sore important, as they will
dictate the terms on whidi existing stockholders sell a stake of the arpany to
new ewners.

Table 2 presents sate data on gross equity issues in the U.S.,

Japan, aid Gensny. As, can be seen, arpanies in the bank-dcxdnated ecxriauies
of Japan aid Germany have historically tended to rely less on the equity market

as a sairce of firsncing. Frau 1982 to 1985, U.S. equity issuance as a
24For example, Kaplan (1989) firds that firms involved in leveraged
biycxits terd to reduce their capital expenditures. Hca.'ever, as Jensen (1986)

has anued, this say not necessarily represent urderinvesteent, tot rather a
curtailment of wasteful "excessive" investment expenditures.
27

fraction of )P was aprcximately four times that of Japan aod Germany. This
differential across cxxintries reinforces the ccjnolusions drawn abeve — that

there has been less reason for managers in Japan ani Germany to be rnei
with carrent stock prices than those in the U.S.

Hver, an analysis of recent trenis in financirg also sgests that over
tine, the enviroceent facing Japanese ani German crspanies may

to resemble

that in the U.S. sore closely. Table 2 also shs that the durii the period
1986-1988, there has been a pronounced onvergen across crAintries in the

reliance on equity issues. Inieni, the table may actually unierstate the
extent to whicth Japanese ccecanies have recently teen tapeieq the equity

market. Fros 1987 to 1989 alone these ccirçanies issued $115 billion — ahtmst

4% of p — of hybrid instruztents sucth as convertible bnis ani s with
warrants, whidi contain a significant equity ccionent.25
}tre broadly, the deregulation of the Japanese capital markets has led to
a distinct soveitent away fran bank financieg sod in the direction of seaities
issuance. Fran 1971 to 1975, Japanese caipanies raiseiiL 84% of their external

fuhos fran banks. A decade later, this fraction had fallen to 57%, arid it
continues to decline to this day.

This general treni. taards greater use of

the ann' s-length seiirities market may porteod convergence taans the U.S.
se3.el aloeq a number of dimensions. Specifically, one might expect a weakening

of the system of stable shareholdirgs, sod a conxinitant increase in the focus
by Japanese managers on short-term stock price novenerits.

Another factor that sight influence the degree of foa.is on corrent stock

prices is managerial caipensation. friile we do not adoress this tic here
(see the contrftotion by Gitbns arid Murçuiy in this volume), our coroeptual

25 The Econamist (1990).
28

framawork does offer one insight. In the preserw of an information gap,
incentive cxzpensation schetes that link pay to stock price performance should
atteapt whenever possible to incorporate stock price performance over a long

horizon. Tying pay to near-term stock price levels can create problate if
managenent is better—infonasi than outside shareholders and thus can gamp up

prices by taking actions that do not maxinize long-run value.

It sunriarize: a rusher of factors sees to operate in the direction of
making u.s. managers mare likely to foais on short-term stock prices than
their Japanese or German counterparts. Hadever, there are gocd reasons to

believe that the future nay not mirror the past in this regard. In psrtiailar,
it is quito possible that the next several years will witness a convergence of
the Japanese (aid possibly German) systese in the direction of air awn.
precondition 2: The Information Gap Between Gearebolders and Managenent

We n turn to an examination of the second precondition for
urderinvesthent shcen in Figure 10: the existence of a managesent—shartholder

information gap. To many observers it seees intuitive that a company' a

aenagesent will knaw acre alnat its inner workings and prospects than will
outside shareholders. For exasple, management may be in a better position to
jadge when certain expenditures (e.g. on maintenance, advertising, R&D, pricing

f or market share) represent solid investments that will pay of f in the future,

as cçposed to just wasteful "fat." As argued shove, it is precisely these
"invisible" investments that are mast likely to be sacrificed by managers

seeking to bost airrent stock prices.

29

There is also a wealth of pirical evidence sucportir the existence of
an information gap. )ti&th of this evidence osi frcin the significant oLeerved

responses of stock prices to anrinostients of thames in financial policies (as

opposed to chaeges in operatir policies). If these thares were pirely
financial amd if the market knew as audi a}xxit the finn as did 1nanagnt,

then the anr.intosaents ild he expected to have on effect on stock prices.
Dividends are one exasple of sudi a diange. It is well known that stock

prices respond favorably to the annonnnt of an increase in dividend
paynents, even if on other information is anrxinced simltanec*isly.26 By
effectively pittin its onney where its m.ith is, managenant seena able to
cisunicate an additional degree of truthfulness stout its (optimistic) outlook

whidi ild not he possible using mare words. In other words, dividends aear
to act as a credible "signal" of inanagemant's superior information.

The larger a firm's information gap, or the greater its coxrn with
irrent share prices, the Itore it may rely on dividends to signal information
about its futhre prospects. A firm with shareholders that can nonitor
performance directly may able to avoid large dividend paynents with little cost

to crrent share prices. By contrast, a firm with passive and dispersed

shareholders may rot have this luxury. In this vein, it is interestirg to note
that Japanese dividend yields are audi lcMer than those in the U.S. — 1.2% as
ccmparcd to 4.6% in the 1980s. Although there are many possible explanations

for this differential, it may in part reflect a greater concern on the part of
U.S. caipanies with the tinoly transmission of information to outside
shareholders.

26 See, for exaxple, Asquith and Miillins (1983).
30

Etuity issues are a second exanple of a finarcial policy which affects

stock prices. The anznrcenent of a seascried auity offerin (in the U.S.)
leads on average to a decline of slant 3 percent in a fin's stock price.27
With no information gap, such an annwncaent toild have no effect on the
market's expected present value of firm cash flows. Cbnsaguently, share prices

ild he unaffected.
Hcaiever, if managers kra atre slant the cczrpany than does the market, an

attaspt to raise funds by sellirq of f ownership (as cçxsed to sellin bends)
any induce the market to revise downward its expectation of future cash flows.

That is, equity issues nay be perceived as a pessimistic signal frcn managerrent

abcnt the intrinsic value of the cntpany.28
than3es in dividends, equity offerirqs and reporchases, and stock

transactions by corporate insiders all effect stock prices in the way sugeested
by information-gap hypothesis. Thus all the available evidence confirma the
intuitive view that there will always be sate information gap between
manageirent and cutside shareholders. However, the magnitade of this gap — and
hence the scope for underinvestirent — depends on a number of factors.

One obvia.ms way for the gap to be narrowed is thra4i tisely,
cnrprebensive accajntin and disclosure policies. For instance, when czzrparmies

disclose R&D expenditures separately fran other costs, this can help

27 Similarly, stock prices increase by aixut 3 percent upon the
snnotmncement of a stock repirdiase. These effects are not stall: in dollar
tans they ascent to slant 31 percent of the value of the equity issue or
reçxirchase. For evidence on the relationship between stock prices and equity

transactions see, for exasple, Asquith and Mullins (1g86) and Verunelen (1981).
28 Myers and Majluf (1984) sttñy how the choice between debt and equity
finance can be a signal of information held only by msnagenent.
31

shareholders figure cut that at least sa of the masts selxx1y an elenent of
investment, and shculd he expected to generate cashflcMs in the future.

Still, ne accrxintin and disclosure systan can, thrch siile reports
fros manag nt to shareholders, eliminate all informational problse. Even if
R&D masts are brcen cut separately, hc can shareholders distirjuish the good
research projects frau the bad ones? Wnat line on an acrcuntin? statssnt
enables investors to judge whether a caupany' s expenditures to penetrate a new

market represent neney wall spent or a total waste?

The limitations of disclosure thrx:*4i stan:3ard finarial reports are
underscored by the isportance corporations place on "investor relations." For

exanple, prior to an ouity issue, a ootpany and its investhnt bankers will
typically anbark on a 'road shcai" which is intended to batter educate the
market alxxit the calpany' s future prospects. Indeed, such efforts to manage
the information gap are an inprtant service provided by investment banks.
&t efforts to enhance investor relations, like other forms of Inanageaient—

initiated disclosure, imavitably suffer fran a credulity problon. Thus, saI
of the turden of information prcxiuction cust fall on the shcxilders of

shareholders themselves. This iirplies that the research straties that
shareholders pursue — the quality and diversity of information that they
uncover thrcugh their n efforts — vu be key determinants of the
information gap.

One can imegine several forces that might influence the nature of this

research. Tradir horizons are a likely influence. It seems believable that
traders with relatively short horizons will be less irclir to stndy certain
aspects of corporate strat and performanms than traders with longer
horizons.
32

A single exanpie helps make this point clear. Imagine that a trader in a
cxzrpany 'a stock can devote his researth efforts to a-a of twe tasks: trying to
predict

next week's earnings aninircatent, or trying to achieve a solid

understardirg of the cnipany 'a R&D portfolio. If the trader is planning to

turn over his position in the near future, the latter strategy nay he
unattractive. Even if unierstanuing R&D is very inportant to urderstarding the
intrinsic value of the ipany, there is probably little short-term gain to be
had fran trading on

R&D information. The information is just not

likely

to

became rni kncwlezge (sal thereby be inpainial in the cxrpany' 5 stock price)

before the erd of the trading horizon. As Brennan (1990) pits it: "Pity the
man who alone knows how to value a gold sine, for his reward shall he slight."

Or, as one foreign exchange traded noted, "I can't afford to he five steps
ahead of everytoly else in the market. That's suicide."29
Evading ahead of an earnings sninincament, on the other hand, can he a

very attractive strategy for sateone with a short horizon. If he predicts the
announcesent correctly, the game is over aid he takes his profit within a few

days. There is no neal to wait a long tine for the market price to reflect
the information that he those to study.

Thus it is quite possible that short trading horizons nay teal to skew
research incentives. Rather than trying to develcp an in—depth urderstarding

of the subtler aspects of corporate strategy (which uld place them "five
staps ahead" of the market), traders may, paradoxically, focis on variables

(like earnings annwrnants) that will soon he made public anysay. Or they
nay use other research approaches (like varinis charting techniques) that can

be helpful in predicting near-term order flows and price changes, bit that

29 wall Street Jcurnal, September 23, 1988.
33

again do not provide sudi fuzamenta1 information about the cxiany in
question.30

This reasonir s.qests that in the preserwre of an information gap, short

trading horizons can impact corporate investnt horizons thrc*h t distinot
channels. First, as discassed earlier, shareholders with short horizons may
ccauminicate their preferences for near-term price increases directly to

corporate managers. Sf, short tradir horizons nay alter research
incentives in a way that widens the information gap anl therefore increases the
scxe for underinvestment.

Pr&rsdition 3: Sensitivity of Stock Prices to thaones in Earninqs

The last of the prx1itions for uiñerinvestsest in Figure 10 is that
stock prices are sensitive to Ireasures of perforinanre like crrent earnings.
Given that an information gap exists, sare expenlitures that represent econcxnic

investmants will not be recrxgnized try shareholders as such. All that will be

seen is the charge to carrent earnings. Clearly, the ultimate effect on stock
prices (anf thus the incentive to urnierinvest) deperds on the sensitivity of
stock prices to changes in earnings.

There is a large espir iral literature that studies hcM stork pricre react

to unexpected 'surprises" in earnings. This rk firnis a significant
correlation between changes in earnings arni suteeguent dangea in stork prices,

30 Front, Scharfstein and Stein (1990) provide an explicit ardel of the

above argunent, showing how short horizons can lead traders not only to ignore

certain pieces of furdanontal information, bit even to devote research tiinr to
"chartist' stratagies sQhid-n have nothing to do with fursiamantals. See also
Seleifer and Vishny (1990) for analysis of the causes and coneeguences of short
trading horizons.
34

across a wide variety of industries and cnintries.31 At the very least, this
suogests that air third precondition is likely to be satisfial in a broad
range of ciramotances.
Of cosrse, the magnitade of the correlation will vary with a number of

factors. Stock prices shculd respond sore strongly to earnings when earnings
numbers are sore informative about the true eaornsic value of the ocxipany.
Thus differences in acocunting oxiventions arid in the propensity for managers

to "ssooth" earnings could be expected to affect the sensitivity of prices to
earnings.

Another potentially isçortant set of factors has to do with the
variability of industry profitability and the "maturity" of the ccrpsny in
question. For example, if a start-up drug ccspany has a single bad earnings
number, this is unlikely to cause a strong revision in the market's assesssont
of orpany value—after all, mast of the canpany '5 value depends on the outcoso

of experinents still in progress, and this qusrter' s earnings shed no light on
these experiments.

On the other hand, the sase logic does not agply to, say, a mature
industrial company, where a drop in earnings might be taken as a signal of a

permanent decline in the profitability of ongoing cperations, and thereby lead

to a significant decline in the stock price. Thus even if the start-up is
subject to en information gap and its management is concerned with current

stock prices, the tcirptation to underinvest so as to Ixost current earnings may
not be as severe as for the mature canpany. This ltencnsron is apparently
familiar enough ssong setters of the soney managaient ccxsmnity to have

31 See Ctioi and Levith (1990), pages 21-23, for references to this

literature.

35

inspired the follow'ing piece of stock-picking wisdcia: "Don't worry abit

oirrent earninjs—until they turn positive."

4. &misrv ark Policy Isplications
This paper has examined two possible linkages between shareholder trading

practices ani corporate investment. The first linkage, that ergerdered 1y the
"xcess volatility" hypothesis, is both str ightforard aed relatively amariable

to pirical assessment. Oir basic conclusion here is that neither damges in
trading practices over time, nor differen in trading practices across
countries ojntrihite significantly to any urderinvesbint probleai throh a

volatility / cost-of--capital danncl. (Hver, this is not to say that
concerns aver the integrity of stock market microctructure are misplaced.)

Thansactions taxes, increased margin reuireants, aaf similar measures might

well reduce the vlunc of trade, bat there is no evidence to injicate that they
would lower stock-price volatility in a way that ild stinirlate investment.
The information gap hypothesis is, in many ways, a sixth richer paradigm,

aed is probably such clccer to capturirg realistic aspects of any

umierinvesthnt problem. It is difficolt, however, to nove fron the theory to

an airtight detonstration of its pirical validity. Because the theory is all
about information problene aed "invisible" inveatsunts, it is hard to assemble

unambigs evidence in its favor. Bather than attempting to measure directly
the extent to which corporate investeent suffers f ran the existence of an
information gap, we have ta)<en a sore "ciromatantial" aroath —
36

evidenma has borne mare on the precorxlitions for urierinvestmant than on

ureririveatnent itself.
Even if we had strcwer evider of an uriierinvestsent problen, c*ir
analysis cautions against drawin superficial policy conclusions. Many of the

forces that can lead to uederinvestnent are also related to other, positive
aspects of nanic performance. mile increases in thrnover might coryneivably
he associated with shortened managerial horizons, they can also be signs of

enhanced market efficiency in sudi areas as risk nanagnt and hedgin.
As we have seen, sharsholder tradin practices are only one elenent of the
information-gap view of underinvestment. They are inextricably linked with

hostile takeovers, corporate financir patterns, and other capital—market

considerations. t here, once again, hastily-drawn policy conclusions may do
mare harm than good.

Hostile takeovers provide an illustration of this principle. Thoogh they
may at tines praiiote uod.erinvestment, a ban on takeovers could remave an

ijiportant disciplinary sthaniss in the U.S. systan of corporate governar.
In an effort to isprove the terna of the discipline/uriderinvesthnt tradeoff, a
number of observers have suested neasures to enhance the independent

influence of corporate boards of directors. A strorer board of directors
mild conceivat y provide many of the disciplinary benefits associated with

takeovers, withcut the attendant crats.
Japan and Germany offer many intereStin lessons atcot alternative systems
of shareholder relations and corporate governance. As we have argued, these

systena do riot appear to display strong evidence of the preconditions for

underinvestmant Yet it is far frcai obvioos that U.S. policymakers shoold
atteupt to duplicate the Japanese or German financial environnent. If

I
37

anythin, nrket forces sn to 1e driving other antries tiard the U.S.
nxe1, rxt vice-versa. AnI while these darqes may inzirease the scepe for
information—gap-driven urderinvestnent, the wry fact that they are taking

place sgests that they also entail cxiensating benefits.

38

5. References

Abegglen, Jases, ani George Stalk, Jr., Kaisba, The Japanese Corporation, (New
York: Basic Books), 1985.

Asquith, Paul, ani David Mullins, "The Ispact of Initiating Divideni Paynents
on -iareI-iolders Wealth", Journal of Business, 56 (January 1983), 77—96.

Asquith, Paul, ani David Mullins, "Itjuity Issues aid Offering Dilution",
Journal of Financial Econanics, 15 (January 1986), 61—90.

Black, Fiscther, "Noise", Journal of Finance, 41 (July 1986), 529—543.

Branoato, Carolyn, "The Pivotal Role of Institutional Investors in Capital
Markets", in Bicksler aid Sametz, ads., The Fiduciary Responsibilities of
Institutional Investors, (New York: Dew Jones-Irwin) forthccning 1990.

Brennan, Midiael J., "Latent Assets", Journal of Finance, 45 (July 1990), 709—
730.

Case, Earl, aid Robert Shiller, "The Efficiency of the Market for Single—Family
Hcses", Anerican Fboncznic Review, 79 (Mardi 1989), 125—137.

Cboi, Frederick, aid Richard Levidi, The Capital Market Effects of
International Arcountino Diversity, New York: DiM Jones—Irwin, 1990.

Cutler, David, Janes Poterba, aid lawrence Suaiiairs, "Speculative Dynamics aid
the Role of Feedback Traders", Anerican Fconcsiic Review, 80 (Nay
1990), 63—68.

Delnng, Bradford, Ardrei Shleifer, lawrence Suanars, and Robert Waldsann,

39

"Noise Trader Risk in Financial Markets", Jcurnal of Political Brouy, 98
(Aiaust 1990), 703—738.
The

Ecernist, "Japan's Warrant

Fans,

Hangover", Septber 8, 1990.

Regene, ar Kenneth Frenth, "Permanent ar Transitory Qmp-ients of

Stock Prices", Ja.irnal of Political rxrw, 96 (April 1988), 246—273.
Franks, Julian, arx Cohn Mayer, "Capital Markets ani Corporate Qtrol: A

Sby of Franca, Germany ar the U.K.", Fnanic Policy, (April 1990),
191—231.

French, Kenneth, ar Rithard Poll, "Stock Return Varias: The Arrival of
Information anf the Reaction of Traders", Jcernal of Financial Bronanics,
17 (Septeaher 1986), 5—26.

Froot, Kenneth, David Scharfstein, ani Jereay Stein, "Heri on the Street:
Informational Inefficiencies in a Market with Short—'rerm Speculation",
NBER Working Paper no. 3250, February 1990.

Froot, Kenneth, "Short Rates amf Epectad Asset Returns", NBER Working Paper
no. 3247, Marcth 1990.

Froot, Kenneth, arid Pridre Perold, "New Tradir Practices arid Short—Ran Market
Efficiency", NBER Working Paper no. 3498, Noven±er 1990.

Greeriwald, Bruce, arid Jeremy Stein, "The Task Force Report: The Reasoning

Behi f the Recrirm9ratations", Jcerr,al of Econanice Perspectives, 2 (Sunmr
1988), 3—23.

Jensen, Midiael, "Agency Ccets of Free Cash Fkai, Corporate Finance arid
Takeovers", ?esrican Econanic Review, 76 (May 1986), 323—329.

Jones, Jonathan, Kenneth Lebn, arid Harold Ma3herin, "Institutional nership of
Ecuity: Effects on Stock Market Liquidity an Corporate Iong-rerm

40

Investment", in Bicksler and Sametz, aim., The Fiduciary Rastusibilities
of Institutional Investors, (New York: 1kM Jones-Irwin) forthcnainj 1990.
Hermann, "The German Experience," Columbia Business Law Paview,

Kallfass,

(1988) 775—791.
Kaplan,

Steven, "The

Effects

of Management Buyaxts on Operatin Perforxisnce ard

Value", Jcnrnal of Financial Ecioncraics, 24

(October

1989), 217—254.

Karçoff, Jonathan, "The Palatine Between Price thanes and Tradirg Volume: A
Survey", Jonrnal of Financial and Deantitative Analysis, 22, (1987),

109—

126.

Kester, W.

Carl,

(Boston:

Japanese Takeovers: The Global Contest for Corporate Control,

Harvard

Business Sthool), 1991.

Light, Jay, and Andre Perold, "The Institutionalization of Wealth: thanging
Patterns

of Investment Decision Making," in Saauel Hayes, at, Wall Street

and Psiulation (Boston: Harvard Business Sdiool), 1987.
Myers, Stewart, and Nionlas Majluf, "Corporate Financing and Invesbnent

tisions when Fins Have Information That Investors De Not Have", Jcurnal
of Financial Fboncnics, 13 (June 1984), 187—221.
Myers, Stewart, "Signalirg and Accountinj Information", NBFR Working Paper no.
3193, December 1989.
New York

Stock Exctiange, Market Volatility and Investor Confidence Psport, (New

York: NYSE) June 1990.
Poterba,

James, and Lawrence Sunaers, "Mean Psversion in Stock Prices: Evidence

and Liplications", Jaarnal of Financial Fconanics, 22 (October 1988),
27—59.

Presidential Task Force on Market Mectianisme: Psport sulritt& Janaary 1988,
U.S. Government Printirg Office.

41

Schwert, G. William, 'Thy I)Des Stock Market Volatility thare Over Tiji?",
Journal of Finance, 44 (Dber 1989), 1115—1153.

Shiller, Rebert, "Stock Prices ann Social Dynamics", Brookiis Papers on

Enanic Activity,

1984:2, 457—498.

Shleifer, Annrei, an Rohert Vishny, "Value Maxisization an the Aajuisition
Procs", Journal of Econcinic Perspectives, 2 (Winter 1988), 7—20.
Shleifer,

Airei, ann Pdrt Vishny,

"Ebullibrinn iort Horizona of

Investors

ar Firna", ?nerican Eonnasic Review, 80 (May 1990), 148—153.

Stein, Jeramy, "Thkeover Threats ann Managerial Myopia", Journal of Political
EoDncsw, 96 (February 1988),
Stein,

61—80.

Jereny, "Efficient Capital Markets, Inefficient Fire: A Wxlel of

Myopic Corporate Behavior, Ciarter1y Journal of Fconcnnica, 104 (Hovesber
1989), 655-669.

Sunu-rers, Lawrence, "Coes the Stock Market Rationally Reflect Parkianantal

Values?", Journal of Finance, 41 (July 1986), 591—601.

Vermaelen, T., "Carson Stock Reçxirrthases ard Market Signallirg", Journal of
Financial Ecoriamicns, 9 (June 1981), 139—183.

West, Kenneth, '&ithlez, Fads, ani Stock Prices Volatility Tests: A Partial
Evaluation", Journal of Finance, 43 (July 1988), 639—656.

Workir Group on Financial Markets: Interim Report suznitted to the President,
May 1988, U.S. Governarent Printin Office.

42

Figure 1

Excess-Volatility View of Underirwestment

Cost of

\

'V

Figure 2

Daily Changes in the S&P 500
in excess of 5 percent
32
30
28
26
24
22
20

8
16
14

12
10

1926

1939

1936

1941

1946

9951

00o0c 518008,8 800 P00,0800 80th01, c8jcol80000

1956

1961

1966

1971

1976

1981

1966

Figure 3

Monthly Changes in the S&P 500
in excess of 10 percent

H,

0LI
1926

Note:

1931

1936

19.41

1946

Dela Ia 1090 etclude January 0OOI.IQ9

4951

On only.

Snuine: Starn36ua end Ron., and eudn.n ceic4aonnn.

956

t1,,j,,.
964

1966

1671

1976

1961

1966

Figure 4

Average Monthly VolatUity
of the S&P 500, 1928-90

06

t92

1933

1936

1943

1946

1953

1958

N01 D996 906 1990 iocIde 38846y throogh Jurro Orrry.
Soorce: Sleode,rl 198 PoorO 984 9o00009 oOiouLthonO

1963

1968

9973

979

9963

1908

Figure 5

Ratio of Annualized 1 5-Mintute to Weekly Volatility
S&P 500, 1983-89
0.84

092

09
088

086
084
0.82

0I
078
0.76

074

072
0.7

068

00860.: Standaid and Poor,. NYSE, and authors caiaAaOorn

Figure 6

Stock-Index Sluggishness and Futures Trading Volume,
S&P 500, 1982-89
04
035
03

0.25

0.2

0 15

0.1

0.05

0

-005
1943

N

1904

1905

1ug07iness (milococre1ason of IS-roolule .iidox returns)

1900

+

Source: Standard end boors. 18750. 0.40. and tutors ooiou0borrs.

1907

1900

1989

futures udurrre )rrrrlhorrs of 0000arfs dutded by SO)

Figure 7

Relationship Between Stock Market Volatility and Turnover
by country, 1986-88
Meson

a

55

50

Singapore

6

Heng Kong
C]

0

Malaysia

Australia

U

N Ziwerd

Nosy

kelasrd

Italy

C]

C]

30-

South At rice

5550 France

Sweden

25 -

UK

BlaQOith

Swrlzeoand

West Germany

c

ra Netherlands

20

a

Canada

-

oerrrrrero

U

US

Austwa

i

1S•
0

a

I

20

40

60

50

toned percentage yjnrocen

Source: Goldman Sectrs Inlernabenal. L1d. and sutton calci4a5005

100

120

140

¶60

Figure 8

Trading Volume in Exchange Rate Futures
1975-89

S

C

1911

I

pound

4

Deutsche mark

Source: CMC and action calcciatront

1912

1913

7

1984

1985

Swiss franc

1988

1987

1988

2

1989

yen

Figure 10
Information-Gap View of Underinvestment

Stck-Prco-Dren
Underinvastmont fl

invisible Assets

766
191
957

Equity
Holdingn
(12/89,$bil)

2.1

20.0
5.0
25.0

Percent
Ownership

26
22

21

22

53
14
45

84

86
447

361

18

406
28
434

9.4

6.2

6.4
33.0

20.0

1.3

29.9
2.0
32.0

1.1

1.9

2.5

4.8
3.8
4.5

4.5

1.9
7.1
2.2

Share Turnover
Sept 30, 1990)

TABLE 1

Decomposition of

82

45.0
8.7
53.7

40

127

17.3

1.0

(12 months ending

Total pension funds

1,723
332
2.055

5.5

53

234

.8

24.9

100.0

2.8

Time
Horizon
(yearw)

Foundations/Endowments

211

6.3

91

11

449

Share of
Volume6

Households
Self directed
Bank trust depts
Total households

240

6.7

36

103

3,211

Dollar
Turnover'
($bil)

Insurance companies

257

0.3

.4

2.1

.03

14

47

100.0

100.0

1805
3,827

Percent
Turnover0

Funds

11

99.6

Pension funds
Active
Passive

Foreign

3,813

Total for non-members

Mutusl

Other/Unexplained

st

1,356

Member firnss
TOTAL

eriprocoTTceot toroooer.

billion

lakes Fran Federal eeseroe Flow
Funds data; shares held by foundations, etdoseetts end bask trost departments was estimated by Birioyi Associates.
blnstitutimsal turnoverestimated Frau ttA Spectrum data covent4 $1,245 billion in equity assets: Fussioely managed pension ussets,
$123 billion; mjtuai funds,
$108 billion, inoestnentadvisors $483
billion; Insoreecectnpaeies, $81 billion; foundationsand endoueeots, $25 billion; in-house pension funds, $146
billioo; and bank trust
$288
bulbs.
Households
departments,
are assosad to account For 20% ef total oolume (estimate by BininylAssociates).
(self—directed)
Foreign tornooer is the 1089 rate reportedby SalceenBrothers, internatinnal fqoity flows, 1098 tdition. Tornooor for nether firms ass proolded by the
Secar:ties lodostryAssociates. Aggregate turnoverwas
provided by the HYSS.
cptrteot tarnooer times equity holdings.
dshare of non-esoniber aolsoe for all roes hot the last too.

Table 2
Gross Domestic Equity Issuance as a %

Year

of

GDP

Germany

United States

1982

0.81

0.30

0.20

1983

1.14

0.19

0.25

1984

0.48

0.25

0.17

1985

0.84

0.14

0.21

1986

0.64

0.12

0.84

1987

0.74

0.39

0.60

68

0.35

1988

Average 1982-85:
Ave:age 1986-88:

0.82
0.60

0.22
0.40

0.21

0.60

Source: Goithuan Sachs International Limited and author's calculations.

