NBER WORKING PAPEB SERIES

WHY ARE PRICES STICKY?
PRELIMINARY RESULTS FROM AN INTERVIEW STUDY

Alan

S.

Dlinder

Working Paper No. 3646

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
CambridGe, MA 02138
March 1991

This papec is part of NBER's research program in Economic
Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NEER Working Paper #3646
March 1991

WHY ARE PRICES STICKY?
PRELIMINARY RESULTS FROM AN INTERVIEW STUDY
ABSTRACT
This paper reports preliminary results from a large research
project on business pricing which is currently underway.

The

idea is to use interviews with actual price setters to assess the
validity of a dozen theories of price stickiness.

The rather

unorthodox (for economists) methodology is defended; the research
design is described briefly; and a few results based on the first
72 interviews (out of a projected 200) are presented.

This

sample suggests that the median firm changes its price annually
and that price adjustments typically lag 3-4 months behind shocks
to demand or cost.

Alan S. Blinder
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021

Those of us who teach Keynesian economics——an increasing

these days, it seems——attach great importance to the
phenomenon of wage and/or price "stickiness.' It explains, for
example, why recessions cure themselves only slowly and why
number

changes

in the money supply have real effects. In

economics

fact, Keynesian

is sometimes characterized as the economics of nominal

rigidities; the theoretical link from aggregate demand to
employment, say, is hard to forge without them. Yet, more than a
half-century after Keynes published The General Theory,

the

phenomenon itself remains poorly understood. Just why are wages
or prices sticky?
It is not that economists have ignored these questions. One
could literally fill many volumes with good empirical studies of
wage and price stickiness, and many more with clever theories
purporting to explain these phenomena. Yet, despite all this
work, the range of admissible theories is wider than ever, and
new theories continue to crop up faster than old ones are
rejected. (The study I am about to describe, for example, tests
12 theories; and my list is not exhaustive.) This lack of
scientific progress makes one wonder about the basic research
strategy that economists have been pursuing. Is there a better
way?

In Section I, I argue

that traditional research strategies

may be unpromising vehicles for learning about why prices are
sticky; the time may have come to entertain new arid unorthodox
approaches. Section II defends the notion that interviews, in
1

particular, can be a useful research tool in this area. Sections
III and IV then, respectively, describe the design of and
summarize some preliminary findings from a large—scale interview
study currently underway at Princeton. This paper is very much a
progress report. Since the interviewing still has 9—12 months to
go, the information reported in Section IV is but a fragment of
what will ultimately be available. But it is a fascinating
fragment, I think.

I. WHY INTERVIEWS?

The canonical, if infrequently followed, program of
scientific research in economics is to (a) develop a theory of
some phenomenon,
(c)

(b) formulate it in econometric

tens,

and then

test it with actual data. The theory is then either rejected

or provisionally accepted, that is, allowed to

suniv

to the

next test.
Unfortunately, this standard program has been singularly
unsuccessful in the area of wage/price stickiness. Most
economists would, I think, agree that we know next to nothing
about which of several dozen theories of wage—price stickiness
are valid and which are not. We might have expected statistical
tests to have weeded out the weaker theories by now, especially
since many of them have been around a long time. But, in fact,
the survivorship rate rivals that of congressional elections.
Why?
Part of the reason, no doubt, is that economists are fonder
of building theories than of testing them. But I think the main
reason is that most of the theories are empty in the following
2

specific sense: Either they involve unobservable variables in an
essential way, or they carry no real implications other than that
prices are "sluggish" in some unmeasurable sense, or both. This
makes econometric modeling a blunt——perhaps even useless-—
investigative tool. Let me illustrate.

To begin with, think about what we mean when we say that a
theory predicts that prices are "sticky": Often nothing more than
that prices adjust less rapidly than Walrasian market—clearing
prices. But since equilibrium price movements often go
unmeasured,1 it is hard to know whether actual prices are moving
faster or slower than this norm. More important, all the theories
share exactly the same prediction: that prices are "sticky" in
this sense. So how are we to discriminate among them? It seems
difficult even to imagine what a decisive test would look like,
much less to carry one out.
A natural idea is to use each theory to derive other,
auxiliary predictions, and then test these. Unfortunately, often
there are no such predictions——or at least none that can be
checked against actual data. One reason is that many of the
theories are based on variables that are unobservable either in
principle or in practice.
As an example of the former, consider the theory that firms
hesitate to cut
interpret

prices

a price cut

because they fear that customers will

as signal that quality has been reduced--

when, in fact, there has been no cuality reduction (Stiglitz,
•

1987). Clearly, the theory is predicated on the existence of
1. Enough auxiliary assumptions will make them measurable,
at least in principle. But then we are testing a complex,
composite hypothesis.
3

unobservable quality differences for, if consumers could observe
quality readily, price would not play a signalling role.

As an example of the latter, consider the so—called menu
cost theory (Mankiw, 1985). In principle, fixed costs of changing
prices can be observed and measured. In practice, such costs take
disparate forms in different firms, and we have no data on their
magnitude. So the theory can be tested at best indirectly, at
worst not at all.2
One might argue that theories that make identical
predictions are, in an operational sense, the same theory; so it
does not matter which theory is correct. In fact, however, it
does matter. It matters for the value of ecomomics as a
descriptive science; and it matters for the conduct of
macroeconomic policy because not all sources of price rigidity
open the door to welfare—improving policies. For example, an
increase in aggregate demand will probably raise social welfare
if a coordination failure is keeping the price level too high
(relative to the money stock, say). But the same policy might
lower social welfare if prices are rigid because of sizable real
costs of price adjustment.
If it really matters which theory is correct, but
comventiomal modes of economic inquiry cannot ajudicate the
dispute, economic science would appear to be in deep trouble.
Fortumately, one other common characteristic of the theories

2. For example, the menu coat theory predicts that a firm
will never make "small" price changes, which appears to be a
testable proposition. But does it rule out price increases of 1%
or 5% or 10%? Without measuring the menu costs, we cannot answer
this question.
4

suggests a way out: Virtually every theory of price rigidity
describes a chain of reasoning which allegedly leads the firm to
conclude that a change in price is inadvisable.
That is what gave me the idea for an interview study. If
actual decisionmakers really think the way one of these theories
says, they ought to know that they do. If you ask them open—ended
questions like, "Why

don't you cut

your prices when sales

decline?", you may get shrugs or incoherent answers. But, if you
confront them with the chain of reasoning they actually follow,
they ought to recognize and agree with it. Conversely,

if they

explicitly deny the relevance or validity of a particular
argument, then it is probably not governing their behavior. At
least that is my methodological precept. If the true reasons for
price stickiness are buried deep in the subconscjousnesses of
price—setters, interviews will probably miss them.

II. BUT AREN'T INTERVIEWS UNRELIABLE?

Economists,

more so than other social scientists, are deeply

skeptical that you can learn much by asking people. We are
trained to study behavior by watching what people
markets), not by listening to what they

(usually in

y.

There are valid grounds for this skepticism. For example,
critics will point out that subjects of interviews have no

to respond truthfully or thoughtfully; so
economicus might refuse to cooperate or even give misleading
answers. If the respondent has reason to conceal the truth or
incentive

mislead the

interviewer, this objection is probably a show

stopper. So, for example, I would not try
5

to

learn about the

extent of industrial collusion by interviewing suspected
colluders. But, in the case of-price stickiness, people have no
particular reason to conceal the truth.3 As long as people are
not pathological liars, interviews may elicit useful information.
The thoughtfulness problem goes deeper. We all know the
billiard—ball

analogy: A good pool player makes excellent use of

the laws of physics without understanding them, and certainly

without being able to articulate them. For this reason, many
economists doubt that much can be learned by asking "economic
players" about how they play the game. But I believe that more
pointed questions, posed in plain English, can elicit useful
answers. For example, if you ask a skilled billiards player
whether he bases his shots on the principle that the angle of
incidence equals the angle of reflection, he will probably look
at you quizzically.

But, if you take him to the table and,

pointing to the proper angles, ask: "Do you try to make this
angle the same as that angle?", I imagine he would respond in the
affirmative.
Legitimate questions can also be raised about the size and
representativeness of interview samples. Detailed case studies of
two or three companies can, at most, provide anecdotes, not
useful statistical information. And samples that are
unrepresentative

of the underlying population give no basis for

drawing inferences about population statistics. But these are
familiar problems, well known to any user of data. They are not

3. To ensure that this was so, I abjured any questions about
collusion, oligopolistic interdependence, limit pricing, etc.--in
general, any question that might conjure up images of the U.S.
Department of Justice.
6

reasons to reject interview evidence out of hand.
As economists, we should evaluate the usefulness of the
interview method by posing the classic question: "Relative to
what?" Interviews may be problematic; I do not deny that. But
theory and econometrics have their limitations, too-—limitations
that are sometimes more severe than we like to admit.
Theoretical deductions are often untested and/or based on
untested premises. Worse yet, either the conclusions or the
assumptions may be untestable. Econometric evidence is often
equivocal and/or subject to methodological dispute. On top of
this comes the litany of standard objections to time series
econometric evidence: Results are fragile due to small samples,
multicollinearity, and the suspected presence of unit roots;
there may have been "regime changes" during the sample period;
appropriate instruments are scarce or nonexistent; computers make
data mining too easy; and so on and on and on.

The imperfect knowledge we can pick up from interviews and
questionnaires should therefore not be compared to some
epistemological

ideal, but to the imperfect knowledge that

nonexperimental

scientists can deduce theoretically or glean from

econometric studies. By this more reasonable standard of
evidence, data culled from interviews certainly looks
admissible——especially if viewed as a supplement to, rather than
a replacement for, more conventional modes of economic inquiry.

III. TRE

RESEARR DESIGN

Along with a team of Princeton graduate students, I have now
been in the business of interviewing executives about their
7

pricing strategies since August

1988.

Let me briefly describe the

research strategy and some of the tactics.
Designing the questionnaire: The first step, obviously, was
to decide which theories were to be tested and then to turn them
into questions that ordinary people can understand. This
selection process was not entirely objective; nor could it have
been. In scouring the intellectual waterfront, I excluded
theories that sounded silly, or that actually

silly, or that

seemed too complicated to be explained tersely in plain English.
These omissions were not particularly costly; they did not
disqualify any of the major competing theories. (The twelve
theories actually tested are described briefly in the next
section.)
Translating the equations and diagrams into English proved
to be quite easy. My first stab at a questionnaire was tried out
on many "guinea pigs"——including economists, business people, and
a few scholars involved in survey research——and altered in
literally hundreds of ways. During this lengthy process of trial
and error, one of the theories from my original list of twelve
was dropped from consideration and one new one was added.4 But,
in general, the current version of the questionnaire bears a
striking resemblance to my original draft. Translating

from

technical journalese into English simply proved not to be very
4. The omitted theory is of interest. Greenwald and Stiglitz
(1989) argued that prices vary less than quantities over business
cycles because risk—averse firms are more uncertain about the
consequences (for profits) of changing prices than about the
consequences of changing quantities. This idea made sense to me,
and I thought I could explain it in plain English. But several
failures convinced me that the interview method is simply not
capable of dealing with this particular theory. This illustrates
a general point: Not all theories are testable by interviews.
8

difficult. I took this to
be a good omen.
However, one
important caveat should be
entered. Hot
infrequently, a question must be
rephrased on the spot to
the
make
respondent understand it.
To do so
successfully, an
interviewer must be
reasonably articulate, must
be able to
on his or her
think
feet, and, most
importantly, must
economics well
understand
the
enough to
paraphrase a question without
its
meaning. Thus
changing
professional pollsters will not
do.
interviewers are
Instead, my
carefully selected Princeton
graduate students.
Eliciting cooperation
from businesses:
The next
getting our feet in the
problem was
door and
getting
our
by the right
questions answered
people. A low
response rate would
fears of
obviously raise
selectivity bias.

A

small—scale pilot
study was used both to
estimate the
likely response rate in
a
large—scale study and to
polish our
questionnaire and
interviewing techniques. We
16 firms in the
randomly selected
northeastern United States
and wrote each
an
introductory letter
requesting an interview. We
then followed
with phone calls
up
and/or further
mailings as
necessary
and,
considerable effort,
after
successfully interviewed
The estimated
eight
50% response rate
companies.5
(with a standard
error of 12.5%)
struck me as
high enough to merit
proceeding to the full
So far, the
study.
response rate in the full
study is running above
In
60%.
addition, we had no
trouble at all
making connections
with the
person or persons in
each company who
could answer our
questions. The number of "I
don't know"
responses has been
small,
5. These
eight companies are not
reported below.
included in the data
9

the wrong person."
we hear, "You're asking
did
never
talk
and almost
than willing to
found people more
have
we
Once in the door,
understandable
find the questions
They
frankly.
of privacy.6 Our
and not invasive
tell us
(with some exceptions),
are often eager to
that
is
people
in fact,
fear that we
experience,
have dared ask for
never
would
we
which
things about
promise
be prying. We do, of course,
would appear

interesting,

to

confidentiality.
GettirtcT

economists to

av attention:

may
The hardest problem
to the

to pay attention
Getting economists
ahead:
lie
yet
have a perfect
into thinking I
myself
delude
not
do
results. I
whose beliefs cannot
in our profession
those
are
solution. There
evidence.
of evidence, maybe not by any
sort
this
be shaken by
on the
and focus my efforts
a
are
minority
But I think they
not gullible, majority.
persuadable, though
increase the
have been taken to
steps
concrete
Several
be.
whatever they may
of the ultimate findings,
of
believability
or major proponents
to the originators
letters
First, I wrote
the study,
the nature of
letters explained
The
each theory.

of the questionnaire,
of the relevant portion
included a copy
and asked the
in the questions,
improvements
asked for suggested
of their
other testable implications
to
suggest
"theorists"
useful ideas for
sometimes offering
Most
responded,
theories.
Interestingly,
which were adopted.
the questionnaire,
modifying
a single further implication
one person suggested
not
the
however,
This underscores
the
questionnaire.
in
tested
that could be

to
effort was expended
considerable
6. As noted earlier,
latter.
10
guarantee the

point I made earlier about the theories being
empty.
Second, and much more important, we have taken

great pains
to ensure that the sample of firms is
(a) large enough to
generate a database suitable for serious statistical
analysis,
(b) randomly selected, and (C)
representative of the private,
for-profit GNP. To my knowledge, this is the first time
anything
like this has ever been attempted in an
interview study. Since it
is what makes the study unique, it is worth
describing in some
detail.

We purchased a tape
listing firms with annual sales over $10
million in the northeastern United
States, an area which accounts
for about 40—45% of U.S. GNP. From this
sampling universe, we
eliminated government enterprises and
non—profits on the grounds
that the theories we wanted to test were
all about profit—seeking
firms; this left almost 25,000 firms. We then
assigned a sampling
weight to each firm proportional to its value added7 and
drew a
random sample of 400 firms,
seeking to complete 200 interviews.
(Remember, the estimated response rate was
50%.)
Notice that we excluded any
company with annual sales under
$10 million, even though they employ
nearly half the labor force.
Why? Because there are so many of them, and the
expense of
reaching any sizable portion would be prohibitive.
Clearly, an
optimal experimental design would balance the value of the
information obtained against the costs of
obtaining it and would,
therefore, undersample very small companies.8 We
approximated
7. Actually, we knew
employment for each firm and the ratio
of value added to
employment for each two-digit industry.
8. This presumes that the
study aims to explain the behavior
of the GNP deflator.
11

below the $10 million
this crudely by not sampling any companies
threshold. Analogous cost considerations motivated the
distance from Princeton,
geographical truncation: costs depend on
N.J.; benefits do not.
These two exclusions, however, might compromise the
we remedied them as follows.
representativeness of the sample. So

because
Suppose pricing behavior varies geographically only
industrial structure differs across states, not because, say,
firms.
California firms are inherently different from New Jersey
Then we can (and did) create a synthetic national sanmie by
to reflect national,
reweighting each firm in the Northeast
rather than regional, shares in value added. Firms in industries
were
that are overrepresented in the Northeast, like banking,
appropriately undersampled; and firms in industries
oil extraction, were
underrepresented in the region, like gas and
the industrial structure of
correspondingly oversampled. Thus,
as a
our sampling frame was made to match that of the nation
whole.
While we were adjusting sampling weights, it was a simple
matter to eliminate (part of) the potential bias from omitting
with
small firms. For example, any sample that excludes firms
annual sales under $10 million will underweight

retailing. We

firms enough to assign
simply oversampled the remaining retail
for every
retailing its proper national weight——and similarly

from our
other two-digit industry. In this way, we eliminate
bias" that stems from the
sample the portion of any "large—firm
firms.
different industrial structures of small versus large
12

However, to the extent that small firms really differ from large
firms in the sane industry, the bias remains.

IV. PRELIMINARY RESULTS

The

interviewing is now in progress. Given the limited

clerical and interviewer resources at my disposal, we are
conducting them in eight waves of approximately 50 letters (25
interviews) each over

a

period of about 18 months. As of this

writing, the first three waves are nearly complete and we have
just begun the fourth.

The results reported here are based on tabulations of the 72
interviews completed as of mid—November 1990. Even this partial
sample is probably the largest ever used in a study of this
nature; but it is still too small to permit much useful
disaggregation.

So I restrict my attention to national averages

in this paper. Once the full sample of 200 is available, however,
there will be a great deal of information about, e.g., how the
validity of different theories varies by industry.
The questionnaire comes in two parts and usually takes about
45—60 minutes to administer. Part

A

gathers a variety of factual

information about each firm, while Part B inquires directly about
the theories.

The factual data in Part A will eventually be used for
disaggregation,

in cross—tabulations, and as righthand variables

in regressions explaining the validity of the various theories. I

make little use of these data in this paper, but one issue is
important enough to deal with right now: Just how "sticky" are
13

prices in the U.S. econony?
To find out, we ask each firm,

"How often do the prices of

your most important products change in a typical year?" So far,
the median response is once per year.9 The distribution
Frequency of price change
(tines ner vear
More
4.01
2.01
1.01
1.0
Less

Percent of conpanies

than 12
to 12
to 4
to 2

than

is:

1.0

10.1%
4.3%
10.1%
20.3%
37.7%
17.4%

These results offer cheer for Keynesians who model prices as,
say, rigid for one period or more. I like to joke that in

theory we know that the length of "the period" is
one quarter. According to these data, less than 15% of the GNP is
repriced more frequently than quarterly, and fully 55% is
repriced no more often than once per year. If we had to pick a
macroeconomic

single abstraction to represent the whole economy, annual price
review would appear to be the "right" model.
From the point of view of macroeconomic theory,

frequency of

price change may not be quite the right question to ask, for it
depends as much on the frequency of shocks as on firms'

strategies.

pricing

long price
shocks
to
and
cost.
demand
Table 1
adjustments lacy behind
summarizes the results from a series of questions of the form,
We are more interested to know how

"How much time normally elapses after a significant ____________

before you

raise [reduce] your prices?" We inquire about four

9. The mean is not a particularly meaningful statistic
because two firms responded "thousands of times." If these are
excluded, the mean was still 10 times per year, with a standard
deviation of 45.5.
14

events: an increase in demand, a decrease in demand, an increase
in cost, and a decrease in cost. The table shows that, while the
distributions are quite spread out, the mean lags cluster in the

There

3-4 month range.

is

precious little evidence that prices

increase faster than they decrease, and virtually none that firms
respond to cost shocks more quickly than to demand shocks. The
latter came as a surprise to me.
Part B asks decisionmakers what they think about the
theories themselves. It is divided into twelve parts. We begin
each part by succinctly summarizing one of the theories and then
posing a question like, "How important is this in explaining the
speed of price adjustment in your company?"10 Respondents answer
freely

in their

own words, but interviewers are instructed to

code the responses on the following four—point scale:
1

=

2 =
3 =

totally unimportant

of minor importance

moderately important
4 = very important

don't know or cannot answer
This scale resembles the typical grading system used at
universities, but we should expect the "grades" to be more
N

compressed.

=

At the high end, no theory is ever going to score a

perfect 4.0. Indeed, a theory rated "very important" by half the
firms and "of minor importance" by the other half would be a fine
theory indeed. Thus I would interpret a score of 3.0 as quite
good, by no means the equivalent of a B. At the low end, a score
of 1.0 would mean that every firm

in

the

sample

dismissed the

10. For many theories, there is a preliminary factual
question. For example, before we ask whether judging quality by
price deters price increases, we first ask whether the firm
thinks its customers actually do judge quality by price.
15

is not a grade of D, but a kind of
theory out of hand. This
super—F. Indeed, any score below 1.5 is a remarkably poor
performance.
If the respondent says

a

particular idea is "totally

unimportant" to the speed of price adjustment, we ask no further
questions about that theory. Otherwise, we ask a variety of
followup questions——sometimes many, sometimes few——geared
specifically to each theory. In this interim report, I ignore

most of the followup questions and concentrate on the main
questions about the perceived validity of each theory. But one
group of followup questions merits a brief mention.
For nine of the twelve theories, we included an "asymmetry"
question asking whether prices are more inflexible upward or
downward. The questions were posed differently for each theory,
and so defy any short tabulation or summary. With the Nixonian

preface "Trust me!," I will summarize the responses in two brief
statements: (1) We have so far found only very weak evidence for
asymmetry.

(2)

The balance of this evidence suggests that prices

are actually slicthtly stickier upward than downward. But this
question will clearly have to be revisited when more data are in.
Table 2 summarizes the central results on the validity of
the

twelve

theories, as perceived by actual decisionziakers,

ranked in order of popularity. The second column names the
theories briefly, and sometimes cryptically. (Explanations
follow.) The third column records the mean score on the abovementioned four—point scale; remember that we expect most theories
to score in the 1.5—3.0 range. We can interpret a rating of 1 or
16

2 as meaning that the firm

rejects

the theory as an explanation

of price rigidity, and a rating of 3 or 4 as meaning that the
firm

accepts

it. So the fourth column gives the percentage of

respondents that rate the theory as 3 or higher——an indicator of
the fraction of the private, for—profit GNP to which this theory
applies)-1-

The two alternative ways of ranking the theories

agree closely. Ranked from best to worst by mean score, the
theories are:
1. Atop the list is a theory cryptically

lags/service. The idea,
(1990),

denoted delivery

which I attribute to Dennis Carlton

is that price is but one of several elements that matter

to buyers. Rather than cut (raise) prices when demand is low
(high), firms might prefer to shorten (lengthen) deliver lags or
provide more (less) auxiliary services.

Canton

emphasized

delivery lags; but many of our respondents point to other aspects
of service. The mean score for this theory so far is a healthy
2.86. Seventy-six percent of the firms accept the premise, and
65% say it is an important factor in slowing down

price

adjustments.
2. Coordination

failure: This very old idea has been revived

and formalized in recent New Keynesian theorizing by, among
others, Cooper and John (1988) and Ball and Romer (1987). The
notion is that firms might like

to.

raise or lower prices, but

hesitate to do so unless and until other firms move first. Once
other firms move, they follow quickly. The mean score for this

11. Because sampling weights were proportional to value
added, no further weighting of the sample is required at this
time. 'Votes" from small firms and large firms count equally.
17

theory of 2.85 and its "acceptance rate" of 66% are quite high
indeed.
3. Cost—based pricing connotes another
idea.

very old Keynesian

This is the theory that prices are based on costs (of labor

and purchased materials) and do not rise until costs rise. When

with the notion that the prices of upstream firms become
the costs of downstream firms as cost increases percolate through
the input—output table (Gordon 1981, Blanchard 1983), this can
lead to substantial lags in price adjustment. Well over half the
firms in our sample so far rate this a moderately or very
important factor in explaining the speed of price adjustment; the
mean score is 2.72.
4. Implicit contracts rounds out the top four. This phrase
connotes Okun's (1981) "invisible handshake" theory that firms
combined

have

implicit understandings with their customers which proscribe

price increases when markets are tight. Though this theory
obtains an average score of 2.52, it elicits the most bimodal
responses of any. Sixty—one percent of the sample accepts the
premise that implicit contracts exist. Within this sector,
respondents generally think that such contracts are an important
source of price stickiness. The mean response among those not
responding "totally unimportant" is a stunning 3.42.
5. Exolicit nominal contracts refers to the naive Keynesian
idea that written contracts prohibit price adjustments while they
remain in force. Most firms have such contracts, for at least
some of their products; but discounting appears to be common. Our
rough estimate is that this is an important factor in price
stickiness for only about 40% of the economy. The mean score
18

(counting firms with no explicit contracts as l's) is 2.29.
6.

A number

of theorists have suggested that firms incur

special costs of price adlustsent whenever they change prices.
Both menu costs and convex costs are lumped together under this
rubric,12 but followup questions distinguish between the two.
About 70% of all firms report that they have such costs. But
fewer than half think them an important factor in slowing down
price responses. The average score is 2.28.
7.

According to a very old idea revived in the mid-1980s,

demand curves become less elastic when they shift in (Shapiro,
1988). Such procyclical behavior of elasticity would lead to
countercyclical markups which would, in turn, rigidify prices.
This is another case where the premise is often accepted (59% of
the time), but the idea is thought to be a significant source of
price rigidity in only 36% of the cases. The average score is
just below 2, which connotes minor importance.
8. Pricinc points refers to a somewhat "non—economic" idea

advanced by Anil Kayshap (1987): that certain prices--such as

$19.95 for a shirt——are psychological barriers which firms are
reluctant to cross. This also scores 1.97 on average. Again, a

majority

of the firms

(53%)

accepts the premise; but only a third

think it explains much price stickiness.
9. Inventories

refers to the theory that, when demand rises

(falls), firms draw down (build up) their inventories rather than
increase (decrease) prices (Blinder, 1982). Note that this
question is not asked of service companies, so the sample size so

12. On the former, see Mankiw (1985); on the later, see
Rotemberg (1982).
19

far is only 33. Of these, however, fewer than a third think
inventories a significant factor in deterring price adjustments.
The average score is a low 1.72.
10. Constant marcinal cost is shorthand

for the simple model

advanced by Robert Hall (1986): that prices are sticky because
both marginal costs and markups are constant over the business
cycle. Since its ratings are so poor——a mean score of only 1.56
and an acceptance rate of just l9%--I should explain how we posed
the question. First, we asked respondents how their "variable
costs of producing additional units" (our plain—English
translation of marginal cost) behave as output rises. Only 42% of
the sample reported that their MC was constant.13 The 58% who
said MC was rising (13% of the sample) or falling (45%) were
deemed to have automatically rated the theory as totally
unimportant. Among the minority of firms reporting constant
marginal cost, however, about 60% said that the constancy of MC

was totally unimportant or of minor importance in explaining
their speed of price adjustment.
11. Hierarchies

is a code word for a "theory" not on my

original list of 12, for it does not come from the academic
literature. Rather, it was suggested to us by an executive of a
large corporation. The simple idea is that price changes are
slowed down by the difficulty of getting a large, hierarchical
organization to take action. Its low average score of 1.54 nay
appear unsurprising, since it should apply only to giant

13. This includes those who said MC is constant except at
certain discrete points. For example, a fast—food chain may have
constant MC until it must open a new store to serve its expanding
customer base, and then have constant MC thereafter.
20

companies. But, even among firms with annual sales over $100
million, its mean score is only 1.66.
12. The worst theory, according to our
practitioners, is
judging guality by price, a theory I have mentioned before. It
obtains a paltry mean score of 1.45 and an
acceptance rate of
just 12%. Less than a quarter of the firms in the
Sample so far
think their customers would "interpret a price cut as a
signal
that the quality of the product has been reduced." In our
tabulations, we count the others as rating the theory "totally
unimportant." However, among the minority of firms whose
customers

judge quality by price, roughly 45% say it is a
or
moderately
very important factor in discouraging price
increases. Thus this theory may be of some
importance within

a

narrow sector of the economy.
In summary,
themselves

into

it seems to me that the

theories divide

three groups. The top four listed above

distinguish themselves as especially promising and/or applicable
to the U.S. economy. The leading theory (by a slim
margin)-—
delivery lags/service-—has not received the attention it

other three look to me decidedly Keynesian. Costbased pricing is, of course, old—fashioned Keynesian stuff.
deserves.

The

Coordination

failure is a major strain of New Keynesian

theorizing. And Okun's (1971) "invisible handshake" is by now
part of the Keynesian tradition.

At the bottom of the list, we find four theories which
appear to be rejected by our respondents. Two of them have
enjoyed great popularity in the 1980s. If practitioners are to be
believed, marginal costs are constant in only a minority of
21

industries. And

judging

quality by price appears to be

neither a

common nor an important phenomenon.
It is true that these results are based on only 36% of the
ultimate sample. But I will be surprised if the rankings change
dramatically as more data come in; 72 observations is sufficient
to answer most questions about national averages.-4 The payoff to
a large sample will come later, when I have enough data to answer
of firms make
disaggregated questions like, "What kinds
'invisible handshakes' with their customers?" I will report
information

of

that sort at a later date.

46
14. I first tabulated these results when we had only
completed interviews. That ranking was similar to that reported
here.
22

Table 1
Lags

in Price

Adjustment(1)

question: How much time normally elapses after a significant
________________________ before you raise (reduce) your prices?
Event

Mean Lag
(in months)

Standard Deviation

Increase in demand

3.23

2.93

Decrease in demand

3.60

3.93

Increase in costs

3.17

2.90

Decrease in costs

3.97

4.47

(1)Based on 72 interviews completed as of mid—November

23

1990.

Table 2
Summary
Rank

Evaluation

Theory

of

Theories1

Mean Score

Percentage "3"
or higher

1

Delivery lags/service

2.86

65%

2

Coordination failure

2.85

66%

3

Cost—based pricing

2.72

57%

4

Implicit contracts

2.52

56%

5

Explicit nominal contracts 2.29

40%

6

Costs of price adjustment

2.28

43%

7

Procyclical elasticity

1.97

36%

8

Pricing points

1.97

33%

9

Inventories

1.72

28%

10

Constant marginal cost

1.56

19%

11

Hierarchies

1.54

18%

12

Judging quality by price

1.45

12%

(1)Based on 72 interviews completed as of mid—November 1990.

24

Bibliography

a

Ball, Laurence and David Romer, "Sticky Prices as
Coordination Failure," American Economic Review,
forthcoming.
Blanchard, Olivier J., "Price Asynchronization and
Price Level Inertia," in Inflation. Debt and
Indexation, R. Dornbusch and M. Simonsen eds.,
MIT Press, 1983, pp. 3—24.
Blinder, Alan S., "Learning By Asking Those Who Are Doing,"
Eastern Economic Journal, Vol. 16, No. 4 (October-December,
1990)
Blinder, Alan S., "Inventories and Sticky Prices: More
on the Microfoundations of Macroeconomics," American
Economic Review, June 1982, pp. 334-348.
Canton, Dennis, "The Theory and the Facts of How Markets
Clear: Is Industrial Organization Valuable for
Understanding Macroeconomics?", in R. Schinalensee
and R. Willig (eds.), Handbook of Industrial
Orcanizatjon (North Holland), 1990.
Cooper, Russell and Andrew John, "Coordinating Coordination
Failures in Keynesian Models," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, CIII, August 1988, pp. 441—463.
Gordon, Robert J., "Output Fluctuations and Gradual Price
Adjustment," Journal of Economic Literature, XIX,
June 1981, pp. 493—530.
Greenwald, Bruce and Joseph E. Stiglitz, "Toward a Theory of
Rigidities," American Economic Review, Vol. 79, No. 2 (May
1989), 364—369.
Hall, Robert E., "Market Structure and Macroeconomic
Fluctuations," Brookinas Pamers on Economic Activity,
1986:2.
Kashyap, Anil K., "Sticky Prices: New Evidence from Retail
Catalogs,TM Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
mimeo, November 1987.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, "Small Menu Costs and Large Business
Cycles: A Macroeconomic Model of Monopoly," Quarterly
Journal of Economics, May 1985, pp. 529—538.
Okun, Arthur; Prices and Quantities: A Macroeconomic Analysis,
Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution (1981).
Rotemberg, "Sticky Prices in the United States," Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 90, No. 6, December 1982,
pp. 1187—1211.
Shapiro, Matthew D., "The Cyclical Behavior of Price—Cost
Margins: Demand Elasticity and Marginal Cost,"
mitneo,

January

1988.

Stiglitz, Joseph E., "The Causes and Consequences of the
Dependence of Quality on Price," Journal of Economic
Literature, Vol. XXV, No. 1, March 1987, pp. 1-49.
25

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This paper was prepared for the December 1990 meetings of the
American Economic Association, Washington, D.C. I owe many debts
of gratitude to the Russell Sage and Alfred P. Sloan Foundations
for financial support; to Eric Wanner for persuading me to go
ahead with the project; to Rue Canetti for extensive and
excellent research assistance; to Phyllis Durepos for efficiently
handling the considerable volume of office traffic; to my
graduate student interviewers, Anthony Marcus, David Genesove,
Katy Graddy, Dean Jolliffe, Harold Kim, John Leahy, Alec
Levenson, John Penrod, Michael Quinn, Steve Schwartz, Tim
Vogensang, and David Zimmerman; to Bob Abelson, George Akerlof,
Larry Ball, Olivier Blanchard, Elizabeth Bogan, Dennis Carlton,
Russell Cooper, Bob Gordon, Bruce Greenwald, Glenn Hubbard, Tom
Juster, Danny Kahneman, Anil Kayshap, Alan Krueger, David Romer,
Julio Rotemberg, Bob Shiller and Andy Weiss for helpful
suggestions; and, especially, to the many business executives who
took time out from their busy schedules to answer our questions.
Parts of this paper inevitably overlap with an earlier report on
this research, Blinder (1990)

