                   NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




             THE STAYING POWER OF LEVERAGED BUYOUTS




                        Steven N. Kaplan




                     Working Paper No. 3653




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cartridge, MA 02138
                            March 1991




Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago and NnER.
Michael Beane collected much of the data for this study as part
of his M.B.A. honors thesis. Sang Han provided additional
research assistance, George Baker, Eugene Fana, Robert Certner,
Michael Jensen, Mark Mitchell, Kevin M. Murphy, Mitchell
Petersen, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, Robert Vishny, and
seminar participants at the University of Chicago have provided
helpful comments. The Center for Research in Security Prices
provided research support- Address correspondence to Steven
Kaplan at Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago,
1101 East 58th St., chicago, IL 60631. This paper is part of
NEER's research program in Financial Markets and Monetary
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                          NBER Working Paper #3653
                                          March 1991



                THE STAYING POWER OF LEVERAGED BUYOUTS


                               ABSTRACT


     This paper documents the organizational status over time of
183 large leveraged buyouts (LBO5) completed between 1979 and
1986. As of August 1990, 63% of the LaOs are privately owned,
14%are independent public companies, and 23% are owned by other
public companies As time since the LaO increases, the
percentage   of LEOn that have returned to public ownership

increases.    The (unconditional) median time LnOs remain private

equals 6.70 years.    This evidence suggests that the majority of

LEO organizations are neither short-lived nor pennanent.      In

addition     the moderate fraction of LBO5 assets owned by other

(potentially related) companies implies that asset sales play a
role in, but are not the primarily force motivating LEO

transactions.


Steven Kaplan
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th St.
Chicago, IL 60637
    L           Introduction

                In the 1980s,   an unprecedented number of public corporations and their divisions

    went private in leveraged buyout transactions (LBOs). LBO activity increased from $1.4

    billion in 1979 to $77 billion in 1988.1 LBOs are typically characterizedby debt to total

                                                                                      the case
    capital ratios exceeding 85%, significant equity ownership by management, and (in

    of public   company LBOs) premiums to public shareholders exceeding 40%. In addition to

    including management, the buyout investor group often is led by a LBO sponsor or promoter

    that structures the transaction, owns or controls the majority of the company'sequity, and

    controls the board of directors.

                In spite of the large transaction volume, L130s remain poorly understood. In

    particular, there is a healthy debate concerningthe stability of the LBO organizationwhich,

    in turn, has implications for the possible sources of value in LBO transactions.2 Jensen

    (1989) argues that LBO organizationssolve the free cash flow problem faced by companies

    in low growth industries.         A large portion of the wealth increases in LBO transactions are

    directly attributable to the incentives LilOs provide to pay out free cash flow. These

    incentives include large debt-service payments, large equity stakes for managers, and often

    the presence of an LBO sponsor -- labelled an acLive investor by -Jensen --who monitors and

    controls the management team. AlLhough public companies (and their managers) are

    capable of obtaining the same benefits, they rarely have the incentive to do so. In low-

    growth businesses, therefore, Jensen argues the public corporation is inferior as an

    organizational form to      Lhe   L130 organization.

                 Rappaport (1990) disagrees that the LBO organization is superior to the public

    corporation. I-ic argues that the discipline of debt and concentrated ownership imposes costs

•   of inflexibility to competition and change. As a resulL. he claims Lhat buyouts are inherently



          See Jensen (1989). Figures are in 1988 dollars.

         See Kaplan (1989a and 1989b) for a discussion           of and evidence   on sources of value in
    management buyouts of public companies.
                                                      2

Lransitory organizations. The typical active investor invests funds provided by outside

investors who expect to be repaid in fwe to ten years. Rappaport argues that LBO firm

equity will    be sold to the public in an initial public   offering (IPO), or sold to a public

company in a related business to meet this repayment constraint.

               In their study of hostile takeovers, Bhagat, Shieffer and Vishny (1990) also

question the importance of incentive-intensive organizations, They find that only 20% of the

assets involved in hostile takeovers are owned by LRO organizations two to three years later.

Alternatively, they find that 72%        of the assets end up owned   by corporations with similar

assets -- related or strategic buyers. They conclude that raiders and LBO promoLers serve

largely   as brokers rather than operators.

               Finally, Kaplan (1989a) and Schipper and Smith (1982) consider the importance of

taxes   as a   sour of value in management buyouts.          The value of tax benefits depends largely

on the value of the tax deductibility of debt. This, in turn, depends on the length of time the

increased debt is maintained. Tax benefits of debt are more valuable if the debt is

permanent than if it      is   paid off within two or three years of the buyout.



               Under Jensen's view that LBO incentives are a critical source of value, LBOs

should remain private for an unspecified, but significant period of time. To the extent that

LBOs do subsequently go public, Jensen's view suggests that debt levels will remain high and

equity will still be largely held by managers and active investors. The maintenance of high

debt levels would also be consistentwith an important role for lax benefits.

               In contrast, Rappaport expects LBOs, needing the flexibility offered by access to

public markets, will return to public ownership relatively quickly. The arguments and results

of Bhagat et at. suggest that some of these LBOs will return to public ownership as divisions

of related     or strategic buyers.

               In this paper, I consider the evidence     for the Jensen and Rappaport views of LBO
                                                      3

    organizations.    I esamine the post-buyout organizational form of     183 large LBOs completed

    between 1979 and 1986 from the time of      their completion through August 199ft As of

                                                                          14% are publicly owned and
    August 1990, 63% of the LBO companies are privately owned,

    still independent, while 23%    have been purchased by publicly owned U.S. or foreign

                                                                          of the LBO company,
    companies. The 63% reflects the current organizational status

    ignoring the current organizational form of assets sold (and purchased) after the buyout.

    The percentage of LEO assets privately owned changes only slightly, decreasing to 60%,

    when assets sold (but not assets purchased) are considered.

               The 63% and 60% figures given      above     are "reduced form" percentages in that they

•
    measure the current     organizationalstatus of   the   LilO assets, ignoring the path taken to

    reach that status. LBOs private as of August 1990 include those that return to private

    ownership after first having returned to public ownership. Almost 45%          of the 162 LEOs

    whose status can be identified through the entire period return        to public   ownership at some
                                                                              --
    point after the buyout. The median time -- conditional on returning public these

    companies remain private is only 243 years. However, the unconditional estimate of
                                                                                       the

    median time private equals 6.70 years. The likelihood that a LEO returns to public

    ownership is small in the first year after the LEO and appeats to be larger and constant

     thereafter.

               Overall, this evidencesuggests that the typical buyout is neither short-lived,nor

     permanent. Consistent with the Rappaport model, the large fraction of LBOs that return to

     public ownership suggests that the LEO is often a transitory organizational form, bridging

     periods of public ownership.

                   Alternatively, consistent with the Jensen model and the importance ot the

     incentive-intensiveorganization,a substantial fraction of LEO assets are private and still

     highly leveragedmany years after the LI3Os. In addition, many of the independent public

     companies appear to be hybrid organizations,retaining some of the characteristica of the
LBO organization. Equityownership by managersand buyout investors               exceeds 40% and

debt ratios appear higher than pre-buyotlL levels in the LBOs that are currently independent

public companies. These results are also consistentwith an important role         for tax   benefits.

              The results also imply a moderate,but not primasy role for asset sales to strategic

buyers in LBOs. Almost 32%         of the original LBO   assets are owned by companies with other


operating assets. Because some      of these    buyers might be in unrelated businesses and

because asset purchases are not counted, 32% is an
                                                   upper bound on the percentageof assets

that can be owned by strategic buyers. This is a lower percentage than the 72% reported by

Bhagat et at. for three years after hostile takeovers, and somewhat lower than the 43%

reported for the 7 LBOs in their sample. In contrast to their findings        for hostile takeovers,
the results   for LBOs in this paper are consistentwith     incentives playing a role in explaining

value increases.

           The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the sample and the data

collection process. Section 3 presents a detailed analysis     of the private / public

organizational status    of the LBOs   over time. Section 4 describes other current

characteristics of the LBOs. Section 5 examines the cross-sectionaldeterminants of

organizational status and section 6 concludes.



2.   Sample and Data.

           2-1           Sample.

           The sample includes those tronsactions identified as leveraged buyouts by

Securities Data Corporation (SDC) or Morgan Stantey          & Company between 1979 and 1986.
I exclude transactions completed after 1986 to ensure at least 3.67 years      for changes in

organizational form to occur. To increase the likelihood      of identifying a companys current

organizational status,   I include only those   buyouts with a transaction value greater than $100

million. These criteria generate a sample       of 183 companies.   Column   A of table 1 shows   the
                                                     5


number of Lransactions completed over time.

          These sample buyouls were valued at $83.0 billion when they were completed.

Over the same period, W.T. Grimm's Mergerstat Review reports $92.2 billion in going

private and unit   management     buyout transactions. This sample, therefore, includes a large

fraction of the dollar value of transactionscompleted between 1979 and 1986.




          2.2            Post-Buvout Information.

          I obtained post-buyout infonnation on these companies from Lotus' Datcxt (public
and private) databases, Wall Street Journal articles from the year the LBO          was compleLed


through August 1990 and, when available, financial reports tiled with the SEC. Whenever

possible, the corporate treasurer or controller of each sample companywas called to confirm

the information. The post-buyoutinformation includes and the telephone interviews

attempted to confirm the following: 1) the date and dollarvalue of the original transaction;

2)11 any assets had been sold since the LBO and          if so the assets sold, their dollar value, the
acquirer. and the organizational form of the acqutrer and 3) the current ownership status             /
organizational form of the company.



3.        Post-buvout status - private or public assets?

          3.1            Current organizational siatus .- LBO company.

          Table    1   presents the current status   of the 183   buyoul companies by year of LBO.

These companies are classifiedinto one of four basic categories: (1) unidentified; (2)

liquidated; (3) still privately owned (including companies in Chapter 11); or (4) publicly

owned.   Some post-buyout information is available for 171 of the 183 companies.            The

remaining 12 could not be identified; presumably, they have either changed their names,

been sold, or gone bankrupt.      At most, therefore, the analysis in the rest of the paper uses
these 171 companies. An additional 9 companies were ultimately liquidated or sold            off in
                                                    6


more than one piece, and, therefore, have an ambiguous current organizational form. The

remaining 162 companies have an August 1990 organizationalform that I could                identi,. At

a minimum, the analysis that follows uses these 162 companies.

            As of August   1990, 63.0%   (or 102) of the 161 LBOs of known       status are still


privately owned. The remaining 37.0% (or 60) are publicly owned -- 13,6% (or 22) are

independent public companies while 23.5% (or 32) are owned by other public companies.

The 63.0% result pertains to all of the LOGs in the sample. LOOt completed at the end of

1986 have had as liLtIe as 3.67 years to change organizational forms since the buyout


compared to over    11 years   for LOGs completed in 1979. If LBOs are transitory

organizationswith uncertain lives, one would ccpect earlier LBOs to be less likely to be

privately owned. The pattern in table     1   is roughly consistentwith this. Only 46,3% of LObs

completed by 1983 are still privately owned compared to almost 68.6% of LOGs completed

after 1923. However, the pattern is by no means monotonic. Fewer than 31% of the LOGs

completed in 1983 are still private compared to almost 55% of those completed in 1981.



            3.2        Current organizational status -- all assets.

            The previous results reflect the current organizational status     of the LOG      company.


They would be misleading if many of the buyout companies make large divestitures and sell

the divested assets to public companies. To address this possibility, I calculate the fraction

of a company's assets that are private as of August 1990. For each sample          LOG, I determine

the current organizational form    of all of that   company's assets.   If no assets   have been sold,


the fraction of a company'sassets that are private is determined by its current organizational

status.   For LOOs which have sold assets, the fnction of assets still private         is calculated as


the value weighted avenge of the organizational forms of the sold and retained assets. In

the few cases the LOG company has been liquidated, the sale prices          of the different    assets


are used as weights. In those cases in which some assets are not sold (and, therefore, cannot
be valued), accounting numbers are used as weights. When they can be calculated, the

operating income before interest, depreciation, and taxes      of the different pieces are used as

weights. Book assets are used if operating income is not available, and, finally, sales, if book

assets are not available. In all cases, the weighs are based on the assets held by the LBO at

the time it went priVate.

          Table 2 shows that the adjustment for asset sales decreases the fraction       of assets

privately owned slightly -- from 63.0%to 60.1%. The pattern over time is similar to that          for

the current organizational form of the LBOs. The number of LBOs that contribute to this

table increases to   166 because the assets of four    of the liquidated companies can   be tnce±

          It is worth adding that the 60.1% result should be considered a lower bound on

the assets private because    it   does not adjust for asset purchases by the private companies. If

asset sales to public entities are considered public, subsequentasset     purchases by the private

companies could be considered to be private.



          3.3          Oreanizational status by year after LBO.

          Instead of presenting the fraction of LBOs that are private by year of 120

completion, table 3 presents the fraction of LBOs that are private by year after the LBO.

This is analogous to considering organizational status in event time. This table uses all 171

of the LBOs for which data are        available. The nine companies that are subsequently

liquidated are included for years in whichtheir organizational forms are unambiguous.

          From year     1   to year 8 after the buyout, the fraction of LBOs that are privately

owned decreases monotonically from 97.1% to 52.2%. The fraction increases in years 9 and

10, but those increases are based on a small number of observations.



          Tables 1-3 show that LBOs return to public ownership at widely varying times.

Almost 25%   of the LBOs are publicly owned three years after the        bu out, rising to almost
                                                   8

50% by eight years after     the buyoot. This pattern suggests that the typical buyout is not

short-livednor is   it   permanent.
                                                                                                     4.




            3.4          Estimates of time spent private.
                                                                                                     $
            The percentages given above are reduced form percentages in that they measure

the current organizational status of the LBO assets. They do not distinguish between (1)

LBOs still private from the original LBO and (2) LBOs that have gone private a second time

after returning to public ownership Table 4 presents the time pattern relative to the year of

buyout completion by which LEOs returned to public ownership. Almost 45% -- 72 of 162 -

-   of theLBOs whose status can be     identified through the entire period return to public

ownership   at some point after the buyout. Forty-one of these companies return public by

issuing equity to public shareholders. The remaining thir1yone companies are purchased by

publicly owned companies -- both domestic and foreign. The median (avenge) time --

conditional on returning public -- these companies stayed private is only 2.63 (2.83) years.

This is similar to the 2-42 median (2.89 average) time spent under private ownership by the

72 firms in Muscarellaand Vetsuvpens (1990). The differences between the 45% result in

this section and the smaller percentage in the previous ones reflect the fact that 12 of the 72

companies that return to public ownership subsequently go private again. Nine of these 12

are independent public companies that complete a second LEO. The remaining threeare

owned by other public companies that subsequentlygo private. The 12 companies remain

public a median (avenge) of 2.46 (2.34) years before going private again.

            If all the LBOs in the sample had returned to public ownership at a known time it

would be possible to calculate the unconditional median (and average) time private directly.

As table 4 shows, however, the majority of LBOs in this sample are private as of August

1990 and must be considered censored observations. LBOs are censored in year i after the

LEO if they are still private as of August 1990, but were completed between      1-1   and i years
                                                            9

     before August 1990.

                 It   is possible to use the information about returns to public ownership and

     censored observations to estimate the distribution          of times it takes an LBO to           return to


     public ownership. The product limit or Kaplan-Meier estimate of the survivor function is:


                 S(t)
                                =
                                           ir...1   (l-d/n)
     where dt is the number of LAOs that return public at            t   and   nt is the number of LBOs that
     have   (1) not yet returned public prior to tk and (2) were completed at least                t   years before.

     These estimates can be considered maximum likelihood estimates [See chapter 1                       of

     Kalb(leisch and Prentice (1980)]. The cumulative failure rate equals             1   -   S(t), where the

     cumulative failure rate is equivalent to the cumulative distribution function                 of the probability

     of returning     to public ownership.

                 Table 4 shows that the median survival time or time to public ownership is

     between 6 and       7   years after the LAO. The estimated median time is 6.70 years.                If the last
     observation were not censoredand the oldest LBO returned public in September1990, the

     estimated mean would equal 6.79 years. Because the last observation is censored, this

     estimated mean is clearly downward biased. The estimated standard error using the 6.79

     year mean is 0.37.

                      'The data used   to construct   table 4 can also be used   to estimale the relation

     between the likelihood         of returning public and   time. This relation is known as the duration

 •
     dependence. Duration dependence is positive (negative) if the probability a LAO company
-w
     returns to public ownership during the           jth period, conditional on being private at the


•    beginning of the ith period, increases (decreases) over time.

                 An examination of duration           dependence is interesting because       it   provides

     important information on the process by which LAOs return to public ownership.                        A flnding
     of negative   duration dependencewould imply that LBOs remaining private for some time
                                                  10

 become increasingly likely to remain private in the future. This could result if initial

 uncertainty about the benefits of private ownership are resolved over time. Companies that

 find-the benefits of private ownership to be large become increasingly less likely to return to       4

 public ownership. Negative duration dependence would be consistentwith permanence for

some LBOs.

           Alternatively, negative duration dependence could also reflect the existence of

unobserved heterogeneity. For example, if there were two different LBO types -- short-term

information-basedLBOs and longer-term incentive-based LBOS -- both with constant hazard

rates, initially, a random L130's likelihood   of returning    public (conditional on being private)

wilt be a weighted average of the number of the two types in the
                                                                 sample. Over time,

however, the short-term LBOs will return to public ownership and only long-term LBOs will

remain. As a result, estimated duration dependence will be negative. However, the
                                                                                  longer-
term LBOs will continue to return to public ownership         at their same constant rate.
           Negative duration dependence, therefore would         be consistentwith permanence for
some LBOs, but could also indicate the presence of unobserved
                                                              heterogeneity. In contrast,

positive and no duration dependence boLh would imply that L130s return to public ownership

at some constanL or increasing   rate.3

           Although more sophisticatedmethods exist, the simplestway to study duration

dependence is to estimate a logit regrsion model.4 The hazard rate in this analysis is the

probability that a LBO company returns to public ownership in the ith year after the LBO,

given that the LBO was still private at the beginning of the P year.        If an LBO has fewer
than i complete years of post-LBO operations, that P
                                                              company-yearis not counted as an

observation. Independent variables can be created for each company-year. To examine



      See Kiefer (1988), p.67l-2, for a clear discussion      of these issues.
      See Allison (1984), Kalbfleisch and Prentice (1980), or }Ciefer (1988). The results
                                                                                          using
the togit model are qualitatively identical to those obtained using hazard model estimates.
                                                  11

duration dependence, dummy variables are assigned for each company-year that equal one if

the company-year is the ith post-LEO year and zero otherwise.        In addition to   potential

duration effects,year effects can aist.    For erample, LBOs completed in 1983 may have

been different from LBOs completed in 1986. Aca'rdingly, a set          of dummy variables are

assigned to   each company-yearbased on the year the LEO was completed.5 The company-

years are then pooled and the usual logit    regression   model is estimated on the resulting

sample.

             Table 5 presents the logit model estimates, Regression 1 indicates that      the


estimated probability of returning public (conditional on being private) is lowest in the first

post-buyout year -- the coefficients imply the probability is 3.7%. The implied probability

peaks   in the fourthyear at   13.9% and drops slightly thereafter. This suggests positive


duration dependence followed by slightly negative duration dependence.

             Regression2 replaces the variables for the 2nd year through the 9th year and aftcr

with one variable for the second year and after. The likelihood ratio test statistic of tO is

not significant (chi-square distribution with 7   degrees   of freedom).   The data, therefore, do

not reject the hypothesis that after the first year, the LEO    companies are equally likely to

return to public ownership. The coefficients imply that the probability       of returning public in

any year after the fIrst year is 11,9% while the probability    of returning in the first year is

only 3.7%.

             Regression3 retains the 2nd year and after variable, but adds variables indicating

the LEO completion year. The completion year variable should be compared to LBOs

completed in 1986. Regression3 indicates that only LBOs completed in 1983 are

significantly more likely to return to public ownership in a givenyear than are LBOs




      The results are similar when the LEO completion year dummies are replaced by dummy
variables for each observaLion year. For ccample, the dummy variable for 1988 equals one if
the company-yearends in 1988, and 0 otherwise. This provides an alternative control for year
effects.
                                                    12


completed in other years. Given the data limitations of this sample,         it is difficult to know

why deals completed in 1983 are different. Regression 3 also shows that controlling for the
                                                                                                           S

completion year has only a minor effect on the duration dependenceof returning public.


                                                                                                           *
                Overall, the results in this section suggest that LBOs return   to public   ownership at

a slow, but steady rate. Because the data do not exhibit negative duration dependence, the

results are consistent with one underlying hazard function (for one type         of LBO) determining

the distribution     of time to   return to public ownership. Again, this implies that LBO are

neither short-lived nor permanent organizational forms.



4.              Current LBO characteristics.

               The analysis to this point distinguishes between privately and publicly owned

assets.    It does not describe whether LBO companies        and assets are still independently

owned     or have been purchased by other      companies.    In addition, the private / public

dichotomy does not necessarily imply large differences in post-buyout leverage or equity

ownership. This section presents evidence on post-buyout independence,leverage,and equity

ownership.



               4.1        Independent or strategic assets?

               As mentioned earlier, Bhagat, Shleifer and Vishny (1990) question the impedance

of incentive-intensive organizations in hostile takeovers.      They find that only 20% of the

assets involved in hostile takeovers are owned      by LEO organizations two to three years later.

Alternatively, they find that 72% of the assets end up owned by corporations with similar

assets    —   related or strategic buyers. In their sample, raiders and LBOs serve largely as

broken rather than operators. They conclude that shareholder gains in hostile takeovers

may be explained by efficiency gains from joint operations, but also by gains from market
                                             13

power or from overpayment by the strategic buyers.

          Table 6 distinguishes LEO companies in my sample by their current private       or

public status and by whether they are currently independent or owned by another company.

LEO companies which are releveraged by a new LEO investor group are considered to be

independentlyowned, Of the 162 LBOs I can classi4', 45 or 27.8% are owned by companies

with other operating assets. Because some of the purchasersof the LBOs might be in

unrelated businesses, 27.8% is an upper bound on the percentage of LBO companies that

can be owned by strategic buyers. The percentageof LEOs owned by other companies is

smallest for LEGs completed in 1986, Excluding LBOs completed in 1986, the percentage

increases to 35%.

          Table 7 presents an analysis similar to that in table 2 by consideringthe current

independent / non-independentstatus of all LEO company assets, including assets divested

by the LEO company. An average of 31.8% of the assets for the 165 LEOs        I   can classify are

owned by companies with other operating assets. Excluding LEOs completed in 1986, the

percentage increases to 39%.

          These results imply a moderate role for asset sales to strategic buyers in LBOs.

Only 31.8% of the original LEO assets and 27.8% of the LBO companies are owned by

companies with other operating assets at least 3.67 years after the buyout. The percentages

owned by companies in the same industry are undoubtedlysmaller. These are lower

percentages than the 72% reported by Ehagat et al. for threeyears after hostile takeovers,

and than the 43% reported for the 7 LBOs in their sample.

          It is possible that asset sales are more important for LBOs motivated by hostile

prsure.   Accordingly, I divide the sample into hostile and friendly   l2Os. LEOs are

considered hostile if: (1) the LBO receives or is a response to a hostile takeover bid; (2)

the LEO announcementfollows the purchase of at least 5% of the LEO company equity by

a hostile party in the prior six months; or (3) the LEO is a division of a company that
                                                   14

satisfies the hostile definitions in (1) and (2). For the 42 LBOs classified as hostile, 31.6%

of the assets are owned by    companies with other operating assets;the percentage is 31.5%

for the 121 LBOs classified as friendly.6 The atent of asset sales to strategic buyers,                4


therefore, is not related to the actual presence of hostile pressure.    (It is possible, but not
testable, that this result would change if it were possible to measure unobserved, but

perceived hostile pressure.)



            In contrast to the results in Shagat et al. for hostile takeovers, the results for this

sample of LBOs are consistent with the view that incentives play a role in explaining the

gains in LBOs.



            4.2        Is high leverage maintained?

            One of the distinguishing characteristics of a LBO is high leverage. Kaplan

(1989b) reports a median debt to total capital ratio of 87.8% at buyout completion for

management buyouts announced between 1979 and 1985. This contrasts with a debt to total

capital ratio of only 18,8% before the buyout. LBOs that remain private need not retain

their high leverage. Similarly, LEOs that return to public ownership do not necessarily

eliminate their debt, This section considers the post-buyout capital structure, when available.

of the sample LBOs at the     end   of fiscal year 1989 (the last fiscal year end with such data).

            I measure post-buyoutcapital structure or leverage      in three ways. The first

measure is the book value of total debt (short-term and long-term) as       a   fraction of the book

value   of total capital where total capital is the sum of total debt, preferred stock, common

equity. The second measure is the book value of total debt as a fraction of the LEO

transaction value reported by SDC or Morgan Stanley. The third measure is the ratio of




   6    The hostile-friendlystatus   of two   LBOs is ambiguous.
                                                   15

interest expense to operating income before interest, depreciation, and taxes in fiscal year

1989.

             Capital structure data   for the 1989 fiscal year are publicly available for 21   of the

22 LBOs that are independent public companies as of August 1990. Such data are available

for only   33   of the 95 privately owned LBOs.    Although the relatively small fraction of data

for privately owned LBOs leaves open the possibility       of   a post selection bias, the direction
of Lhat bias    is   not clear.

             Panel A of table 8 shows that the 33 privately owned and independent LBOs

maintain high levels of debt after the buyout. These companies have a median ratio of total

debt to total capital is 0.978 at the end of fiscal year 1989. Total debt for these companies is

91% of the LBO transaction value. These values are similar to those found by Kaplan

(1989b) at the time LBOs are completed. The median ratio of interest expense to operating

income     of 0.719 also seems high. Bernanke, Campbell         and Whited (1990) find a median

ratio of interest expense to cash flow of 0.219 in 1988 for all COMPUSTATfirms. Kaplan

and Stein (1991) find that projected post-buyout interest expense to pre-buyout operating

income is 0.833 for 124 larger managementbuyouts in the 1980s.

             The     21 publicly owned   and independent LBOs maintain a substantial amount of

debt, but less than the privately owned LBOs. The median ratio of total debt to total capital

is 0.663, while total debt is 58.8% of the LBO transaction value. The debt levels for the

public LBOs are higher than the pre-buyout levels of 18.8% reported by Kaplan (1989b).

Interest expense to operating income appears to fall more sharply. The ratio of 0.276

exceeds the median 0.219 found by Bernanke et at., but is much lower than the 0.833 found

by Kaplan and Stein.

             As the previous section indicates, almost 28%       of the LBO companies have been

purchased by other companies. Leverage data for the 1989 fiscal year are publicly available

for 33 of these companies. Panel B of table 8 shows        Lhat   the median ratios of debt to total
                                               16


capital and interest expense to operating income    for the four private LBO    purchasers   are

similar to those of the private and independent LBOs. The ratios for the 29 public LBO

         are slightly less than, but similar to those for the independent public LBOs.
purchasers


                                                                                                   I
           The results in this section suggest that privately owned LBOs, both independent

and purchased. maintain debt levels similar to the levels when the LBO was completed. In

contrast, publicly   owned LBOs, both independentand purchased, maintain debt levels lower

than the initial L3O levels, but higher than pre-buyout levels and median public company

levels. These results seem consistent both with the Jensen incentive view and with the tax

view.




           4.3         Is high equity ownershio maintained?

           Another distinguishing characteristic of L130s is concentrated equity ownership.

Management and the LBO promoter typically own or control 100%           of the post-buyout

equity. According to the Jensen view, the concentrated equity ownership provides strong

incentives for managers and the LBO promoter to maximize shareholder value. Almost by

definition, LBOs which remain privately owned retain their concentrated equity ownership

structure. It is an empirical question whether LUOs that return to public ownership, either

as independent companies or as purchases     of other companies,   are still characterize by

concentrated equity ownership.

           Stock ownership data are available for 17 of the 21 independent public LBOs for

fiscal year 1989. As panel A of table 8 indicates,buyout sponsors and management investors

hold a median of 40.0% (and an avenge of 42.6%) of post-IPO equity tn these 17

companies. McConnell and Servaes (forthcoming) examine over 1000 non-financial

companies tracked by the Value Line Investment Survey      in   1986 and   find a median insider

ownership of 5.0% (and an avenge of 11.8%). The much larger insider ownership
                                                   17

percentages   of post-IPO equity suggest     that significant incentives to maximize shareholder

value are still present in LBOs that return public, but remain independent.

             Stock ownership data are also available for 29 of the public purchasers    of LEOs
for fiscal year 1989. Insiders own a median of 5.7%          (and an avenge of 16.2%) of the equity

in these companies. These owiershippercentages are slightly higher than, but not

significantly different from the cortpondingpercentages in McConnell nnd Servaes.

Independent LBO purchasers, therefore, do not appear to be characterizedby particularly

concentrated equity ownership.




5.           Cross-sectionaldeterminants of public / private status.

             5.1         The importance   of active   investors,


             Although Jensen's (1989) argumentsare relevant for all LBOs. his primary focus is

on active investors and LEO Associations. The primary examples           of these organizations are
LBO partnershipsand the merchant banking divisions of investment banks and commercial

banks. Accordingly, I classify     the sample LilOs as involving one of three types of buyout

investors:   LEO partnership,merchant bank division, and other. LEO partnerships include

Adler Shaykin, Clayton Dubilier, Forstmann Little, Gibbons Green, Hicks & Haas, Kelso,

Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, Riordan Freeman, Thomas Lee, Warburg hocus, and Wesray.

Merchant banking divisions include Allen & Company, Bankers Trust, Citicorp, Donaldson

Lufkin Jenrette, First Boston, Merrill Lynch, and Morgan Stanley. All other sample LBOs

are classified as other. These include LBOs organizedentirely by managementand by less

well-known LBO partnerships.        To the extent that some of the LBOs classified as 'other are

sponsored    by less well-known LEO      partnerships, this classification distinguishesbetween the

less well-known and the larger, better-known LBO sponsors.

             Panel   A of table 9 shows the current private / public status   of LEO companies by

type of LEO investor.      A lower percentageof       the LUOs arranged by LEO partnerships,
                                                        18

52.3%, are currenLlv privaLe; the percentage of LUOs arranged by merchant banks that are

currently private, 72.7%,   is   similar to   Lhe   65.6%    for all others. The 523% for the LEO
                                                                                                          4
partnerships is dtfferent from the 66.9% for the other two groups at the 10% level (chi-

square statistic = 2.96 with one degree of freedom). Although not presented, this difference

remains in a logit regression that controls for the year of LEO completion. This Stiggesls

that LBOs arranged by LBO partnerships are somewhat less likely to be permanent.



           5.2       Divisions vs. public companies.

           LBOs   of divisions may be driven by the same underlying            causes as LEOs of public

companies. However, there are reasons thaL divisional LEOs might have different

motivations from those for LBOs           of public   companies. First, it is possible that managers in

LEOs of public companies use their private information to purchase the company at a price

below its true value The gains in these LBOs come from information advantages rather

than from any superiorityof organizationalform. The information differencesbetween

divisional managers and parent-company managers                are arguably smaller than those between

public company managers and the stock market. If such differencesare important, public

companies should return to public ownership more often.

          Alternatively, it is possible that divisional buyouts have a greater need for capital.

One common reason for divestitures           is   that the divested division is not part of the parent

company'score business.7 This suggests that the parent may have ignored (or been unhappy

with) the division's operations.     IL   seems plausible that these divisions will have valuable

investment projects that the parent company previously prevented them from pursuing.

Accordingly, divisional LI3Os would be more likely return to public ownership than LBOs of                4




      See Kaplan and Weisbach (1990).
                                                       19


     public companies.8

                Panel B of table   9 presents   the current private I public   status   of both divisional
14

     and public company LBOs. Almost exactly the same fraction of divisions and public

     comparnes, 62.2% and 63.8%, are still privately owned. Again, the result is the same            in logit

     regressionsthat control for the LBO completion year. This suggests that LBOs, whether                   of
     divisions or public companies, are motivated by similar forces.




                5.3         The importance of size.

                As the market value of equity owned by undiversiried LBO equity owners

     increases, the risk-bearing costs of these holdings also increase. The higher these costs are,

     the more likely should be the LBO company'sreturn to public ownership. Similarly, a LBO

     company may require access Lo public equity markets to finance future investment after

     desired organizational changes are implemented under the LBO organization. It is probable

     that risk-bearing costs as well as the need to ulttmately access public equity markets increase

     with the value of the LBO transaction.

               Panel C ol table 9 compares the current private / public status           of LBOs valued at

     less than $300 million to that   of LBOs valued at $300 million or more.           Somewhat more    of
     the larger LBOs -. 42.2% -- than the smaller LBOs -- 33.0% -- are currently publicly owned.

     The difference, however, is not significant at conventional levels (chi-square statistic = 148

     with one degree of freedom).

                In contrast, a logit regression that controls for the year of buyout completion

     suggests that LBOs valued at more than $300 is apprrnimately 15% more likely (significant

     at the 5% level) to be publicly owned as of August 1990. If, however, transaction value or its


     log replaces   the $300 million transactionvalue dummy in the logit regressions,         the coefficient




           This is not entirely satisfactory because parent companies presumablycould have divested
     the divisions by spinning them off to public shareholders.
                                                    20

becomes insignificant (although it remains negative). These mixed results suggest that risk-

bearing costs play a moderate role in determining the public or private status          of LBOs.



            5.4         Differences in likelihood    of returnice   to public ownership.

            The results in the previous subsections show that the current public         / private staLus
of divisional LBOs is similar La     Lhat   for public company and divisional LEOs while LHOs

organized by ISO partnerships and larger LBOs are more likely to be publicly owned.

Because they are based on the reduced form" current organizational status, they may not


accurately reflect any differences in the timing      of returning to   public ownenhip

            Table 10 presents the results of a logit regression identical to regression 3       of table

S except   that   it includes LBO   partnership, division, and size variables. The estimates confirm

that LBOs arranged by LBO partnerships are more likely to return to public ownership

(sigatticant at the 5% level). For example, in the second or later year after a larger public

company LBO, completed in 1986, the probability Lhe LBO will return to public ownership is

11.4% if an LBO partnership is involved, 7.3% otherwise.

            The estimates also suggest that divisional LBOs are more likely to return to public

ownership at some point than LBOs           of public companies     (significant at the 5% level). For

example, in the second or later year after a LBO completed in 1986, not involving a            LBO

partnership, the probability a larger divisional LBO will return to public ownership is 14.7%

compared to 7.3% for a public compaay LBO.

            At first glance. it is punling that the likelihood of returning to      public ownership is

greater for divisions than   for public     companies while the percentage    of LBOs   that are

currently private does not differ for the two groups. Part of this difference occurs because 8

of the 12 L130s that     go private after returning public were divisional LBOs. Part may also

be explained by the fact that relatively fewer of the divisional LBOs were completed in the

early 1980s.
                                                       21

                 The finding that divisional   [SOs return   to public ownership more quickly than

    public company LEOs is not consistentwith public company managers profiting from

    information advantages. The informational advantage is arguably smaller in divisional LBOs

    than in public company [SOs. In contrast, the result is consistentwith divisional LEGs

    having a greater need for capital.

                 Finally, LUOs valued at $300 million or greater at the time     of the LEO are

    significantly more likely to return   to public   ownership Lhan LEGs valued at less than $300

    million.     For example, in the second or later year after    a public company LEO not involving

    a LBO partnership, compLeted in 1986. the probability a larger LEO witl return to pubtic

    ownership is 7.3% compared to 1.9% for a smaller LEO valued at less than $300 million.

    This is consistentwith thc costs of risk-bearing and the need to access public equity markeLs

    being higher for larger LEOs.




    6.           Conclusion.

                 This paper has documented the organizationalstatus over time       of large leveraged

    buyouts (LEGs) completed between 1979 and 1986. Overall, the paper gives some support

    to both the Rappaport and to the Jensen (and tax) views of leveragedbuyouts.

                 As of August   1990, 63%    of the LEGs are privately owned,   14% are independent

    public companies, and 23% are owned by other public companies. As time since the LEO

    increases, the (unconditional) percentageof LEOs that have returned to public ownership

    increases.    The hazard or the likelihood   of returning to   public ownership conditional on

    being private is small in the Iirst year and appears to be larger and constant thereafter. The

4   (unconditional) median time an LEO remains private equals 6.70 year& Consistentwith

    Rappaport, the LEO appears       to be   a transitory organizational form. Although they are     not

    permanent, the majority of LEO organizations are not short-lived.

                 Private ownership is not Lhe only distinguishing characteristic of a LEO
                                               22


organization. The paper also considers post-buyout independence,leverage,and equity

ownership. The results suggest an important, but moderate role for asset sales to strategic

buyers in   120s.   Fewer than 32% of the original LBO assets are owned try companieswith

other operating assets. Because some of these buyers might be in unrelated businesses and

because asset purchases   are not counted, 32% is an upper bound on the percentageof assets

that can be owned by strategic buyers. The actual percentageis undoubtedly lower. This is

much lower than the 72% reported by Bhagat et al. for three years after hostile takeovers

and somewhat lower Than the 43% reported      for the 7 LBOs in their sample. In contrast to

those results for hostile takeovers, the results for LBOs are consistent with Jensen's view that

incentives play a role in esplaining the gains in LilOs.

            LBOs that remain privately owned LBOs, both independent and purchased,

maintain debt levels similar to the levels when the LBO was completed. In contrast, publicly

owned LBOs, both independent and purchased, maintain debt levels lower than the initial

LBO levels, but higher than pre-buyout levels and median public company levels. The

independent public LBOs also appear to maintain relatively concentrated equity ownership.

These results seem broadly consistentwith important roles for incentives and tax benefits,

            Further evidence is reported on the cross-sectionaldeterminants of the private /

public status   of LBOs. 120s arranged by LBO       partnershipsappear to be less permanent

than LBOs arranged by othert The former are somewhat more likely to be publicly owned

than the latter group of LBOs. At the same time, larger LBOs and divisional LUOs appear

to return to public ownership more quickly than LBOs of public     companies.   This suggests

that LBO partnerships, larger LBOs, and divisional LBOs have a greater need for liquidity

and (or access to equity capital.




            It is worth noting that this paper describes the experienceof LBOs completed
before 1987. Most     ot these LBOs are followed by a growing economy in the first few post-
                                              23

buvout years. In contrast, many of the LBOs completed after 1986 have to contend with       a
weakeningeconomy and, possibly less favorable stock and bond markets. At the same time,

Kaplan and Stein (1991) present evidence that buyout prices and financial structures are

more aggressive in 1986 to 1988 than in earlier years. The effect of the increase in deal

aggressiveness and the weakening economy in 1990 on the organizational experience    of LBOs
is an open and interesLing question.
                                              24

                                          Rdax

Allison, Paul, 1984, Event history analysis, (Sage Publications, Inc.: Newbury Park, CA).

Bernanke, Ben, John Campbell, and Toni Whited, 1990, U.S. Corporate Leverage:
         Developmentsin 1987 and 1988, Brookings Papas on Economic Athvity 1,
          255-286.

Bhagat, Sanjay, Andrei Shlei(er, and Robert Vishny, 1990, Hostile takeovers in the 1980s:
          The return to corporate specialization,&ookings Papas on Economic Activity:
          M'icroeconomics, 1-72.

                                 of free cashflow, corporate finance and takeovers,
Jensen, Michael. 1986, Agency costs
          American Economic Review 76, 323-329.

Jensen, Michael, 1988, Takeovers:    their causes and   consequences, Journal of Economic
         Perspecxives 2, 21-48.

Jensen, Michael. 1989,The eclipse of   the public corporation, Harvard BusinessReviewNo 5,
          61-74.

Kalbfleisch, John and Ross Prentice, 1980, The statisLical analysis   of failure time data (John
           Wiley & Sons: New York,    NY
Kaplan, Steven, 1989n, Management buyouls: Evidence on taxes as a source         of value,
          Journal of Finance 44, 611-632.

Kaplan, Steven, 1989b, The effectsof management         buyouls on operations and value, Journal
           of Financial Economics24, 217-254.

Kaplan, Steven, and Jeremy Stein, 1991, The evolution of buyout pricing and financial
          structure in the    1980s,Working paper (Universityof Chicago, Chicago, IL).

Kaplan,Steven and Michael     Weisbach, 1990, The success of acquisitions: Evidence from
           divestitures, Working paper (University of Chicago, Chicago, IL).

Kiefer, Nicholas, 1988, Economic duration data and hazard functions, Journal ofEconomic
          Literature 26, 646-679.

Muscarella, Christopher and Michael Vetsuypens, 1990, Efficiencyand organizational
          structure: A study of reverse LBOs, Journal of Finance 45, 1389-1414.

McConnell, John and Henri Servaes, 1990, Equity ownership and corporate value, Journal of
           Financial Economics (forthcoming).

Rappaport, Alfred, 1990, The staying power of the public corporation, Harvard Business
        RMew No. 1,96-10k
                                           25

Roundtable discussion, 1990, The economic consequences of high leverage and stock market
         pressures on corporate management,JounwiofApplied CorporateFinance 3, No.
         2, 6-37.

Schipper, Katherine and Abbie Smith, 1988. Corporate income tax effects of management
          buyouts, Working paper (Universityof Chicago. Chicago, IL).

Smith, Abbie, 1990, Corporate ownership structure and performance: The caseof
         management buyouts, Journal ofFinancial Economic,, 26.
Table   1



Currentownership status of parent company by year of completionfor 183 leveraged buyouts valued at more
han SlOl million and completed in the period 1979-1986.


            Year       Total     Slants         Liqui.   Slams        PereenL          Percent
                       LOOs'     Not            dated    Known        Publicly         Privately
                                 }cnowni                              Owned            Owned                      p
                                                                      Aug. 1990'       Aug. 19g0


            1979        5          0             0         5          40.0             60.0
            1980

            1981        II         0             0         11         45.5             54.5

            1982        13         1             0         12         50.0             50.0

            1983        16         1             2         13         69.2             3418

            1984        37         1             5         31         39.0             71.0

            1985        33         3             2         28         39.3             60.7

            1986        68         6             0         62         29.0             71.0



            1979-       45         2             2         41         53.7             46.3
            1983

            1984-       138        10            7        121         31.4             68.6
            1986




            All        183          12            9       162         37.0             63.0
            Deals                                                 I                -

'Sampleof evemged buvouts identifiedas leveraged buvouls by either Securities DaIs Corporation or Morgan
Stanley.

  A btyout's status is not known   if we   could not contact the company     or hnd any information about   rho
company.

                                           if
 A buvout is considered a public entiw (1) it has issued equity to the public and is          itill
                                                                                         a public company
as of Aug. 30, 1990 or (2) a majority of the buyout company assets has been purchased by and is still owned
by any public company, both domestic and foreign.

 A beynutis considered a private entity if the majority of the assets of the buvoutcompany are still privately
owned, either by the buyout company or by a subsequent private buyer.
    Table 2

    Estimated current ownenhip status of average company assets by year o(aimpletion   of 166   leveraged buvouLs
•   valued ac more than Sl)  million and completedin the period 1979-1986.


                      Year      Number            Percent Assets        Permnt Assets
                                UBOs              Publicly Owned        PrivatelyOwned
                                                  Aug. 1990             Aug. 1990


                      1979        5               40.0                  60.0
                      1980

                      1981       11               42.7                  57.3

                      1982        12               52.2                 47.8

                      1983       13                75.4                 24.6

                      1984       33                38.4                 61.6

                      t985       30               42.6                  57.4

                      1986       62                29.0                 71.0



                      1979.      41                55.2                 44.8
                      1983

                      1984—      125              34.7                  65.3
                      1986




                      All        166              39.9                  60.1
                      Deals



     Sample of leversEed buvouta identifiedas leveraged ho outs by either SecuntimData Corporationor Morgan
    Stanley. Twelve of 183 LBOs are excluded bemuse we could not contactthe company or find any information
    about the company.                                                            -



     Assets of a buvoutcompany are considered public if they are owned by a publicly owned company us of Aug.
    30. 1990. This column measurra the average fraction of company assets public for all LBOs completedin the
    given period.

     Assets of a huyouc company are considered private    if
                                                          they are still privately owned, either by thc buvssut
    company or by a subsequent private buyer as of Aug. 30, 1990. This column measurm the average traction
    of company assets public for all LBOs completed at she given period.
Table 3

Ownemhip status of parentcompany by age of leveraged huiout
                                                                 For 171   leveraged buyouls csluni at morethan
S1  million and completed in the period 1919-1986.


              Age of LBO        Total LBOs Status       Percant                 Fercant
                                Known at Year P         Publicly Ownedi         PrivatelyOwned



               Year   1          171                      2.9                    97.1

               Year 2            169                     14.8                    85.2

               Year 3            168                     24.4                    75.6

               Year 4            135                     32.6                    61.4

               Year   5                                  36.0                     64.0

               Year 6             63                      39.7                    60.3

               Year 7             38                      44.7                    55.3

               Year 8             23                      47.8                    512
               Year 9              7                      28.6                    71.4

               Year 10             4                       0.0                   1.0

 •
  Sample of leveraged buyouisidentifiedas evengedbiivouts byeither Securities Data Corporationor Morean
 Stanley. Twelveof    83
                       LBOs areexcludedbeeaiase  wecould not contactthe company or find any inlormaiion
                            i
 about the company. Year is the end of year i after the buyout.

  A buyout is considered a public entity if (1) it has issued equity to the public and is still a public company;
 or (2) a majority of the buyout company assets has been purchased by and is still owned by any public
 company, both domratic and foreign i yeats after the buyout.

  A buyout is considered a pnvateentity if the majorityof the assets of the buyoutcompanyare still privately
 owned,either by the buyout companyor by a subsequent privatehinter i yeats after the buyouc.
Table 4

Percentage of L.BOs that return to public ownership by age of levetaged buvout               or 162 leveraged   buvouts
valued at more than 5100 million and completedin the period [979-1986.


          Year           UBOs                  LBOs           LBOa              CumulaLtve       Cumulative
          After          Private at            ReLenting      Cenaoree          SuMval           Failure Rate
          LBO            beginning of          to Public                        Rate (LBOS       (LBOs
                         Year i                Ownershipt                       private)         public)


          Year I          162                    6                 0             96.3             3.7

          Year 2          156                    20                0             84.0            16.0

          Year3           136                    17                0             73.5            26.5

          Year 4          119                    16               26             62.8            372
          Year5            77                     7               25             56.2            43.8

          Year6            45                     3               13             511                            1

          Year 7           29                     1               10             49.3            50.7

          Year 8           18                     I                6             46.6            53.4

          Year9            11                     0                6             46.6            53.4

          Year    10       5                      0                1             46.6            53.4

          Year    11       4                      1                3             35.0            65.0



 LEOs private at beginning of year i include those LBOs that (1) have not yet returned to some form of
public ownership; and (2) were completedmore than i-I years earlier. Includes only those 162 LOOswhose
organintional status is known for all post-buvoutyears.

  A buvout is considered a public entity if (I) it has issued equity to the public and is still a public company;
or (2) a majority of the buvout company assets has been purchased by and ts still owned by any public

company. both domcsttc and foreign i years after the buyout.

 LBOs censored are LBOs that (1) were completed between i-I and i years earlier and (2) are ttill private as
of August 1990.

  The cumulative       scrawl rate,   S(t),    or product limit   estimate equala:


                   =                           d / n)
          S(t1)
                                'k1    1   -

where d5 is the number of LBOs that return public at I] and ii, is the number of LBOs that have II) not vet
                                  t
retumed public just prtor to and (2) were completed as least t1 years before. The cumulative failure rate.
                                                                                             t
  - S(tJ), is the estimated fractionof LBOa that have returns to public ownership ycsrs utter completingart
LBO.
Table 5


Logit regresainna of the probabilityof returning 10 public ownershipconditional on beingprivatelyowned as
a function of the tinte from the LBO and of the LBO completionyear for 162 leveraged buyoutsvalued at
more than       St
                 million and completedin the period 1979-1986. (Asymptotic t-ttatiStiea are in parcnthctcs.)


Dependent Variable Equals 1 if LBO company returnsto public ownership                     in given yearconditional on being
private at beginning of year. 0 othenMie.


                                      Cl)                    (2)           I             (3)
                           Coeft            SE     Coeff.          St      I Coeff.            SE
     Constant              -3.26'           042    -3.26'          042         -3.45'          0.47

     2nd yea?               126'            048

     3rd year                t.30'          0.49

     4th year                1,44'          0.51

     5th year                198            0.60

     6th year                1.1510         0.67

     7th year                1.01           0.85

     8th year               0.86            1.12

     9th year and later      0.%            1.13

     2nd year and later                              1.261          0.44        1.31'          0.44

     1981   and earlier'                                                       -0.22           0.44

     1982                                                                       0.15           0.47

     1983                                                                       07810          0.44

     1984                                                                      -0.02           0.39

     1985                                                                       0.59           0.39



     N Ohs.                           688                     682                        688

     Log Likelihood                  -217.9                  -218.4                     -215,0

   The ia year variables are dummy variables equat to one if the company-year observation is for the year
 after the LBO and equal to zero othenvise. The 9th year and later (2nd year and later) variablea equal one
 if the company-year observation is for the 9th year or later (2nd year or later) after the LBO and equal to zero
 otherwise.

  The variables 1982 to t985 equal one if the LBO 10 completedin thaI year and zero otherwise. The                            1981
 and earlier variable equals one for LBOs completed1981 and earlier.

 O
     Signilitant at the 1% level;                  Signifleant at the 5% level;
                                                                                                 " Sigttifleantat the   10% level.
Table 6

Number and ownership status as of Aug. 1990of 162 leveraged buyoulsvalued at morethan SlOG million and
completedin Ihe period 1979.1986.


  Year      Total       Public   Inde.       Owned        Private   lade-       Owned by        Percent
            LBOs        Aug.     pendent     by Other     Aug.      pendent     Other           Owned by
            Status      1990'    Public      Public       1990'     Private     Private         Other Co.
            Known'               Co.         Co.                    Co.         Co.


  1979                   2        2          0                       2                            20.0%
  1980

  1981       11          5                   4             6         6           0                36.4%
  1982       12          6                   4             6         5                            41.7%
  1983       13         9         3          6             4         3                            53.8%
  1984       31         9                    6             22       20           2                25.81
  1985       28         1         3          8             17       15           2                35.7%
  1986       62         18        8          10            44       44           0                16.1%



  1979-      41         22        8          14            19       16           3                41.4%
  1983

  1984-     121         33        14        24            83        79           4                23.1%
  1926



  All       162         60       22         33            102       95           7                27.8%
  Dcals



 Sample of leveraged buyouls identified as leveraged buvouts by either Securitius Data Corpomlion or Morgan
Stanley. locludm only those 162 LBOs whose organizational status ts known for all post-buvout Years.

  A buyout is considered a public entity if (I) it has issued equity to the public and is still a
                                                                                                  public COmpanY
as ol Aug. 30, 1990 or (2) a majority of the buvout company assets has been purchased by and is still owned
by any public company, both dommtic and foreign.

 A huvout is considered a private entity if the majority or the asaels of the buvout
                                                                                     company are still privately
owned, etther by the buvout company or by a tubsequent private buyer.

  A buyout's status is not known if we could not contact the
                                                             company or find any information about the
company.
Table I

Estimatedpercentageof companyassetsownedby independentcompanicompared LO company assets owned
                                                                  valued at more tban Sill] million and
by other companies by year of completion of 165 leveraged bu ouls
completed in the period 1979.1986.

                  Year       Number           Percent .4ssels       Percent Assets
                             LBOs             Independently         Owned by Other
                                              Owned                 Companies
                                                      l990          Aug. 1990'


                   1919       5                80.0                  20.0
                   1980

                   1981       U                63.6                  36.4

                   1982       I2               58.3                  41.7

                   1983       13               40.0                  60.0

                   1984       33               671                   32.3

                   1985       30               59.7                  40.3

                   1986       61               80.5                  19.5



                   1980-      41               56.6                  43.4
                   1983
                   1984-      124              72.1                  27.9
                   1986



                   All        165               68.2                 31.8
                   Deals


 •
  Sample ofleveraged buyouts identified as leveraged buyouts by either Securities Data Corporation or Morgan
 Stanley. Twelveof 183 LBOs are excluded beause we could not contact rIse company or find any information
 aboutthe company The current independence oF an additional six LBOs could not be delennined,

  Assets or a buvout company are considered public if 01ev are owned by a publicly owned company as of Aug.
 30. 1990. This column measures the average fraction of company usda public for all LBOs completed in he
 given period.

   Assets oF a buvout company are considered private if they are still privately owned, either by the buyout
 company or by a subsequent privale buyer as of Aug. 30, 1990. This column measures the average fraction
 of company assets public for all LBOs completed in the given period.
                                                         1990. 30, Aug. of as mpany)co(psrivatriy..owned publicly-owned a by owned are they       if
                                                                                                                                              Sc) (priva
 public cisnsidered are company huystul ofni Asseis assets.operating wishcompany another by purchased been not have hey           if
                                                                                                                               independent are LiOn
rights. voting of regardless equally treated are stock commonof classes different of Shares purchasers. LEO public the of directorsand managers by
and LBOs public independent the of sponsors hnyoul and directors, managers, by owned stock common of fraction the is owneraltip equity Insider
                                                                                           taxes, and depreeialion,interest, before is income Operating
                                                                      Stanley. Morgan or SOC by given value transaction LDO the is value deal Initial
                                                                                                                    1989, year lineal for equity common
and stock, preferred debt, total of value book the equals value) (book eapilal Total 1989. year fiscal for debt lolal of value book the is debt Total
                      Stanley. Morgan     or (SDC) Corporalion Data Securiiies either by buyouta    leveraged as identified buyouls Irveraged   of Sample •
                         0.057                  0.264                   NA,                0,484           29       Purchasers LBO rublie
                         NA.                    11704                   NA,                0.923            4      Purchasers LBO Private
                                  .
                                                                                                                     LDOs Purchased All B.
                         0.4th)                 (1.276                  0.588              0,3             21                  Public LBOs
                         NA,                    0.719                   0.910              0.978           33                 Privale LBOs
                         NA.                    0.624                   (1.774             (P.928          54      LBOs' Independent All A.
                     Eraction'               Income4                              Value)' (Book
                    Ownership            Operating to     Value' Deal tnitial      ()ipital Total    LiOn of
                Equily Insider        Expense Interest        10 Debt Total        '0 Dehi Total     Number
              1979-1986. period he in completedand million tt.kJ than more al valued buyouls leveraged 87 for status organizational current lay year
liseal 1989 ike of end the at insiders by ownership equity and income, operating to interest value, transaction initial 10 debt capiial, total to debt Median
                                                                                                                                                       8 Table
           a
Table 9

PubLic or private status ol (1) buvouls arranged by LEO specialists, inveelment banks, and all othert (2)
divisional and public company buyouts and (3) largerand smaLler buyouls as of Aug. 1990 for 183 leveraged
buouts valued at more 'ban S1 million and cempieted in the period 1979-1986.


                      Total     Status             Status Known     Percent           Percent
                                Unknown            as ol Aug.       Publicly Owned    Privately Owned
                                or liquidated      1990             as of Aug         as of Aug. 1990
                                as of Aug.                          1990
                                19%


  Pane!   A
  LEO Parcnershtp       50         6                44               47.7              52.3

                                   2                22               27-3               12.7
  Merchant Bankb        24

  All other,            09        13                %                34.4               65.6



  Panel B:

  Division                        13                82               37.8               62.2

  Public Company        88]        8                 80              36.2               63.8



   Panel C:
   Under S34Y3 M        103        12                91              33.0               67.0

   Atleast$3(M          80          9                71              42.2               57.8



   All   Bevoum         183                          162             37.0
                                                                                      r63.0
                               f_21
  LEO partnemhiptLObs are [.EOs arranged by AdlerShaykin.ClaytonDubilier, ForstmannLittle, Gibbons
 Green. Hicks & I-has, Kelao, Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, Riordan Freeman. Thomas Lee, WarburgPincus, and
 Weatsy.

   Merchant Bank LEOn are LObs arranged by Allen & Company, Bankers Truss, Citicorp, Donaldson Lulkin
              baton, Merrill Lynch, and Morgan Stanley.
 Jenrette, First
Table 10

Logit regreasions of the probabiliLyof returning to public ownershipcondiLionalon being privately owned as
a function of division or public company status, preaence of LEO partnership, LEO sian, time from the LEO
and year of LBO completion for 162 leveraged buyouta valued at more than 81(i) million and completed in
the period 1979-lYSt (Asymptotic t-statiatitsale in parentbaa.)


                                 if
Dependent variable equals 1 LEO company returns
to public ownershipin given year conditionalon being
private at beginningof year 0 otherwise.


                                      (1)
                         Coeff.             S.F.

  Constant
  LEO Partnership'        049"              0.30

  Division'               0.78'
                                            .2!..._
  At least S303 M'         1401             045

  2od year and latet4     0.501a            0.30

  1981 and earlier       -0.32              0.46

  1982                    0.72               0.53

  1983                     1.15'             0.47

  1984                    0.17               0.41

  1985                     0.64              0.40



  N Ohs,                              688

  Log Likelihood                   .212.9


'The LEO partnershipvariableequals one if the LEO is arranged by an LED partnershipand zero othersite.

 The division variable equals one if the LEO company is a division of another company and zero if it it a
public company before the LEO.

'The at least$300 M variable equals one if the LEO transactionvalue is at least 8300 million.

 The 2nd year and later variable equals one if the company-year observationis for the 2nd year or later alter
the LEO and equal to zero otherwise.

- The variablea 1982 to 1985                    if
                              equal one the LEO is completedin that year and zero otherwise. The 1981
and earlier variable equals one for LBOs completed 1981 and earlier.

                                                                                    '°
  SignifIcant at the 1% level;                        Significantat the 5% level:        Significantat the 10% level.
