                   WHER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




  THE DISTRIBUTION OF FAMILIY INCOME: MEASURING AND EXPLAINING
     CHANGES IN THE 1980S FOR CANADA ANt) THE UNITED STATES




                     McKinley L. Blackburn
                         David E. Bloom




                     Working Paper No. 3659




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138
                           March 1991




Helpful coments and suggestions were provided by Gary Burtless,
Martin Dooley, Garnet Picot, and Robert Plotnick. This paper was
written while the authors were Visiting Scholars at the Russell
Sage Foundation. It is part of a project sponsored by the Donner
Foundation. This paper is part of USER's research program in
Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                          NBER Working Paper p3659
                                          March 1991

   THE DISTRIBUTION OF FAMILY INCOME: MEASURING AND EXPLAINING
      CHANGES IN THE 19805 FOR CANADA AND THE UNITED STATES
                               ABSTRACt

     This paper attempts to measure and explain recent changes in
the distributions of family income in Canada and the U.S. using
comparable micro-data for the two countries for 1979 and l987
Three main sets of conclusions are reached.
     First, the distributions of total family income (pre-tax,
post-transfer) in the two countries changed differently in the
l980s. Average family income increased faster in Canada than in
the U.S., though income inequality increased unambiguously in the
U.S., but not in Canada. Imposing a simple structure on the data
reveals that the social welfare implications of these changes are
generally indeterminate for each country.
     Second, changes in the distribution of transfer income had
important influences on the distribution of total family income in
both Canada and the U.S. Transfer income in Canada increased more
rapidly than it did in the U.S. during the 1980s and also became
more redistributive in nature. Most notably, the shifts in
transfer income left female—headed families in Canada with a.
higher mean income and less income inequality in 1987 than they
had in 1979. Among female-headed families in the U.S., income
inequality increased while average income declined.
     Third, increased income inequality in the U.S. partly
reflects increased earnings inequality, which is itself
associated with a widening of education-earnings differentials
that occurred in the 1980s. Earnings inequality also increased
in Canada in the l980s, despite the stability of education-
earnings differentials.

McKinley L. Blackburn                     David E. Bloom
Department of Economics                   Department of Economics
University of South Carolina              Columbia University
Columbia, SC 29208                        New York, NY 10027
I. Introduction

     it .s no.s well known that income inequality increased substantially in

the United States during the l980s.   'iJhy it increased and whether the

trend will continue, are still questions that are much debated. Less

concern seems to have been devoted to changes over time in inequality in

Canada, although this is changing. Yet, with few exceptions, researchers

have not attempted to compare trends in income inequality and its

correlates between the two countries. Such a comparison could help

identify the forces responsible for observed patterns in inequality for the

two countries. Indeed, Canada and the U.S. seem to be particularly

appropriate for waking cross-national inequality comparisons, since the two

countries are fairly similar in the extent of the welfare state, the lack

of a centrally-controlled wage-setting mechanism, and the nature of the

family.

     It is inherently difficult to draw conclusions from international

comparisons of inequality. As has been pointed out by Lydall (19Th), for

example, differences across countries in how data are collected, or in any

quality-control adjustments that are made by statistical, agencies that

collect the data, can generate misleading differences in measured

inequality. Nevertheless, much use has been made of compilations of

inequality measures for several countries, e.g., those collected in Jam

(1975), despite the fact that there are differences across countries in the

income concept being applied, the definition of an income-receiving unit,

and in population coverage (see van Ginneken and Park, 1984). In our view,

the preferred method of making such cross-national inequality comparisons

is to use comparably-collected microdata -   - which   we believe is available

for the U.S. and Canada -- and to make adjustments so that the underlying



                                      1.
concepts that define an income distribution are as close as possible in the

two countries. In this paper, we make such a comparison for the

distributions of family income and individual earnings in Canada and the

United States in 1979 and l987

     While a discussion of the literature on recent changes in income and

earnings inequality in the U.S. is available (see Beach, 1999; see also

Blackburn and Bloom, 1987), we are not aware of any such summary for

Canada. Section II of the paper provides such a review, Section III

discusses our approach to comparing income distributions across countries

and over time, and presents our empirical results for the distribution of

family income. Section IV continues the analysis by focusing on the

determinants of changes in the dispersion of earnings among males in the

two countries   Section V summarizes our findings.



II. A Review of Studies of the Distribution of Income in Canada


     Several recent studies have focused on the topic of changes in the

level of economic inequality in the U.S. The prime questions of interest

have been the following: is there any evidence of an increasing (or

decreasing) trend in the level of inequality? and, if so, what factors can

explain the trend? For the most part, these studies can be separated into

those that have family income inequality as their focus, and those that

analyze Individual earnings inequality. (One exception is Blackburn and

Bloom, 1987, which analyzes both.) It is apparent from these studies that

income inequality among families has been increasing, at least since the

1960s (see Blackburn and Bloom, 1987; see also Levy, 1998). The reasons

that have been proposed to explain this trend include changes in the




                                     2
distribution of family size, the increase in the percentage of families

with female heads, and the increased labor force participation rate of

women, as well as the commonly suspected changes in the distribution of

individuals' earnings. Blackburn and Bloom (1987) argue that the

distinction between family income and individual earnings inequality is

important over the period because changes in the individual earnings

distribution are only part of the explanation for rising family income

inequality. Studies of earnings inequality find an upward trend for males

(but not for females or for all earners) that seems to have steepened in

the 1980s (see Blackburn and Bloom, 1987; Karoly, 1988; Sunless, 1990).

Shifts in the demographic and industrial composition of the male working

population have been suggested as possible explanations for the increase in

male earnings inequality, though the evidence suggests that the increase is

largely attributable to changes in the structure'1 of wages, i.e., changes

in the returns to education and experience, and changes in the mean level

of earnings within industries (e.g., see Juhn, Murphy, and Pierce. 1989;

Blackburn, 1990).

     Many of the issues noted above have also arisen in connection with

recent work on the distributions of earnings and income in Canada. As in

the United States, there appears to have been an upsurge of academic

interest in these topics in the 1980s, and many of the same hypotheses to

explain inequality changes have been considered in both countries. In this

section, we briefly review the recent literature on inequality (and average

income) trends in Canada, with an appendix table further detailing selected

aspects of these studies.

     One of the earliest studies of Canadian income inequality is Henderson

and Rowley (L977) In a detailed analysis using data from the Survey of



                                     3
Consumer Finances (SCfl, these authors discovered a slight upward trend in

the inequality of total family income over the years 1965-1973. Since

their empirical analysis suggests that income inequality is higher among

smaller families and since family size declined in Canada in the years

under study, they point to changes in family size as one of the major

reasons for the increase. They also find that the decline in the

percentage of families with at least one male earner, presumably due to

both an increase in female-headed families and a decline in the rate of

male labor force participation, is important to the increase, since

families with no male earners have higher measured inequality.

     Subsequent studies of family income inequality in Canada have also

pointed to family-size and labor-force participation rate changes as

contributing to movements over time in the level of inequality.1 Wolfson

(1986) extends the time period studied by Henderson and Rowley to 1983; his

results suggest that inequality increased in the late 1960s, decreased over

the l970s, but began to increase again in the early 1980s. Like Henderson

and Rowley, he finds changes in the size and structure of families to be an

important contributor to increased inequality; he also points to the rise

in female labor force participation as another factor leading to increased

inequality. He explains the fall in inequality over the 1970s in terms of

the increases in both transfer and investment income as a percentage of

total family income, since increases in both appear to have an equalizing

effect on the family income distribution.

     Dooley (1988) analyzes changes in the prevalence of "low-income




1As alluded to earlier, this contrasts somewhat with the U.S. literature,
which often treats changes in family income inequality as mainly reflective
of changes in the earnings distribution for working males.


                                     A
status° in Canada from 1973 to 1986. Low-income status is similar to the

official definition of poverty in the U.S. Like changes in poverty rates

in the U.S.. changes over time in the proportion of individuals that are in

families classified as "low-income' can result from changes in the mean of

the income distribution, or from changes in the level of inequality

characterizing the distribution.2 Dooley finds that the low-income

proportion fell from 1973 to 1979 -   - due both to a decline in inequality

and to an increase in the average level of real family income -   - but
increased from 1979 to 1986 (although not for the elderly for whom it

continued to decrease). Dooley attributes the fall in low-income

percentages in the 1970s to declines in family size, increases in the level

of government transfer payments, and increases in the Level of wives'

earnings;3 the increase in the incidence of low-income in the 1980s is

argued to be related to the decline in the real value of husbands'

earnings, especially among younger adults. Dooley (1989) focuses on the

low-income status of children, finding that declining family size and

increasing educational attainment of family heads are most important to the

decline in the l970s in the percentage of children itt "low-income"

families

     McWatters and Beach (1990) present measures of both average laity




2The low-income proportion could also change over time if the real value of
the low-income cutoff levels changed; however, Dooley applies the 1986
values of the cutoffs to data from all of the years that he considers.
3The family size effect likely works through increasing mean incomes within
family-size categories, since (as mentioned above) other research using the
saute data finds that in Canada inequality tends to be higher among smaller
families.
4Changes in educational attainment were not studied as a contributor to
changes in low-income incidence in Dooley (1988).



                                       5
income and family income inequality for the years 1965-1987. Like earlier

studies, the figures they report suggest increasing inequality in the late

1960s, and falling inequality in the 1970s. Their numbers also suggest

that inequality was higher in 1984 than in 1979, but that it declined from

1984 to 1987. On the basis of time-series regressions of quintile shares

on various aggregate-level variables, McWatters and Beach show that family

income inequality is negatively associated with the rate of male labor

force participation and positively associated with the rate of female labor

force participation.

     Compared to the literature pertaining to U.S. inequality trends,

Canadian analyses have paid more attention to changes itt the family income

distribution and less attention to changes in the distribution of

individual earnings. Ue are aware of only four recent studies for Canada

focused on trends in the distribution of individual income or earnings.

The study by Buse (1982) uses micro-level data from individual income tax

returns to study individual income inequality from 1947 to 1978. Although

changes in the definition of income over the period cloud his inferences

somewhat, Buse finds there to be an upward trend in inequality over the

period as a whole. His time-series regressions also suggest that the

overall labor force participation rate is a strong negative correlate of

inequality.

     While Dooley (L986) does not focus on earnings inequality per se, he

does consider the extent to which there have been changes in the

relationship between annual earnings and two individual characteristics:

age and education. His findings suggest a relatively stable age-earnings

relationship in the 1970s, and a large decline in the estimated return to

schooling In the early 1970s. This latter finding parallels the results of



                                     6
Freeman (1976) for the U.S.   Both authors suggest that the phenomenon of

generational crowding can explain some (but not all) of the decline in the

return to schooling that they document.

    In his 1987 paper, Dooley focuses on how earnings inequality among

Canadian men changed from 1971 to 1982. Focusing on seven years from that

period, his results reveal no clear trend in the inequality of weekly

earnings, or the inequality of annual earnings among full-rime, year-round

workers. Within age/education groups, however, he finds increases in

earnings inequality among less-educated, younger males and declines in

inequality among more-educated, older males. Regression results suggest

that the unemployment rate was an important factor associated with

increased earnings inequality (for some groups) over this period.

    Myles. Ficot, and Wannell (1988) also study changes in the

distribution of individual earnings. They find that from 1981 to 1986

there was an increase in the percentage of male workers in low-wage jobs.

However, they also find evidence of an increase in the employment share of

what might be described as the upper middle portion of the hourly earnings

distribution, so that the change in inequality over the period is not

clear. They perform a shift-share analysis that suggests that industry and

occupational changes played only a small role in the observed changes in

the wage distribution.

     To summarize the existing Canadian evidence (which tends to be mote

consistent across studies than the evidence for the U.S.), Canada appears

to have experienced two periods of increasing family income inequality over

the last twenty-five years: the late l960s and the early 1980s. Prior to

1980, there were large increases in real incomes and corresponding declines

in poverty rates; since 1980, there has been some reversal of these trends.



                                      7
The decline in family size in Canada is a factor that leads to higher

inequality and, somewhat paradoxicaLly, to lower poverty rates, while the

increase in female labor force participation is found to be positively

associated with the level of inequality, The evidence that is available on

earnings distributions provides little indication of a significant trend in

earnings inequality.

    With the exception of Euse, and Myles, Picot, and Wannell, all of the

studies we surveyed use the Survey of Consumer Finances as their source of

data. As noted by Dooley (1986), one problem with using the SCF for this

purpose is that, prior to 1977, Statistics Canada did not make available

public use samples with information on income non-respondents. However,

since 1977, they have imputed income values for non-respondents to the

income questions With the Current Population Survey (CPS) in the U.S.,

imputed incomes are provided over the entire history of the public use

samples   With the CPS it is clear that the characteristics of income

non-respondents tend to be different from those of income respondents (e.g.

see Lillard, Smith, and Welch, 1986), so that the omission of income

non-respondents in the Canadian data before 1977 might seriously bias

inequality comparisons between the pre- and post-1977 samples.5 For this

reason, our use of the SCF is limited in this paper to the study of

patterns and trends in the 1980s.




5This observation suggests that the studies of Canadian income inequality
reviewed above (c.thich all use the SCF) may have biased estimates of the
change in inequality over the late 1970s. It would be useful to know if
using only nonimputed incomes for the Canadian analysis after 1977 would
change any conclusions regarding the level of inequality, but there are
unfortunately no imputation flags in the Canadian public use samples.



                                     8
ill. Welfare Comparisons for Families in Canada and the U.S.


  A. Making We1far Comparisons

      For a population of n individuals, let 1.-'2              y he the associated

incomes subscripted such that y1y2. .             .y.   The Lorenz curve function is

defined as
                             L
(1)         L(i/n) — Z (y/ny)              for in
                    i—i

where y —   S (y1/n). In addition to the Lcrenz curve, there are also numerous
           i—i
scalar   indices that are commonly used to make inequality comparisons

between two distributions. Many of the indices, including those used in

this section of the paper, satisfy the following property: if the

Lorenz curve for one distribution ties above the Lorenz curve for a second

distribution at one or more points and never lies below it at any other

point, then the inequality index will be lower for the first distribution

than for the second. However, the converse does not hold.6 In what

follows we measure inequality using the mean logarithmic deviation (MLD),


            MUD —Slog(y/y)/n

the entropy index (E),
                  n
             S — S
                        Eylog(y/y)]/(tty)
                 i— 1

and the Cmi coefficient (C),
               n         n
                                     2—
            G —S         S  1y-y I/(n y)
                 i—I    j—l




61n section IV of the paper, we use the variance of logarithms as a measure
of inequality since it possesses a convenient decomposition property
(outlined in that section). Although it is widely used, the variance of
logs does not satisfy the Lorenz-curve property.

                                              9
     Atkinson (1970) was one of the first economists to consider the

relation between inequality and social welfare   Re showed that under

fairly minimal assumptions income distributions could be compared in terms

of their implied levels of social welfare on the basis of the location of

their corresponding Lorenz curves. In particular1 if the Lorenz curve for

one distribution lies above the Lorenz curve for a second distribution at

one or more values of the ordinate, and if the first distribution's Lorenz

curve never lies below that of the second, then the first distribution has

(lower inequality and) higher social welfare than the second. Two key

assumptions underlie this result: one, that social welfare increases

whenever the income received by any member of society increases; and, two,

that social welfare is a strictly quasi-concave7 function of all individual

incomes.8 If the Lorenz curves for the two income distributions   cross,

nothing can be said about the relative social welfare associated with the

two distributions without imposing additional structure on the social

welfare function.

     The usefulness of Atkinson's result is diminished by two important

properties of the social welfare interpretation of Lorenz curve

comparisons. As can be seen from equation (1), the Lorenz curve will be




7Strict quasi-concavity implies that the social welfare of the average of
any two income distributions will be higher than the social welfare of at
least one of the two distributions being averaged. Atkinson actually made
a more restrictive assumption about social welfare than quasi-concavity:
he assumed social welfare was the sum of individual strictly concave
utility functions that were identical for all individuals. The
less-restrictive result referred to here is from Dasgupta, Sen, and
Starrett (1973). who show that the result holds assuming strict
Schur-concavity of the social welfare function (a less restrictive
assumption than strict quasi-concavity).
8Symmetry across income units in the aggregation of incomes into social
welfare is also assumed.



                                    10
the same for two distributions if either of the following is true: (a) if

one of the distributions is an n-fold replication of the other

distribution; or, (b) if one distribution consists of incomes from the

other distribution all, multiplied by a common factor. This property

suggests that Lorenz curves can be used to compare the "inequality" levels

of income distributions, even if those distributions have different numbers

of individuals or different mean incomes. However, these inequality

comparisons lose any social-welfare interpretation, since social welfare is

by assumption an increasing function of all incomes.

     These limitations of Lorenz-curve comparisons can be circumvented by

making comparisons of both the mean level of income and the level of income

ineçuality. For example, if the mean of one distribution is higher, and

its inequality (in the Lorenz-curve sense) is Lower, then the social

welfare of that distribution must be higher (given the earlier

assumptions); likewise, if the mean is lower and inequality is higher,

social welfare must be lower     But this procedure is inconclusive when the

mean and inequ.ality move in the same direction. Fortunately, Shorrocks

(1983) and Kakwani (1984) have extended the Atkinson result to comparisons

of income distributions with different mean incomes. The structure of

their result is similar to that of Atkinson: given the same assumptions

about the social welfare function, one distribution corresponds to a higher

level of social welfare than another if and only if its generalized Lorenz

curve (GLC) lies above the other distribution's CLC at all ordinates, where

the GLC is defined simply as the Lcrenz curve multiplied by the mean

income, i.e.,

                     i
        CL(i/n) —    S (y/n) for irt.
                    i—i



                                        11
CLC comparisons are identical to the following sort of comparison: at the

qch n-tile of the population for both distributions, compute the average

income of all individuals with incomes less than Yq; if this average income

is higher, for all q, for one of the distributions, then that dIstribution

must have a higher level of social welfare.9'1°

     In the next subsection, we compare family income distributions in 1979

and 1987, for Canada and the U.S., on both an inequality and a welfare

basis. For meaningful welfare comparisons (e.g., for comparing generalized

Lorenz curves) it is necessary to express incomes for different years in an

identical year's currency. To this end, all incomes are expressed in 1987

U.S. dollars, correcting for inflation in the U.S. using the CNP personal

consumption expenditure (PCE) deflator, for inflation in Canada using the

consumer price index (CPI), and for the exchange from Canadian into U.S.




9GLC comparisons can also be thought of in the following way. Suppose an
expected-utility-maximizing individual has his choice between two
probability distributions for determining his income, Assume that the
individual's utility function is increasing and quasi-concave in his
income. Provided that the CLC's associated with the two distributions do
not cross, the individual will choose the probability distribution with the
higher GLC. If the CLC's do cross, our assumption about his utility
function does not yield a certain prediction about which distribution he
would choose.
10me method of comparing distributions through generalized Lorenz curves
corresponds identically to the criterion for second-order stochastic
dominance that has been suggested in the finance literature (e.g, see Radar
and Russell, 1974). It is also possible to compare income distributions on
the basis of the criterion for first-order stochastic dominance, which
would be appropriate if the restriction to quasi-concave welfare functions
were not desirable. The first-order criterion is that the cumulative
distribution function for one distribution lie below the cumulative
distribution function for a second distribution in order for the first
distribution to have higher weLfare. The condition for first-order
stochastic dominance is stronger than the second-order condition, in the
sense that if the first-order condition holds then the second-order
condition must also hold, while the converse is not true. Since the
assumption of quasi-concavity does not seem overly restrictive to us, we
focus primarily on GLC comparisons in our empirical work, although we do
make some use of first-order comparisons.


                                    12
dollars using a 1980 purchasing power parity measure provided by the OECD.

Since the most tenuous part of these adjustments relates to the OECD

measure of purchasing power parity, the comparisons of average income

across countries should be interpreted cautiously.11 Alternatively, the

comparisons that we consider most informative are those relating to how the

U.S. and Canadian income distributions are changing differently over time.



  B. Results

     Comparisons of changes in income inequality across countries are more

informative when the data from the countries are more similar -     - both   in

the kinds of income information collected and in the way in which the

population being sampled is defined. In this section we use the Current

Population Survey for the U.S. and the Survey of Consumer Finances for

Canada to study the distribution of family income. These data sources

provide information for nationally representative samples of the population

of families in the U.S. and Canada. and both employ similar definitions of

the family -- two or more related persons living together (using the

"economic" family concept for Canada). Both d.atasets also include

information on individuals who live alone or with others to whom they are

not related. These individuals are included in our analysis and treated as

separate families. Total income also has a similar definition in the U.S.

and Canadian data - -   cash   income received over the preceding calendar year,

excluding capital gains and any lump-sum payments received. Although




11For instance1 if we used the purchasing power parities implicit in the
tables provided in Summers and Heston (1988). the average incomes that we
report for Canada in the next subsection would be somewhat lower.




                                         13
several sources of income tend to be under-reported in both surveys -     - in
particular, some government transfer payments, and investment income --     the
extent of under-reporting appears to vary little across countries (and over

time within countries). Both surveys also have upper limits on the amount

of income from a particular source that can appear in the public use

samples; we recoded incomes for some of the surveys so that all samples

used would have the same top-code for incomes ($50.000 in 1979 1.78.

dollars). For both countries, we use data collected in 1980 and 1988, so

that we have income information for 1919 and 1987.

     One problem that naturally arises in measuring family income

inequality relates to the fact that families of different sizes and

compositions may require different amounts of income to be equally

weLl-off.'2 We handle this problem in two ways: first, in addition to

focusing on the distribution of total family income, we analyze a

distribution of income that is standardized for family size and

composition, le. ,   TMequivalent" income; and, second, we classify all

families into one of eight demographic types, our assumption being that all

families of a particular type have roughly equal income needs. The eight

family-types are: male unrelated individuals; female unrelated

individuals; unmarried females living only with one child (under age 18);

unmarried females living only with two or more children; married couples

living with no children (or any other related individuals); married couples

living only with one child; married couples Living only with two or more




1'2For example, a distribution where all, one-person families receive $10000
and all two-person families receive $15000 may be preferable to a
distribution where all families receive the average income, although the
latter distribution would be considered more equal if no account were taken
of family size.


                                      14
children; and all other families, Disaggregating the data in this manner

allows us to examine whether inequality or welfare is changing differently

within these relatively homogeneous demographic groups.

     The distribution of families according to demographic type is reported

in the top panel of Table 1 for the U.S. and Canada in 1979 and 1987.13 The

family breakdown is quite similar in both countries, the primary difference

being that U.S. families are more likely to be female-headed, and less

likely to consist of married couples with two or more children, Our hope

was to capture most of the families in the first seven categories, since

comparisons of changes in inequality or welfare among families in the

"other" category --   families   with children over 18, or with aunts, uncles,

grandparents, etc. -- are less valid since the types of families that fall

into this category can be quite varied. But somewhat to our dismay,

roughly one-fifth of the families in any year fall into the "other"

category.

     During the 1980s, the only family-type that clearly grew in both

countries was males living without relatives; female-headed families and

females Living without relatives increased their share in the U.S. but not

in Canada, where there were instead sizable increases in the percent of

families classified as married couples with no children, and in the 0other"

category. The middle panel of Table I reveals that the growth of unrelated

individuals as a percent of all families has been due to there being both

more formerly-married and more never-married individuals living without

relatives. The increase in female-headed families in the U.S. has been




13Although the family distribution is actually measured at the time of the
survey (i.e., 1980 and 1988), in order to minimize confusion we will refer
to these family distributions as being for 1979 and 1987.


                                        15
almost entirely due to an increase in families headed by never-married

females. The bottom panel shows that two-earner families have increased in

both countries (and especially in Canada) among married couples with

children. The relatively large growth in female-headed families and

unrelated individuals in the U.S. led to the average number of earners per

family actually falling in the U.S. from 1979 to 1987, in contrast to

Canada, where the average increased.

       Estimates of average total family income for each of the family types,

and for all families, are reported in Table 2. Among all families, total

income grew at an annual rate of 0.7 percent in Canada, but at a rate of

only 0.4 percent in the U.S. Income grew for almost all family-types in

both countries, the exceptions being female-headed families with

two-or-more children, and "other" families, in the U.S. Married couples

with children, and families with female heads (with or without children)

experienced the largest growth in average income in Canada, while females

living alone and married couple families had the highest income growth in
             14
the   U.S.
                                .


                  In both countries, income growth was most rapLd among families

with no earners, while families with only one earner experienced the

slowest income growth over the period.

       Table 3 examines the sources of total family income and the strength

of their association within families. Income is divided into three

sources: total family earnings: property income; and transfer incomeJ5




14Using Canadian Census data for 1980 and 1985, Dooley (1990) does not find
an increase in average income for lone females with children, though he
does report an increase in average transfers received by such families.
Whether this difference in findings is due to different ways in which the
data were collected or handled, or to differences in the specific years
being studied, is not clear.
15There is likely to be some misclassification of income in Table 3


                                          16
One relevant fact evident from Table 3 is that while transfer income

increased as a percent of total family income in both countries, the

Increase in transfers was especiaLly large in Canada, The share of income

from property sources increased in the U.S., while the share coming from

total family earnings decreased in both countries. The only notable change

in the correlations between sources of income was the increased absolute

value of the negative correlation between transfer income and total family

earnings in Canada, suggesting that transfer income became more

redistributive in Canada from 1979 to 1987.

     One limitation of using average total-family-income statistics

(reported in Table 2) to study changes over time in the average level of

economic well-being is that these statistics essentially double-count the

contribution of transfers, This is because total family income is a

pre-tax, post-transfer measure of income      For instance, an economy that

experiences no growth in factor income, but increases the amount of money

(frictionlessly) transferred through the government (and therefore the rate

of taxation in order to finance the increased transfers), will record an

increase in average total family income (as it is measured in Table 2),

even though there has been no change in the average well-being of families.

Such double-counting is likely to influence substantially our inferences

about average income growth, since transfer income increased in both the

U.S. and Canada during the 1980s. To circumvent this problem, we measured

factor income only (i.e., earnings plus property income) in recalculating




(if income from privately-held pensions is considered property income) since
a lack of detail in the public use samples made it necessary to include all
pension income as part of transfer income. Note also that property income
is under-reported, by 40 to 55 percent, in both surveys.



                                     17
average income for the economy as a whole. With this measure, we find that

average family-income growth was actually higher in the U.s. (0.18 percent

per annum) than in Canada (0.08 percent per annum) from 1979 to 1987,

showing that almost all of the growth in average income observed in Table 2

for Canada, and about half of the increase for the U.S., were due to

increased transfers. Also, using factor income only shows average income

to be roughly $500 higher in the U.S. than in Canada in 1997 (rather than

being roughly equal in the two countries1 as Table 2 suggests).

     Table 4 presents Lorenz curve coordinates for the distribution of

total family income (including transfer income) among all families1 and

within family types. Comparisons of Lorenz curves are made at quintile

points of the income distributionsj6 Among all families in the U.S., the

Lorenz curve for the 1987 distribution lies below the Lorenz curve for the

1919 distribution, implying that inequality was clearly higher in the U.S.

in 1987 than in 1979. No conclusions can be drawn about changes in

inequality over this period in Canada, since the Lorenz curve shifts in at

the lower quintile points    reflecting an increase in the share of income

going to those families at the bottom of the distribution -   - but   then

shifts out at higher quintile points. The three inequality indices

mentioned above are reported in Table 5; focusing only on these would

suggest that inequality fell in Canada, though Table 4 tells us that it is

possible this conclusion would change if other inequality indices were

used. Comparing the U.S. to Canada, we find that family income inequality




1'6Strictly speaking1 the curves should be compared at every point available
in order to determine whether they cross. However, a comparison of
selected curves at decile (and finer) levels indicates that our substantive
conclusions are not sensitive to the fineness of the comparison.



                                     18
is higher in the 13.5. than in Canada in both 1979 and 1987.

        One potential explanation for the differences between Canada and the

U.S. in the change over time in family income inequality is that the two

countries' family-type distributions have shifted differently over time.

We might conclude that changes in inequality are Largely explained by

changes in the distribution of family types if inequality did not change

among families within family typesJ7 But Table 4 reveals that increased

inequality within the U.S. is not due solely to such family-type changes,

sinte the Lorenz curves shifted outward from 1979 to 1987 for seven of the

eight family types in the U.S. (the exception being married couples with no
              18          .      .
chi.ldren).        Income inequality is lower in Canada than in the U.S. for all

eight family typesJ9 Within family types in Canada, inequality clearly

fell for lone females and female-headed families with children, but does

not appear to have changed for the other family types (except for married

couples with no children, for whom inequality appears to have increased).

       To construct generalized Lorenz curves, one can simply multiply the




171t is also true that changes in the variation of average incomes across
family types can lead to changes in overall inequality, even if the
family-type distribution and the level of inequality within family types
remained constant.
18The mean logarithmic deviation (KL.D) is particularly useful when
decomposing inequality into contributions from subgroups of the population
(see Bourguignon, 1979). For both countries, we decomposed the observed
change in MLD from 1979 to 1987 into portions due to:   (a) changes in the
percentage of families within family types; (b) changes in mean incomes
within family types; and, (c) changes in MLD within subgroups. Roughly
one-third of the increase in MLD for the U.S. (.018 points) can be
attributed to changes in family-type percentages; changes in family-type
percentages also worked to increase MLD in Canada, but the size of its
contribution in Canada (.006 points) was only one-third the size of the
U.S. contribution. In both countries, changes in group means had. a
negative impact on MLD, while within-group changes in MLD constituted the
major source of change in the overall value for this inequality index.
19
     This is true In both 1979 and 1987.


                                         19
Lorenz curve    coordinates   by average income. In order to use only factor

intome in calculating average incomes, we adjusted each familys income by

multiplying it by the ratio of average factor income to average total

income,20 The results are reported in Table 6.       For the most part, focusing

on this set of generalized Lorenz curves does not change any of the

substantive conclusions reached earlier for Canada: for all families it

cannot be said that welfare increased, though for families headed by

females (including lone females) social welfare was clearly higher in 1987

than in 1979.

     For che U.S., the results suggest that for all families, and within

most family types, increases in average income were not large enough to

offset increases in inequality and unambiguously increase social welfare

from 1979 to 1987.21 Two exceptions for whom welfare was clearly higher in

1987 are lone females - - whose high rate of growth in average income offset

their increase in inequality -. and married couples with no children. The

fact that average incomes fell while inequality increased for U.S.




20The same ratio (the one for the economy as a whole) was used for adjusting
average total income for each of the family types. This is preferable to
using the ratio of these incomes among families in the family type in
question, since average well-being for a group is not necessarily related
to the average factor income earned by that group. Note that the use of
the same ratio in adjusting all incomes implies that the Lorenz curves for
the distribution of total family income adjusted in this way will be the
same as those reported in Table 4.
     It would be even more desirable to analyze an after-tax,
after-transfer measure of income, However, there is no information on
direct taxes in the U.S., or on indirect taxes in either country, in the
data we use. Further, any assignment of the distributional burden of
government borrowing or inflation would be highly speculative, given the
current state of knowledge on these burdens.
210ne implication of second-order stochastic dominance comparisons is that a
necessary condition for welfare to decrease (increase) is that average
income must decrease (increase). Since average income did not decrease for
all but one of the family types in the U.S., it follows that welfare for
these family types could not have unambiguously declined.


                                         20
female-headed families with at least two children led to this group being

the only one In the two countries that was clearly worse off in 1987 than

in 1979.

     Our second method for comparing inequality and welfare in a manner

that reflects needs differences across families is to standardize the

income of each family for the family's size and composition. Thus, we

measure the number of "equivalent adults" in families with different

numbers of individuals, divide the family's income by the number of

equivalent adults, and then weight each family4s equivalent income by the

number of individuals in the family (so that we are measuring the

distribution of equivalent family income across individuals, not families;

see Danziger and Taussig, 1979). The equivalence scales we use are those

implicit in the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics' poverty lines; we also use

per capita family income as an alternative standardization (which, it

should be noted, takes no account of any household economies of scale,

unlike the first standardization described above). Lorenz and generalized

Lorenz curves   for these two   types of distributions are reported in Table

722 These numbers suggest that income inequality fell (or at least       did not
increase)   in Canada from 1979 to 1987, while average incopie increased,23 so

that both of these family income distributions in. 1987 were preferable to

those in Canada in 1979. For the U.S., both the inequality and the mean of

these distributions intreased, leading to the generalized Lorenz curves

crossing for the two years and leaving the change in welfare indeterminate.




22We again multiply all incomes by the ratio of average factor income to
average total income.
23The fifth quintile coordinate for the generalized Lorenz curve is by
construction equal to the average income.



                                        21
     in summary. the results of this section suggest that changes in the

family income distribution from 1979 to 1987 were very different in Canada

and the U.S. While average income (using factor income only) appears to

have grown at a somewhat faster pace in the U.S. than in Canada, income

inequality clearly increased in the U.S. but not in Canada. In both

countries, social welfare can be said to have increased for some

family-type groups, but not for all groups. However, if corrections for

differences in family needs are made using equivalence scales, it becomes

clear that the 1987 Canadian distribution is preferable to the 1979

Canadian distribution, while no clear conclusions about changei in social

welfare in the U.S. can be made.24

     Increases in transfer income seem to have played a large role in

keeping income inequality from increasing in Canada, Table 7 also present:s

inequality measures and distributional comparisons for total family

earnings among families with positive earnings, in both countries, average

total family earnings grew, but the inequality of earnings also grew. The

fact that the inequality of family earnings increased in Canada, while the

inequality of family income did not, suggests that the growth of transfer

income - -   which   from Table 3 we know is strongly and increasingly

negatively correlated with earnings       -   has had an equalizing impact on the

distribution of economic well-being in Canada. The fact that inequality




24tJe also calculated values of the empirical cumulative distribution
function for the equivalent income distribution. The results show that the
first-order stochastic dominance comparisons lead to the same conclusions
about social welfare changes (using the equivalent income distribution) as
the second-order stochastic dominance comparisons. This is because the
cumulative distribution function for Canada in 1987 has a lower value than
the 1979 function at all levels of income, while the 1987 U.S. distribution
function lies above the 1979 function at lower income levels but falls
below the 1979 function at higher income levels.


                                         22
clearly fell in Canada only among families headed by females (including

lone females) further suggests the importance of increasing transfer

income, since these families are the ones most directly affected by changes

in transfer policy.



IV. Changes in the Distribution of Hale Earnings


     A topic of research that has begun to garner wide attention in the

U.S.. is the recent increase in the dispersion of earnings among males. As

noted in Section III, the inequality of total family earnings increased in

both Canada and the U.S. in the l9SOs. Earnings inequality among a

comparably-defined sample of prime-age male earners also appears to have

increased from 1979 to 1987 in both countries. In this section we examine

the forces that may have worked to increase earnings inequality among males

in both countries, and that have potentially contributed to an increase in

family income inequality in the U.S.

     We focus our analysis on the earnings of a sample of male workers aged

25-64, who worked full-time year-round in the previous calendar year, and

who were either the head of their economic family, or were the husband in a

married couple that headed an economic family.25'26 Descriptive statistics

for the samples, which are drawn from the 1980 and 1988 SCF and CI'S, are




25The definition of full-time differs slightly in the two countries - - 35
hours or more per week in the U.S., but only 30 hours or more per week in
Canada. However, there are relatively few male workers who work between 30
and 35 hours per week in the U.S., so this difference is not likely to be
of much importance to our results.
26Earnings information is available in the Canadian SOP public use sample of
"economic" families (defined as two or more related individuals living
together, and unrelated individuals) for the household head (husband if a
married-couple family) and wife only. This fact made the restriction to
household heads necessary.

                                       23
presented in Table 8. Using the variance of the natural logarithm of

earnings as our measure of inequality, we see that earnings inequality

among males increased in both countries during the l980s, with the increase

being slightly larger in the U.S. than in Canada.27 In addition,

characteristics of the samples changed in a very similar fashion in both

countries from 1979 to 1987, with educational attainment clearly increasing

and the percent married falling. The age composition of the population

shows that the baby boom was of longer duration in the U.S., simce the age

distributions look very similar in 1979, but the entering cohorts in the

l9BOs were relatively much smaller in Canada than in the U.S.

     The coefficients from 01$   earnings   regressions for both countries in

1979 and 1987 are reported in Table 9. The dependent variable is the

logarithm of annual earnings, and the independent variables fall into four

classes: age and age squared; three educational-attainment dummies; two

marital status dummies; and eight (U.S.) or four (Canada) region dummies.

Comparing the estimates across countries for a given year, one sees that

the age and maritai status coefficients are reasonably similar, but the

earnings differences related to education are much larger in the U.S. Ove,r

the 1980s, changes occurred in the structure of earnings in both countries,

but in very different ways. For instance, there was little change in the

age/earnings relationship in the U.S., but in Canada the rate of growth of

earnings at the younger ages appears to have increased. The marital status

effects decreased in the l9BOs in the U.S., but there was no




27lnspection of Lorenz curves reveals that earnings inequality among males
increased unambiguously over the period in both countries, as did the other
three inequality indices, so that our use of the variance of logs does
provide an accurate indication of the direction of changes in earnings
dispersion.


                                      24
(statistically) significant change in the marital status differentials in

Canada. Most importantly, there was an increase in the education-related

earnings differences in the U.S., but from our estimates there appears to

have been no such change in Canada.

     Figures 1 and 2 provide more detail concerning the change in the

education/earnings relationship by plotting estimates of the

education/earnings profile using the complete years of schooling

information available in the data (i.e., eighteen education dummies in the

U.S., one for each year of education, and five education dummies in

Canada). The regressions from which the statistics in these figures are

drawn also include as independent variables thirty-nine age dummies (one

for each age), and the marital status and region dummies. In the figures,

the 1987 regression coefficients were rescaled so that the value for the

high-school dummy coefficient was equal to the same countryts 1979 value

for that dummy's coefficient; any changes in the plotted relationship can

thus be interpreted as changes in how workers with a given number of years

of schooling are doing relative to high-school-only workers.28 Inspection

of the graphs shows that the only major change for either country is among

U.S. workers with 16 or more years of schooling, a group whose relative

earnings clearly increased from 1979 to 1987.29

     Using these estimated earnings equations, the variance of logs can be




28The rescaling involved subtracting the difference between the 1987 and
1979 high-school-dummy coefficients from all of the other 1987 education
dummy coefficients (including the zero value for the coefficient for zero
years of schooling).
291or several recent analyses of the reasons behind the increase in the
return to education among males in the U.S., see Murphy and Welch, 1988;
Bound and Johnson, 1989; Katz and Revenga, 1989; and Blackburn, Bloom, and
Freeman, 1990.



                                      25
decomposed into variation contributed by the variances and covariances of

the independent variables; this allows us to measure the contribution of

each independent variable to the increase in the variance of logs (see

Blackburn, 1990). in particular, if earnings (w) can be represented as:

                      -I

(2)          w — exp(S fix.+e)
                     j—l

where xis a vector of associated independent variables,                is the

corresponding coefficient vector, 3 is the number of subsets of regressors

(e.g., 3—4 in this analysis because we consider vectors of age, education,

marital status, and region dummies), and c is an independently distributed

error term, then the variance of logs can be represented as:


                                     ,
                                                                  a2
              2
(3)                    Zfl'04$. +    Z    I                   +
             c1n w                               2fl4U.1fi1
                      j._jiiJJ      j—lk—j-t-l



where        is the covariance matrix for x and x.K. The coefficient vectors

and coefficient matrices were estimated for both countries in both years,

and the different components of the decomposition are referred to as

"primary variance effects" in Table 10.

        The results for the U.S. suggest that the biggest contributor to the

the increase in earnings variation from 1979 to 1987 was education (i.e.,

the composite effect of changes in the covariance matrix for the education

dummies and changes in the education-dummy coefficients). The other

important contributor to the increase in the variance of logs in the U.S.

is the covariance between age and education. Educational attainment

actually declined slightly among the youngest cohorts in the 1980s, thereby

increasing the covariance between age and education, which added to the

increase in the variance of logs since both age and education are


                                         26
positively related to earnings.30 In contrast to these results for the

U.S., the education effect and the age-education covariance effect are not

important to the increase in the variance of logs in Canada; in fact, the

difference in the magnitude of these two effects explains 75 percent of the

difference between the two countries in the increase in the variance of

logs from 1979 to 1987.

     For both countries, more than half of the increase in the variance of

logs is attributabLe to the increase in the residual variance (i.e.. a2 in

equation (3)). Following Blackburn (1990) we also consider the possibility

that the magnitude (and therefore the change in the magnitude) of the

residual variance is related to the composition (and the change in the

composition) of the population. For example, the residual variance may be

expected to increase as the age of the working population increases (e.g

as is predicted by the job matching theory of Rarris and HoLnstrom, 1982).

Therefore, we estimated equations with the squared error term (e2) as the

dependent variable, and with the same independent variables as in equation

(2); of course, €2 is not observed, so we used the squared residual from

the earnings equations as the dependent variable, i.e., we estimated:
                    J
             —   exp(E yz1+v)
                        3 .1
                   i—i

where   is the predicted error term from equation (2), the y.'s are vectors

of coefficients, and v is an error term. Using the estimates of the ifs




30The change in the variance of logarithms can be more finely decomposed
into portions due to changes in the coefficients and changes in the
tovariance matrices. This decomposition shows that the increase in the
education effect in the U.S. is due entirely to changes in the education
dummy coefficients, and that the increase in the age-education covariance
effect is due entirely to an increase in the covariance between age and
education.



                                     27
for 1979, we estimated how the change in the independent variables would be

expected to change a2 by multiplying the change in the average of each

independent variable by the associated coefficient from the residual

variance equation. The resulting predictions are reported in the "residual

variance effects" section of Table 10.

     In both countries, marital status changes have tended to increase the

residual variance (and therefore the variance of logs), since unmarried

(and especially never-married) males tend to have larger unexplained

earnings variation. In the U.S., the movement towards the Northeast (where

the residual variance is Lower) has tended to decrease the variance of

logs. The increase in educational attainment has also tended to lower the

residual variance. Overall, changes in the residual variance associated

with changes in the independent variables sum to zero in Canada, and are

slightly negative for the U.S.

     Consistent with Juhn, Murphy, and Pierce (1989) and Blackburn (1990),

the increase in the variation of earnings that is explained in this section

is much less than the total increase in the variation of earnings. This is

especially true for Canada, where only 22 percent of the increase in the

variance of logs is accounted for by our analysis (35 percent is accounted

for in the U.S.). Nevertheless, it is clear that earnings inequality

increased more in the U.S. in the l9SOs then in Canada (for males). Our

anaLysis suggests this to be predominantly an education-related difference.

insofar as changes in the distribution of individual earnings contribute to

changes in the distribution of total family income, the fact that total

family income inequality increased in the U.S. but not in Canada in the

1980s also appears to be at least partly related to education.




                                     28
V. Summary

     Lx ante, one might have expected that changes over time in the

Canadian and U.S. income distributions would be similar. This expectation

would be reasonable if it were true that the labor markets in the two

countries have been similar (and to some extent interrelated), and if the

nature and role of the family in the two societies have been similar. Our

findings do not verify this expectation, but instead suggest that changes

in the family income distribution were quite different in the two

countries. Average family income from factor-of-production sources (i.e.,

total income less transfer income) grew slowly, by postwar standards, in

both countries, but the rate of growth in average income from 1979 to 1987

was higher in the U.S. than in Canada. However, income inequality among

families clearly increased in the U.S. over the same period, while in

Canada there was no clear change in inequality (or perhaps a decline in

inequality if equivalent income is usec-). In neither country can it be

conclusively said that families were better off in a social welfare sense

(assuming welfare is directly reLated to income), although evidence that

social welfare increased in Canada does emerge when we analyze

distributions of equivalent and per capita income.

     What was different about the countries that led to differences in how

the income distributions were changing? One factor that played a role was

differences in how the structure of families changed in the l9SOs. In the

U.S., there was an increase in the relative prevalence of female-headed

families with children, but not in Canada; there was also a more pronounced

shift towards unrelated individuals itt the U.S. than in Canada, Both of

these groups tend to have relatively high levels of inequality, so these

differential shifts likely played a role in increasing inequality in the



                                    29
U.S. relative to Canada. Yet, inequality increases occurred within all

family   types   (except one) in the U.S. •    but did not clearly increase within

family types (except one) in Canada, so family-type changes are not the

entire story. One especially interesting difference between the countries

pertains to how the economic status of female-headed families with children

changed in the 1980s, since the economic welfare of these families

increased dramatically in Canada, but either remained constant or declined

in the U.S. These results suggest that income transfers play an important

role in explaining the different changes in inequality in the two

countries, since female-headed families are one of the primary recipients

of transfer income, and transfer income increased much more over the period

in Canada than in the U.S.

     tZhile family income inequality increased in the U.S. but not in

Canada, earnings inequality among prime-age males increased in both

countries in the 1980s. In addition, the increases in earrtings inequality

in bath countries are largely not explained by changes in observable

characteristics of the populations (i.e., age, education, marital status,

region), though slightly more variation is explained in the U.S.

Interestingly, the size of the unexplained portion of the increase in

earnings inequality is very similar in the two countries. The primary

reason why the explained portion is higher in the U.S. is that the return

to education for males increased in the l980s in the U.S., but does not

appear to have increased in Canada.31




31tJhile we do not explore this possibility in any detail here, this
difference in the change in the returns to education could be due to the
more rapid growth in Canada in the supply of more-educated workers (see
Table 8).



                                          30
                                 REFERENCES


Atkinson, Anthony B. 1987,    "On the Measurement of Poverty."
   Econometrica, 55(4): 749-764.

Beach, Charles K. 1989. "Dollars and Dreams: A Reduced Middle Class?
   Alternative Explanations." Journal of Human Resources. 24(1): 162-193.

Blackburn, McKinley L.  1990, "What Can Explain the Increase in Earnings
   Inequality among Males'?" industrial Relations. 29(3): 441-456.

Blackburn, McKinley L. and David E. Bloom. 1967. "Earnings and Incouie
   Inequality in the United States." Population and Development Review,
   13(4): 575-609.

Blackburn, McKinley L, and David E. Bloom. 1989. "Income Inequality
   Business Cycles, and Female Labor Supply." In Research on Economic
   inequality. Volume 1. Greenwich1 Conn.: .JAI Press.

Blackburn, McKinley L,, David E. Bloom, and Richard B. Freeman. 1990.
   "The Declining Economic Position of Less Skilled American Men." In A
   Future of Lousy Jobs? The Changing Structure of U.S. Wages. Edited by
   Gary Burtless. Washington, b.c.: The Brookings Institution.

Bound, John and George Johnson. 1989. "Changes in the Structure of Wages
   During the 1980s: An Evaluation of Alternative Hypotheses." National
   Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper # 2963.

Bourguignon, Francois. 1979, "Decomposable Income Inequality Measures."
   Econometrica. 47(4): 901-920.

Bourguignon. Francois. 1989. "Family Size and Social Utility; Income
   Distribution Dominance Criteria." Journal of Econometrics. 42: 67-80.

Burtless, Gary. 1990. "Earnings Inequality over the Business and
   Demographic Cycles." In A Future of Lousy Jobs? The Changing Structure
   of U.S. Wages. Edited by Gary Burtless. Washington: D.C.: The
   Brookings Institution.

Buse, Adolf.  1982. "The Cylical Behaviour of the Size Distribution of
   Income. in Canada; 1947-78." Canadian Journal of Economics. 15(2):
   189-204.

Danziger, Sheldon, and Michael Taussig. 1979. "The Income Unit and the
   Anatomy of Income Distribution." Review of Income and Wealth, 25:
   365-375.

Dasgupta, Partha, Amartya Seti, and David Starrett. 1973. "Notes on the
   Measurement of Inequality." Journal of Economic Theory. 6; 180-187.

Dooley, Martin D. 1986. "The Overeducated Canadian? Changes in the
   Relationship among Earnings, Education, and Age for Canadian Mart:
   1971-81." Canadian Journal of Economics. 19(l): 142-159.
Dooley, Martin 0. 1987. "WithIn-Cohort Earnings inequality Among Canadian
   Men: 1971-1982.' Relations lnduscrielies. 42(3): 594-609.

Dooley, Martin D. 1988. "An Analysis of Changes in Family Income and
   Family Structure in Canada Between 1973 and 1986 with an Emphasis on
   Poverty Among Children." Program for Quantitative Studies in Economics
   and Population Research Report # 238.

Dooley, Martin D. 1989. "The Demography of Child Poverty in Canada:
   1973-1986." Program for Quantitative Studies in Economics and
   Population Research Report # 251.

Dooley, Martin D.  1990. "Changes in the Economic Welfare of Lone Mother
   Families in Canada Since 1970." Unpublished paper, McMaster University.

Freeman, Richard 8.   1976. The   Overeducated   American.   Orlando,   Florida:
   Academic Press.

Hadar, Josef and William Russell. 1974, "Stochastic Dominance in Choice
   under Uncertainty." In Essays on Economic Behavior Under Uncertainty.
   Edited by M. Blach, D. McFadden, and S. Wu. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Harris, Milton and Bengt Holmstrom.  1982. 'A Theory of Wage Dynamics."
   Review of Economic Studies. 44(3): 315-333.

Henderson, D.W. and J.C.R. Rowley. 1977. "The Distribution and Evolution
   of Canadian Family Incomes, 1965-1973." Economic Council of Canada
   Discussion Paper   91.

Jam, S. 1975. Size Distribution of Income: A Compilation of Data.
   Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin Murphy, and Brooks Pierce. 1989. "Wage Inequality
   and the Rise in Returns to Skill." Unpublished paper, University of
   Chicago.

Kakwani, Nanak. 1984. "Welfare Ranking of Income Distributions." In
   Advances in Econometrics. Volume 3. Greenwich, Conn.: JAI Press.

Karoly, Lynn A.   1988. "A Study of the Distribution of Individual Earnings
   in the United States from 1967 to 1986.' Unpublished doctoral thesis,
   Yale University.

Katz, Lawrence F. and Ana L. Revenga. 1989. "Changes in the Structure of
   Wages: The United States vs Japan.' Journal of the Japanese and
   Intez-national Economies. 3: 522-553.
Levy, Frank. 1988. Dollars and Dreams: The Changing American Income
   Distribution. New York: Norton.

Lillard, Lee, James P. Smith, and Finis Welch. 1986. 'What Do We Really
   Know about Wages? The Importance of Nonreporting and Census imputation."
   Journal of Political Economy. 94(3): 489-506.
Lydall, Harold F,  1978. "Some Problems in Making International
   Comparisons of Inequality." In lncolDe Inequality. Edited by John
   Maroney. Lexington. MA: Lexington Books.

McWatters, Catherine J. and Charles N. Beach.   1990, "Factors Behind the
   Changes in Canada's Family Income Distribution and the Share of the
   Middle Class." Relations Industrielles, 45(1): 118-133.

Murphy, Kevin and Finis Welch. 1988. "Wage Differentials in the 1980s:
   The Role of International Trade." Unpublished paper, University of
   Chicago.

Nyles, J., C. Picot and t. Wanrtell. 1988. "The Changing Wage Distribution
   of Jobs, 1981-1986." Canadian Economic Observer. 11(4): 1-33.

Shorrocks, Anthony F. 1983. "Ranking Income DistributionsJ' Economica.
   50(1): 3-17.

Summers1 Robert and Alan Heston. 1988. "A New Set of International
   Comparisons of Real Product and Price Levels: Estimates for 130
   Countries, 1950-1985." Review of income and Wealth. 34(1): 1-25,

van Cinneken, Wouter and Jong-goo Park. 1984. Generating Internationally
   Comparable Income Distribution Estimates. Ceneva: International Labour
   Office.

Wolfson, Michael. 1986.   "Stasis Amid Change: Income Inequality in Canada
   1965-1983." Review of Income and Wealth. 32(4): 337-368.
                                   Aa?ersJis:    Studies    of   Changes in Canadian Income and    Earnings    inequality


        Study              Data                      Period               Distributional                Results                          Important    Factors
                                                                               Aspect



                                                                 Studies at the family Level

 Henderson and      Survey of                    1965-1973                  Inequality            trend towards
 Rowley 11977)      ConSLpwr                                                                                                 declining    family she      arid   the
                                                                            of family             greater
                    Finances                                                                                                 decline     in familiea    with    saele
                                                                            income                inequality over            earners
                                                                           (Cmi                   period
                                                                           coeff     I



 Wolfson 11986)    Survey of                     1965-1983                  lnequsl £1/           increase from
                   Consuner                                                                                                  fsniIy-tpe changes        and
                                                                                                                                                    changes
                                                                           of "census"             1965-11, declIne
                   Finances                                                                                                  In labor force participation,
                                                                           (sell ies,             to 1979,                  especiaLly aueang females, ere
                                                                           with equiv.            increase to 1983          scsI iirpoi-tant; Increase In
                                                                           adjustment                                       investment and transfer inccane
                                                                                                                            was equalizing
Dooley (1988)      Survey of                    1973-1984                  tow-income              increase in              decline
                   Consune r                                                                                                           In family site was
                   F i nances                                              etatus, end            economic stutus            Important    to   the Increase      in
                                                                                                   In the 1970s,            economic status, as was the
                                                                           income,       for      but a decrease            increase In goverrisent transfer
                                                                           fa,si Lies             In the 1950s              parnents and the increase in
                                                                                                  (escept for               wive's earnings
                                                                                                  elderly)
Dooley (1989)     Survey of                     1973-1986                 low-income           decline inlow-
                  Constaner                                               status                                            declining family the end
                  F nances
                    i                                                                             inccsne                   increaaingeducational
                                                                          ancng                percentages over             attalrvsent esplain all of
                                                                          children             period, though               declining poverty for children
                                                                                               sLight       Increase        in married couples, but only
                                                                                               in the 19$Os                 about one-half      for   female-headed
                                                                                                                            families
KcWattar; and     published data                1965-1987
Beach (1990)                                                              inequat   i Il/      large increases
                  using the                                                                                                 increase in women's labor force
                                                                          arid ann             in   mean, arid
                  Survey of                                               incomes        for                                participationhas an increasing
                                                                                               sanedecline in
                  Const.aner                                                                                                impact on inequality, as has the
                                                                          families             inequality, 14)              fall in ,,,aie labor force
                  finances                                                                     to  1980; little             participation
                                                                                               change in mean,
                                                                                               arid   sotre
                                                                                               increase in
                                                                                               inequality      after
                                                                                               1980
                                    Studies of Changes In Canadian   Incn and Earnings inequaLity (continued)

         Study               Data                     Period          Distributional                 Results                    irportant Factors
                                                                            Aspect




                                                           Studies at the Irdividuat Level

Ruse (1982)          individuaL tea            1947-1978                inequaLity                                              in the
                                                                                             upsard trend in          changes            Labor   force
                    returns                                            of                    inequaLity       (from   participation rate •re the
                                                                        IndividuaL           regressions       that   factor 'cat isportant to changes
                                                                        Inc oaw              control     for          in inequality, with higher
                                                                                             inc                      participation leading to Lower
                                                                                             definition               I
                                                                                                                        nequel I ty
                                                                                             changes)

Oooiey (1986)       Survey of                  various years           return to             decline In the           the entrance of the baby boom
                    Consine   r                from 1971-                                    return to
                                                                       education,                                     eeelM to explain aotre, but not
                    Finances                   1981                    and age,              adjcat   Ion,            alt, of the change In the return
                                                                       for males             ecstly In 1971-          to education
                                                                       aged 20-64            75;   no   change   in
                                                                                             age-related
                                                                                             differentials

Dooley   (198?)     survey of                  various years           InequaLIty            no clear trend           changes In the Lrenptoment rate
                    cons.sucr                  from 1971-              of weekly             for all workers,         at-c leportant to changes over
                    Finances                   1982                    erg! annuat           increases for            time In inequality
                                                                       earnings              some yotrig
                                                                                             workers, and
                                                                                             decreases for
                                                                                             come old workers

Myles, Picot, and   Survey of Work             1981 and 1954           Inequality            Increase    In           only a smell part of the
werreLI (1988)      History                                            and swan   of         percentage of            observed change Is attributable
                    (1981); Labor                                      hour Iy               Jobs at very tow         to Industry and occt*at ion
                    Market                                             earnings              wages,    bat no         shifts
                    Actlvfly                                                                 clear    change In
                    Survey    (19M)                                                          Inequati   ty
                                      Table 1
                 Descriptive Statistics for the Family Population'


                                   United States                   Canada
Variable                          1979        1987          1979            1987
Percent in Family-
 Type Group:
  Lone Male                       13.7        15.6          13.0            14.1
  Lone Female                     16.8        18.0          16.5            16.5
  Female/1Kid                      2.3         2.7           1.7             1.6
  Femaie/2 Kids                    3.0         3.1           1.5             1,6
  Married/0 Kids                  21.3        20.5          19.7            21.1
  Married/i Kid                    8.2         7.5           8.9             7,4
  Married/2 Kids                  15.0        13.3          19.0            16.5
  Other                           19.7        19.4          19.7            21.2

Percent of Families With Read
 Widowed, Divorced, or Separated

  All Families                    26.6        28.0          19.2            19.8

  Lone Male                      42.9         42.2          30.4            32.5
  Lone Feaaie                    64.8         63.2          51.6            51.5
  Female/I Kid                   74.5         66.7          73.9            59.2
  Female/2 Kids                  80.0         69.9          85.0            80.3
  Married/0 Kids                               --            --              --
  Marrted/i+Kid                                --            --              --
  Married/2 Kids                               --            -.              --
  Other                           29.1        32.4          21.2            21.5

Percent of Families
 With 2 Earners:
  All Families                    39.0        37.5          40.7            44.3

  Lone Male                                    -   -         .-              --
  Lone Female                      -   -       --            .-              -.
  Female/i Kid                     6.6         7.7           6.5             8.3
  Female/2 Kids                   11.5         9.0           9.1            10.9
  Married/0 Kids                  44.2        44.4          48.1            48.3
  Married/lKid                    69.6        76.0          66.3            77.1
  Married/I Kids                  60.8        68.5          55.0            71.7
  Other                           72.1        70.2          74.2            76.5

Average S   of   Earners          1.34        1.29          1.27            1.43


 The family population definition includes unrelated individuals - -
individuals  living alone or with individuals to whom they are not related
-- as separate families. Children are defined as anyone under the age of

lB. Sample weights were used in calculating all figures reported in Tables
1-8.
                                     Table 2
               Average Total Faintly Income (in 1987 US Dollars)'



                             United States                Canada
                                             Growth                   Growth
Lopislation Group            1979    1987     Rate2    1979    1987    Rate

All Families                27043   28026    0.4%     26438   28066   0.7%

Among Family-Type:
  Lone Male                 18021   19137    0.8      16281   16601   0.2
  Lone Female               11846   14000    2.1      11679   13398    Li
  Female/i Kid              13181   13497    0.3      11633   13039   1,4
  Female/2 Kids             12144   11522 -0.7        12789   14336   1.4
 Married/0 Kids             30231   32022    0.7      28123   29675   0.7
 Married/i Kid              33314   36759    1.2      31745   34533   1.1
 Married/2 Kids             34992   36936    0.7      32921   36026   1.1
 Other                      38037   37996 -0.0        37451   39149   0.6

Numbers of Earners:

  0                        10836    12466    1.8       9246   12801  4.1
  1                        22836    23244    0.2      21639   21527 -0.1
  2                        36501    39145    0.9      35633   37018   0.5
  3+                       48851    50561    0.4      47250   48324   0.3


'The conversion to 1987 US dollars used the GNP PCE deflator for the US,
the Canadian CPI reported in the X.L        2j Labor Statistics. 1912
(Geneva: ILO), and the purchasing power parities developed by the OECD.
Total family income includes cash income for all f wily members, excluding
capital gains and one-time lump-sum receipts. income figures were
top-coded at 50O0O 1979 VS dollars.
2These are estimated annual (exponential) growth rates, calculated using
the 1979 and 1987 endpoints.
                                    Table 3
                       Components of Total Family Income


                                 United States                     Canada
                                1979        1987           1979              1987


Percent of Income from:
  Tot. Fern. Earnings (IFE)     82.9        81.0           83.8              79.7
  Property Income (Pt)2          5.7         7.0            5.8               5.3
  Transfer Income (TI)          11.4        12.0           10.4              15.1

Correlation Between:
  TFE and Fl                    .040        .036            .013              .015
  TFE and TI                   -.423       -.434           -.414            -.453
  PlandTl                      -.133       -.094           -.063            - .020




i. Property income consists of interest and dividend income, but does not
include private pension income.
z. Transfer income includes both government cash transfers, and some
private cash transfers (e.g., alimony and child support), as well as
government and private pension income.
                                  Table 4
  Lorenz Curve Coordinates, At Quintile Points, For Total Family Incooe'


                               United States
Family Type                  1979    1987      A2     1979    1987   a

All Families
  1st Quintile                .039   .035             .043    .048
  2nd Qu.intile               .139   .131             .151    .156
                                               +
  3rd Quintile                .310   .298             .331    .330
  4th Quintile                .568   .558             .590    .565

Lone Kale
  1st Quintile                .035   .031             .043    .046
  2nd Quintile                .133   .124
                                               +      .140    .147
  3rd Quintile                .302   .283             .316    .312
  4th Quintile                .554   .536             .573    .567

Lone Female
  1st Qtsintile              .045    .040             .052    .062
  2nd Quintile               .143    .132             .149    .173
                                               +
  3rd Quintile               .297    .283             .297    .326
  4th Quintile               .539    .528             .549    .566

Female/i Kid
  1st Quintile                .039   .031             .048    .070
  2nd Quintile                .142   .115
                                               +      .155    .183
  3rd Quintile               .319    .270             .326    .335
  4th Quintile               .581    .527             .573    .584

Female/? Kids
  1st Quintile               .045    .038             .047    .074
  2nd Quintile               .152    .125             .158    .199
                                               ÷
  3rd Quinti].e              .313    .266             .313    .356
  4th Quintile               .558    .502             .546    .583

Married/0 Kids
  1st Quintile                .058   .059             .062    .071
  2nd Quintile                .175   .175      -
                                                      .179    .189
  3rd Quintile                .351   .351             .365    .363
  4th Quintile                .603   .603             .619    .609


Married/i Kid
  1st Quintile                .076   .066             .080    .078
  2nd Quintile                .216   .198             .729    .220
                                                                     +
                                               +
  3rd Quintile                .405   .385             .421    .410
  4th Quintile                .647   .633             .661    .651

           +
Married/2    Kids
  1st   Quintile              .076    .067            .083    .085
  2nd   Quintile              .220    .203            .234    .233
                                               +              .422
  3rd   Quintile              .408    .391.           .424
  4th   Quintile              .647    .637            .660    .660
                           Table 4   (continued)

                               United States                  Canada
Family Type                  1979     1987      A          1979    1987      A

Other
  1st   Quintile              .037     .051                .068       .072
  2nd   Quintile              .181     .169                .203       .205
                                                                             ?
  3rd   Quintile              .369     .353                .393       .392
  4th   Quintile              .628     .620                .645       .644


The numbers reported are the Lorenz curve     values   at ordinates     — .2 (1st
quintile), .6 (2nd quintile), .6 (3rd quintile), and .8 (4th      quintile).
2This column indicates the direction of change in inequality based on
shifts in the Lorenz curves from 1979 to 1987, with a +,, representing an
increase, a "-  representing a decrease, and & ?" representing an
inconclusive change.
                                    Table 5
                 Indexes of Inequality for Total Family Income


                                 United States                   Canada
Family Type                     1979        1987          1979            1987

All Families
    MLD                         .425        .466          .348            .295
    Entropy                     .263        .278          .229            222
    Cmi                         .398        .411          .373            .371

Lone   Males
    MLD                         .601        .632          .426            .361
    Entropy                     .302        .325          .264            .257
    Cmi                         .416        .436          .394            .394
Lone Females
    MLD                         .526        .596          .469            .296
    Entropy                     .299        .320          .276            .231
    Cmi                         .417        .434          .407            .373
Female/I Kid
    MLD                         .485        .578          .312            .219
    Entropy                     .258        .335          .238            .203
    Cmi +                       .389        .449          .381            .353
Female/ 2 Kids
    t{LD                        .464        .543          .330            .219
    Entropy                     .268        .354          .266            .192
    Cmi                         .398        .457          .400            .339
Married/0 Kids
   MLD                          .250        .252          .222            .191
   Entropy                      .194        .188          .172            .168
    Cmi                         .343        .341          .327            .324
Married/l Kid
   MLD                          .168        .201          .150            .170
   Entropy                      .129        .152          .111            .119
    Cliii
        +                       .278        .302          .258            .271
Married/2 Kids
                                .186        .206          .150            .125
    Entropy                     .131        .144          .109            .105
    Cmi                         .275        .295          .254            .254
Other
    MLD                         .237        .272          .184            .164
    Entropy                     .170        .186          .137            .132
    Cmi                         .320        .336          .290            .288


*
 MLD    is
        the mean logarithmic deviation. In calculating MLD and Entropy,
nonpositive incomes were recoded as $1. Incomes were not recoded in
calculating the Cmi coefficient.
                                    Table 6
              Ceneralized Lorenz Curve Coordinates, at Quintiles
                            for Total Family Income


                                 United States               Canada
Family Type                     1979    1987 A2       1979       1987 A

All Families
  1st Quintile                   924     819          1009       1152
  2nd Quintile                  3340    3116          3576       3709
  3rd Quintile                  7422    7146 7        7840       7863
  4th Quintile                 13622   13480         13974      13948
  5th Quintile                 23968   24324         23678      23828

Lone Male
  1st Quintile                   553     527           622       642
  2nd Quintile                  2132    2081          2048      2068
  3rd Quintile                 4816     4773 7        4608      4399 7
  4th Quintile                 8855     9022          8349       7993
  5th Quintile                 15972   16844         14581      14094

Lone Female
  1st Quintile                  476     494            542       708
  2nd Quintile                  1502    1623          1555      1969
  3rd Quintile                  3116    3484 +        3106       3704 +
  4th Quintile                  5663    6508          5739      6442
  5th Quintile                 10499   12328         10460      11375

FemaleJl Kid
  1st Quintile                   456     367           505       776
  2nd Quintile                  1655    1371          1612      2025
  3rd Quintile                  3728    3203 7        3392       3707 +
  4th Quintile                  6786    6255          5971       6470
  5th Quintile                 11682   11880         10418      11070

Feutale/? Kids
  1st Quintile                   482     384           538        898
  2nd Quintile                  1632    1268          1805       2424
  3rd Quintile                  3364    2693 -        3584      4335 +
  4th Quintile                  6003    5096          6258       7090
  5th Quintile                 10763   10142         11453      12171

Married/0 Kids
  1st Quintile                  1564    1706          1558       1791
  2nd Quirttile                 4676    5096          4514       4758
  3rd Quintile                  9414   10203 +        9186       9156 7
  4th Quintile                 16238   17529         15585      15350
  5th Quintile                 26794   28186         25187      25194
                            Table 6 (continued)


                               United States                 Canada
Family type                   1979    1987 L2         1979       1987   a

Married/I Kid
  1st Quintile                2250        2123        2283      2286
  2nd Quintile                6380        6416        6504      6457
  3rd Quintile               11964       12454   7   11980     12016    7
  4th Quintile               19095       20496       18803     19091
  5th Quintile               29526       32355       28431     29319
                                     .
Married/2 Kids
  1st Quintile                2358        2191        2456      2610
  2nd Quirttile               6811        6601        6900      7129
  3rd Quintile               12652       12707   7   12509     12915    +
  4th Quintile               20064       20712       19466     20174
  5th Quintile               31013       32511       29484     30586

Other
  1st   Quintile              1909        1698        2288      2398
  2nd   Quintile              6098        5640       6804       6818
  3rd   Quintile             12439       11818   -   13172     13036    7
  4th   Quintile             21185       20729       21644     21401
  5th   Quintile             33712       33443       33541     33238


tThe coordinates are expressed in 1987 US dollars, and are corrected for
double-counting of transfer income.
2Th is column indicates the direction of change in social welfare based on
shifts in the generalized Lorenz curves from 1979 to 1987, with a "-i-"
representing an increase, a      representing a decrease, and a •7fl
representing an inconclusive change
                                  Table 7
    Welfare and Inequality Comparisons for Other Definitions of Incowe


                                    United States          Canada
lncome Definition                  1979    1987     A   1979   1987 A

Per Capita Income2

Lorenz Curve Coordinates
  1st Quintile
  2nd Quintile                     .162    .148          .183    .191
  3rd Quintile                     .329    .313          .353    .361
  4th Quintile                     .569    .557          .590    .597

Cen. Lcrenz Curve    Coordinates
  1st Quintile                      462     425          557     632
  2nd Quintile                     1509    1500         1619    1792
  3rd Quintile                     3064    3170     ?   3121    3389    ÷
  4th Quintile                     5298    5643         5211.   5597
  5th Quintile                     9313   10133         8839    9382

Inequality Measures
  Mean Log. Deviation              .336    .387          .253    .213
  Entropy                          .249    .273          .202    .187
  Cmi CoefficLent                  .380    .401.         .346    .335

Equivalent Income

Lorenz Curve Coordinates
  1st Quintile                     .052    .044          .064    .069
  2nd Quintile                     .172    .157          .194    .198   .
  3rd Quintile                     .350     333
  4th Quintile                     .600    .588          .623    .624

Cen. Lorenz Curve Coordinates
  1st Quintile                  852         772         1.015    1136
  2nd Quintile                 2816        2725          3062    3276
  3rd Quintile                 5739        5788     7    5965    6275   ÷
  4th Quintile                 9828       10218          9853   10325
  5th Quintile                16388       1.7380        15827   16551

Inequality Measures
  Mean Log. Deviation              .305    .354          .227    .192
  Entropy                          .207    .229          .164    .156
  Cmi Coefficient                  .350    .371          .315    .310

Total Family Eaninga4

Lorenz Curve Coordinates
  1st Quintile                     .038    .035          .044    .039
  2nd Quintile                     .149    .139          .166    .153
  3rd Quintile                     .328    .313          .352    .334
  4th Quintile                     .585    .573          .607    .592
                            Table 7 (continued)


                               United States           Canada
Income Definition             1979    1987          1979    1987

Inequality Measures
  Mean Log. Deviation         .366    .402          .310    .338
  Entropy                     .239    .258          .208    .230
  Cmi Coefficient             .379    .395          .352    .371

Average Total Family Earnings,
 By Number of Earners
  1 Earner                   19568   19497         18534   17521
  2 Earners                  34015   36477         32579   33430
  ?Earners                   45768   47454         43338   44122

  All Families with
  Earnings                   28076   29027         26863   28063

i. This column indicates the direction of change in either inequality or
social welfare (whichever is applicable).
2. The per capita income distribution uses total family income (adjusted
for transfer double-counting) per person in the family as the income
measure for each individual in the family; the distribution is measured
across persons.
3. Equivalent income for each person is total family income (adjusted for
transfer double-counting) divided by the number of equivalent nonelderly
adults in the family; the distribution is measured across persons.
4. The total family earnings distribution uses all earned income of
individuals in the family as the income measure; the distribution is
measured across all families with positive earnings.
                                    Table B
           Descriptive Statistics for the Male, Full-Time Year-Round,
                              Prime -Age Population


                                 United States                    Canada
Income Level                     1979        1987          1979            1987


Variance of the Logarithm
 of Annual Earnings              .286        .320          .270            .288

Percent:
 Married                         86.3        80.7   •
                                                           88.4            85.5
 Widowed, Div., Sep.              7.2         9.3           4.5             5.3

Percent in Age Groups:
 25-34                           33.2        32.4          34.1            30,8
 35-44                           27.3        32.2          28.2            32.9
 45-54                           23.0        21.9          22.9            22.9
 55-64                           16.5        13.5          14.8            13.4

Percent In Education Groups:
 Less than High School           20.3        14.1          36.2            24.9
 High School Graduate            35.5        36.4          30.1            31.5
 Some College                    18.1        18.9          18.9            23.3
 College Graduate                26.1        30.6          14.8            20.3

Percent in Region:
 Northeast                       20.6        24.3           --              --
 North Central                   24.7        24.4           --              --
 South                           28.6        29.8           --              --
 West                            26.1        21.5           --              -.
 htlantic                         --          --            7.0             7.3
 Quebec                           --          -            25,5            24.5
 Ontario                          --          --           38.8            39.5
 Prarie                           --          --           17.2            17.0
 British Columbia                 --          --           11.5            11.7



Sample Size                     27626       24693         16821            17954


*Primeage is defined as 25-64. For the U.S., full-time year-round is
defined as working an average of at least 35 hours per week for at least 50
weeks over the year; for Canada, it is defined as working 30 hours per week
for at least 50 weeks. The samples are restricted to either heads of
families or spouses of heads of families. Sample weights were used in the
calculations for Tables 9-11 for Canada, but not for the US (where the
provided weights vary relatively little).
                                    Table 9
                   OLS Estimates of Annual Earnings Equations



                                 United States                   Canada
Independent Variable            1979        1997          1979             1987


Age                             .055        .056          .051             .056
                               (.002)      (.003)        (.003)           (.003)

Age2/100                       - .057      - .057        -.057            - .061
                               (.003)      (.003)        (.003)           (.004)

High School                     .274        .270          .175             .152
 Graduate                      (.008)      (.010)        (.010)           (.010)

Some College                    .372        .402          .226             .222
                               (.010)      (.011)        (.011)           (.011)

College Graduate                .570        .652          .475             .465
                               (.009)      (.010)        (.012)           (.011)

Married                         .230        .176           .220            .197
                               (.012)      (.011)         (.015)          (.013)

Widowed, Div., Sep.             .125        .080           .107            .145
                               (.016)      (.015)         (.023)          (.021)



R2                               .18          .21           .13             .13



•The regressions also include eight region dummies for the U.S., and four
region dunimies for Canada1 as independent variables. The dependent
variable is the natural logarithm of annual earnings.
                                            Table 10
                  Decomposit.on of      the    Variance of Logarithms1


                                    UnitS Stat es                                    Canada
Effect                             1979   1987    A                     1979         1987


Primary Variance Effects:

Age                                .009           .010      .001        .005      .007            .002
Education                          .043           .052      .009        .025      .026            .001
Marital Status                     .004           .003     - .001       .003      .003                0
Region                             .004           .005      .001        .003      .003                0
COV(Age,Education)             -   .004           .000      .004    -   .002     -.002            .   0
COV(Age,MST)                       .002           .003      .001        .001      .002            .001
COV(Education,MST)             -   .002       -   .001      .001    -   .002     -   .002             0

Residual Variance Effects:2

Age                                 --            --       - .002        --           --          .001
Education                           --             --      - .001        --           --      -   + 002
t4arital Status                     --             --       .003         --           --          .002
Region
                                    --             --      - .004        --           --      - . 001

Variance of Logarithms             .286           .320      .034        .270         .288         .018
  A Accounted For                   -   -          -   -    .012         -   -        -   -       .004
  A Unaccounted For                 --             --       .022         --           --          .014


i. The log earnings regressions included two marital status dummies, 39
age dummies, 17 education dummies (5 education dummies for Canada), and
eight region dummies (4 region dummies in Canada) as independent variables.
The residual variance regressions used the same independent variables. The
covariance effects between the region variables and the other three sets of
variables were small and inconsequential, and are not reported.
a. The effects were calculated by multiplying the change in the means of
the independent variables over the two years (for any one country) by the
residual variance equation coefficient estimates in 1979 for that country.
                                                 Figure 1
                                  Education-Related Earnings Differentials
                                            in the United States

              Logarithmic Differential
        1.2

          1


       0.8

       0.6

       0.4

       0.2



      -0.2
              0               3            6           9            12       15   18
                                               Years of Education




The differentials in 1987 were scaled so
                                           HI]9___
that the 3979 and 1987 high-school
differentials are equaL
                                                 Figure 2
                                  Education-Related Earnings Differentials
                                                in Canada

            Logarithmic Differential
      0.6

      0.5

      0.4

      0.3

      0.2

      0_I



            0                3             6           9            12       15   18
                                               Years of Education




The differentials in 1987 were scaled so
                                           L3iIIEFFI
thai the 1979 and 1987 high-school
differentials are equal.
