                   NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




        DISPERSiON AND HETEROGENEITY OF FIRM PERFORMANCES
           IN NINE FRENCH SERVICE INDUSTRIES, 1984—J987




                         Elizabeth Kremp

                        Jacques Mairesse




                     Working Paper No. 3665




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridqe, MA 02138
                           March 1991




A first version of this paper has been presented at the
Conference on Research in Income and Wealth: Output Measurement
in the Services Sector, Charleston, South Carolina May 4-5
1990. We are grateful to lvi Griliches for encouragements and
suggestions, and tc the participants of the NBER productivity
seminar for comments. We thank Jean Albert, Jean Marie Chanut,
Marc Tajan. and Philippe Trogan for their help in having access
to the French annual survey of market services data. This paper
is part of MEER's research program in Productivity. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                         NBER Working Paper *3665
                                         March 1991

        DISPERSION AND HETEROGENEITY OF FIRM PERFORMANCES
           IN NINE FRENCH SERVICE INDUSTRIES, 1984-1987
                             AD STRACT

     In the present study, we have taken advantage of the wealth

of information provided by the French annual survey of market
services to construct a panel sample of data on about 2300 large
firms, from 1984 to 1987, in nine selected service industries (at

the four digit level of the industrial classification) .    We   have

contrasted the average performances of firms across industries,

in terms of labor productivity ratios and profitability margins,

both in levels and in growth rates. We have compared these
averages indicators fnr more or less inclusive sample

definitions, going from the survey of all firms to a 'balanced'

and "cleaned' panel data sample of large firms, and for the two

kinds of averages usually considered in macro and micro-analyses.
We, then proceeded to show that the differences across industries

in average productivity and profitability are usually small when

compared to the range of individual differences within
industries, and have investigated to what extent the extreme

variability in individual performances could be accounted for by

other heterogeneity factors, besides the industry effects.

Elizabeth Kremp                          Jacques Mairesse
National Bureau of                       Institut National de la
Economic Research                        Statistique 18,
1050 Massachusetts Avenue                Boulevard Adniphe Pinard
Cambridge, NA 02138                      75675 Paris Cedex 14,
                                         FRANCE,
                                              and
                                         National Bureau of
                                         Economic Research
                                         Cambridge, MA 02138
I.       INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION

         The present paper has three distinct, but intertwined, motivations, pursuing jointly three

purposes, each corresponding to one of the subsequent sections.

         Since the early l980s, the French Institute   of Statistics has been conducting an annual
survey of market services, which is thought as a very good, and in some respects rather unique.

source of general information on this sector. Our first goal is to give a brief description of this

survey (in section II of the paper). This survey is not only useful to ensure a knowledge of the

relcvent macro-facts, but it also provides a wealth of microeconomic information to the structure

of these industries. In recent years, an increasing number of studies have taken advantage of

information at the micro level to investigate the behavior and performance of firms. Most of

these studies have, however, concentrated on manufacturing industries, since the more easily

accessible databases cover primarily large publicly traded corporate companies, which are

numerous in these industries. In view of the growing importance of service industries, it is

clearly desirable to initiate similar studies for them also.

         The outlooks of economists working at the micro and the macro levels, and the ways they

treat the data are quite different. Our interest, in section III of the paper, is to illustrate some of

the basic problems involved, and provide some indications of how they can be dealt with. This

we do in analyzing the productivity and profitability performance of firms in selected service

industries, for the four recent years, 1984 to 1987. for which the French survey was available

to us.

         More precisely, we have concentrated on large firms with twenty or more salaried

employees, since they are exhaustively surveyed and have to answer a more detailed

questionnaire. We have also selected nine service industries which we thought typical in various
                                                                                                2

ways. These are industries at the four digit level of Ihe French classification of industrial

activities, with at least two or three hundred large firms. They all belong lo lhe private

competitive sector and fatl in the category of"personal services', where direct provider-customer

interrelations are essential. Two of them arc traditional consumer services, which have recently

undergone important changes: Restaurants and Hotels. The seven others are producer services

with different characteristics:   Engineering Services, Computer Programming, Computer

Processing, Legal Services, Accounting Services, Personnel Supply and Building Cleaning
services.

       We focus on four measures of performances or "outcome" variables. We take sales per

person and (preferably) value added per person, as measures of labor productivity, and value

added to sales ratio and (preferably) operating income to sales ratio (price cost margin), as

measures of profitability margins.2 We consider these variables, bnth in levels (in the beginning

and ending years, 1984 and 1987) and in rates of growth or changes (over the three year period

l984I87).
       For the approximately 7000 large firms which have been surveyed from 1984 to 1987 in

our nine selected industries, we have been able to construct a 'balanced" and "cleaned" panel

sample of 2289 firms. The first problem which we touch upon is just that of constructing a

sample', and assessing some of the differences which arise in going from the analysis of the

population to that of a sample. This problem raises in fact the difficult and more fundamental

issue of the renewal of the population through the entry and exit of firms on the one hand, and

that of firms which should be viewed as "outliers" (or else which report incomplete or erroneous

information) on the other hand.
                                                                                                   3

      The second typical problem which we also illustrate is that of defining an average level and

growth rate, say of productivity for an industry, and comparing the numbers that macro- and

microeconomists will usually compute. In fact, the microeconomist is concerned not only with

the average characteristics of the variables of interest, but also with many other aspects of their

full distributions. Tue differences between the various averages are only the reflection, more or

less transparent (and easily interpretable), of the magnitude (and changes in magnitude) of the

dispersions and correlations of these distributions.

      One of the most striking phenomenon, when analyzing microdata, is precisely the extreme

variability that they reveal. Part of such variability may be accounted for by heterogeneity

factors, such as differences in specific activities, historical and environmental conditions, but a

large part must also correspond to intrinsic or true dispersion.4 In section IV of the paper, we

document the extent of the variability in the productivity and profitability variables in our sample

of service firms, and contrast it with the differences in the avenge levels of these variables across

industries. We do so both cross-sectionally (in 1987) and in the time dimension (over 1984/87),

in an attempt to exhibit a few of the heterogeneity categories that are usually thought as relevant

and that we could distinguish.




Ii. TIlE FRENCH FIRM ANNUAL SURVEY ON SERVICES
       The survey on services is part of the general French system of annual firm surveys

("ettqueres annue/Ies d'entreprisesi. It is the last to have been launched in the early 1980s, and

it is directly managed by INSEE, the French National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies.

Over the years, its scope has been extended, and it presently covers all market services, except
                                                                                                   4

health, social care, education and research activities. Sixty-two industries at the four digit level

of the French ctassification of activities and commodities (NAP: "Nomenclarnre d'4crivtiEs dir

Produiis") are now surveyed, involving some 600,000 service firms, and about 2,500,000 persons

(2,000,000 salaried and 500,000 non-salaried) in t987.5 Table A-i in the appendix provides

some illustrative statistics at the two digit industry level for all firms, and for firms with twenty

or more salaried employees in 1957.

       The survey is a survey of firms or "enterprises,t in the sense of juridically independent

profit making entities. Liberal professions, such as lawyers or accountants, are included, but

non-profit organizations are not. The service firms surveyed are classified according to their

main activities, and can have one or more different establishments!

       The survey is conducted by sending a detailed mall questionnaire to all firms with twenty

or more salaried employees, and a simpler one to a representative sample of smaller firms. The

sample for the latter is stratified by size categories and activities (the sampling rate varying

between 1 down to 1/100), and is renewed by half each year. The rate and quality of the answers

are deemed quite satisfactory, especially considering that a very large number of very small firms

(with 0,1, or 2 salaried employees) are surveyed]

       Basically, the survey provides detailed information on the current income accuunts of the

firms, as well as complementary information on their labor force and capital assets. Table 1

summarizes the structure and contents of the questionnaire for the larger firms (with 20 or more

salaried employees).

      The larger firms have to report their statement of income and expense for the last

accounting period (" fiscal year") with a breakdown of some 30 operations (sales of merchandises,
                                                                                                5
purchased goods and produced services; purchases of goods and raw materials; changes in

inventories; taxes; wages and social security costs; interest incomes and expenses; profits and

losses). All firms are asked to give a detailed breakdown of their total turnover ("chifrrc

doffoires") by services (400 different services or commodities for 62 activities), and also a

detailed one of their purchases (about 30 categories, including "goods purchascd for resale" and

various "intersectoral exehanges').

       For labor the following items are given: the total number of salaried employees at the end

of the year, with a distinction between professionals (i.e., managerial, executive and supervisory

personnel), other full-rime employees, part-time employees and apprentices; the total number of

non-salaried persons with a distinction between owners and associates (or independent workers),

full-time family workers and pan-tine ones. The total number of hours worked by salaried

employees during the calendar year is also asked, together with corresponding wage bill.

       For capital, larger firms report the gross book value of their fixed assets which are

registered in their balance sheets at the beginning and end of their fiscal year and they have to

provide a decomposition of the change in gross hook value that occurred over the fiscal year, in

terms of acquisitions, eessions, discounts, revaluations and other adjustments. For all firms,

investment expenditures (measured on the basis of acquisitions) are detailed in seven categories:

land, new and existing buildings and structures; new and second-hand transportation equipment;

new and second-hand machinery and othe- equipment.
                                                                                                    6

III. AVERAGE PRODUCTIVITY AND PROFITABILITY PERFORMANCES: FROM THE
     SURVEY TO "SAMPLE" AND FROM "MACRO" TO "MICRO" AVERAGES

       Economists working at the micro level and at the macro level have divergent perspectives.

Even when they investigate the same issues, adopt the same models and rely on the same basic

econometric techniques, because the data they use are so different, the ways they look at them

in practice are also very different. This is already apparent with the problem of defining the

scope of study: while the macroeconomist considers the population as a whole (say, a complete

industry), the microceonomist usually deals with a sample (say, of firms in a given industry).

This is also clear in the supposedly simple question of measuring an average level or growth rate

of an economic variahle such as productivity (for a given agreed-upon definition).

       In general, the possibilities offered by micro data (typically cross-sectional or panel data

coming from surveys) are much larger than for macro data (typically aggregate time series

provided by national accounts), but the difficulties in dealing with them tend also to be greater.

While the number of observations is incomparably higher, it is also the case that interesting

variables are often more crudely measured (or less "manufactured") and much more affected by

errors, or else arc simply not avaitahte.

       to this section, we intend to look primarily at the avenge performances of our nine service

industries, but at the same time we shall illustrate the different choices that arise from a macrn

point of view and a micro one in constructing the sample and computing averages. We first

compare the two indicators of value added per person and operating income to sales margin for

the survey of all firms, for the group of all "large firms" of twenty salaried employees and more,

for he group of what we call "!ar"e continuing firms", and finally for the panel data MrnpLe,
                                                                                                      7

     which we deem satisfactory for further econometric investigation. We then proceed on

     comparing the two kinds of avenges usually considered in macro and micro-analyses:
ft
     respectively, weighted (arithmetic) means and unweighted (eventually geometric) ones.

           The main numbers for comparisons across "samples" and between "avenges4 are given

     in Tables 2 to 4, white additional information and insight can be gained from Tabtes A2 to AS

     in appendix. A number of explanations and observations coutd be made on these tabtes; we will

     only comment on the few points we want to stress.

           Table 2 gives the total number of persons by industry in t987 for oor various " sample?,

     helping to define more precisety what they are (while Appendix Table Al gives the corresponding

     number of firms). rhe figures given for "all firms" are the official numbers from the French

     survey (see references to the INSEE publications). They correspond to the complete population

     of firms in the nine service industries. There is in Iota! some 165,000 firms, with a labor force

     of about 1,200,000 persons in [987 (salaried and non-salaried employees) and an average size

     of seven persons per firm. Most of the firms are small. Only about 5300 of them (3%) have

     twemy salaried employees or more, for a total, however, of as much as 47% of the workers

     (570,000 persons). These firms, which we call "large firms", are the ones for which we have

     had individual information (in anonymous form); they are surveyed exhaustively and have

     answered a detailed questionnalre.9 The proportion of large firms varies widely across our nine

     industries; in terms of numher of persons it varies from a low 15 to 25% in Restaurants, Hotels,

     and Legal Services to a high 80 to 90% in Personnel Supply and Building Cleaning Services.

            What we call "con tinuing firms" are the large firms which have kept answering the detailed

     questionnaire during the four years 1984 to 1937. The proportion of continuing firms among the
                                                                                                  8

large firms does not vary too much across the industries; it is about 80% on average in terms of

number of persons (and 55% in terms of number of firms). The firms acenunting for the

difference between the two samples in t984, which we call "leaving", have stopped reporting in

1985, 1986, or 1987, because they ceased their activities, went bankrupt or were taken over, or

because they shrunk in size under the limit of 20 salaried employees. Cnnversely, the firms

accounting for the difference between the two samples in 1987, which we call "entering", began

answering the detailed questionnaire in 1985, 1986, or 1987, because they went in business with

already 20 or mnre salaried employees from the start, or because they increased their size over

this limit)0 Although in principle it should be possible from the questionnaire (or from another

source to which we had access), to distinguish between the two main reasons why firms have

been "leaving" or "entering" the information was missing and we could not do it.

      Micro data sets are not in general immediately fit for econometric analyses; first, they have

to be thoroughly "cleaned" from observations which can be seen as erroneous or which clearly

appear as "outliers". If this is not done, such observations, even if few, can influence the

estimates (and statistical tests) to a very large extent (and wrongly so, significant corretaticns

possibly arising from them only, or being masked by them). Thus in order to get a satisfactory

balanced panel sample, we had to clean the continuing firms (balanced) data set. We did so in

three steps. First, we cleaned out firms with incolserent information or missing values for our

main variables. Then we eliminated firms with extreme outliers in the distributions of a few

important ratios, either in 1984 or in 1987. Lastly, we dropped out firms exhibiting huge rates

of increase or decrease, over the three years 1984 to 1987, for some of the main variables, The

sample wEnch we finally obtained (and to which we simply refer as the sample) amounts to about
                                                                                                          9

     80% of the continuing firms, both in terms of number of persons and number of firms, this

     percentage differing little by industry.

            Table 3 gives the avenge level and avenge growth rate (or average absolute change) of

     the value added per person and operating income to sales ratins, both across industries and data

     sets, while Appendix Table A3 gives the avenge number of persons per firm and the average

     growth rate of number of persons..LS Both tables show a rather clear pattern. As could be

     expected, since the three data sets overlap greatly, the numbers for the large firms, the continuing

     firms and the sample are usually close, discrepancies showing up more often in growth rates than

     in levels, and being much larger for the growth rate of employment than for that of productivity

     or the change in profitability. However, the numbers are much farther apart in the ease of all

     firms, with the exception of Personnel Supply and (to a lesser extent) of Building Cleaning,

     where large firms outweight the smaller ones. In the seven other industries, value added per

     person tends to be significantly lower for firms with less than 20 salaried employees. There is

     no such systematic difference in terms of the corresponding change in productivity and

     profitability or that in employment.

           If we consider the three data sets consisting of large firms, the hierarchy of industries is

     quite well marked. The avenge size of these firms varies a great deal across industries; it is

     strikingly high in Personnel Supply, but it is also quite large in Building Cleaning and Computer

     Programming. Computer Programming, Computer Processing, Engineering, and Legal Services

     have the highest avenge levels of value added per person (300 thousand francs per person in

fr
     1987 or more), while Personnel Supply and Building Cleaning Services have the lowest ones

     (respectively about t35 and 75 thousand francs per person). Computer Programming and Legal
                                                                                                    10

Services are also at the top in terms of (gross) operating income margins (25% and 30%),

together with Hotels (25%). Personnel Supply and Building Cleaning, joined by Engineering,

stand again at the bottom (with a margin of about 8 to 10%). Legat Services have experienced

by far the largest growth in labor productivity: about 30% from 1984 to 1987, as well as the

biggest increase in profit shares, nearly 8%. They are followed by Computer Processing and

Accounting Services, both having a very fast growth in productivity but only a modest increase

in profit shares. These two industries have known also a relativety rapid growth of employment,

while that of Legal Services has been about the slowest. Personnel Supply stands as the opposite

case of Legal Services, exhibiting a huge increase in employment (about 70% over t984-87) and

having at the same time the worst productivity growth record. Hotels are stilt another case, with

a very mediocre performance in both employment and productivity growth.

      The fact that the avenge productivity and profitability ratios are close enough for alt the

large firms and the continuing ones (these two sets largely overlapping) does not preclude that

these numbers could differ substantially between firms leaving and entering (since the weight of

these firms, over the three-year period, remains small relatively to that of the continuing firms).

It is better to compare directly these two categories of firms, as it is done in Appendix Table A4.

Contrary to what would appear likely, however, value added per person is not clearty higher for

the entering firms than for the leaving ones; nor is it the case, either, for the operating income

to sates margin. Onty Computer Processing, Legal aid Accounting Services seem to confirm

such expectations.    It is interesting to note that in all of our industries the entering and leaving

firms are much smaller (by about three times) than the continuing firms, However, it is again

rather surprising to see that the average size of these firms is about the same, whether entering
                                                                                                 11


or leaving. A closer look at the individual size distributions, by industry,   of the two groups of

firms shows that Lhey are indeed quite similar.'4

      Although firms entering and leaving do not contribute much to changes in productivity or

profitability, since they do not differ much, they do correspond to large flows of workers coming

in and out. These flows have an important part in explaining the pattern of changes in

employment in our service industries. They amount on average, over the three-year period 19 84-

87, to as much as 20 to 25% of the total stock of persons working in the large firms, white the

overall increase in the number of employees in the existing firms is about 20%. As can be seen

from Appendix Table AS, such decomposition of the changes in emplnymenL vanes greatly across

industries. For exampte, while the very fast growth in Personnel Supply Services (67%) is

mainly due to hirings in the existing firms, that of Computer Programming Services (61%) is also

accounted for by the creation of new jobs in entering firms, which offsets largely (by 38%) the

losses in jobs from the leaving firms.

      What we refer to as "macro" and "micro" averages are given in Table 4 for our ratios of

interest, both in levels and in growth rates; to make them more comparable, these are computed

for our (cleaned and balanced) sample. The macro-avenges are the usual ones we have been

looking at in the previous Table 3. They are defined in a sense as if an industry as a whole

would represent only one very large firm. In terms of the underlying individual ratios at the firm

level, they are the (arithmetic) weighted means of these

       From a micro point of view, there are various other possibilities. One is in fact confronted

with the full distribution of the variables, and one can choose different kinds of avenge

characteristics; one may also be very much interested in dispersion or in other aspects such as
                                                                                                   12

concentration. Usually, the simple unweighted means are computed, since they are most easy

to interpret; medians are also often considered, being more robust in the presence of outliers.

Often the original variables and ratios, when positive, will be first transformed into logarithms,

the main reason being to make their distribution more normal)6 What is then computed, instead

of the more standard arithmetic means, are the geometric means, which can be expected to be

rather close to the medians (if the distributions in logarithms fit well to the normal curve, and are

thus approximately symmetrical). This is what we do here for the two productivity ratios, and

the so-labeled micro-avenges in Table 4 are precisely their geometric (unweighted) means)7

      Therefore, the usual departures of the micro averages from the macro ones are twofold.

The first one (which concerns only our two productivity measures) is that between geometric and

arithmetic means, and the difference between the two is related to the dispersion of the individual

ratios)B The second distinction (which concerns our four ratios) arises from the fact that the

micro averages are unweighted contrary to the macro ones. The differences between the two

reflect the magnitudes of correlations (or covariances) between the firm individual ratios and the

corresponding values of the denominator variable.'9 With these distinctions in mind, various

observations can be made in comparing the "macro" and "micro numbers from Table 4.

      A first look shows that what we havejust said about the ranking of the industries according

to their performances, on the basis of the aggregate data (i.e., the macro averages), is still valid

if we consider the micro averages. The industries performing "best" and those performing

"worst" remain the same with respect to productivity as well as profitability, and both in terms

of levels and rates of growth. However, if we go into more detail, the comparability in levels

appears much more satisfactory than that in rates of growth. The rankings of industries according
                                                                                               13

to the macro and micro average levels of value added per person and of operating income margin

are (almost) the same, with very few inversions and only between adjacent industries. The

rankings of the corresponding avenge rates of growth are not that close, with a number of

inversions among more or less distant industries.

      Although our qualitativeconclusions on the rclattve performances of the industries appear

to be similar, particularly so in levels and much less in rates of growth, the magnitudes of the

macro and micro avenges can be widely different. Taking first the case of levels, the two kinds

of averages remain rather close for the value added and operating income to sales margins,

reflecting the absence of a systematic (and large enough) correlation across firms between these

ratios and size. They can be on the other hand much farther apart for the sales and value added

per person productivity ratios. These differences are accounted for both by the dispersion of the

individual productivity ntios and their correlation with size.1° Dispersion explains why the

(geometric) micro averages should be lower than the (arithmetic) macro averages by about S to

20 percent depending on the industry. The correlation explains the remaining gap, going in the

same direction if positive and in the opposite one if negative. Thus, one can gather from the two

sets of avenges that the correlation between productivity levels and size (in numbers of persons)

is positive (and strong) in Computer Processing, and that it is negative in Personnel Supply and

Building Cleaning Services.21

       In the case of rates of growth, the discrepancies between the two types of averages can be

more substantial, particularly for the two productivity indicators. They are not, however,

accounted for so simply as in levels. The differences between the productivity average growth

rates can be seen as arising from the dispersion of the individual rates (as previously), from the
                                                                                                  14

correlation of these rates and the corresponding levels of productivity in the beginning year

(1984), and from the KchangeN in the correlations of these individual levels of productivity with

size (number of persons) between the last and first year of the period (1987 and 1984)•fl Thus,

the impressive difference for the complete sample (i.e., the nine industries) hetween the micro

average rate of growth of value added per person and the corresponding macro avenge rate of

growth: 7.2 percent as against only 1.4 percent, can be decomposed in the following way: + 3.1

percent coming from the dispersion of the individual growth rates; -2.0 percent coming from their

correlation with the corresponding productivity levels; -6.9 percent resulting from the change in

correlation over the three years period between these productivity levels and size.



IV. DISPERSiON AND HETEROGENEITY OF PRODUCTIVITY
    AND PROFITABILiTY LEVELS AND CHANGES

      Looking at average characteristics by industry and at the differences between them can be

very misleading if one forgets about the extreme variability of these characteristics at the firm

level. The economic performance of one industry may be much better than that of another one,

and yet the distribution of a particular outcome measure will usually overlap in the two industries,

with a large proportion of firms being lower in the first and higher in the second.

      In this section, we focus on such within industry variability for the four 'outcome"

variables of productivity and profitability. We investigate to what extent it is accounted for by

the more detailed four digit classification (in nine service industries), and by other attributes

which are usually viewed as contributing to the firm heterogeneity. These are three indicators

of specialization (within five digit sub-industries), location (Paris region versus the provinces),
                                                                                                    15


and form of ownership (corporate firms versus non-corporate firms).

      Tables 5 and 6 summarize the results of analyses of variance relating these "outcome"

variables to the above mentioned attributes. Usual presentations of such results tend to stress the

statistical significance of the various effects and report corresponding F statistics. In a micro-

data analysis such as ours, given the large number of observations, statistical tests do not convey

much information. All the main effects (and most of the interactions between them), even when

they are quite small, appear to be statistically "signifi.iit".23 What matters is whether these

effects actually reduce the (unexplained) dispersion of the variables of interest substantially and

whether the magnitude (and sign) of the effects themselves appear to be economically meaning-

ful. This is what is to be looked for in Tables 5 and 6.

       Table 5 is set up in terms of the standard deviations of the four productivity and

profitability ratios. It gives first the overall dispersion (i.e., across industries, using up 1 degree

of freedom only), then the within industry dispersion (using up 9 degrees of freedom), and last,

the dispersion within the much finer categories constructed from the cross-classification of the

three indicators of specialization, location and form of ownership (using up 71 degrees of

freedom).24 These standard deviations are shown in the cross-sectional and time dimensions of

the data (1984 and 1987 levels and three year growth rates).25 In order to facilitate the

interpretation, we have also adjusted them in terms of "permanent" and "transitory" dispersion

and we have computed the corresponding correlations between the 1984 and 1987 levels.26

       The main message of Table S is the extreme dispersion of firm individual productivity and

profitability ratios and rates of growth, even when account is taken of systematic differences

between industries and other major sources of heterogeneity. The magnitudes of the standard
                                                                                                  16

deviations speak for themselves. If one is ready to make the more or less crude assumption that

these ratios are distributed normally, then about one third of the firms arc outside the plus or

minus one standard deviation range around the mean, and these ranges can be very wide indeed.27

For example, for one third of the firms, value added per persois differs by a factor of more than

three across industries (2 o about 1.1), and (by more than two, on average, within industries (2

o about 0.65). Similarly, for one third of firms, the three year growth rate in value added per

person (or in sales per person) differs by more than 45 percent across and within industry, and

the operating income ratio differs by more than 20 percent, either in levels for 1984 and 1987

or in the variation between these two years.

      To be more specific (and to be also more precise by considering the actual distribution of

the variables by industry), it is instructive to compare Legal Services and Personnel Supply

Services and look at graphs for these two industries. Legal Services (7708) have the highest

average operating income to sales margin while Personnel Supply Services (7713) have the lowest

avenge one. Although the operating income margin is on average four times higher in the first

industry than in the second one: 0.32 as against 0.08, (see Figure 1) the lower tail of the

distribution in the first recovers (nearly) completely the distribution in the second. Legal Services

and Personnel Supply Services are also the two industries with the largest and (almost) smallest

changes in the operating income margin: +7.5 and 0 percent respectively. In this case the lower

half of the distribution in the first industry overlaps with the complete distribution in the second

one (see Figure 2).

      Avenge value added per persoo in Legal Services is twice that in Personnel Supply

Services (260 thousand francs per person as against 130 thousand), and the lower half of the
                                                                                                      17

    distribution in the first industry overlaps approximately with the upper half of the distribution in

    the second one (see Figure 3). These two industries have also the strongest and (almost) the

    slowest three years productivity increase: 24 and 1.6 percent respectively, but the corresponding

    distributions at the firm level overlap fully, except for the lower tail in Personnel Supply (see

    Figure 4).

           Besides providing overwhelming evidence of huge dispersion, Table 5            suggests two

    additional observations. The first is the predominance of industry effects in explaining the

    heterogeneity of productivity and profitability ratios across firms. Comparing the overall, within

    industry, and within category standard deviations for 1984 and 1987 shows clearly that the

•   division of the data mb nine service industries, at the four digit level of the industrial
    classification, contributes much more to the reduction of dispersinn among firms than the

    breakdown into finer categories by specialization, location and form of ownership. Although

    such a conclusion could, in principle, depend on the order in which the various effects are

    considered, this is far from true here. For example, the R2's for the 1987 level of value added

    per person and operating income to sales ratio are about .65 and .40 respectively, taldng into

    account industry effects alone. They increase to about .75 and .45, when specialization, location

    and the form of ownership are introduced as additional effects (see Appendix Table A6). But if

    we looked at these three effects alone, then the R2's would only amount to .15 and .05

    respectively. In additional analyses of variarce, not repoited here, we have used also different

    breakdowns by size-groups, in particular, interacting the form of ownership with the distinction

    between smaller and larger firms (with less and more than 40 salaried employees). Contrary to
                                                                                                    18

industry effects but similar to the case of the three other attributes, size characteristics account

for surprisingly little of the dispersion in productivity and profitability levels,25

       The second observation is related to the comparison of levels with growth rates. While

the industry classification contributes importantty to reducing the variability in levels, it has onty

a small impact on the dispersion of the rates of growth in productivity or the changes in

profstabittty. In other words, the contrasts between the average industry growth rates, even when

they are significant (economically as welt as statistically), are relatively minor compared to the

wide range in the rates of growth of individual firms. If we interpret the numbers in terms of

permanent and transitory components, we see that permanent dispersion has an industry

component while transitory dispersion has practically none. Comparing levels and growth rates,

it is also interesting to consider the relative size of the permanent and transitory components. The

productivity variables, and the value added to sales margin as welt, appear rather stable, with a

permanent dispersion much larger than the transitory dispersion, even within industry (or within

category). The operating income to sales margin is more volatile, the transitory and permanent

dispersions being nearly of the same size within industry (and within category).

       Although the three indicators of specialization, location and form of ownership play a

modest role on the whole in accounting for the heterogeneity of the levels of productivity and

profitability, it is instructive to examine the magnitude of their estimated effects These are

shown in Table 6 for 1987 levels? In each panel, the 'overall' line provides what can be

viewed as our "average" estimates, corresponding in fact to the intermediate specification in

which the three effects are not interacted with the industry effects,3° The first column gives the       t
                                                                                                           19

         percentage of firms, which are respectively less specialized, located in the Paris region, and

         corporate owned.

'a             The indicator of specialization characterizes the firms whose activity appears highly

         concentrated in contrast to firms which are more diversified. Whenever it is possible, this

         distinction is made at the most detailed level of the industrial classification used in the survey.

         As can be seen in Panel A of Table 6, this indicator of specialization can be defined in only five

     •   out of the nine service industries (for Restaurants and Computer Processing, and for two J'sub-

         industries" in Legal Services, three in Building Cleaning Services and four in Engineering

         Services).3' The particular (and somewhat arbitrary) criterion we have adopted here is that of

         a share of value added above 75 percent in the main detailed activity for the "more specialized"

         firms (and below that for the "less specialized" ones). Surprisingly enough, a large majority of

         firms in the various industries or sub"industries are highly specialized, over three quarter of them

         being classified in the "more specialized" group with our a priori fairly stringent definition. No

         definite pattern seems to emerge in the differences between the more or less specialized firms.

 •       Although in many cases diversification goes along with an increase in sales and value added per

         person (of about 10 percent on average), its influence is usually insignificant, and at best a minor

         one, on the value added and operating income to sales ratios.

               The location indicator distinguishes firms in the Paris region (Paris intro muros and "TIe

         de France") and in the rest of Prance. Almost half of the large (more than 20 employees) service

         firms are located in the Paris region, thus providing another evidence of centralization in France.

•        The pattern of differences between the Parisian and provincial firms, although somewhat

         analogous, is more clean-cut, than that arising from the degree of specialization. The influence
                                                                                                    20
on profitability ratios is rather small, except perhaps in Legal Services which arc significantly less

profitable in the Paris region. On the other hand, the impact on the two "productivity" variables

is quite strong and significant: for at least seven of the nine service industries, sales and value

added per person are about 20 percent higher on avenge in the Paris region as compared to the

provinces. Ii may he the case (for example in Legal services) that competition is more intense

in the Paris region and hence that firms would have to be more productive and would tend to be

less profitable. However, more likely, the observed differences reflect largely price differen-

tials rather than true productivity differences. Wages arc notoriously higher in Paris and lie de

France than in the rest of the country (due to higher costs of living and a more competitive labor

market).

       The third indicator is based on the legal status of the firm, and contrasts corporate firms

to proprietary owned ones. The proportion of firms belonging to one or the other categories

varies according to the industry. En the sample as a whole, a third of the firms arc non corporate

even though they have more than 20 employees. Unfortunately the distinction in the legal status

of a firm does not correspond to the distinction which is a priori more relevant of managerial and

non-managerial ownership, since managers may also control the stock majority in corporate

companies. The two should be at least positively cnrreiatcd and one might thus expect that non

corporate firms would be more productive and profitable than corporate ones in a given industry

or on average (controlling for industry). What we sec in fact is rather the oppositr picture. Sales

and value added per person arc significantly higher in most industries for the corporate firms,

which may correspond to the fact that they charge higher prices for their services on average (and

pay higher wages), as much as it means real productivity superiority. The evidence is mixed fur
                                                                                                    21

the two profitability ratios; in particular the operating income to sales ratio is higher for corporate

firms in Computer Processing and Legal Services, white it is higher for non corporate firms in

Restaurants   and in Accounting Services.
                                                                                                  22

V. CONCLUDING REMARKS AND SUMMARY

       As stated in the introduction, this paper has tried to do three things; to present the French

annual survey of market services; to illustrate some of the problems arising from the different

points of view of macro and microeconomists, when assessing industry averages differences; to

exemplify the extreme variability of such performances at the firm tevet, and attempt to

decompose it in terms of heterogeneity components and intrinsic dispersion. Along the way, we

have touched upon a number of issues which would be worth investigating further and deeper.

We shall end by remarking briefly on three of these issues and by summarizing what has actually

been done.

       Entry and exit of firms arc particularly important in the services sector, as can be seen

from the fact that the renewal of large firms in our nine industries is about as high as 15 percent

per year (in terms of number of firms). Our somewhat puzzling (and inconclusive) findings on

the differences of productivity and profitability performances between entering, leaving and

continuing firms should he reconsidered in a more focused analysis. To do such a task properly,

however, one will have to be able to consider also the smaller firms (with less than 20 salaried

employees), for which only a representative sample is surveyed, it will be particularly valuable

for that purpose, if finns were asked a question about their age (or date of creation) and one

about thctr past employment record (say, the number of salaried employees at the end of the year,

for the last three years), or if such information could he recovered satisfactorily from other

sources.

      The discrepancies between what we have called macro and micro averages of our

indicators of firms performances are a reflection of the underlying distributions of the variables
                                                                                                23

of interest and their interrelations. Such discrepancies raise in fact interesting questions about

the relationships between size and levels of productivity, size and growth rates of productivity,

levels and growth rates of productivity, and so forth. To go about these questions through the

comparison of avenge overall index numbers seems, however, rather awkward; it is better to

study them per se either by relying on a (more straightforward) descriptive framework, or by

embedding them in an explanatory model.

       What we have done in order to account for the variability of our productivity and

profitability measures across firms is only a first step. One would like to assess the significance

and magnitude of a number of explanatory factors, by specifying and estimating production

functions and price-cost margins type equations. Such studies at the micro lcvc! are still rare in

service industries, and we intend to follow this route in foture work However, it is clear from

the outset that not having information on individual price differentials and quality attributes of

the services provided by the firms will be a major shortcoming for an in-depth productivity or

profitability analysis. More generally, standard accounting data such as the ones collected by the

French annual survey of market services are most valuable and even indispensable; they have,

nevertheless, important limits. In order to carry out specific investigations, economists will have

to rely more and more on additional sources of information and specially designed surveys for

given industries.

       In the present study, we have taken advantage of the wealth of information provided by

the French annual survey of market services, to construct a panel sample of data on about 2300

large firms, from 1984 to 1987, in nine selected service industries (at the four digit level of the

industrial classification). We have contrasted the avenge performances of firms across industries,
                                                                                                   24

in terms of labor productivity ratios and profitability margins, both in levels and in growth rates.

We have compared these averages indicators for more or less inctosive sample definitions, going

from the survey of at! firms to a ubalanceds and "eleaiied" panel data sample of large firms, and

for the two kinds of averages usually considered in macro and micro-analyses. We have also

indicated how major discrepancies could be related to size effects, to the different characteristics

of firms entering or leaving the industry, or to the dispersion of the underlying variables and their

correlations. Whatever the sample or average definitions, Legal Services ranks first in terms of

labor productivity and profitability levels as well as rates of growth, while Personnel Supply

Services ranks last (or almost). However, by contrast to Legal Services, which have done a little

more than maintaining their level of employment, Personnel Supply Services have known a

remarkable growth (of about 70 percent in total number of persons over the three years, 1984-

87).

       We, then, proceeded to show that the differences across industries in average prodoctivity

and profitability are usually small when compared to the range of individual differences within

industries. As a striking example, the distributions of the rates of growth of firms in value added

per person for Legal Services and Personnel Supply Services overlap nearly completely, although

these two industries have respectively the strongest and (almost) the slowest three years

productivity increase: about 24 and 1.6 percent. We have investigated to what extent the

extreme variability in individual performances could be accounted for by other heterogeneity

factors, besides the industry effects. We found that in fact the industry effects largely

predominate in explaining the dispersion of the productivity ratios and profitability margins in

levels, and that our three other indicators of specialization (within the four digit level industry),
                                                                                                25

location aod form of ownership play a minor role, with location being the most significant of the

three and probably reflecting price differentials. However, we found also that the dispersion in

the prodoctivity growth rates and profitability changes, contrary to levels, is only weakly related

to the industry breakdown.
                                                                                             26



                                          Footnotes



I. Among the producer services, one might aiso distinguish between Engineering
Services, Computer Programming, Legal Services and Accounting Services which are in

the nature of "counselling', and Computer Processing, Personnel Suppty and Building
Cleaning, which are more in the nature of 'doing'. One should also note that Personnel
Supply are not readily comparable to the other services in the sense that temporary
workers could be considered as an intermediate input, and not as labor (as they are
actually recorded in the survey together with permanent emptoyees).

2. The measure of these variables is straightforward enough on the basis of the
information provided in the survey, and only three points need to be noted. The number

of persons includes both salaried employees and nonsalaried persons. Value added and
operating income have been corrected to include expenditures on rented capital buildings

and equipment. For a number of firms the fiscal year, for which we have their accounts,

is different from the calendar year; we found, however, that this timing problem did not
matter much, and we have not done any corrections for it in the present work.

I Rates of growth arc computed for sales and value added per person, as the three
years differences in logarithms, while the absolute changes are considered for the value
added and operating income to sales ratios.      Since we had no information on the prices
of services at the firm level, in order to compute our measures of the rates of growth of
productivity we have deflated sates and value added by the corresponding aggregate
price indices, which are available at the four digit of the industrial activity classification.

These industry price indices are themselves rather rough; the deflated figures should he,
                                                                                             27

however, more akin to real productivity indicators and more comparable across industries.

While we report in this paper sales and value added per person in nominal Francs per

person (usually for 1987), the corresponding rates of growth arc thus given in terms of

"volume" i.e., constant Francs of 1984. There are no such problems of deflation for the

profitability margins which are expressed naturally in percentages (of total sales).

4. Part of the variability, of course, is bound to arise also from the numerous
observational and measurement errors.

5. This is a major survey with a permanent staff of over 80 employees.

6. The survey is "une enquete de secteur," covering alt the activities (main and secondary

ones) of the firm, and is different (in accordance to the distinction of the French national

accounts between "sectors" and "branches") to what would be "one cnquctc de branche,"

corresponding to "units of production" having the same activities.          Branch surveys exist

in manufacturing industries and other industries, but not in services.           The operational

definition of the "main activity" (or "primary industry") of a firm is explained in M. Tajan

(1986). The problem is less difficult than in other sectors, since the majority of service

firms are small and most of them tend to be quite specialized.

7. About 70,000 questionnaires (of which 11,000 for the firms with twenty and more

salaried employees) have been sent for the 1987 survey in March 1988. The rate of non-

response has been about 20%, nearly half of which corresponds to firms which have

ceased their activities in 1987. Among the questionnaires returned, another 7% were also

for firms interrupting their activities, and some additional 14% were not usable for various

reasons. In terms of number of firms the rate of missing, incomplete or erroneous data

is thus about 20%, but is only about 6% in terms of number of employees or value added.

Starting in 1989 for the year 1988, the sample has been expanded to 90,000
                                                                                                 28

questionnaires in order to obtain more reliable detailed results at infra-regional levels. For

more information, see the publications presenting the survey results for the various years.

8. The   parts   of the questionnaire which ask for the detailed breakdown of sales and
purchases are specific to the different service sectors, Such detailed information is useful
in particular to determine the main activity of firms; it is also important for the construction

of "branches" accounts in the national accounts.

9. The figures we give for the "large firms" (of 20 and more salaried employees) are those

we have computed on the basis of the data we have bad access to. They differ to some
extent from the corresponding figures which have been published. These are corrected
in various ways to reintroduce firms still existing, but which for some reasons have been
allowed to not report or to send back incomplete questionnaires.                 For example, the
published numbers are about 6.5% higher than ours in 1987 for the total number of

persons and total value added (value added per person being thus equal to the first
decimal).

10. Various miscellaneous reasons, such as failing to report, or being allowed not to
report, can also explain why firms have been "leaving" or "entering" during the study
period. However, one would think, considering the quality of survey that these reasons
affect only a few firms. In this respect, we have eliminated altogether from the large firms

sample a number of "intermittent" firms "leaving" and then "reentering" (these firms amount

to about 3% of the total number of persons in 1984 or 1987). Similarly, we have not
considered the firms which are present only in the intermediate years 1985 and 1986. We
have also discarded the few firms answering the detailed questionnalre, even though they

had less than 20 salaried employees in 1984. We thought preferable, however, to keep
the few firms with 20 or more salaried employees in 1984, which reported less than 20
                                                                                                29

salaried employees in the following years, but continued answering the detailed

questionnaire sent to them.

II. To be more precise, about 50 percent of the firms which have been cleaned out have

been so because of missing or incoherent figures, and the remaining 50 percent have

been eliminated, in toughly equal proportions, due to extreme values of important ratios

in levels or to extreme rates of growth of major variables. tt can be noted that about half

of the firms are dropped out for two reasons or more.

t2. The operating income to sale ratio numbers are not available for the population of "all

firms", since firms with less than twenty salaried employees are only asked to answer a

simplified questionnaire in which they do not have to report their profits and loss accounts.

13. Comparing the actual distribution of the two ratios for the firms entering arid leaving

(and not only their avenges) shows that the differences in'these three industries are real,

and cannot be accounted by a few "outliers".       In fact, one can see that the profit shares

are also higher, by a small but clear margin, for the entering firms than for the leaving

ones, in two more industries, Engineering and Computer Programming.

14. Considering per se the group of firms which we ctean out of our sample is not a priori

very interesting, since most of these firms are some sort of 'outlier". Although we know

that they do differ in specific ways from the firms kept in the sample, there is little

difference between the continuing firms sample (including them) and our proper sample,

in terms of average productivity and profitability.      In a sense this is reassuring. lt also

suggests that in a similar fashion the entering and leaving firms, which somewhat

surprisingly show rather close productivity and profitability performances, may differ in fact

in some other dimension, such as cash flows and debt-equity ratios.

15. In this sense, for example, the macro-average of value added per person is the ratio
                                                                                             30
of the total value added for the industry divided by the corresponding total number of

persons in the industry (that is, the ratio of the sample means of value added and total

number of persons). It is also equal to the (arithmetic) mean of the individual value added

per person ratios of the firms in the industry, weiehted by the number of persons in these

firms. This weighted mean (the ratio of the means) differs in general from the unweightcd

one (the mean of the ratios), the difference depending on the correlation of the individual

ratios and the weights.

16.   Another advantage of taking logarithms is that dealing with ratios becomes more

simple,   the log of a ratio being the difference of the logs. Thus the mean of the log of a
ratio is just the difference of the means of the logs.

17. We have verified that these geometric means differ very little in fact from the medians,

showing that the log transformations achieve symmetry well enough, and also that the

sample has been cleaned successfully of the most offensive outliers. Note that, since the

profitability margins we consider are proportions varying between 0 and 100%, it is not

appropriate to transform them into logarithms.

18.   As a first approximation the arithmetic means is larger than the geometric one by a

factor equal to exp (02/2), if e is the standard deviation ofthe logarithm of the variable (or

ratio) considered. This is the exact formula if the distribution of the variable (or ratio) is

exactly log-normal.

19.   The formulas are straightforward for the avenge levels (such as value added per

person as indicated in footnote 14); but they are more complicated for the average growth

rates.

20. The fact that the distribution of the individual ratios is not exactly log-normal is a third

source of difference between their (geometric unweighted) osicro averages and their
                                                                                             31

(arithmetic weighted) macro averages in levels.            However, this source proved to be
negligible in our case.

21. The fact that these two industries account for about 60 percent of the total number

of persons in our nine industries implies that the macro avenge levels of our two
productivity indicators are smaller than the micro ones.

22. The differences in the changes of the profitability averages arise only from the last of

these three sources, i.e., the change in the correlations (or more precisely the
covariances) of the individual ratios with size (in terms of sales) in the first and last years

(of the study period).

23. At the conventional significance level of S or 1 percent.

24. Taking into account that (he indicators are not fully interacted in order to avoid empty
cells,

25. That is precisely the three year differences of logarithms for the two productivity
variables and three year absolute changes for the two profitability ratios.

26. As an additional help to the reader, the traditional R2 coefficients of determination
which parallel these standard deviation numbers are given in Table A6 in the appendix.

27. This assumption is particularly crude for the two profitability ratios, but provides an
acceptable approximation for the logarithms of the two productivity ratios.

28. This statement must be, of course, qualified;          it applies to firms which are already
large enough, since we are only considering in our sample firms with 20 or more salaried

employces As we have noted, in the previous section, in most industries (with the two

exceptions of Personnel Supply and Building Cleaning) value added per person appears
lower in the firms with less than 20 salaried employees. In other analyses of variances,
                                                                                        32

we have also experimented with the number of establishments per firm; this indicator.

however, played a negligible role.

29. The estimates are only shown for 1987; they are praciieally the same for 1984 and

most of them are negligible (and insignificant) for the 19 84-87 growth rates.

30. And thus using up 9+3= 12 degrees of freedom instead of 71.

31.   The four others have only 'more specialized' firms.
                                                                                             33



                                          References



Aubert, M. and Ph. Trogan. 1974. "Les gains de productivit dans lea services tradidonncls

      ci modernes. Economic et Satij1jgij, number 55, Paris.

INSEE. 1986. sEnquete annuelle d'entreprise dana lea services: Principaux rdsultats do 1984.11

      L.CoHections del'INSEE, number 521, Paris.

INSEE. 1987. "Enquêtc annuelle d'entreprise clans ics services: Principaux rdsultats de 1985. H

      Los Collections de I'INSEE, number 542, Paris.

INSEE. 1988. "Enquête annuelle d'entrcprise dans los services: Principaux résultats do 1986."

      Le&.Coliections do 1'INSEE, number 576, Paris.

INSEE. 1989. "Donndes sectorielles sur lea services en 1987." INSEE Resultats, number 7,

      Paris.

INSEE. 1990. "Les Comptes des Services en 1988." iNSEE Resultats, numbers 49,50,51,

      Paris.

Moyne, V. and Ph. Trogan. 1987. "The development of statistics on market services over the

      last twenty years: the French experience." Contribution to the 20th General Conference

      of the rntemational Association for Research on Income and Wealth (TAR1W), Document

      interne. INSEE, Paris.

Tajan, M. 1986. "Enquête annuelle d'entreprise clans Ics services: Guide de l'utilisateur."

      Document interne. INSEE, Paris.
        60




        50




        10




        30




        20




         10




             0
                 04   04   2   20     28     36   44   2   50


                                    Figire    I


Distributions of the 1987 Levels of Firms Operating Income to
Sales Ratios for Legal Services and Personnel Supply Services
           vr
           Sc




           40




           20
                             /




                25   -IT         •J—'r
                             Figure   2


• Distributions of the 198487 Changes in Firms Operating Income
 to Sates Ratios for Legal Services and Personnel Supply Services
                          0
                          V


       :._aIlIL
           35   43   44   46     5.2   56   6.0   64



                               FiRure 3

Distributions of the 1987 Levels of Firms Value Added per
 Person for Legal Services and Personnel Supply Services
                         Figure 1

Distributtonsof the 1984-8? Changes in Firms Value Added per
  Person for Legal Services and Personnel Supply Services
                                            Table 1

                            Detailed Questionnaire for Large Firms
(with 20 or         More Salaried  Employees on December 31 of the year   of the Survey)
I.   -       Firm   characteristics

                Identification Number (called SIREN)

                Address

                Legal form of organization

                Tax system

TI. -        Conditions   of   activity
                End and length oi fiscal year

                Description of the activity (creation, merger, modification of

                ownership disappearance...)

III. -       Employment and wages

                Number of salaried workers: supervisory, non-supervisory, parr-

                timers, and family workers

                Quarterly distribution of salaried workers and number of hours

                worked

                Non-salaried workers

                Earnings and fringe benefits

 IV. -       Breakdown of sales (turnover) varying according to the different

             industries

V.       -   Profit   and loss account

                      Expenditures                       Income

                      Purchases of goods                 Sales of produced goods

                       Purchase of raw materials         Sales of produced services

                       Changes in inventories            Financial yields

                      Taxea

                       Pages and salaries

                       Taxes en profits
                                    Table 1 (Continued)

                    Detailed Questionnaire for Large Firms
(with 243 or More Salaried Employees On December 31 of the year of the Survey)

VI. -   Capital   and Investments

           Total capital outlays of rhe beginning of the year

           Investoerit and retirement during the year

           Total capital outlays at the end-of-year


           Breakdown of investments between investisents acquired and

           investments brought through a modification of ownership end

           according to seven categories: land; new buildings and structures;

           existing buildings and structures; new transportation equipment;

           secondhand transportation equipment; new machinery and other

           equipment; second-hand machinery and other equipment.

VII.- Breakdown of expenditures varying according to the different industries

           Tncluding in particular:

                  Goods purchased for resale

                  Interindusty exchanges

                  Rented capital (msterials and properties)

                  Sub-contracting
                                                         Table 2

                             Total Number of Persons in rho Survey and Sample in 1987


                                         Nusther of Persons    in thousands         Corresponding Proportions in percent

                                 All           Large     Continuing                   Large!   Conrinuing/     Sasple/
                                 Firms         Firms          Firms      Sample        All        Large      Continuing

6701 Restaurants                 258.1          40,6          28.4        19.1         15.7       70.0          67,2

670R Hotels                      161.0          38.9          26.9        23.3         24.1       69.1          86.6

7701 EngineerIng                108.5           59.3          45.7        32.7         54.7       77.1         71.6

1703 Computer Programising       98.5           44.7          25.9        19.2         45.4       57.9         73,7

7704 Computer Processing         41.4           25.6          21.1        13.9         61.8       82.4         65.9

7708 Legal   Services           106.9           16.5          12.6            8.4      15.5       75.9         66.7

7709 Accounting                  95.3           35.2          26.4        19.5         36.9       75.0         73.9

7713 Personnel Supply           121.2          159.1      142.8          123.6         92.9       89.8         86.6

8708 Building CleanIng          180.6          149.3      114.8           97.2         82.7       72.2         84.7


Total                          1221.7          569,4     444.5          356.6          46,6       78.1         80.2
                                                         Table 3


                              Productivity and Profitability in the Survey and Sample

                                        Value Added Per Person              Operating Income to Sales Ratio

                                 All       Large    Continuing                Large     Continuing
                                Firms      Firsts     Firsts       Sample     Firms      Firms     Sample

Pope1   8:   Average Levels
             in 1987

6701 Restaurants                116.2      167.9      171.1        179.8      13.7         14.2    1L.5

670K Hotels                     154.7     208.6      224.2         731.6      23.2         23.7    24.3

7701 Engineering                245.3     295.2      297.7         297.9       6.3         6.1      9.5

7703 Computer Programming       2675      360.7      375.8         350.6      17.3         17.0    14.4

7706 Computer Processing        298.8     335.0      326.3         314.4      25.0         23.6    23.2

7708 Legal Services             242.1     329.1      324.1         3C6.2      28.0         29.4    30,9

7709 Accounting                 233.7     260.4      258.1         256.5      15.7        14.9     15.0

7713 Personnel Supply           136.3     136.7      135.9       .136.0        8.3         8.5      9.5

8708 Building Cleaning           78.9      75.9       75.3          73.3       9.9         9.9      9.9


Total                           156.3     184.1      180.1         171.4      14.1        13,7     14.2
                                                    Table 3 (Continued)

                               Productivity and Profitability in the Survey and Sample

                                         Value Added Per Person            Operating Income to Sales Ratio

                                  All       Large   Continuing                Large      Continuing
                                 Firrs      Firms     Firms       Sample      Firms       Firms     Sample

Panel   B:   Average Rates
             of Growth 87/84

6701 Restaurants                  -0.1        7.0       4.8        8.6        1.9           2.2      2.9

670R Hotels                       -1.2       -4.6       2.4       -2.9        1.0           1.6      19
7101 Engineering                  -6.7        1.4      l.8         4.1        0.1          -0.6      1.9

7703 Computer Prograauaing         5.5       -0.5       1.0        5.6        0.5          -1.6     -1.0

7704 Computer Processing           9.3       14.3      12,5       14.3        4.0           1.8      2.3

7708 Legal Services               28.4       37.8      32.2       29.3        6.3           8+5      7.5

7709 Acrcunting                   16.2       10,5       9.0       11.2        1.3           1.0      Li
7713 Persnunel Supply             -2.4       3,5       -6.3       -6.4       -0.1          -0.1     -0.1

8708 Building Cleaniui            2.2        -1.6      -0.5        1.8       -0.5          -0.3      0.3


Toral                             5.1        0+7       0.3         1.4        l.            0.9      1.4
                                                          Table 4

                                "Macro"    and "Micro" Averages Compured From the Sample

                                        Sales               Value Added         Value Addod to     Operating Incoae
                                      Per Person             Per Person           Sales Ratio       to Sales Ratio

                                   Macro       Micra       Macro     Micro       Macro     Micro    Macro    Micro
Panel   A: Levels   in   1987

6701 Restaurants                   323,3       305.3       179.8    168.6        55.6       55.7     14.5     11.9

670R Hotels                        364.0       305.3       231.6    189.1        63.6       62.6     24.3     21.5

7701 Engineering                   523.5       405.7       297.9    263.4        56.9       67.1      9_S     11.0

7703 Computer Prograrieting        541.1       495.0       350.6    338.2        64.8       70.7     14.4     13.9

7704 Computer Processing           505.2       342.3       31.4.4   234.7        62.2       70.1     23.2     20.1

7708 Legal Services                423.7       385.5       306.1    290.3        72.2       76.0     30.9     32.5

7709 Accounting                    311.7       281.7       265.5    237.1       82.2       84.4      15.0     13.4

7713 Personnel Supply              144.8       161.0       136.0    148.1       93.9       92.1       8.5      7.7

8708 J3uLlding Cleaning             86.7        89.5        13.3     76.8       88,0       86.0       9.8     10.3


Total                              237.5       248.8       171.4    181.4       72.0       74,7      14.2     15.3
                                                   Table   4   (Continued)

                             "Ma cr0" and "Micro" Averages Computed                From the Sample

                                       Sales                   Value Added                Value Added to     Operating Income
                                     Pet Person                 Per Person                  Sales Ratio       to Sales Ratio

                                   Macro   Micro               Macro    Micro              Macro     Micro     Macrn    Micro

Panel   B: Rates of Crouth 87/84

6701 Restaurants                     2.3     0.2                8.6          4.9            3.2        2.6       2.9      1.2

670R Hotels                         .5.0     -3.8               -2.9     -0.4               1.4        2.0       1.9      2.0

7701 Engineering                   -1.6      5.5                4.1          5.9            3.1       -0.3       1.9      1.6

7703 Computer Programming           8.6     12.1                5.6          7.2           -1.9       -2.6      -1.0     -1.3

7704 Computer Processing           13.6      9.1               14.3          8.9            0.3       -0.4       2.1      0.3

7708 Legal Services                28.2     23.6               29.1     24.0                0.5       0.3        7.5      7.6

7709 Accounting                    11.4     10.9               11.2     10.5               -0.1       -0.3       1.6      1.6

7713 Personnel Supply              -8.3      0.9               -6.4          1.6            1.9       0.7       -0.1     -0.1

8708 Building Cleaning              3.5      5.1                1.8      4.4               -1.4       -0.5       0.1      0.5


Total                              -3.1      6.5                1.4      7.2                3.1       01         1.6      1.6
                                     Table 5

                Estimates of dispersion: atandard deviations
              Overall, Within Industries and Within Categories
         according to specialization, location and form of ownership


                                           Logarithm      Vaiue     Operating
                           Logarithm       of vaiue      added to     Income
                            of sales        added          sales     to sales
                           per person       person         ratio       ratio

Overall Oieoersion

1984                          0.63             0.54         0.16       0.10

                              0.85             0.56         0.15       0.11

57/84                         0.23             0.24         0.07       0.03

Permanent5                    0.52             0.53         0.14       0.07

Transitory"                   0.17             0.17         0.05       0.06

Correlation (84,87)           O.g3             0.91         0.90       0.70

Within Industry Dispersinn1

1984                          0.35             0.32         0.10       0.05

1987                          0.35             0.32         0.10       0.09

87/84                         0.22             0.22         0.07       0.05

Permanents                    4.22             0.28         0.08        0.05

Transitory"                   0.16             0.16         0.05       0.05

Correlation (54,87)           0.80             0.75         0.74       0.56

Within Category Dispersion2

1954                          0.32             0.25         0.09       0.05

1987                          0.32             0.30         0.05        0.06

87/84                         0.22             0.23         0.07       0.05

Permanents                    0.28             0.25         0.05        0.05

Transitory"                   0.16             0.16         0.05        0.05

Correiatioo (84,87)           0.77             0.70         0.73        0.57

Notes! (1) 9 industry parameters (2) 71 industry and firm type parameters.
* Permanent Dispersion :      c=     (o   + a57— 0257j54) /2.

   Transitory Dispersion: a6 = (c4,g/2.
                                           Table 6

                             Estimates cf Main Effects in 1987

                                            % of                 Value     Value OperatIng
                                            firma     Sales      added     added    income
                                          in first     per        per        to       to
                                          category    pereon     person     sales     sales

Panel A; Ipfluence of specialization
Less specialized versua more specialLzed

overall                                       22.3                 .09"      —.01      .01

Within sub—industries

6701      Restaurants                         14.1      .07        .13'       .03      .04''


77011                   —   Buildings         23.2     —.08       —.14       —.03     —.06

77012 Engineering —         Infrastructures   36.1      .11        .02        .07     —.05

77013 Services in; — Manufacturing            16.1      .26        .15       —.06     —.02

77018                   — Other               17.6      .13        .09       -.03     —.02

7704      Coeputer processing                 19.2      .26'       .23-      —.03      .02

77092 Legal             — Proper              18.1      .16"       .15"       .00      .06

770916 Services         — Other               27.9       .164*     .17*4      .01       .02


57081 Building          —   Residential       29.4       .02      —.03       —.03     —.02

67082 cleaning          —   ceresercial       37.4       .03       .04         .01      .00

87084 services;         —   Industrial        34.8     —.04       —.06       — .02      .01

87088                   —   other             12.1       •47**     .29         .12    —.01

Panel B;  Influence of location
Paris versus Provinces

Overall                                       47.2       .174       .19        .01     —.01'

Within Industries

 6701     Restaurants                          60.9      .16"       .20"       .02      .00

 67016    hotels                               34.5      .10"       .15        •Q4*     .00
 7701     Engineering services                 52.7      .27k'      .27"       .00      .01

 7703     computer programming                 74.0      .04        .15        .06      .00
                                    Table 6 (Continued)

                             Estimates of Main Effects in 1987

                                          a of               Value        Value Operating
                                          firms     Sales    added        added       income
                                        in first     per      per           to          to
                                        category    person   person        sales       sales



Panel 8; Influence of location (Continued)
Paris versus Provinces

Within Industries

7704      computer processing              41.0       .25*        .22*      —.02        .02
7708      Legal services                   48.1       44**        .265*                —.06k

7709      Accounting services              24.0       .28"        .255*         .02    —.02

7713      Personnel supply                 61.5                                 .01     .01*

8708      suilding cleaning                47.1       .03         .05           .01

Panel C: Influence of Lone of
Corporate versus Non—Corporate

Overall                                    67.9                   .oe 01*               .00

Within Industries

6701      Restaurants                      68.6       .09         .08*          .00     .03**

670R      Hotels                           74.4       .10-        .15"          .03     .02

7701      Engineering services             70.8       .20"        .06       —.08" —.02
7703      computer programming             81.5       .03         .08           .01     .03

7704      Computer procesiing              62.8       .43"        .34       —.07"       .01*

7708      Legal services                   90.3       .03        —.03       —   .04     .07"
7709      Accounting services              84.2       .10w        .12"          .01     .03"
7713      Personnel supply                 55.5       .02         .02       —.01       —.01

8708 Building cleaning                     37.1       .00         .01           .01    —.01
                                                 Appendix Table Al

                         Illustrative Statistics für the French Market Services Sector,
                            Two Digit Level of the French Classification (NAP), 1987


                                                                                                        Operaiing
                                                                                             Value      income to
                                                                                             added        sales
                                  tiumber of        Fumber of                 Sales        per            ratio
                                     firms           persons          (in 106 franca)          çerson
                                                                                         (in 10 francs)   in 8

Service Industry                 All     Large     All     Large       All       Large    All    Large   Large
(tvo digit NAP)                 Firms    Firms    Firms    Finn       Firms      Firas   Firms   Firms   Firms


56   Recycling                   4505     191     21229     1996      16105       8207    202     254      8.3

66   Repair services            13663    119      29540     6841      6392        2021    117     175     10.2

67   Hotels,   Cafes,

       Restaurants             157871   1686     594390   135876     143692      40075    127     163     12.3

74   Travel Agencies             1777    159      25084    15371     26717       18031    222     252      5.8

7/   8usiness Services         137405   5481     995445   536367     3681/0     207559    207     222     10.6

78   Insurance                  22062    129     67210      9152     18171        3857    195     297     13.9

79   Real Estate Management     26905    473     106180   25663      71987       23480    251     341     12.1
                                         Appendix Table Al (Continued)

                         Illustrative Statistics for the French Market Services Sector,
                            Two Digit Level of the French Classification (NAP), 1987


                                                                                                       Operating
                                                                                            Value      income to
                                                                                            added        sales
                                  Number of         Numher of               Sales         per Ferson     ratio
                                    ilrms            persons        (in 106 francs)     (in l0 francs)   in %

Service Industry                 All     Large     All     Large     All        Large    All    Large   Large
(tsso digit NAP)                Firms    Firms    Firms    Firms    Firms       Firms   Firms   Firms   Firms



go   Automobile end Equipment

       Renting                   8372     243     38380    20845    26653       13743     483    455     43.3

81   Real Estate Agencies        8996     589    88658     71605    68616       56404     463    461     38.8

86   Motion Pictures

      and Television             3549     257    63987    46431     34798      26782      288    323     25.5

87   Personal services          87836    1603    437063   204190    61335      27776       97    101     11.7
                                                  Appendix Table A2

                                 Total Number of Firms In the Survey and Sample

                                       Number of Fitets In 1987         Corresponding Proportions in Percent

                                All       Large   Continuing                Large   Continuing!   Sample/
                               Firms      Firms     Firms    Sample          All       Large    Continuing

6701 Restmurants              61743         797      402          312       1.3        50.4       77.6

670K Hotels                   28463         567      297          235       2.0        52.4       79.1

7701 Engineering              1530]         658      391          27]       4.3        59.4       70.8

7703 Computer Prograee6ing    15351         523      171          144       3.4        32. 7      84.2

7704 Computer Processing       32B2         346      231          158      10. 5       66.8       67.5

7708 Legal Services           20418         413      276          216       2.0        66.8       78.3

7709 Accounting               12696         712      416          367       5.6        58.4       88.2

7713 Personnel Supply           742         451      290          205      60.8        64.3       70. 7

8708 Building Cleaning         7232         820      497          407      11 .3       60.6       81. 9


Total                        165234       5287      2971      2289          3.2        56.2       770
                                                Appendix Table A3

                         Average Size and Growth oP Eisployment in the Survey and Sample

                               Number of Persons Per Firm in 1987       Growth Rate of Number of Persons 87/84

                               All      Large   Continuing                  All     Large   Continuing
                               Firms    Firms     Firms      Sample        Firms    Firms     Firms      Sample

6701 Restaurants                4.2      50.9     10.7        61.2          4.2     -2.5      0.7         3.1

670R Hotels                     5.7      68.6     90.6        99.0          8.7      9.7     -5.3         1.6

7701 Engineering                7.1      90.2    117.0       117.9          2.6     -8.1     -4.2         -5.8

7703 Computer Programming       6.4      85.4    151.7       167.7         60.6     6L3      33.0        28.3

7794 Computer Processing       126       74.0     9L3         88.8          L3      -4.8      5.4         8.5

7708 Legal Services             5.2     40.2      45.6        38.6          L8      -7.5      2.2         2.8

7709 Accounting                 7.5     49.5      63.4        53.2         11.9     21.2      9.7        10.0

7713 Personnel Supply         230.8     352.8    492.3       602.7         64.5     66.9     76.4        74.7

8708 Building Cleaning         25.0    182.1     230.9       238.7         20.0     16.7      1.8         2.0


Total                           7.4    107.7     149.6       155.8         16.7     22.1     18.9        20.6
                                                       Appendix Table Mi

              Comparison of Firms     Leaving    and Eütering      the Large    Firms   Data Set from 1984 to 1981

                                                         Number of Persons               Value Added         Operating Income
                              Number of Firms                Per Firm                     Per Person          to Sales Ratio
                             Leaving       Entering       Leaving      Entering         Leaving   Entering   Leaving   Entering

6101 Restaurants               351              395         37.9         30.7           143.6      160+4      11.3       12+6

6709 hotels                    21+5             270         32+8         44.4           216.7      173+5      21.4      21+8

7701 Engineering               256              267         65.8         51.0           256.6      286.6       4+6       6+8

7703 Computer Programming      123              352         67.3         53.5           339.9      339.9      13+4      17+8

7704 Computer Processing       129              115         53+2         39.2           302.0      375.4      19.3      30+8

1108   Legal Services          203              137         27.6         29.2           224+9      344.5      23.8      25+0

7709 Accounting                151              296         33.3         29+9           230+3      287 +0     16.8      17+9

7713 Personnel Supply          152              161         95.0        101+8           122+ 5     142+ 9      7.4       7+2

8708 Building Cleaning         218              323         69+4        107.0            88.2       77.7      12+2      10.0


Total                         1800          2316            51.5         53.9           196+0      198,4      12+1      15.1
                                Appendix Table AS

              Decomposition of the Change in Total Number of Persons
                  for the Large Firma Data Set from 1984 to 1987

                     Decrease     increase                Variation
                       for          for       Resulting      for         Total
                     Leaving       Entering   Variation   Continuing   Variation

Panel A: Absolute Change oi Total Number ot Persons in Thousands

6701 Restaurant        13.4        12.1        -1.3          0.2        -1.1

670R hotels             7.0        12.0         4.9         -1,5         3.4


7701 Engineering       16.8        13.6        -3.2         -2.0        -5.2
7703   Computer
       Programming      8.3        18.8        10.6          6.4        17.0

7704 Computer
        Processing      6.9         4.5        -2.4          1.0        -1.4

7708 Legal
        Services        5.6         4.0        -1.6          0.3        -1.3

7709 Accounting         5.0         8,9         3.8          2.3         6.1

7713 Personnel
     Supply            14.4                     1.9         818         63.7

8708 Building
     Cleaning          15,1        34.6        19.42         2.0        21,4


Total                  97.6       124.9        32.2         70.6       102,8
                                Appendix Table 5      (Continued)
               Decoteposirion of the       Change  in TcLai Number of Persons
                                 for rho    Large Firms Data Set                 -




                       Decrease            Increase                  Variation
                           for               for      Resulting        for       Total
                       Le at'   i ng       Entering   Variation      Continuing Variation
Panel   B:   Growth Rate   of Total    Number of Persons        in

6701    Restaurants         32.2            29 - 2      -3.0            0.5          -2.5
67CR Hotels                 19.9            33 .8       13,9              .2          9,7
7701 Engineering            25.7            20.8        -4. 9           -3.1         -6.1
7703 Computer
     Programming            29.9            680                         23 .2        61,3
7704 Computer
     Processing             25,6            16. 8       -8,8             4.0         -4.8

7706 Legal
     Services               31.3            223          -9.0            13          -7.5
7709 accounting             17.3            30.5        13.2             8.0         21.2
7713 Personnel
     Supply                 15.1            17.2          2.1           64,8         66.9
8702 Building
        Cleaning                11,8        27.0         15.2            1.9         16,7

Total                           19.8         26.8         7.0           15,1         22.1
                                 Appendix Table AG

             Coefficients of determination   for industry effects only
                       and for all effects with intsraction



                            Logarithm     Logarithm       Value      Operating
                            of sales      of value       added to      Incoam
                              per         added per       sales       to aales
                             person        person         ratio         ratio
                             LQY_N         LQVCN          Vcy            0IT_y


P: Industry Effects

1964                          0.66            0.65         0.63           0.27

1907                          0.70            0.67         0.60           0.39

87/84                         0.10            0.07         0.03           0.07

Permanent                      0.74           0.72         0.68           0.42

Transitory                     o.og           0.07         0.02           0.06

Sguared correlation 84,87 0.64                0.56         0.55           0.34


B2! All Effects

1984                           0.74           0.72         0.67           0.33

1987                           0.75           0.73         0.65           0.45

87/64                          0.14           0.11         0.08           0.12

Permanent                      0.79           078          0.72           0.47

Trensitory                     0.11           0.08         0.06           0.09

Squared correlation (84,87) 0.59              0.50         0.53           0.32


•The ft2 in this table are computed from the corresponding standard deviations
in Table 2.
