NEER WORKING PAPERS SERIES

CCVERNNENT, FINANCIAL MARKETS, AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Joseph E. SLights

Working Paper Nc. 3669

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1991

This

paper is part of NBER's research programs in International
Studies and Financial Markets and Monetary Ec000mics
Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
tintional Bureau of Economic Research.

NEER Working Paper t3669
April 1991

GDVERNNENT, FINANCIAL MARKETS, AND ECONOMIC OEVELOPMENT

ABSTRACT
Ideological debates on the role of government in development
have focused on two contrasting prescriptions: one calling for
large scale government interventions to solve problems of massive
market failures, the other for the unfettering of markets, with
the dynamic forces of capitalism naturally leading to growth and

prosperity. This paper is part of an exploration of a middle
road, focusing in particular on the role of government in

financial markets. After explaining the importance of, and the
limitstions on, capital markets, particularly in allocating
scarce investment resources, the results are used as a basis of a

critique of the two 'extreme' approaches. Recognizing the
limitations of government intervention as well as of free
markets, the 'new viewlr of capital markets provides new insights

into s vaciety of policy issues, which are addressed in the final
section of the paper.

Joseph K. Stiglitz
Oepartmeot of Economics
Encina Hall
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072

Government, Financial Markets, and Economic Development'
Joseph S. Stiglita

For the past several decades, economists have offered developing
countries two contrasting prescriptions for success. One school of thought
has seen the failure of countries to develop as evidence of

a massive

market

failure, and suggested that what is required is massive government
intetvention; at the very least, government should take a central role in
planning, allocating investment and credit, and controlling international
trade.2 The second approach see government more as the problem than as the
solution:

hy unfettering markets, the dynamic forces of capitalism would

natnrally load to growth and prosperity.

There is growing diailluaioruaent within the Third World with both of
these extreme approaches. Many governments are groping to find an eclectic

approach, in which governments play a limited, but vital, role in the
developuent process.

Those who advocate such "reasonahlc" approaches to

1Noveaber 1990 rcviaion of a paper originally presented at a
conference at the Vargas Foundation Rio de Janeiro, August 7-8, 1989.
Financial snpport from the Olin Foundation, the Hoover Institution, and the
National Science Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. Conversations with
Ron Mcltinnon were particularly helpful.
My work in this area has also
benefited greatly from conversations over the yeara with Mark Cersovitz,
Jonathan Eaton, Andrew Weiss, and Bruce Greenwald. An abbreviated veraion
of some parts of the paper appear as "Financial Markets and Development,"
Oxford Review of Econneic Policy, 1989.

2Though the intcllectual origins of this perapective undoubtedly go a
long way hack, in recent decades, this school has attempted to relate the

problems observed in less developed countries to the general 'market
failures approach." This approach begins with the fundamental theorem of
welfare economics, which provides a
aasuatptions under which market
economies are Pareto efficient, and then attempts to interpret observed
instancea of deficiencies in market economies can he related to the failure
of spnnitic aaaueptiona within that model being aatitfied

set of

1

government policy [ace a difficulty: the two alternative approaches have a
clearly articulated intellectual basis, a framework to which they can appeal

for guidance. Never mind that the underlying assumptions are inappropriate

or that sore of the central ptedictions of the theories supporting one or
the

other extreme

approaches say be tefuted:

of concern to academics.

are

these are reiineeents which

The ideology serves a vital function

of

providing ready- -if not always appmopriate--answers to difficult questions.

the

purpose of this paper is to present an outline of some of

ingredients

the

of the intellectual foundations of the middle approach of

balanced government intervention, focusing in particular on finaocisl
markets, and to explain why I believe it

estreme

is that the two alternative,

approaches are so intellectually bankrupt.

The two extreme

approaches share in common two factors: an appeal to aimple prescriptions

to solve complex problene, and an explanation of the failures of their
prescriptions to work in those instances where they have been tied to the

patients' foilute to

follow the prescribed course of medicine

in its

entirety.

1 focus my attention on the role of government in financial markets.
This is partly because of the general consensus concerning the central role
of

financial msrkets in economic development, partly because of rhe extrese

divergence in views concerning the appropriate role of government in this
sphere.

I begin with two assertions concerning the historical experience of the
role

of financial markets and government in economic development:

1. Governments hsve played a central role--whether for good or ill say
he

debated--in

the development of moat of those countries which today belong

among the more developed. I am particularly concerned here with the role of
government in financial markets. In the United States] the railroads were

given huge land grants, which provided them with an important asset
facilitating raising capital by issuing bonds. Even today. in the US, more
than a quarter

of

all loans (to private individuals or firms) are made with

gcvernment guarantees or are intermediated by government lending agencies.

In Japan, MITI is believed to have played a central role in determining
which industries get credit. High on the agenda of nationalization in most
countries is the nationalization of the banking industries.
2.

Well functioning equity markets have played a relatively

unimportant role in economic development.
countries, a

relatively

Even today, in the developed

small fraction ef new funds is raised on equity

markets.

Most, but not all, ci the successful efforts at development have
entailed enterprises requiring considerable amounta of capital. There are
four principal ways that such egglomerations of capital can be formed: (a)

accumulsticn of capital by families; (b) sccumulation within corporate
enterprises; (c) voluntary agglomeration of capital via capital markets
(including banks) ;
gcvernment.3

and (d)

"forced" agglomeration of capital via

Successful development requires not only the agglomeration

of capital, but also the appropriate allocation and management of capital.

This entails screening different investment opportunities for those most

3tovernrsent policies may. in effect, channel aavings to large
enterprises within the private sector or be used for large projects within
thu public sector.

likely to yield high returns and managing the investment opportunities in a
way to ensure that they live up to thetr potentiala.

The problems of agglomerating and allocating capital are, of course,
closely linked together. When capital is accumulated within families, there

is no separation of ownership and control, ot to put it

in

the more

fashionable jargon of modern information economics, no principal agent
problem. The family has a clear incentive to ensure that the funds are well
spent.

Of course, if the family has many enterprises to manage, they can

only devote part of their energies to each project, and must engage in
considerable delegation.

Thus, principal-agent problems Inevitably arise,

but there is at least a clear incentive to ensure that they be handled as
well as possible.

The heightened sense of egalitarianism in modern societies has
resulted in most governments imposing taxes which inhibit huge family
agglomerations.

Some large agglomerations occur within corporations, but, as we are
increasingly becoming aware, the interests of those who run the corporations!
often are distinctly different from those who nozstnslly own the corporation.

By now, there is a clear body of evidence suggesting at least that in many

instances managers advocate, and undertake, actions which do not maximize
the market value of the firmA

Capital aarkets--providing for voluntary agglomerations--while they crc

of critical importance, face, as we show in the next section, importenc
limitations arising from imperfect and incomplete information.

4The clearest evidence relates to how firms respond to taxes and takeovers. See Stiglitz (1922a) and Shleifer and Viahny (1968).
4

We have increasingly become aware of the limitations of government
within capital markets. Governments compound the standard principal agent

problems with what may be called, for want of a better term, political
economy problems.

Providing loans at interest rates which are below the

"actuarially" appropriate rates provides an excellent way for governments to

provide

hidden subsidies to their friends and supporters: who is to know1

until oc unless the borrower defaults1 that the loan was not one that could

be justified on good business grounds; end even if it is attacked on those
grounds one can always appeal to broader social objectives. The potential

scope of the abuse of public loan programs and the difficulties of
contcnlling those abuses makes such programs problematical, even if one
could justify them on other grounds (a point to which I shall return later.)

From this perspective then, we face a second best problen: none of the

aethods of providing for the agglomeration of capital are without their
deficiencies or difficulties.

This paper is divided into three sections.

In the first, I explain

both the importance of, sod the limitations on, capital markets.

In the

second. I use these results as the basis of a critique of what I have called

the two extreme approaches to development strategies. In the third, I use
the analysis of Part I to address several policy issues,

5

I. Aspects of
A.

the Theory of Capital Markets

On the Inportance of Capital

Markets

markets perform several critical roles: they aggregate savings
and they allocate funds. In the process of performing these functions,
Capital

funds must be allocated not only

among competing sectors, but also among

competing management teams (firms). iithin capital markets, banks play a

distinct role: having allocated the funds, banks continue to perform an
important

task in ensuring thmt the funds are uaed in the way promised by

the borrower, and thmt the horrower, in responding to new contingencies,
takes into account the interests of the providers of capital. At the same
time that they provide these services, they reduce the risks facing savers
by allowing for diversification.

The funds required for undertaking investments of any scale are, as we

Banks and other

have noted, beyond the means of most entrepceneurs.

financial institutions take the relatively small savings of large numbers of

individuals, aggregate them together, and thus make funds available for
larger scale enterprises.

This is socially desirable because of the

importance of scale effects:

if each individual was limited to the

investments he himself could finance, returns would be correspondingly
limited.

This would be an important rcle, even if

all

individuals were

identical, and the bank could, accordingly, allocate the funds simply by
randomly choosing one individual to receive the loan.

Eut individuals are not identical.

others, and some have better ideas.

Some are better managers than

A central function of finsnciel

institutions is to assess which managers and which projects are most likely
to yield the highest returns.

Moreover, nnce the loan has been made, it is important to mocitor that

the funds are spent in the way promised, and that the project is well
managed.

These two functions of financial institutions are referred to as their
screening and monitoring roles.5

B.

Financial Strucrure

The form in which capital is provided has consequences both fnr how
these screening and monitoring functions are performed and the behavior of
borrowers. The three most important forms in which capital is provided are

tqjjt, long term leans, and short tern loans.

1. Equity

From the perspective of the entrepreneur, equity has two related
distinct advantages. Risk is shared with the provider of capital, and there

is no fixed ohligaticn for repaying the funds.

Thus, if times are bad,

payments to the providers of capital are suspended. The firm will not face
bankruptcy, and will not be forced to take the extreme measures intended to

stave off bankruptcy.
advantage:

From a social point of view, equity has a distinct

because risks are shared between the entrepreneur and the

provider of capital, the firm will not normally cut back production as much

5See SLights and Weiss (1989).
7

as it would with debt financer if there is a downturn in the economy. (See
Greenwald and Stigiitz (lPSBb, lSBSc))

But there are some distinct disadvantages of equity.

Becauae

entrepreneura do not have a fixed conatitment (and because they must share

the returns to their effort with the other shareholders) incentives are
atteousted, Because shareholders only get a fraction of profits, managers
have an incentive to divert profits to their own uses (not only managerial

perks, but the acquisition of knowledge and skills which improve their
market position).6 Recent literature has stressed how imperfect information
provides

theoretical explanations for why take-overs and other markets

mechanisms provide only limited discipline on managerial behavior, and

consequently, fat why managers have considerable autonomy.'

These

incentive issues have recently received considerable attention, as instance

after instsnce of cash rich oil, companies squandering the extraordinary
profits they received during the years of high oil profits come to light;
Exxon with its half billion dollar loss on Reliance and Mobil with its loss

on Montgomery Ward are but two of many instances. Indeed, the increase in

value which has been associated with corporate financial restructuring,

There is, by now, considersble empirical evidence for these views,

Managers not nniy expend resources to increase their outside market
value, but they also take actions which make it more difficult for the firm
Sac
This is referred to as managerial entrenchment.
to replace then.
Shleifer and Vishny (1988).

7See Grossman end Hart (1980) and Stiglitz (l982h, 1985).
precursor of these arguments, see Eerie (1926).

8

For a

increasing firm debt, is often partly attributed to the fact that with high
debt, managers are forced to work hard--they have their backs to the wall)9

Moreover, those entrepreneurs who are must willing to sell shares in

their fines include those who believe, or know, that the marker has
overvalued their shares.

There are, of course, good reasons fur issuing

equities--risk averse individuals with good investment projects, requiring

more capital than they have will also issue shares. But these individuals
snd firms are mingled together with these who see an opportunity to cash in

on the markets' ignorance.

distinguish among the two.

And unfortunately, the market cannot easily

As a result, there is an adverse signal

associated with issuing new equities- -on average, the value of firms' shares

6Robert Mall has, accordingly, referred to this theory of corporate
finance as the "batks-to-the-wall' theory of corporate finance.
Early
studies emphasizing the role of finance in affecting managerial incentives
include Jensen and Meckling (1976) and Stiglitz (1974), who pointed out the

close analogy hetween the
traditional incentive concerns in
the
and similar problems in modern corporate
sharecropping literature,
enterprises. For a isore recent survey, see Jensen (1968),

5Three other mechanisms for ensuring that those who get fonda froa
others treat the providers of capital in the manner promised should briefly
be noted: (a) Reputation may be effective, if firms wish to re-enter the

capital market to raise capital again in the future.

But reputstion
mechanisms are only effective if firms wish to raise additional capital,
and the adverse signalling effect associated with new equity may make firms

particularly reluctant to re-enter the equity market, at leaat for a
codnsiderable period (see Gale and Stiglitz, 1989).

Moreover, reputation

mechanisms become particularly ineffective as firms face threats of
(See Eaton, Cersovitz and Stiglitz [1986] for a general
bankruptcy.

In LDGs, the absence of an established
reputation may put new domestic financial institutions at a disadvantage and

discussion of these issues.)

serve as a barrier to entry.
(b) Fraud and securities laws may impose
important constraints on how firas treat their providers of capital.
In
many LDGs, legal systems are, however, both slow and relatively ineffective.
Cc) In traditional societies, trust (ethnic ties) may provide an effective
enforcement mechanism.
In the process of developeent, however, these
ties may be weakened, impairing the efficiency with which capital markets function.

9

decreases when they issue shares. This serves as an important deterrent to
issuing shares,1

The disadvantages oi equity seen, in most cases, to outweigh the
advantages, even in enre developed economies. Relatively little capital is

raised by new equity issues, and even by secondary equity issues (where a
ptincipal stockholder shares his shares, either so that he can diversify his
portfolio or spend his wealth).

gut the more developed countries have several distinct advantages in
issuing equities that are not available in most LDCs.

The existence of

well organized secondary markets for securities makaa equities particulerly
attractive.

It

increases

liquidity and

allows

easy portfolio

diversification.

Moreover, the standard accounting procedures (enforced, in part, by the

taxing authorities and hy government securities regulators) reduce the
problems posed by outright managerial cheating. They make it more difficult

for investors to be eislead by shady practices, including Ponri achemes.
Managers can still rip off the firm--in one recent take-over episode, they

walked off with more than a $100 million--but typically, the amount they
take is hut a sisall fraction of the firm's assets.

In the early days of

modern capitalist economies there wore numerous instances of stock market
soaas,

Given this history, and the apparent ease with which stockholders

can be taken advantage of, it is perhaps remarkable that equities aarkcta
work as well as they do.

10The theoretical arguments are provided in Greenweld, Stiglitz an Weiss

(1984), Stiglita (1982) or Myers and Hajluf (1984).
evidence, see e.g., Aaquith end Mullins (1986).

For empirical

Nonetheless, we must bear in mind the quite limited role that they play

in raising capital in developed countries.

Hopes of raising substantial

amounts of capital in this form within LDCa appear to me to be
unreasonable. 11

Tha

evidence is summarized in Mayer, 1989: new share issues, during
the period 1970-1985, as a percentage of net financing, were negative for
Finland, U.K and the U.S. , and only 2.2% for Canada and .6% for Germany.
Critics may point out that at certain selected times, stock markets
have raised appreciable amounts of finance.
(See, for instance, Taggart
(1985), who cites figures as high as high as 19% for the period 1923-39.)
Taggart notes that the increase in equity issues, from 2% in the 60's to 3%
in the 70's, is largely accounted for by public utility preferred stock
issues; preferred stock does not suffer from some of the "enforcement"
problems associated with common stock; moreover, utilities, because they are
regulated and accordingly heavily monitnred, do not suffer from some of the
other control problems associated with equities in other industries.
Moreover, the temporary success cf a financial instrument in raising
capital provides little evidence for its long run viability. It takes time
for investors to learn about all the relevant attributes of a security, and

it takes managers time to learn about all the ways by which they can
manipulate securities, Thus, income bonds looked like they had risk sharing

advantages over traditional bonds, without the enforcement problems
associated with common stock; yet investors eventually learned that firms

could manipulate the value of income, and that they were inadequately
Junk bonds are an
The income bonds thus grew out of favor,
protected.
instrument which have recently enjoyed considerable popularity in the United
States.
They have higher nominal yields than ordinary bonds; the question

is, are those yields high enough to compensate for the additional risks?
Though experience with these bonds is sufficiently limited that one should

be cautious in drawing conclusions, preliminary evidence suggests that
default rates on junk bonds that have been outstanding for a number of years
are so high that actual returns are no higher than on much safer bonds. A
major receaaion in the United States, with a concomitant high default, would
turn investors away from junk bonds. Scandals in the U.K. equity earket at
the turn of the century contributed to the decline in equity issues there.
(See Kennedy, 1987, for an excellent account of these.)

Today, investors in LOGs bring to bear the full experience of how
equities have been abused, even in societies with fairly well functioning
legal systems. This should make them wary about what would happen in LOGs.
See Greenwald and Stiglita (1989b) for a more extensive discussion of the
develpnent of financial markets snd its relationship with changes in the
legal systems.
11

2. Short Term Loans

Short term hank loans give the firm much less discretion: finns are on

a short leash. They must make interest payments, and the bank can request

its funds back at each of the due dates.

Thus, while nominally.

shareholders control the firm, minority shareholders exercise no effective
control, while banks often exercise considerahie influence over the firm's
actions. Their refusal to renew a loan can have serious sdverse effects on
the firm,

and thus firm's have a strong interest in complying with the

demands of the benks. Overseeing loans is, of

course,

one of the bank's

main economic roles--the role of monitoring noted above.

There Is an important difference between the contractual arrangements

and the true economic nature of the relationship. For the lender can only
force the horrewet to repay the amount due if the borrower hss the funds; if

he does not, he can force the borrower into bankruptcy. But there are often
significant economic costs of doing so, reducing the amount that the lender

will eventually recover. Hence, the borrower can often "coerce" the lender
into extending more credit- -or at least not forcing the borrower to repay

what is due.

The borrower knows this, end this may affect his behavior.

(This explaina why banks sre losthe to undercapitalize projects, knowing
that they can be "forced" to extend further credit later.) The experience

with Third World Debt provides ample evidence to the importance of this

'째The view that backs may exorcise more effective control over capitol

than minority shareholders is developed in Earle (1926) and Stiglita
(l9i5)

12

phenomena.'

The possibility of behavior leading to subsequent "forced

loans" provides banks with further incentives to monitor borrowers.

than markets are distinctly different from the kinds of "auction"
markets characterizing other goods and services.

Traditional textbook

oxpositicns characterized loan markets like the market fnr chairs or
tables, with the price (the interest rate) equilibrating supply and demand.
But this view is incorrect. It misses the essential property of loans- -they

are not contemporaneous trades, but an exchange of funds by one party for a
prosise of a return in the future, It misses the essential heterogeneity of
1oan contracts- -

the differences in the probability of default.

misses the essential informational problems- -

while

And it

the lender knows thst

different borrowers differ in the probability of default, he cannot
perfectly ascertain which borrowers have high default probabilities; and
while the lender knows that borrowers can undertake actions which affect the
likelihood that he gets repaid, he cannot perfectly monitor those actions.14

Three important consequences follow: first, the process of allocating

credit (and monitoring its use) is not simply left to the market, with
different borrowers competing for funds by offering to pay higher interest
rates,

Banks screen loan applicants.

Secondly, because of adverse

selection and adverse incentive effects associated with increases in the

interest rate (that is, as the interest rate charged increases, the
"quslity of the mix of applicants changes adversely, and successful
For an early theoretical discussion of these concerns with short term
For an analysis of
debt, see Hellwig (1977) and Stiglitz and Weiss (1981).
third world debt from this perspective, see Eaton, Ceraovitz, and Stiglitz
(1986)

These arguinants also apply to equities markets.

13

applicants undertake riskier projects)'5 , banks may not raise interest rates

evon when there is an excess demand for credit.

The interest rate doea not

perform its market clearing role. Karket equilibrium may be--and frequently
is- -characterized by credit rationing. Thirdly, loan contracta will have a
variety of provisions other than interest rates, which will affect both the
actions undertaken by borrowers and the mix of loan applicants. While these

non-price terms (such as collateral) may affect the extent of credit
rationing, they do not eliminate it (See Stiglits and Weiss (1986, 1990).)

Moreover, banks may respond to defaults not by increasing the rate of
interest charged on subsequent loans, but by cutting off credit.

Thus, loan markets face different aspects of the three problems of
enforcement, selection and incentives that equity markets face. So long as
the firm does not go bankrupt, the 'enforcement" problem is not as serious:

there is no necessity to having to ascertain what the firm's profits are.

The firm has a simple commitment.
enforcement prcblem:

But as we suggested, there are still

in the event of bankruptcy, the bank must see to it

that the borrower does not subvert funds; end, as we have argued, the
borrower may attempt to extract more funds from the borrower, under the
threat of bankruptcy.

The selecticn problem in the case of equity focused on firms with low
expected returns; in loan markets, there is also a selection problem, now
focusing on those with high probabilities of default.

The incentive prohlem itt the case of equity markets focused on the
attenuation of managerial incentives. Since borrowers can keep all of what

the firm obtains in excess of what they have borrowed, effort incentives

155ee Stiglits and Weiss (1981).
14

are good (And, as we have suggested, these incentives may be reinforced by
firms' concerns about bankruptcy.) But there are adverse risk-incentives:

fines pay insufficient attention to returns in those contingencies where

the lire goes hankrupt.'5 When firms have a high likelihood of default,
these incentive distortions can become quite large.

Finally, while in principle, both providers of loans and equity have an

incentive to monitor the actions of the borrower, lenders may be in a more
effective position for doing so, through their ability to withdraw credit.
And while typically there are many equity owners, each firm has only one or

in any case a few providers of loans.

This means that the "public good

problem associated with- monitoring- -of ensuring that the borrower takes
actions which are in accord with the interests of the lenders--ia less for
loans than for equity)7

3. Bonds

Bends represent a half-way house between short term loans and equity.

With a bond, a firm has a fixed comisitment

it must pay interest every

year, and it must repay the principal at a fixed date. As a result, all the
problems we have discussed above with loans arise with bonds.

This aspect of the discrepancy between the interests of firma and the
providers of capital was noted in Stiglitz (l972)
1?That is, since all those who provide a particular form of capital are

treated the same, if any one provider takes actions (e.g. monitoring the
actions of the firm) which increases his returns, all other members of the
class are benefited equally.
This gives rise to a classic public goods
problem: Firm management is a public good. See Stiglits (1985). Shleifer

and Vishny present evidence that fires in which equity ownership is
concentrated actually do perform more in accord with the intereata of
shareholders -

IS

Bonds have one significant sdvantage--and disadvantage.

Because, the

lender cannot recall the funds, even if he is displeased with what the firm

is doing, the firm is not on a "short" leash, the way it is with loans.
This has the advantage of enahling the firm to pursue long term policies--

but has the disadvantage of allowing the fin to pursue policies which
adversely affect the interests of bondholders. Bond covenants may provide
some restrictions, but these generally only foresee a few of the possible
contingencies facing firms.

The recent spate of take-overs and corporate

financial restructuring have significantl.y adversely affected bondholders,
and yet they had little or no say in the proceedings.

There may be second reason why bonds play a relatively saall role in

raising capital, even in major industrial countries

There may be en

adverse signal associated with a firm expressing an unwillingness to be put

on a short leash.

A firm which knows that it will be undertaking safe

actions, and that its projects are really good will be willing to subject
itself to the continued scrutiny of its bankers. Those who do not want such

close scruriny include those who think there is a high likelihood that
eventually they will fail to pass auater.

Thus, even if there were some

economies associated with long term commitments, the market night not
provide these ccmsiitments.5

At the saae time, it must be recognized that the focus on short tern
performance may have adverse long term effects,
16

C. Banks versus Markets

In recent years, there has been increasing reliance on markets, as
opposed to banks, as a source of capital. What are the causes of this, and

what are ita consequences?

One possible explanation is that transaction

costs may be lover. Competition among banks may be limited (partly because

of the role that iniormatinn plays as a barrier to entry), and firms that
have high public visibility, with a strong financial position, may be able

to raise funds at comparable interest rates, with lower fees, through
markets. Turning co markets to raise funds has one further advantage, hut a
related disadvantage. The firm using the market (e.g. borrowing by issuing
commercial paper or bonds) may be less affected by credit crunches imposed
by monetary authorities,

In such periods, firms that rely on hank credit

may find that they either have to do with less credit, or must issue
commercial paper; but in dcing so, they may be at a disadvantage relative to

firms that have done so on a regular basis. On the other hand, firms that
rely on long term bonds for much of their financing may find that rhey can
respond less flexibly to changing circumstances.

Firms which are in good

financial strength may perceive themselves as needing this flexibility less,

in which case the willingness to rely on bond finance becomes a positive
signal (as opposed to a negative signal, as suggested above.)

'5This would not, of course, be true if credit markets were like auction

markets with the commercial paper of one firm being a perfect substitute
for commercial paper from another. Potential lenders have to decide whether
a particular firm which is turning to the cozsmericial paper market is doing
so because of the general credit crunch, or because his bank knows that his
credit worthiness has declined, and has cut off credit.
17

If market finance is, indeed, less flexible than bank finance, the
change could have important consequences for the Isacroecoomic stability of
the economy:

Greenwald and Stiglits (1988b, 1938c), Stiglitz and Weiss

(1990) and Bornonke and Gertler (1989) have argued that financial
constraints play a central role in the economy's business flucruations.

D. The Distinction and Links Between Primary and Secondary Capital Markets

Our discussion so far has focused on the role of capital markets in
raising new capital. The term "capital marketsT' (like the term capital) is
nsed in a variety of ways; most of the activities which go under the rubric

of capital markets are connected only loosely with the primary function
which I have described, of raising and allocating new capital. The markets
on which claims to assets are traded are sometimes referted to as secondary
capital markets.

Indeed, only a small fraction of the reacurces of the

financial industry is directed at raising and allocating capital.

Keynes likened the seccndary financial market (the stock market) to a
beauty contest, in which the judges were concerned not with judging who wss
the most beautiful contestant, but who the other judges would think would be
judged the most beautiful contestant (or, perhaps more accurately, he shonid

have said, who the other judges would judge the other judges to judge to he
the most beautiful contescant. .

. .)

Others (Stiglica, 1982) have suggested

that the stock market might be thought of as a gambling casino.

It is

impossible to reconcile behavior in this market with rational, risk averse
individuals.

18

While the

ability of individuals to trade on the secondary market

undoubtedly makes securities mere attractive, Keynes, as well as many more

recent authors (such as }{irshleifer, 1971, and Stiglitz, 1971) have
suggested that ranch of the short term speculative activity has zero or
negative net social value. While it is true that the stock market may be

efficient, reflecting all available information20, that information has
little effect on resource allocations. Firms do not and cannot rely on the
information (whatever that is) communicated by the stock market for making
their production and investment decisions. (See Stiglitz, 1989.) While one
individual, by getting the information earlier than the other, may be able

to "trick" another individual into buying a share from him, or selling a
share to him, these trades only affect who gets society's resources; they do

not affect the level of production. They represent, in other words, private
rent seeking activities.

I stress this because the two aspects of financial markets are often
confused.

Much of the recent innovations in financial markets have been

concerned with the secondary market.

New instruments have been invented.

Transactions can be recorded sore

quickly.

But improvements in the

secondary markets do not necessary mean that the economy functions more
efficiently. (Indeed, Stiglitz and Weiss (1989) have shown that some of the

financial innovations, such as faster recording of transactions, may

2째Though if it were truly efficient in that sense, no one would have
any incentive to collect information, and thus the only information which
would be reflected in the market price would be free (although in this case,
that may not mean completely worthless) information.
See Grossman and
Stiglitz (1976, 1980).
19

actually be unaabiguously welfare reducing.)

In particular, the primary

financial markets may not perform their roles any better.21

These observations are important, because they warn ua against
thinking that improvements in secondary financial markets--or decreases in
government regulations of secondary financial markets-- necessarily, or even
normally, will iaprove the efficiency of the economy.

II. A Critique of the Two Paradigms

A. The Market Pmradigsi

Allocating capital is thus a much core complicated matter than the
simple "supply and demand" paradigm suggests.

Unfortunately, much of the

simplistic advice given by "free market" economists is based on the
hypotheses that markets fur capital are just like aarkets for chairs and
tables; that competitive markets--whether for chairs, tables, or capital--

ensure Pareto efficient resource allocations; and that policies that move

the economy closer to free market soiuttcns are welfare enhancing.

All

three of these presumptions are incorrect. We have already argued against
the first. And there is no Intellectual foundationa for either of the ocher
two,

The second best theorems of Meade and Lancaster and Lipsey long ago
showed thac in crononies in which there were some distortions, removing one

Taxing
2tThey even may perform their functions less effeotively.
transactions may reduce noise trading, and hence market volatility.
Long
term investors' expected return may be increased, and their risk may be
reduced. See, e.g. Scmmera and Summers (1989) or Stiglitz (1989).
20

distortion may not be welfare enhancing. Uhile they did not have in mind
the kinda of problems with which we are concerned here, the baaic lesson
remains valid in this context as well.22

More fundamentally, Greenwald and Stiglitz (1986, 1988) showed that

economies in which markets are incomplete23 or in which inioreation is
imperfect--that ia, all economies--are, in general not constrained Pareto

efficient that is, there almost always exista some forms of quite limited

government intervention, e.g. taxes and subsidies, which respect the
limitations on markets and information which are Pareto improviogJ''

I ahould perhaps distinguish the Greenwald-Stiglitz view from other
market failure approaches to government intervention. Since the formulation

of the Fundamental Theorems of Welfare Economics, there has been a wallarticulated view concerning the role of government intervention, which has

been known as the market failures approach.

This apprcach identifies

inportant instances where the assumptions underlying the Fundamental Theorem

are not satisfied, and argues for a very seiectfye intervention in the
market co correct those well-identified instances of market failure.

For

instance, the presence of pollution cells for a government pollutant tax.

22Ron Mckinnon (1989) provides a good discussion of how liberalizing
financial markets in less developed countries may not have been welfare
enhancing.

23 Several earlier studies showed that eccnonies in which there were
an incomplete set of risk markets were not constrained Pareto efficient.
See, in particular, Newbery and Stigliti (1981, 1982, 1984) and Stiglits
(1982b) -

2They show that several widely discussed examples in the literature
(e.g. the Arrow-Debreu model, or the Diamond (1967) stock market model)
represent special cases in which the market is Pareto efficient.

21

The market failures approaches identifies a role for government in
correcting externalities and providing public goods. Beyond that, the

absence of markets into the future provides a basis for government
investment planning,

By contrast, Creenwald and Stiglita argue that market failures crc
pervasive in the economy and that accordingly there is no nigaumption that
the market, left to itself, would be constrained Paretn efficient.

They

recognize that this in itself does not constitute a recoismendation for
government intervention: nne must be able to identify the Pareto improving

intervention and one must argue that goverresent policies will actual be

consistent with such Pareto iaproviog interventiona.5

The difficulties

associated with each, of these tasks suggests that government intervention
should be selective and aimed at what is likely to be the most significant
instances of market failure.

The problems that arise in financial markets

suggest that market as one such candidate.

B. Government as the Solution

While the precise arguments put forward by Greenwald and Stiglitz in
their critique of market solutions may be new, the view that markets do not

provide a good basis for raising aod allocating capital within LDCs (or,
for that matter, in more devaloped countries) is not.

In the absence of a

complete act of futures markets, prices cannot perfors that central role of
coordinating investment decisions that traditional price theory ascribes to

In their paper, they relate the desirable government interventions to
empirically observable parameters.
22

it. Whether for this or other reasons, many governments have seen the task

of allocating capital as being too important to he left to the private
sector, The socialist platform typically has the nationalization of banks
and other financial institutions high on its agenda.

The central problems which I have discussed are no less problems within

the public sector than in the private.

Shifring the locus of decision

saking does not alter the difficulties associated with selection and
monitoring. But to make matters worse, the government often does not have

the incentives to ensure that it (or its ageits) does a good job in
selecting and monitoring loans.

The deep pocket of the government means

that any losses can easily be made up.

Moreover, since economic criteria

are often supplemented with other criteria (saving jobs, regional
development), losaas can be blamed not on an inability to make judgments
about credit worthiness, but on the non-economic criteria which have been

imposed. The absence of the check provided by the market teat means that
credit can he allocated on the basis of political favoritism: the subsidy
associated with charging a lower rste of interest than the riskiness of the
loan merits is hidden.26

The results of this and the previous subsection oight, at firat, seen
to be ai odds with each other, but they are not. In the previous section,
we showed thee in economies in which there are an incomplete set of markets
or imperfect inforaaticn (virtually all markets) there exists actions by the

government which are Pareto improvements, and which respect thc limitations

26Moreover, even in the absence of corruption, if rationing is optimal,
the ability to choose among loan applicants gives the government an enorsous
saoont of power.
23

on the existence of markets and the availability of information. Government
is not given any more powers in these respects than the private sector.5'
When the central result of economic theory was that no government, no ratter

how benevolent or how far sighted, could improve upon the workings of the

private sector, we had no need to call upon a theory of government to
describe what an actual government might do in a particular situation: the
upper hound of what it might achieve was no higher than that of thu private
market, The Greenwald-Stiglitz theorem ssye that there is a potential scope

fcr welfare improving government activity. Whether government action will
actually improve matters is a more delicate question.

This subsection of

the paper serves to remind us that governments face the same informational
prohlems that the private sector does, snd in addition faces some "political

economy" problems, difficulties which, in the past, in jppjy

(but

not all)

instances have limited the ability of the gcvernmenr to effect welfare
improvements.

But while I am not sanguine about the ability of government to rep)ece

markets as a mechanism for raising and allocating capital, our anaiysis at

least suggests the possibility that there may exist government polities
which will enhance the efficiency--for the social perspective--with which
the market economy raimes and allocates capital. Of course, any analysis of

government policies towards capital markets needs to take into ocoonnt the
fundamental problems (enforcement, selection, incentives) to which we hove
called attention.

With this view in mind, I went to discuss several

째7lhere are, of course, still distinctions between the government and
the private sector. The government, for instance, has the power to tax and
to proscribe entry. For a fuller analysis, at a theoretical level, of rho

differences between governnent and other economic organizations, see
Brights (l989b,)
24

I want to emphasize the tentative nature of this

possible policies.
discussion:

the central thrust of my paper is that alternative policies

need to be evaluated from s perspective which takes into account the central

features of capital markets, as I have described there, and the second best
nature of the problem.

III. Renarks on Economic Policy

Banks versus secujities msrkets as sources of funds, The first, and most
obvious implication of our analysis is that the LDCs must expect that firms

within their economies will have to rely heavily on bank lending, rather
than sacuricies markets, as sources of funds. While it may do little harm

for governments to try to promote tha growth of aacuriciaa markets, both
aarkata for equities and long term bonds, these are likely to provide only a

small fraction of the funds firms require.

If investors are inadequately

protected, by strong securities and fraud laws, and a judiciary which can

fairly and effectively enforce such laws, there is a high likelihood of
abuses; the resulting loss of investor confidence may have repercussions
well beyond the aecurities directly affected.

Since primarily reliance almost inevitably will be placed on bank
lending, it is importani for governmenta to take actions which improve the
efficiency of the banking system.

For instance, having well definad property rights (say in land)
provides a source of collateral, which facilitates bank lending.

A

judiciary which can quickly deal with defaults, at low costs, allowing the

25

lender Lo

seize

and dispose of the collateral again enhances the willingness

of hanks to lend.

Such reforms may seem relatively uncontroversial, compared tn the
suggestions below.

Foreign investment and banks.

Many governments of LDCs have been

particularly loath to allow foreign banks to play a major role.

I want to

suggest that this policy ipgy be misguided, but in any case, needs to be re-

examined
In

from the perspectives provided in

all countries, the ratio of banks' net worth to their liabilities is

usually very small.
firms.

this paper.

In a sense, banks can be viewed as highly leveraged

Highly leveraged firms are particularly prone to undertaking risks

which are not in the interests of their lenders--here these who have
deposited funds with them.

In the United Ststem (and many other countries) the government provides

depositors with insurance.

When the idea of auth insurance was first

broached to President Roosevelt, he reacted strongly negatively, pointing
out (to use our modern terminology) the moral hazard (incentive) problems to

which that insurance gives rise.

Though he eventually relented, vith

hindsight, we can see how right he was!28

Banks which undertake greater

risk can offer greater intereat rates to depositors, who tan, with impunity,

turn over their funds to the bank, These banks attract funds away from mote
prudent banks. A kind of Gresham'a Law works with a vengeance.

2810 the United States, at the preaent time, not only do a majority of
savings and loan institutions have negative net worth (if their assets were
valued at current market value), but so do a significant frattioo of the
major banks. See Bruishaugh, Carron and Litsn (1989).
26

What is at issue is not jusL corruption (though that plays a role as

well)째, but rather judgments about prudent risks.

It is evidently

extremely difficult for honk regulators to monitor banks effectively.

One

must largely rely on market forces to ensure that banks take prudent
actions. What regulators can do is to try to ensure that the banks have an

incentive to take prudent actions.

The maintenance of reputation is one

such incentive. But the cost of losing one's reputation is obviously larger

for a large international hank than for a small local bank.

(net worth) also may be effective.

High equity

Local banks may find it difficult

raising the required equity.

These arguments suggest that foreign banks and firms may be sore
reliable in siloceting capital efficiently than domestic banks and fitiss.

To put it another way, establishing a reputation is like any other
investment.

The process of allocating capital- -when due concern is taken

for the requisite incentives if it is to be done well- -is e capital
intensive process, and foreign banks (and other international companies) may
have a comparative advantage in that process.

At the same time, there may be an infant industry argument for
protection, and, in particular, for limiting external capital flows (which

allnw foreign institutions to serve the role of intermediation30) and the
operation of foreign banks domestically.

So long as savers have a choice

between domestic and foreign banks, at comparable tents, they will choose

29The corruption itself may, to some extent, be viewed as endogenous;

the opportunities to profit by dishonesty attract those with such
inclinations.

In several LUCs, capital outflows roughly equal capital inflows.
It is as if funds went to international banks to be intermediated, and then
wore returned to the country of origin.

27

the latter.

(Lack of) reputation serves as an effective entry barrier for

doaesitc banks: to compensate for the lack of reputation they cannot pay a

higher interest rate, for that (in the by now familiar way) would
oxacorbate both the moral hazard and adverse selection problems.
Domestic firms are not only at a reputation disadvantage; they are also

at a risk disadvantage.
portfolio.

International firms can diversify over a wide

Even if the domestic banks have a portfolio of assets that is

widely diversified among domestic risks, the common (country) risks which

affect all of them (exchange ri-sks and other macro-economic risks) make
theit portfolios riskier.

Hence, even with the same "reputation" and the

same equity base, investors might rationally prefer foreign firms,

While foreign fins may thus have an advantage within the cepitsl
market, they may have an informational disadvantage --they may find it more

difficult to respond to the particular situations which arise in the
country.31 That is why there is much to be gained from a country having its
own entrepreneurs.22

But entrepreneurship is, in part, learned, and to

undertake the learning requires capital.

And we have explained why it is

that dozes tic entrepreneurs end banks may find it difficult raising the
requisite capital.

Note that a standsrd argument against the infant industry arguisent
simply doesn't apply in this context: if the idea is a good one, the firs
should be willing to sell at a loss, until its costs are down to a level at

which it could compete effectively. For to sell at a loss, the firm must

31This argument may not be a compelling one against foreign honks
located within the LDCs.
32There are undoubtedly other reasons as well, such as national pride.

28

borrow or raise equity, and it is precisely the inability of firms to borrow
or raise equity which is our concern here

Moreover, there may be a distinct difference betwoen private and social

returns, both to entrepreneurship and to providing capital to new
entrepreneurs. Private investors (banks), for instance, are only concerned
with that fraction of the total returns which they can appropriate; society,

more broadly conceived, is coccerned with the total returns to the project

which accrue within the country (thus excluding the surplus returns which
say accrue to foreign investors.)33 '

More broadly, foreign hanks, in allocating capital, will have different

objectives than those of domestic banks, so that the disparity between
social and private returns may be particularly large.

Foreign banks may

particularly concerned with nationalization, end thus may provide capital to

sectors which appear relatively isajuna from nationalization, and in forms
(with restrictions) that make nationalization less likely and that make it

aore likely that, should nationalization occur, they can recover their
capital.

While these arguments might suggest a role for government credit
markets, the caveats we expressed earlier suggest that other forms of
Restrictions on foreign banks and

indirect subsidy may be more effective.

on capital flows out of the country (impeding the efficiency of the
33itiglitz and Weiss (1981) argued that in their model of credit
rationing, there was a distinct disparity between social and private
returns.

Hoff [i989 argues, for instance, that when an entrepreneur
undertakes a new project, it conveys information to other entrepreneurs
about the idiosyncratic properties of the country's production techcology,
returns which that entrepreneur cannot appropriate.

29

secondary capital market) oay be cne way of channelling funds to domes tir

cotrepreneurs and of subsidizing domestic banks and corporations.

Such

broad restrictions provide domestic investors with incentives to allocate

funds to the best domestic projects/entrepreneurs, and if there is broad
enough competition within the domestic economy--an important caveat- - the
rents obtsined by domestic firms will be limited.

Another caveat is in order As always, a concern needs to be expressed
thst restrictions are not used simply to protect domestic monopolies. Thus,
if one or two banks dorlnate the doncstic banking industry, restrictions on

foreign banks may simply scrvo to protect those firms' monopoly rents.
Those firms may not be particularly efficient allocators of capital, and the

disparity between their interests and a broader sense of national interest

may be no less than the corresponding disparity for foreign banks.

Since

in many LDCs, the domestic banking sector is far from competitive, policies

aimed at locking out foreign owned banks located within the country may be
particularly inadvisable,

In the previous section, I argued that restrictions on the secondary
capital markets--on the free flow of funds abroad- -may have sore advantages

in encouraging the development of e domestic financial sector.

To

e0000miers used to hearing the contention that governments should try to
'free up" nerkers, this argument may seem strange.

One of the important lessons of the theory of the second best, to which
i referred earlier, is that when there are some important distortions in the

economy, removing one distortion may not be welfsre enhancing.

In most

LOTs, there are maoy distortions. Indeed, as we argued esrlier, in markets

30

with incomplete risk markets end imperfect information--that is, in all
markets- - there

is

no presumption that market allocations will be

(constrained) Pareto efficient, and a fortiori, there is no preauaption that

making one market--the secondary capital market--work sore nearly like the
"ideal" market is welfare enhancing.

Far instance, McKinnon (1988) has argued persuasively that flexible,

unmanaged exchange rates have imposed enormous risk burdens on producers
engaged in international trade, risks which they cannot divest adequately
thrcugh futures sarkets.

Oor analysis of limited equity markets suggests

thst these risks may have real--and deleterious--effects.

(See, for

instance, Newbery and Stiglits (1981,1984).)

All of this suggests that there are no easy policy answers.

In same

cases, governments have (perhaps unintentinnally) served to exacerbate the

prcblems we have identified rather than reduce them, by subjecting the

domestic banking industry to high taxes and arbitrary and capriciouc
cegulation.

[ri these cases, "freeing op" the market would seem to nske

gcod policy sense.

Multinationals.

Many of the same arguments for why foreign banks may be

able to perform an important role in allocating capital apply to
multinationals,

They have one advantage over banks:

they typically

provide capital in the form of (what is in effect) equity, While equity has

distinct advantages over debt--it provides more effective risk sharing, and

thus leads firma to act in a less risk averse manner, resulting, in turn,

in the economy being less sensitive to a variety of shocks- -we have seen

that tilts era likely to face particular problems in establishing well

31

functioning equity markets. Thus, it may be desirable for governments in
12Cc to recognize the important role that multinationals can play in the
development process, rather than putting impediments in their way,

Risk sharing by government,

For the teasons I have explained equity

markets are unlikely to provide effective risk sharing opportunities. Hany
governments, by their tax policies, exacerbate the effects of limited equity

morkets, for the gcvernment shares in the profits, hut shares in the losses

to a much more limited extent.

As Domar and Nusgrave (1944) and Stiglitz

(1969) long ago recognized if the government fully shares in gains and
losses,

it can actually encoursge risky investment; in effect,

the

government enters into every investment as a silent partner.35 Though this
is not the occasion to provide a detailed technical proposal of how this aay

he done, I should note that there are several ways in which governments can
shore risk much more effectively than they do at present,35

Covernrent risk reduction strstegg. In addition, there are poliojes which
the government eon undertake which reduce the riskiness of the environments
in which firms operate, and given the limited opportunities for risk sharing

35Hore recently, Auerbach and Poterhe (1987) have emphasized the
importance, within the United States, of the provisions limiting loss deductibility.

The important difference between the government acting as a silent

equity partner, through the tax system, and the government acting as a
source of credit (as described above) needs to be recognized: in the latter

oaso, the government is given discretion; in the forcer case,

the

"partnership" arrangement is automatic, While this partnership srtangemenc
obviously affects incentives (attenuating effort inoentives, accentuating
risk incentives), the question is, on balance, are these incentive effects
positive, or, if negative, suffioiently small to outweigh the government's
revenue gain?

32

provided by markets, this can provide a strong stimulus for the economy. In

particular, it can increase both the willingness of firms to borrow (since
the lower the riskiness of the environment, the more they can borrow while
still facing a particular probability of bankruptcy), end the willingness of
banks to lend.
These policies can he both micro-economic and macro-economic in nature.

Stabilizing the price of export crops will not only have a direct effect on
the producers of export crops (assuming that price and quantity are not too

negatively correlated), but will also have an indirect effect;

the

variability of income of the producers of export crops gives rise to
variability in the demand for non-traded goods. Stabilizing incomes within

the rural sector will thus result in increased production of non-traded
goods. (See Newbery-Stiglitz, 1981.)

Conclus ions

In the past two decades there has been a major shift in the prevailing
economic paradigm, reflected in our views of economic policy in general, and
development economics and policy in particular.

Earlier discussions focused on the debate between those who believed in

efficient, competitive markets- -for developing as well as developed
countries--and saw government as a major impediment to the efficient
functioning of the economy; sod those who saw pervasive matket failures
requiring government intervention. Among the central market failures which

33

they cited was the absence of a complete set of futures and risk ieerkets37,
and accordingly one of the central responsibilities of the government was to

plan and coordinate investment activities. In the yesrs following World War
TI governments of newly independent countries set up Ministries of Planning
to fulfill their responsibilities and to facilitate the development process.

But the absence of futures and risk markets was not pure happenstance.

It reflected more fundamental problems- -

including

problems of imperfect

information, imperfect competition end costly contract enforcement--which

affected all economies.

The recognition of the limitations of the

development planning prccess coincided with the recognition of these
linitations of the standard economic paradigm. Withic developed countries,
it was recognized that labor, capital, and product markets worked--in many
instances at least--in a manner markedly different from that depicted by the

conventional competitive demand and anpply snalysia. While this paper has
focused on the problems associated with financial markets, leading to credit

and equity rationing, similar analyses have been conducted of labor and
produnt markets. These problems are, if anything, more pervasive and more
prominent in tDCs than in developed economies.

We have already noted one major implication of this perspective: there
ia no longer any presumption that market solutions are (constrained) Pareto
efficient.

but there is another equally important implication:

the

problems of imperfect information--including imperfect monitoring--is no

less present in the public sector than in the private.

The fact that

noted earlier, the Fundamentsl Theorem of Welfare Economics, which
represented the formalization of Adam Smith's notion of the Invisible 1-land,

requires that there be m complete set of risk and futures markets, Only
under these conditions will competitive markets ensure economic efficiency.
34

markets do not work as well as their ardent proponents claus does not mean

that governments can remedy the problem. The absence or limited scope of
financial markets may not be simply because the private sector has failed to

recognize a profitable opportunity. There are, aa we have seen, good
reasons that financial markets look markedly different from the way they are

characterized in old-style textbooks.

Governments should at least go

cautiously where private markets fear to tread,

We now recognize that, particularly for small open economies, the
problems of macro-economic coordination stressed in the earlier development

planning literature may be far less important than the micro-economic
problems of selecting (quite specific) projects and choosing good managers

to manage those projects.
managing

from above--the

And we now recognize the difficulty of micro-

virtual impossibility of

specifying

the

characteristics (including delivery dates, durability, etc.), and of setting

prices for each of the infinity of possible commodities, We have else come

to recognize the pervasiveness of decentralized planning in market
economies.

The old market paradigm wes wrong in may more ways than

suggested by simply the absence of futures markets.35

One of the functions of the economy's financial institutions is not

only to raise capital, but to channel funds to che most profitable
opportunities (the selection or screening function), and to ensure that
those funds are well used (the monitoring function,) We need to think more

about vhat kinds of institutions can most effectively perform these
functions.

Centralized government bureaucracies and large public credit

institutions may be poorly situated to perform those functions. But there

38For a more extensive discussion of these issues, see Stiglitz (1989).
35

may be ways in which the government can assist in the development of a
variety of institutions which can play an important role.
But much of this paper is predicated on a more pessimistic appreisal.of

the potential role of financial markets in the development process. It has

argued that they play a limited role even within well organized developed

countries, and that their role within the LDCs is likely to be even more
circujastribed. Hence, government policies should be directed at mitigating
the consequences of these inherent--and important--limitations of financial

markets and institutions within LDCa.

lThat might be called hsecond or

"third" heat policies have to be developed.

Many current government

poiicies fail to recognize these limitations which fate both the government

and the private sector.

I have put forward some quite tentative propoaals

which suggest some ways in which government policy can be designed to
reflect the broad set of concerns which I have raised.

36

References

Asquith, 1'.

and Mullins, DV., "Equity Issues and Stock Price Dilution.'

Journal of Financial Economics, 1986.

Auerbach, A,
and Poterba, J.  "Tax Loss Carryforwards and Corporate Tax
Incentives," in Feldstein, K., ed. , The Effects of Taxation on Capital
Formatiop, University of Chicago Press (Chicago), 1987.
Earle, 'Non Voting Stock and 'Bankers' Control," Barvard Law Review, 1926.

Bernanke, B. and Gertler, K., "Agency Costs, Net Worth and Business
Fluctuations," American Economic Review, Vol. 79, 1989, pp. 14-31.

Brumbaugh, R.IL, Cstron, A.S. and Litan, R.E., "Cleaning up the Depository
Institutions Mess," Er.ookjrig
243-295.

.apers

on Economic_Aer4,fl,fl, Vol. 1, 1989, pp.

Diamond, "The Role of a Stock Market in a General Equilibrium Model with
American Economic Review, Vol. 57, 1967, pp.
Technological Uncertainty,
753-776.

and Richard Musgrave, "Proportional Income Taxation and Risk
Domar, E.
Taking," Onarcerly Journal of Economics, Vol. 58, May 1944, pp. 388.422.
and J. E, Stiglits, "The Pure Theory of Country
Eaton, J, , Cersovitz, H.,
Risk," European Economic Review, Vol. 30, 1986, pp. 481-513.

Gale, I. and J. E. Stiglitz, "The Informational Content of Initial Public
Offerings." forthcoming, Journal of Finance,

Creenwald, B. and J. B. Stiglitz. "Externalities in Economics with Imperfect
Information and Incomplete Markets," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.
101, May 1986, pp. 229-256.

_____________

"Pareto

Inefficiency of Market Economies: Search and
Psoers and Proceedings,

Efficiency Wage Models," American Economic Review Vol. 78, May l988a, pp. 351-355.

_____________ "Financial Market Imperfections and Business Cycles." NBER
Working Paper no, 2494, Januaty, l988h.

_____________ "Examining Alternative Macroeconomic Theories," Brookines
Papers on Economic Activity, No. 1, 1988c, pp. 207-270

______________

"Financial

Market Imperfections and Productivity Growth,"

NBER Working Paper, No. 2365, April l989a.

______________

"Information, Finance and Markets: The Architecture of

Allocative Mechanisms," paper prepared for International Conference on the

37

History of Enterprise; Finance and the Enterprise in a Historical
Perspective, Terni, Italy, September 28, 1989b.

Oreenwald, B., Stiglits, JR., and Weiss, A., "Informational Imperfections
and Macroeconomic Fluctuations," American Economic Review, May, 1984, Pp.
19" -199.

Grossman, S. and Hart, 0., "Takeover Bids, the Free Rider Problem, and the
Theory of the Corporation," Bell Journal, 1980, 35 (2). pp. 42-64.
Crosssian,

5, and J.

S. Stiglita, "Information and Competitive Price

Systems," American Economic Review, Vol. 66, No. 2, June 1976, pp. 246-253.

______________ 'On the Impossibility of Informationally Efficient Marketa,'
American Econonic Review, Vol. 70, No. 3, June l9BOa, pp. 393-408.

"A Model of Borrowing and
N. ,
Hellwlg,
Econoeetrica, Vol. 65, 1977, pp. 1876-1906.

Lending with Bankruptcy,"

Hirsthleifer, J,, "The Private and Social Value of Information and the
Reward to lncentive Activity," Americen Economic Review, Vol. 67, 1971,
pp. 561-574

Hoff, K., "Essays in the Theory of Trade and Taxation Uncer Incomplete Risk
Markets," unpublished doctoral dissertation, Princeton University, 1988.

"An Argument for Industrial Policy for Infant Industries Eased
on the Production and Transmission of Information," University of Maryland
aimeo, 1989.
_____________

Jensen, H., "Takeovers; Their Causes and Consequences," Journal of Economic
Perspectives, Vol. 2, Winter 1988, pp. 21-48.

Jensen, H. and Meckling, "Theory of the Firm; Managerial Behavior, Agcncy
Costs and Ownership Structure," Journal Qf Financial Economics, Vol. 3,
1976, pp. 3O5360.
Kennedy, Williem P. (1987), Industrial Structure,. Capital Markets, and the
Qrkgins of British Economic Decline, Caabridge University Press.

Mayer, Cohn, "Myths of the West:

Lessons from Developed Countries for

Development Finance," CEPR discussion paper, London, Match, 1989.

McKinnon, R., "Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies for International
Financial Stability; A Proposal," jnnal of Economic Persnectives, Vol. 2,
No. 1, Winter 1988, pp. 83-105
_____________ "Macroeconomic Instability and Moral Hazard in Banking in a
Liberalizing Kccnomy," in Latin American Deht and Adjustment, P.L. Brock, M.
B. Connolly and C. Gonzalez-Vega, eds. , 1989, Praeget: New York, pp. 99.111.

38

Meade, J.E. ,

Trade and ielfare: Mathematical Supplement, Oxford University

Press, Oxford, 1955.

Myers, S. C., and Majiuf, MS., "Corporate Financing and Investment
Decisions When Firms Have Information that Investors Do Not," Journal of
Financial Economics. vol. 11, pp. 187-221.

Newbery, 0. and Stiglitz, I., The Theory Qf Commodity Frice Stabilization,
Oxford University Press, 1981.

______________ "The Choice of Techniques and the Optimality of Market
Equilibrium with Rational Expectations." Journal of Political Economy, Vol.
90 No. 2, April 1982, pp. 223.246.

______________ "Pareto Inferior Trade", Review of Economic Studies,
Vol. LI, No. 164, January 1984, pp. 1-13.
Shleifer A, and Vishny, R. ,

"Managerial Entrenchment: The case of manager-

specific investments," paper presented at Olin Conference on Economic
Organizations. Princeton, October, 1988.

"A Re-Examination of the Modigliani-Miller Theorem",
Stiglits, J.E. ,
American Economic Review, Vol. 59, No. 5, December 1969, pp. 784-793.

_____________ "Perfect and Imperfect Capital Markets," Paper presented to
Econometric Society Meetings, New Orleans, December 1971.

______________ "Some Aspects of the Pure Theory of Corporate Finance:
Bankruptcies and Take-Dyers", Bell Journal of Economics, Vol. 3, No. 2,
Autumn 1972, pp. 458-482.

_______________ "Incentives and Risk Sharing in Sharecropping," Review of
Eccnomic Studies, Vol. 41, 1974, pp. 2i3-255.

"Information and Capital Marketa," in Financial Economics:
Essays in Honor of Paul Cootner, William F. Sharpe and Cathryn Ccotner eds.,
(Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 1982). pp. 118-158.
Honor of Paul Cootner, 1982a.

______________

______________ "Ownership, Control and Efficient Markets: Some Parasoxea in
the Theory of Capital Markets," in Economic Regulation: Essays in Honor of
James R. Nelson, Ed. by Kenneth 0. Boyer and William C. Shepherd, Michigan
State University Press (Ann Arbor), 1982h, pp. 311-341.

______________ "The Inefficiency of the Stock Market Equilibrium", Review
of Economic Studies, April l982c, pp. 241-2611 (paper presented at a
Conference on Uncertainty and Insurance in Economic Theory in honor of Karl
Botch, Bergen. April 1979)

______________ "Money, Credit and Banking Lecture: Credit Market and the
Control of Capital," Journal of Money. Credit and Banking, Vol. 17, No. 1,
Hay 1985, pp. 133-152.
39

_____________
'Using Tax Policy to Cut-b Speculative Short-Term Trading,"
Conference on Regulatory Reform of Stock and Futures Markets, Columbia
University, May 1989.

___________

"Incentives,

Information, and Organizational Design,"

Ejpgjjica, Vol. 16, No. 1, 1989c, pp. 3-29.

_______________ "On the Economic Role of the State," The Economic Role of
the Stmte, A. Heertjm, ed, (flank Insinger de Beaufort NV) 1989d.

Stiglitz, J. and Weiss, A., "Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect
Information," American Economic Review, Vol. 71, June 1981, pp. 393-410.

_______________

"Incentive Effects of Termination: Applications to the

Credit and Lahot Markets," Ajegxicmn Economic Review, Vol. 72, Denembor
1983, pp. 912-927.

_____________ "Credit Rationing and Collatetal," Recent Developments in
orporate Finance, Cambridge University Press, 1986, pp. 101-135.

"Macro-economic Equilibriuie and Credit Rationing," REEF
____________
Working Paper No. 2164, February 1987,
_______________ "Sanks as Social Accountants and Screening Devices and the
General Theory of Credit Rationing," Essays in Monetary Economics in Honor
of Sir John Hicks, Oxford University Press, 1989.

_______ "Credit Rationing and Its
Stanford University mieteo, 1990.
______

Implications

for Macroeconomics,"

Sumeors, LX. and Summers, V.P. , "When Financial Markets Work Too Well: A
Cautious Case for a Securities Transactions Tax," paper presented to the

Annenberg Conference en Technology and Financial Markets, Washington,
February 28, 1989.
R.A.
"Seculer
Patterns
in the Financing of U.S.
Jr.,
Corporaticns, in EM. Ftiediran (ed), Coroorete Capital Structures in the
Teggart,

United States, National Bureau of Economic Resemrch Project Report,
Uciversity of Chicago Press (Chicago), 1985.

40

