NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES

EARNINGS, DIVIDEND POLICY, AND PRESENT VALUE RELATIOMS:
BUILDING BLOCKS OF DIVIDEND POLICY INVARIANT CASH FLOWS

Bruce N. Lehmann

Working Paper No.

3676

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge. MA 02138
April 1991

This paper is part of NBER's research program in Financial
Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those
of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER Working Paper #3676
April 1991

EARNINGS, DIVIDEND POLICY, AND PRESENT VALUE RELATIONS:
BUILDING BLOCKS OF DIVIDEND POLICY INVARIANT CASH FLOWS

ABSTRACT

In a Modigliani-Miller world, price equals the risk-adjusted
present value of future dividends and dividend policy is
irrelevant for asset pricing. This paper searches for cash flows
with two characteristics: asset prices can be calculated from
their present values and they are invariant with respect to

dividend policy. Residual income measures with these features
are identified under two assumptions: dividend policy does not
alter risk premiums and income earned from investments associated

with dividend policy includes capital gains and losses. These
results hold for otherwise arbitrary risk premiums in the general
no-arbitrage approach to the valuation of uncertain income
streams -

Bruce N. Lehmann
Graduate School of
Business
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027 USA

There is a peculiar schizophrenia underlying the present value relation. On

the one hand, the value of equity is, the risk-adjusted present value of expected
future dividends. On the other hand, value additivity implies that dividend policy

is irrelevant. Hence, the conventional practice of assuming a particular dividend

policy and computing its present value is fraught with hazard. Under the null
hypothesis of efficiency, there is substantial reason to believe that any assumed
dividend policy is misspecified since managers have no obvious incentive to adopt
or maintain a consistent dividend policyJ

For many years, there was comparatively little interest in academia in the

computation of present values. The efficient markets hypothesis, which has
dominated research over the last quarter century, presumes that asset prices equal

their underlying intrinsic values. This focused attention on the behavior of asset

prices and particular risk-adjustment procedures, retarding the development of
improved procedures for calculating intrinsic values.

It is fair to say that most academic research has been concerned with risk-

adjustment procedures for holding period returns. I want to focus instead on

procedures for measuring cash flows more fundamental than dividends in a
particular sense—like dividends, prices are their risk-adjusted present values but,

unlike dividends, they are invariant with respect to changes in dividend policy.
Accomplishment of this task would facilitate the calculation of measures of intrinsic

value that are not price dependent, simplifying the testing of the efficient markets
hypothesis or the exploitation of its predictions for valuation purposes. It does so by

1There is now an enormous literature that examines present value calculations for
evidence of excess volatility under particular assumptions about dividend policy

and expected returns. See, for example, Campbell and Shiller(1987,1988a,b),
Grossman and Shiller(1981), Kleidon(1986), Leroy and Porter(1981), Mankiw, Romer,

and Shapiro(1985), Marsh and Merton(1986,1987), Mattey and Meese(1986),
Shiller(1979,1981,l984), and West(1987,1988).

2

providing an explicit link between accounting measures of capital (i.e., book value)
and rates of return (i.e., return on equity) and their economic counterparts.
There are three building blocks of dividend policy invariant cash flows which

comprise the body of the paper. The next section sets out the general no-arbitrage

valuation environment used throughout the paper and the class of accounting

relations that can be accommodated by the analysis. The main result is the
translation of the no-arbitrage pricing relation for future dividend payments into a
corresponding procedure for valuing arbitrary stocks and flows. The second section

analyzes the role of dividend policy in the dividend policy invariance of residual

income measures based on economic income. It shows that one must generally
define financial policy to be the net issuance of contingent claims by firms plus the

synthetic securities implicitly created by particular dividend payout strategies. The

third section provides a corresponding analysis of accounting-based residual
income measures, emphasizing the role of capital gains and losses in their dividend
policy invariance. A brief appendix contains the proof of the first proposition.
1. The Arithmetic of Stocks, flows, and Present Value Relations

The first building block is the specification of both the valuation
environment and the class of accounting relations to be considered. Generality is
clearly desirable in both dimensions; I do not wish to restrict attention to particular

equilibrium valuation or even efficient markets models or to tie the analysis to a

particular definition of accrued or realized income. Accordingly, I will consider
present value relations that require only no-arbitrage in frictionless markets and any
accounting numbers that obey simple stock/flow relations.

The valuation environment assumed throughout the paper is the general

no-arbitrage approach to the valuation of uncertain income streams. This is
restrictive in some dimensions—it assumes the absence of frictions like taxes,

transactions costs, and constraints on short sales as well as value-relevant

3

asymmetries in the information available to investors.2 Nevertheless, i satisfies

requirements listed above since it does not require market efficiency, particular
risk/return models, or complete markets. Fo1lowig Rubinstein(1976) and
the

Rqss0978), the general no-arbiftage pricing relation is:
H.
Pt

U+pçj)t:.'Y"

ifl-.

>0; E[ytj/It]=i V t,j> 0

j=1

where P is the value of a claim to the income stream dt+,, dt÷, represents Income

received at time tLPq

at time t for a nskiess j period pure

E!

discount bond.3 y,j is the normalized pricing kernel (generally equal to investors'
Ia
intertemporal marginal utility functionals for time t+j multiplied by the
riskless j period pure discount bond),4 an4 the expectation opeçator EN /iI reflects
.j,:

Ci.-il ,':: ,

-:-C YLi1V 0 I)i'

it.

.

r?htY beljefs kid conditional on iufor,rnation

lu

-

requirement that expectations are rational—probability beliefs need only satisb' the
;i?c—C,:. :.:-;—,'.' .z,;::J
.

general mathematical properties of an expctation.

,

-.
;-Q.'::flt _--'-.
- The valuation equation (1) is compatible with two extreme views of.the.
.:.' .+fl;
:i;' C n:H-: 'i•-Th
::::
-._-::C,
--

—

-

0111 1")

LL:'1i.

2More precisely, the latter statement requires investors to perceive a deterministic

relation-between states of' the*,orld: and:.cSh

moral hazard and adverse selection problems (but no,t inresolved information

FikSñs-'Sekáffyfiiake aiathft i-la1 and
asjththettk) là:
pricing kernels ,investpr-specifiç althoufl proportional jransactpns
usüa1l bE a&othmddatè± teneral condit nfbrfrdiig iëIitIciiii]ikè"ffl td hold

lC-:

.-j:-:
in-the presence-of frktipns-ave-notknowj';
31f there is 'no nominally riskless asset, the no-arbitrage present value relation is:

Pt =EE[dt+1Yt,j/14 Yt,1> 0
-- jj-f1 1ti.::.. .
::.i:: - s
1-1A..
where E[d1+3Y1 ,/Ij is tife distount faclor for a1j-penód zero beta ksset

I

pricing kernel is not iecessarily..un;que in in1completi markets That is,,
constraints are placd on Arrow-DebrQu prices in incqplete nrkets but the
4The

''''

is generally insuIficient tQ uniquely identity tham
assumption of io-arbttrage alone
-

inthlscase;

-

.

4

nature of financial markets. This is an efficient markets model when investors
have rational expectations given appropriate specification of their information sets
since market price equals the objective intrinsic or fundamental value. However, it

is also consistent with a wide variety of inefficient markets models. For example,
investor expectations need not be rational so that price need not equal objective

intrinsic value and some investors could even irrationally ignore the presence of

arbitrage opportunities from their perspective so that risk premiums (i.e., the
pricing kernels Yt.j) are not those that would occur if all investors were rational.S

Note also that the central tenets of modem financial theory are embodied in
this general present value relation. The role of modern portfolio theory is implicit
in the risk adjustment used to generate the certainty equivalents of the cash flows
d+;. Modigliani-Miller propositions follow from the notion of value additivity
embedded in (1)—'--the value of a claim to the income stream d1+ is the sum of the
values of claims to any arbitrary decomposition of this stream. This observation on

the linearity of expectations (or, equivalently, on the linearity of price systems)

implies that the value of the firm is independent of its capital structure and the

value of an equity claim is independent of the dividend policy of the firm.6
Modigliani-Miller reasoning will play a critical role in the analysis that follows.

The conversion of the valuation relation (1) into an operational device for
calculating intrinsic value requires knowledge of all of its factors. Much of modern

financial research has been devoted to the identification of the appropriate risk

5ff horizons were finite, equation (1) permits an additional source of irrationality—
the possibility of the terminal price (and, hence, the current price) not reflecting
intrinsic value due to irrationality of future investors. Obviously, the no-arbitrage
pricing relation is not compatible with all sorts of market inefficiency.
6This means that beliefs are assumed to be invariant with respect to financial and
dividend policy. This further restricts the kinds of market inefficiency compatible
with the analysis.

S

adjustment procedures (i.e., identification of Yt,j when expectations are rational. I
want to focus instead on the cash flows d1÷. An implication of the general present

value relation is that security values are independent of all zero net present value
alterations of the stream of cash flows. When the security under consideration is a

common stock, this property is usually referred to as the Modigliani-Miller
dividend policy irrelevance proposition.

Dividend policy irrelevance greatly complicates the calculation of present
values. Legal, institutional, and moral hazard considerations suggest that dividend

payouts will not generally follow the convenient stochastic processes typically
assumed by econometricians. This would occur, for example, in the plausible case
where managers were committed to a stable policy of dividend payments with two

features—retained income must be positive when paid-in capital exceeds book
value and retained earnings are bounded below by zero because of an eventual 100%

payout policy. Moreover, managers might find it convenient to consider occasional

alterations of dividend policy. Conventional assumptions like the stationarity of
dividend growth rates or detrended dividend payments leads to incorrect present

value calculations in these circumstances.

Put differently, present value

calculations are not invariant with respect to dividend policy assumptions even
though prices are invariant with respect to dividend policy.

Therefore, it is desirable to measure cash flows more fundamental than
dividends. In particular, I will seek to identify cash flows with two characteristics:
(1) like dividends, they can be used to compute asset values and (2) their conditional

expectations are invariant with respect to dividend policy. Mathematically, a
random variable zt+j has these characteristics when:

E[zjyqfItJ
(l+pt)i

= zt

j=l

(2)

6

for some variable Zt known at time t where Z and E[zi+1y/l,] do not vary with

possible (and feasible) future dividend policies. I will call cash flows like
dividend policy invariant.
This definition of dividend policy invariance has obvious intuitive appeal. It

permits the application of conventional time series methods to random variables
like ztyj to determine conditional expectations and to facilitate the calculation of
present values. Otherwise, present value calculations require knowledge of how the
conditional expectations of d1÷y1 vary with dividend policy as well as the nature of

the firm's actual (or potential) dividend policy unless the analyst can measure and
forecast economic income.7

I will begin the search for such cash flows by delineating the general class of

stock/flow relations that can be accommodated in the analysis and restating the

present value relation in terms of these stocks and flows. In particular, I will
confine attention to accumulation equations of the form:
(3)

The result presented below is for arbitrary choices of the flow variables x and the
stock variables X1, so long, as X1 does not grow too quickly.

Stocks and flows like these arise from the capital maintenance notions of
income that underlie modern accounting in which assets are often carried at
historical cost or book value. For example, if x is earnings or net income calculated

on an accrual basis and there are no new stock issues, then X is the book value of
owners' equity. Similarly, if Xt is the change in cash (i.e., net income calculated on a
realized basis), then X is the book value of all noncash assets.

The general present value relation may be rewritten in terms of these stock

7Economic income is dividend policy invariant by definition for reasons discussed
later.

7

and flows. This translation is recorded as Proposition I and may be found in
Ohlson(1989a) for the case of risk neutrality and a constant riskless interest rate.

Proposition 1: Let security values satisly the general no-arbitrage pricing
relation (1) and let Xt and X be any numbers satisfying the accumulation equation:

- d+ =
such that

- X..j..i; X given

jim E[XI+Ty1 T/lt]
T

= 0. Then:

(1 P1,T)

c' E[xt+,-fixt+F1
.

Pt=xt+ 7

j=I

(I+pq)J

/I}+'ci
7

_j

cov[xt÷j,yt- i/Id

j=1

cov[X(+1,ytj-(I+f)y11i lIt]

where fj is the forward rate for period t+j, i.e., l+ft,j =-

(1÷pt'

Proof: The proof is contained in the Appendix.

The three terms in the summation merit special comment. The latter two
terms simply shows that stock/flow relations like (3) yield complicated expressions

for risk premiums although they are obviously not changed by this translation.8
The first term is called residual income when Xt is earnings, X is the book value of
owrters equity, and the forward rate equals the cost-of-capital (typically assumed to

be constant). Residual income has a long history in managerial compensation and
performance measurement and plays an important role in the analysis that follows.

It is also worth emphasizing what is not said by Proposition 1. Proposition I
is a statement about arbitrary stocks and flows. As such, it cannot point to particular

8That is,

cov[d+j,y/I] = cov[x+fry1;/I1] - cov[Xt÷11y1/It] + cov[X+jpyt/It].

8

stock/flow relations as being especially useful for
valuation purposes. Economic

reasoning is needed to identify dividend policy invariant cash flows and the means
by which they can be estimated from accounting
measurements.
2. Dividend Policy, Risk Premiums, and the Dividend Policy Invariance of
Residual Economic Income

The next building block of cash flows that are invariant with
respect to
changes in dividend policy requires the definition of dividend policy. Following
Modigliani and Miller(1955) and Miller and Modigliani(1961), it is useful to
distinguish three kinds of policies undertaken by the firm: investment policy,

financial policy, and dividend

policy. Investment policy governs the firm's

investment in physical (and, for some companies, financial) assets. Financial policy
refers to the issuance of contingent daims to finance the desired level of investment
that divide the stream of income generated by investment policy. Dividend
policy
reflects alterations of the stream of payments to equity claimants.
As is customary in Modigliani-Miller analyses, we want to isolate the effects
of dividend policy on equity prices. Accordingly, I will assume that both investment

and financial policy are exogenous and will focus on the effects of dividend

policy.

This means that I will take income from investment and the payments to other

claimants as given. In these circumstances, dividend policy involves
zero net
present value alterations of the dividend stream.
It is difficult to distinguish investment, financial, and dividend policy
even if
there were no accounting
measurement problems. One simply cannot tell from a

balance sheet whether retained

earnings represent investment, financial, or
dividend policy. Earnings retention might reflect financial policy since internal
finance is one way to finance future

investment. Alternatively, it might represent
dividend policy as the firm translates foregone current dividend payments into
future payouts. Similarly, one cannot disentangle these possibilities by looking at

9

changes in firm assets—the firm will invest retained earnings in assets in both cases.

Finally, one cannot distinguish these effects at the time of physical investment so

long as the firm is retaining earnings and engaging in both financial and dividend
policy related transactions at that time. Only specialized knowledge about the firm
can

tell an analyst whether particular financial assets are or were earmarked for

future investments or dividend payments.

These ambiguities arise because of our valuation methods: we replace the
intricate Operations of a business firm with a disembodied replicating portfolio of
contingent claims. Changes in dividend policy alter the menu of contingent claims

that replicate the risk and return characteristics of the dividend stream. Financial
policy involves the actual menu of contingent claims used to finance investment.
Hence, dividend and financial policy changes are indistinguishable without more
detailed knowledge of the firm's inner workings. This knowledge is absent when
we model the firm as a blackbox generating cash flows.

Consequently, it is not clear how to identify the cash flows and net assets
associated with these conceptually distinct elements of corporate policy even in the

absence of accounting measurement problems. This is readily seen by considering
the relevant flows assuming no measurement problems. Accordingly, let itt denote

the economic profits from investment policy net of the changes in the value of the
firm's physical assets (i.e., economic depreciation). Similarly, let 'Vt denote the net

income (or expenditure) on financial policy inclusive of both earnings retention for
future investments and capital gains and losses on the financial liabilities and assets

of the firm. The inclusion of these capital gains and losses is not essential and will
be discussed further in the next section.

How does dividend policy fit into this picture? The simple dividend policy of

paying out net economic profits (i.e., it-i-y, a capital levy on the equity daimants
when net economic profits are negative) creates no additional cash flows or assets to

10

consider. However, any dividend policy in which payouts differ from net economic
profits generates additional financial assets or liabilities with their attendant
impact
on future cash flows. Accordingly, let represent the net profit or loss from the

investment of prior differences between net economic profits and dividend
payments inclusive of capital gains and losses. The inclusion of capital gains and
losses in

plays a substantive role in the analysis, as will be seen in the next section.

For later reference, let Z1 denote the market value of the portion of the firms assets
associated with dividend policy.

In these circumstances, let x1 be total economic earnings inclusive of capital
gains and losses which has three components:
(5)

This decomposition implies that ltt+Wt is unaffected by dividend policy and that ? is

the dividend policy dependent component. The invariance of net economic profits
to dividend policy plays a central role in the analysis.

Now consider the role of dividend policy in this setting. Decompose
dividends into net economic profits (i.e., dividend payouts in the absence of
dividend policy) and a residual:
(6)

Since dividend policy involves only zero net present value alterations of the
dividend stream, the market value of the assets associated with dividend policy is
also the risk-adjusted present value of the residual D1:

, ='>'j
j=1

E{ut÷jyq/Ij
(l+pqfl

which implies that equity prices satisfy:

(7)

11

P1=Z+

,/.i

\ (t+j+wt+j)yt,ji't]
(8)

(l+p)

j=1

Alternatively, the stock/flow relation (3) may be rewritten as:9
(9)

by taking the difference of (5) and (6). Application of Proposition Ito (9) yields:

)

I E[u1+y/lj

i (l+ppJ

E[c+1f1x1÷1/IJ

=+>

(1+p1)

.

j=1

+

).1'

cov[t÷j,ytiij

.

3=1

3=1

+

(10)

The weakness of the present value constraint:

%1
zt=xt+7
I .s
j=1

\

+7

.

(1+pt)J

i cov[c+,y1/I1J

j=i

(I+)J

00

+

'v' cov[xt+1i,y,j-U+fpy11 /ItJ
.

_____

(1

(11)

j=1

explains why it is difficult to construct dividend policy invariant flows. The
conditional expectations of Ct÷j.ftjXt÷Fj and the conditional covariances involving
Ct+'

yj. and Yt.j-1

for each j are generally nonzero and will typically vary with

dividend policy even though their present values are equal to Z. Clearly, the
individual components of the risk premium play an important role in dividend
9Note also that X represents the market value of the net assets of stockholders since
economic income includes all unrealized capital gains and losses.

12

policy invariance. Cash flows will not possess the invariance property so long as
intertemporat shifts in the risk premium components cause expected risk-adjusted
cash flows to systematically change with dividend policy.

This issue arises because the effects of zero net present value changes in the
dividend stream can be like those of investment and financial policy—they can alter

the equity risk premium (i.e., the present value of the covariance terms in the
pricing relations (1) and (4)). As noted earlier, firms could retain additional earnings

in the future, invest the proceeds in contingent claims, and pay out the income
from these investments as dividends later on. An obvious example is the future
repurchase of some of the firm's outstanding contingent claims such as its debt.

Such policies will not alter current equity prices but will typically change the
division into risk premiums and expected present values of dividends.10 They will

also generally change the risk premiums associated with each period t+j (i.e.,
cov[d1+;,y1/I]).

Accordingly, the first major assumption or definition made here is that all
policy changes that alter equity risk premiums are changes in either investment or
financial policy. This is consistent with the exogeneity of income from investment

and the payments to other claimants—in the example above, the purchase of
additional contingent claims alters the net flow of payments to other claimants.
Hence, this definition restricts changes in dividend policy to be those zero net
present value alterations of the dividend stream that leave equity risk premiums
unaffected." In terms of the preceding analysis, this restriction implies that:

"These statements apply to current earnings retention for cum-dividend current

prices.

11This definition places unusual burdens on the analyst in practical applications.
The investigator must identify investment and financial policy and thus the

exogenous income stream. If the firm changes dividend policy in a way that alters
the risk premium, the analyst must decompose this change into investment and

13

i cov[vt+yyt,jiiij
—

—/

i

(1+p1
cov[ct+;,ytjirtj

i (1+p)i
j=1

cov[Xt÷j.i,yt,r(1+f,1)yt1./I]

(12)

(1+p1)i
j=1

and that cov[u+;y,1/It] and

are not

changed by dividend policy.12

The need for this assumption arises because changes in financial and
dividend policy are generally indistinguishable when the firm is viewed as a black
box generating cash flows. Changes in dividend policy generally alter the portfolio
of contingent claims that replicate the risk and return characteristics of the dividend
stream. Hence, they also constitute a synthetic security that replicates this portfolio.
In this sense, any change in dividend policy that alters equity risk premiums can be

viewed as changing the net financial assets of the firm inclusive of synthetic
securities. The difficulty of differentiating the actual from synthetic changes in
financial policy associated with dividend policy changes is eliminated by confining

dividend policy to zero net present value, zero risk premium alterations of the
dividend stream.13 This is also a definition of financial policy.

financial policy components. The present analysis then applies to the residual zero
net present value, zero risk premium dividend stream alteration.
t2This confines the investments associated with dividend policy to zero beta assets
like discount and fixed coupon bonds held to maturity and rolled over into zero beta
assets. It is related to the Modigliani-Miller equivalent risk dass formalism.

"Since:
=

'V' E[d1qq/Ij

•1 (1+p)
j=1

r d1

qq = lcoV{E(d/I)IYtIJ/It

14

Taken together, the characterization of prices in (8) and of dividend policy in

(II) and (12) implies that the residual income variable xi+j-ft,X+1.. is dividend policy
invariant, a fact recorded here as Proposition 2.

Proposition 2: Suppose that security prices satisfy the general no—arbitrage
pricing relation (1). Let Xt be total economic earnings as defined in (5) satisfying the
accumulation equation:
=
x1÷ - X1j.j;

d+

such that T—.°°

E[X+Ty T/lt]
(1+Pt,v

= 0.

X given
Suppose that equity risk premiums are unaffected

by dividend policy (i.e.,

Then the residual

income variable xt÷-f 1X; is dividend policy invariant in that:
=
for all choices of dividend policy and prices satisfy:

' E[(xt÷ff(jxt.1)ytj/JtJ

Pt=Xt+

-

1
j=1

O±Pt,'

=Z+

'4.

'

F[(itt+j+ivt+j)yt i/It]
-

(13)

j=1

Proof: The results follows directly from the assumptions about dividend policy and
the present value relations (8) and (Ii).
These are the ingredients required to synthesize cash flows that are unaffected

by alterations of dividend policy in the absence of accounting measurement
problems. Proposition I indicates how the general present value relation (I) can be
rewritten for general stock/flow relations of the form (3). Confining the definition

it might appear natural to define dividend policy as a set of restrictions on the

covariance terms q1. Unfortunately, this does not generally lead to dividend policy
invariant income measures because the stock/flow relation (3) is additive while

E[(xI+;-Xi+;÷X1+)qj /IJ is multiplicative. It does work in the special case of
deterministic discount factors as noted in the next section.

15

of dividend policy to those zero net present value alterations of the dividend stream

that leave equity risk premiums unchanged prevents intertemporal shifts in the

risk premium components from causing expected risk-adjusted cash flows to
systematically change with dividend policy. This condition is restrictive but
essential—without it, it is necessary to risk adjust the flows X and the stocks X,
making their conditional expectations dependent on dividend policy.

Unfortunately, the analysis in this section involved economic income
variables inclusive of economic asset depreciation. In practice, it is often difficult to
assess changes in asset values in a verifiable and replicable way. Consequently, the

present analysis is not terribly useful unless it can be applied to accounting income
or cash flow measures. This is the focus of the next section.

3. Dividend Policy Invariance and Accounting Income Measures

The final building block of dividend policy invariant cash flows involves the

translation of the preceding analysis from economic to accounting earnings.
Economic profits are not accounting profits, generally differing in their treatment of

asset depreciation. This section identifies the circumstances in which the dividend
policy invariance of accounting measures of residual income arises.

Accordingly, consider two broad accounting income measures: earnings (i.e.,

accrued income inclusive of accounting depreciation) and the net change in cash

(i.e., the sum of the cash flows from operating, investment, and financing
activities).'4 The question at hand is whether the inclusion of capital gains and
BOther income concepts could be handled as well so long as their associated stocks

are treated in an internally consistent manner. For example, earnings could be
replaced by earnings available for common (i.e., earnings adjusted for nonrecurring
items, unjustified income or contingency recognition, noncomparable inventory
and depredation measures, consolidation of subsidiaries, affiliates, and unrecorded

assets and liabilities, and provision for income taxes). See Cottle, Murray, and
Block(1988), Chapters 10 through 17, fora detailed guide to the construction of
earnings available for common (i.e., true operating earnings).

16

losses in net economic profits

x1÷÷y4 and income associated with dividend policy

materially affects the analysis.

In terms of the earlier analysis, accounting income measures take the form:
(14)

where the 'measurement errors z,,

and

reflect the difference between the

components of the economic and accounting income measures. Cash flow income
measures differ in that they make no allowance for net asset depreciation while
earnings

are generally adjusted for measured but not economic depreciation.

Accordingly, investment is calculated net of economic depreciation for economic
income, net of accounting depredation for earnings, and gross of depreciation on a

cash flow basis. Not surprisingly, these 'measurement error' components have
different effects on the construction of dividend policy invariant cash flows.

There are twO present value relations that help identify the issues associated

with the distinction between accounting and economic income measures. The first
arises from the application of the stock/flow relation (3) to income as defined in (12),

yielding a pricing relation of the form (4). The second is the pricing relation (8) for

economic income and the market value of assets associated with dividend policy.
The difference of these two pricing relations implies:
o

=-

1 E[Ct+j+egt÷J+ci,t+j+cct+j_fLjXt+F1
+

(l÷p)

j=1

+

)

/1]

coy [ci+j+cgt+j÷i÷j+eç1+j,y1 /1]

cov[xt+J1,yt 1(1+f j)yt i I

(1+p)'

(i+p)J

j=1

which implies that:

j=1

(15)

17

=

+)'

-

(1+p)J

j =1

+

>1

E[Ct÷j+ect÷1-fi;÷.i lIt]

j=i

j=1

(1+p,)J

(16)

'ç' cov[zt+j.i,ytru+fpy1j lit]

fri

(1

where Z1 is the market value of assets associated with dividend policy and X is the

stock variable associated with the income variable (12) (which differs from the
corresponding stock for economic income defined in Section 2).

Consider first the 'measurement error' components c, and c associated
with net economic profits tW (i.e., the first line of (16) above) for cash flow
income measures. Cash flows measure income gross of depreciation—_depreciation
implicitly figures in the present value of future income which is reduced by future

sales or disposal of depreciated capital or by future declines in the productivity of
capital (measured gross of depreciation). As such, the present values are unaffected

but the timing of expected cash flows and risk premiums are changed. This is
reflected in the difference between the book value of noncash assets X and the
market value of dividend policy related assets Z, the second present value term in
the first line of (16), and the risk-adjusted present value of the 'measurement error'
components 6ict and e.

Similarly, earnings introduce the distinction between measured and
economic depreciation and the need to account for this difference in present value

18

computations. This too results in a difference between the market and book values

of owners' equity and in the altered timing of expected cash flows and risk
premiums. These terms show up in (16) as the risk-adjusted present value of the
'measurement error' components t, and e,1 (which differ from those associated

with cash income) and in the current and present value differences between the
market value based 'book' value of owners equity in (11) and the corresponding
accounting measure of book value implicit in (16).

These differences between accounting and economic income measures are

unimportant for the purpose of identifying dividend policy invariant cash flows.
The reason is simple—neither difference between accounting and economic income

is related to changes in dividend policy. Accordingly, these distinctions affect the

details of present value calculations but introduce no dependence of accounting
income measures on dividend policy.

By contrast, the dividend policy dependent component of income found in
the last two lines of (16) requires the other major assumption of the analysis—1
represents the net profit or loss from investments associated with dividend policy

inclusive of capital gains and losses)5 This could literally mean that all relevant

capital gains and losses are fully realized each period. Alternatively, this
corresponds to the assumption that all such investments are marked to market each

period for accounting purposes. In terms of (16). this involves the assumption that
is equal to zero for all j (although E(eç,1y/I1 = 0 is all that is needed to obtain
the results that follow).

The need for this assumption is straightforward. If the financial assets
associated with dividend policy are not marked to market, the measurement error

15This assumption implicitly requires broad measures of accounting income. It
would be less plausible for narrow definitions of the accounting income variable
since some portion of might then be inadvertently omitted.

19

in accounting income includes unrealized capita! gains and losses on these

assets.
While this would not
generate dividend policy dependence for financial assets such

as zero coupon and fixed income securities held to maturity, the

unrealized capital
generally depend on dividend policy.
This assumption renders the residual income variable xt+1-f1X±1 based
on
accounting income dividend policy invariant, as noted in Proposition 3.
gains and losses of other zero beta assets will

Proposition 3: Suppose that security prices satisfy the general no-arbitrage
pricing relation (1). Let xt be some broad accounting income measure like net cash
flow or earnings satisfying the accumulation equation:
=
- Xt+i;
Xt+j - d÷j
X given

'

urn E[Xt÷TytT/ltJ
such that T—°
= 0.

Suppose that equity risk premiums are unaffected

by dividend policy (i.e., Cov[dt+,y j/tJ=Cov(Ot •+y •y /1]) and that dividend
policy related income includes capital gains and losses. Then the residual income
variable xi÷1-ft1Xt+11 is dividend policy invariant in that:
=

for all choices of dividend policy and

=

,

prices satisfy:

E[(xt÷f ;Xt÷.j)y1 j/lt]
j=1

C,

/j

=zt+ '

(1+PtP'

(Kt+f+wt÷j÷eEt+J+EWt+)yL,J/I]

(1+pti

(17)

J=1

Proof: This follows directly from Proposition 2 and the
preceding discussion.

Hence, there are three building blocks of dividend policy invariant cash flows.
The first is the general present value relation (4) for stock/flow relations of the form

20

(3). The second is the restriction of dividend policy to zero net present value, zero

risk premium alterations of the dividend stream. The final building block is the

assumption that income associated with dividend policy reported in broad
accounting income measures includes any capital gains and losses. Proposition 3
also provides a framework for distinguishing accounting from economic rates of
return and capital stock measures.

The two assumptions—dividend policy does not change risk premiums and
any dividend policy related income includes marking relevant assets to market for

accounting purposes—are necessary br the dividend policy invariance of residual

income. The risk premium restriction eliminates the need to risk-adjust the

dividend policy related components of income which, in turn, purges their
conditional expectations of dependence on dividend policy. Without restrictions on
the accounting treatment of dividend policy related income, the residual income
variable xt+1-fjX÷1 would include the unrealized gains and losses associated with

dividend policy, which clearly can depend on dividend policy. The first assumption
restricts dividend policy substantially and the second is a counterfactual proposition
about the general accounting treatment of capital gains and losses.

A more positive view is that the analysis does cover a broad range of
dividend policies under plausible restrictions. For example, suppose retained

earnings reflect savings by the firm designed to eliminate potential future
borrowing constraints (or other constraints on the issuance of future contingent

claims) much as household savings plays this role in some versions of the
permanent income hypothesis of consumption. It is reasonable to suppose that
such precautionary savings would be placed in safe assets because of their selfinsurance nature. Discount and coupon bonds held to maturity would be safe in
this sense and satisfy the requirements of Proposition 3. On this view, accounting
residual income measures are invariant to a large class of dividend policy changes.

21

In addition, these observations have
obvious significance for present value
calculations given actual practice.
It is commonplace to assume that the present

value relation holds for expected future dividends
discounted by deterministic
discount factors of the form:
"t

c')

E[d+,/i]

.h..i (l+r)I

(18)

fri

with rtj a constant independent of dividend policy. Examples include constant
expected returns (r = r), constant expected excess returns (l+rt )J

(1+p '.

= (1+5)J

for some

constant 6). or constant expected excess returns with a flat term structure of interest
rates (PtJ = Pt V j). These specializations of the pricing kernel
Yt.j make residual
income variables of the form
x1÷1-$,1x11 dividend policy invariant.'6 In any event,

one can certainly make a case for using some residual income variable in place of
dividends in present value calculations.

'6The variable

is defined by:
(1+r1)J

These restrictions on discount factors implicitly restrict dividend policy since:

[

d11

=

(I+rtpl
For

(I+pq)1

example, constant discount factors constrain

d Ii-

I+cov[ /I)lY'ti"1t] to be

proportional to (I+pt J, substantially restricting dividend policy. Similarly, if excess
risk premiums are constant (i.e., (l+r .)I =
(1+5)),
(1+5)1,

(1+p)J

again implicitly restricting dividend policy.

l+cov[( H't i/It] =

22

4. Conclusion

This paper had a very simple motivation. It is well-known that dividend
policy is irrelevant in a Modigliani-Miller world. It is equally well-known that price

equals the risk-adjusted present value of expected future dividends in these
circumstances. The latter fact would not appear to be especially useful for the
purposes of computing present values in the absence of a priori knowledge of the
nature of (value-irrelevant) dividend policy.

There are three building blocks of dividend policy irrelevant cash flows
identified in these pages. The first is the calculation of stocks from the difference

between arbitrary flows and dividends and the translation of the risk-adjusted
present value relation for future dividends into one for the future values of these
stocks and flows. The second is the breakdown of corporate policy into investment,

financial, and dividend policy and the requirement that dividend policies that
synthesize risky contingent claims are classified as financial policy. The final
building block is the assumption that the accounting treatment of income from

dividend policy includes all relevant capital gains and losses, permitting the
calculation of the present value of the cash flow effects of dividend policy in each
future period.

Is there some easily measured cash flow that is useful for computing present

values and is invariant with respect to dividend policy? The answer to this
question is a qualified yes. The analysis identified two necessary conditions for the

dividend policy invariance of residual income measures. The first is that dividend
policy does not alter equity risk premiums, which are those that would prevail in a

world where firms paid out 100% of economic profit as dividends. The second is
that the component of accounting income associated with dividend policy includes

its associated capital gains and losses. Under these conditions, residual income
measures are invariant with respect to dividend policy.

23

This is moderately bad news in that it places unusual burdens on the analyst.
If changes in dividend policies alter equity risk premiums, the analysis requires the

attribution of this change to three components: (1) income from investment policy;

(2) the payments to other claimants; and (3) the residual dividend policy
component. It also requires that the dividend policy component includes

capital

gains and losses whereas accounting income measures typically only include
realized gains and losses. Hence, the analysis would appear to apply only under
very restrictive circumstances.

On the other hand, these are burdens that are usually assumed away in actual
practice.

It is common to assume that either expected returns or equity risk

premiums are constant, thus assuming away the problem of the effects of dividend
policy on risk premiums (but not on the flow of dividends). Similarly, the constant
risk premium assumption effectively limits investment associated with dividend

policy to zero beta assets like bonds held to maturity, on which capital gains and
losses are not an issue. It is reasonable to suppose that the capital gains and losses
associated with other zero beta assets would not substantially alter the analysis.

It is fair to say that techniques for computing the intrinsic value of equity
securities have lagged over the past few decades. This is doubtless a consequence of

the efficient markets hypothesis, which shifted attention away from such
calculations toward the behavior of prices under the assumption that asset prices
were equal to their underlying intrinsic values. This paper is a small step toward
facilitating such computations by identifying cash flows that are more fundamental
than dividends in their invariance with respect to some forms of dividend policy.

24

Appendix
Proof of Proposition 1: The proof involves trivjal algebraic manipulation of
the present value relation in the absence of a nominally riskiess asset.

E[dYi/Ij

1't

E[(xt+rXt+j+Xt+F1)Yt jilt]
j=1

= X1 + E[xt+,Y,/l1] ÷ E[(Yt,j-Yt,F1)Xt÷j.1 iij
j=:l
since 411. E[Xt+TYL,T/It] =
Yt,j

=

riskiess asset,

0

by assumption. If, in addition, there is a nominally

and ;j-"t,j-l

=

yt,y(1u)yi,-i so that E[Y/J1}
(1+p1j)i

(1+p1j)1

where fq denote the period t+j forward rate implicit in

and

the yield curve. Consequently:
00

Pt = Xt

4

'ci
j=1

cov[xt+yyt jilt]

i11]

(l+pt,J
3=1

00

cov[X+j..i,yt,j-(l+f11)y,.i i11J

The present value relation can also be rewritten in terms of future one period
riskless rates since Yj—Y = (t÷-i,i -1)t-i and

I

Q.ED.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Ibegan this research when I was a National Fellow at the Hoover
Institution on War, Revolution, and Peace, continued it as an
Olin Fellow at the National Bureau of Economic Research, and
completed it as a Batterymarch Fellow. I am extremely grateful
to all three organizations for their generous financial support
and to the first two for their excellent research environments.
Special thanks are due to my accounting colleagues Joseph Bachar,
Masako Darrough, Trevor Harris, and Jacob Thomas, each of whom
endured numerous tedious questions with unfailing good cheer. I
owe an obvious intellectual debt to James A. Ohlson (as will be
apparent to readers of Ohlson(l989a,b)) with whom I also have had
numerous helpful discussions. Conversations with Pete Kyle
helped me clarify and articulate the arguments in the paper. An
earlier version of this paper was presented in September, 1990 in
Rome at the First International Conference of the Centre for
Research in Finance-IMI Group and I thank the conference
participants in general and the discussant, Marcello Mentini, in
particular for helpful comments.

25

Bibliography
Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller, 1987, "Cointegration and Tests of Present
Value Models," Journal of Political Economy 95, pp. 1062-1088.

—, 1988, "Stock Prices, Earnings, and Expected Dividends," jOurnal of !inance 43,
pp.661-676.

1988, "The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations of Future Dit'idéñds all
Discount Factors, Review of Financial Studies 1, pp 195-228

Grossman, Sanford J and Robert J Shiller, 1981, The Delerjmnants of the
Variability of Stock Market Prices," American Economic Review:

222

227.

Kleidon, Allan W., 1986, "Variance Bounds Tests and Stock Erice Valuation
Models, journal of Political Economy 94 pp 953-1001

Leroy, Stephen F. and Richard D. Porter, 1981, "The Present-Value Relation: Tests
Based on Implied Variance Bounds," Econometrica 49, pp. 97-113.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer, and Matthew D. Shapiro, 1985, "An Unbiased
Reexamination of Stock Market Volatility," journal of Finance 40, pp. 677-687.

Marsh, Terry A. and Robert C. Merton, 1986, "Dividend Variability and Variance

Bounds Tests for the Rationality of Stock Prices," American Economic
Review 76, pp. 4S3-498.

—, 1987, "Dividend Behavior for the Aggregate Stock Market," journal of Business
60, pp. 1-40.

Mattey, Joseph and Richard Meese, 1986, "Empirical Assessment of Present Value
Relations," Econometric Reviews 5, pp. 171-234.

Ohlson, James A., 1989a, "Accounting Earnings, Book Value, and Dividends: The
Theory of the Clean Surplus Equation (Part 1)," unpublished manuscript,
Graduate School of Business, Columbia University.

—, 1989b, "The Theory of Valuation and Earnings, and An Introduction to the
Ball-Brown Analysis," unpublished manuscript, Graduate School of Business,
Columbia Uitiversity.

Ross, Stephen A., 1978, "A Simple Approach to the Valuation of Risky Streams,"
journal of Business 51, pp. 1-40.

26

Rubinstein, Mark, 1976, "The Valuation of Uncertain Income Streams and the
Pricing of Options," Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science 7,
pp. 407-425.

Shifler, Robert J., 1981, "The Volailily of Long-Term Interest Rates and Expectations
Models of the Term Structure," rournar of Political Econjy 87. pp. 1190-1219.

—, 1981, "Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be justified by Subsequent Changes
in Dividends?" American Economic Review 71, pp. 421-436.

—,

1984,

"Stock Prices and Social Dynamics," Brookings FaDers on Economic

Activity 12, pp. 457-498.

West, Kenneth D., 1987, "A Specification Test for Speculative Bubbles," Quarterly
Journal of Economics 102, pp. 553-580.

—, 1984, "Dividend Jnnovatioris and Stock Price Volatility," Econometrica 56, pp.
37-61.

