                   NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




    THE EMS, THE EMU, AND THE TRANSITION TO A COMMON CURRENCY




                        Kenneth A. Froot

                         Kenneth Rogoff




                     Working Paper No. 3684




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            April 1991




This paper was prepared for NBER's Macroeconomics Annual, 1991.
We thank Lorenzo Bini Srnaghi, Alberto Giovannini, Maurice
Obstfeld, Torsten Persson, and .Julio Rotemberg for helpful
discussions, Rudi Dornbusch end Nobuhiro Kiyotaki for conmients,
Yacine Ait-Sahalia for excellent research assistance, and the MIT
International Financial Services Research Center for generous
research support. This paper is part of NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper M3684
                                        April 1991


    THE EMS, THE EMIl, AND THE TRANSITION TO A COMMON CURRENCY


                             ABSTRACT

     When central banks are about to relinquish control over

their exchange rate and enter into a currency union, the

reptutational costs to devaluation are very low. As with any
finite-horizon game, the endpoint affects the earlier

expectations of private agents, here causing them to demand
higher interest rates and higher wages from countries whose

currencies are relatively weak. In looking at the countries
within the EMS, we find that Italian long-term interest rates as

well as price and wages levels relative to Germany show evidence

of growing gaps   We also find that the real appreciation of the

lira appears to be predominantly due to increases in relative

Italian government spending, and not to relatively rapid Italian

productivity growth. Taken together, this evidence suggests that
convergence within the EMS may have peaked. Furthermore, moving

forward the date of currency union may in the short run increase
both the growth of the gaps and the need for exchange-rate

realignment.

Kenneth A. Froot                        Kenneth Rogoff
Sloan School of Management              Department of Economics
M.I.T.                                  787 Evans Hall
50 Memorial Drive                       University of California
Room E52-449                            Berkeley, CA 94720
Cambridge, MA 02139
                                     The EMS, the EMU,
                          and the Transition to a Common Currency

 1. Introduction
      Over the past decade, the European Monetary System has surprised most observers.
 It has gone from a loose confederation of countries trying, by sometimes almost desperate
 means, to coordinate exchange rates (and little else), to a powerful institution built upon
 increasingly credible, and apparently fixed parities. Its progress has created a momentum
 of its own, as planning for the ambitious next step — the creation of a monetary union and
 common currency — is now well underway. The rush toward monetary union in Europe

 today is shared by both busineaspeople and politicians. (Although economists remain
skeptical, surveys repeatedly show that the popularity of the European 1992 program is
dramatically strengthened when EMU is included.)'
      This enthusiasm has made the question of the day how — not whether — to accomplish
monetary union. One widely acknowledged concern is that the EMS may be extremely
vulnerable to speculative attacks during the transition process, which is presently envi-
sioned to require several years. As a way of avoiding such potential turmoil, a number of
authors have suggested an acceleration of the time-table for union.2
     In this paper, we argue that speeding up the process will not by itself make the transi-
tion stable. One problem is that once the date of currency union is fixed, national central
banks will face a known, finite horizon after which they must relinquish the possibility of
an independent exchange-rate policy. Consequently, there is a danger that their interest
in maintaining a long-term anti-inflationary reputation may wane as monetary union ap-
proaches. A related problem is that their ability to improve competitiveness and to devalue
away the government's debt becomes especially high as currency union approathea (if there
is any price stickiness). As long as currency unification is perceived to be far away, neither
of these problems arises, and the system can remain quite stable. But this stability will
not necessarily translate into an easier transition. Our analysis suggests that intra-EMS
interest-rate differentials might begin rising sharply as union draws closer.
   Sn Conuni,iion of the European communitki (lam.)
 Osea, For enn,ple, Con,mouion oF the European Communities (isa).),   and Cionnetini (1590),

                                                        1
     This theoretical possibility might not generate much concern if it were not for mount-
ing evidence of strains within the convergence process. One of the most puzzling features
of the EMS performance to date is that member countries have seemingly pursued very
different inflation rate policies while allowing for only relatively small adjustments in their
exchange rates. The Italian lira, for example, has appreciated in real terms by almost
40 percent against the German mark over the EMS period. Yet despite substantial cur-
rent account deficits and a spiraling debt/GNP ratio, the Italian government has not been
forced to devalue the lira against the DM since January 1987. At one tiine,it seemed that
Italian capital controls might explain this phenomenon but these controls have now been
dramatically reduced.
     Glearly, explaining the behavior of real exchange rates in the EMS is an important
step towards understanding the dangers that lie ahead for the transition. Unfortunately,
as many studies in recent years have shown, developing an empirical model of real ex-
change rates is extremely difficult.3 Virtually all recent studies, however, concentrate on
floating exchange rates, and the EMS experience is more akin to a crawling peg. Here we
study intra-EMS real exchange rates using a simple inter-temporal maximizing model of
the exchange rates and current accounts, in whicb prices are fully flexible. Government
spending affects the real exchange rate because it falls more heavily on non- traded goods
than does private spending. We use the model to show that divergent government spend-
ing trajectories provide a surprisingly plausible explanation of the apparent divergence of
EC real exchange rates. The results for the Brettoo Woods period are similarly st:iking.
    We also explore alternative explanations for the real exchange rate anomaly, includ-
iug productivity disturbances and improving credibility of monetary policy. Whereas the
evidence supports the hypothesis that high productivity growth in the traded-goods sec-
tor can provide part of the explanation, we argue that productivity shocks alone cannot
account for the large real exchange rate gape. Furthermore, we argue that explanations
based on improving monetary credibility are at odds with ever-increasing real wage gaps.



  see for example, Meee. end Ronff (l959. 5e aim Mar,Lo,i (l5R7 and llnieb 119821.

                                                       2
     Our overall assessment of the situation is that the degree of monetary-policy conver-
gence is generally overstated, and that sharply-varying debt/C tP ratios and real exchange
rates provide a very strong temptation for realignments along the path to currency union.
Indeed, we argue that the temptation is likely to he especially strong at the time of union.
     The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 explores various indicators of
convirgence, including measures of real exchange rates and real wages. Section 3 contains
the main results on government spending and real exchange rates discussed ahove. Section
4 presents a model which illustrates some of the reputational issues that arise during the
transition to monetary union. Section 5 concludes. In Appendix A we present a description
of the EMS and a brief assessment of the arguments for currency union. (Readers less
familiar with the EMS may want to read Appendix A hefore proceeding to the main text.)


2. Convergence within the EMS
     The official Debra report advocates the creation of a monetary union only after mon-
etary convergence among EMS countries has been achieved. During "stage II" (which
is expected to begin in 1992) member countries are to achieve further convergence of
monetary policies, maintain exchange rates within even narrower bands, and develop the
institutional framework for a European Central Bank. More controversially, the EC is to
develop mechanisms for achieving greater coordination of fiscal policy. Stage II is expected
to require 4 or 5 years to complete. The hope of the Delors report is that this steady process
of convergence will culminate in a seamless transition to a common currency.

2.1. Convergence in inflation
    The result of arguments for a gradual move to a common currency has been an height-
ened concern with the convergence process. The degree to which convergence has already
been achieved is most often summarized by the shrinking of inflation differentials. At first
glance, the progress has been impressive. The top panel of Table 1 reports average annual
rates of CPI inflation for several individual countries (Germany, France, Italy, and the US),
the average across original members of the EMS (Germany, France, Italy, Denmark, the
Netherlands, Belgium, Luxemhoorg, and Ireland), and the average for non-EMS European
                                              3
 countries (Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, Portugal, Greece, plus recent entrants into the
 exchange-rate mechanism — Spain and the U.K.).
           The table helps clarify two points. First, the disinflation experienced by EMS was
 shared by most countries, regardless of their presence in the exchange-rate mechanism.4
 Nevertheless, the EMS disinflation is the most dramatic. Second, thcre are still lingering
 differences in inflation rates across EMS nations. The French-German differential has
fallen to an almost inconsequential level — about 0.7 percent — whereas the Italian-German
differential remains at almost 4 percent.
           The bottom panel of Table 1 attempts to measure inflation convergence across the
EMS more systematically, by computing average mean absolute inflation differentials across
groups of countries.5 By this measure, there has been an impressive degree of convergence
within the original EMSS; the average absolute inflation differential now stands at about 1.6
percent, down from 5.3 percent in 19Th and 7.4 percent in 1980. Notice that while there
has also been convergence among non-EMS countries (whose mean absolute differential
over the same period fell from 9.3 to 4.9 percent), the inflation differential between the
average EMS country and average non-EMS country has not shrunk. This is because high
inflation countries such as Spain, Portugal, Greece, and the U.K. have experienced no more
disinflation on average than have the original ERM countries. It is hard to know whether
this pattern will persist with the recent entry of relatively high-inflation countries (Spain
and the U.K.) into the exchange-rate mechanism. Nevertheless, the convergence among
EMS countries over the last decade has been uniquely dramatic.

2.2. Reductions in capital controls
           Figure 1 uses the differential between on-shore and euromarket 3-month deposit rates
to illustrate the extent of deregulation of international capital flows. With unrestricted
capital flows the rates should be approximately equalized; binding controls on capital
inflows (outflows) lead to a positive (negative) differential. The top graph shows that
those countries with relatively unrestricted capital transactions -. the U.K. and Germany
   4A nun,hur at authors have pursued thu pdnt In ro.Lur doltS. 5eo For example Rogoff (15551, Giavausi and Giunnnini
(1555), CuSins (15551, and Ourubu.th 115551.
   uThul column it computed by LOin5 • uimple overage c( the ahiulule valuo or .ui pairwilo iu5aLion differential. 10 saul,
nOfloci.


                                                            I
 — exhibit differentials which are small in size, and which were only slightly larger at the

 inception of the EMS. For those countries with controls in place for much of the period —
 France and Italy — there has heen a dramatic reductinn in deviations from onshore-offshore

 parity, as those controls were lifted.6

 2.3. Convergence in budget deficits
        Efforts toward convergence have not heen limited to those of the monetary authorities.
 The fiscal authorities in EMS countries with budgetary problems have also been under
 pressure to align their deficits. Table 2 shows levels of surpluses and primary surpluses as
 percentages of country CNP.7 Although many countries ran primary deficits throughout
 the 1980s, currently all countries, except Greece, enjoy primary surpluses (bottom panel,
 Table 2). This effort is particularly noteworthy for countries with historically high inflation
 —
     France, Spain, Italy, Portugal, Ireland, and the U.K. —                       for whom the cutting of primary
 deficits represents an adjustment to the loss of seigniorage revenues.
       These improvements are much less obvious in the top panel of Table 2, which shows
 straight measures of budget surpluses as percentages of GNP. Moreover as Dornbusch
 (1990) notes, once the surpluses in Tahle 2 are cyclically adjusted, any move toward con-
vergence becomes even less evident. Italy, for example, has witnessed very positive growth
performance in the last several years, indicating that its cyclically-adjusted deficit has
worsened over time.

2.4. Convergence in price and debt levels
     The evidence on price and debt levels is far less suggestive of successful convergence
than is the experience with inflation and financial market deregulation. Table 3 shows cu-
mulated inflation (measured by CPIs) in several EMS countries relative to Germany, and
   "See Gianaci and Ciovannini llsBtl. 70 ,n.ny oheerveno, the .ucce,.fuJ remueal of capital control. Li, clear .nanifaotation
of the improved debility of the M5. It ii evident from Figure 1 that thrnugtcouL the early 1550,, capitol coeteole permitted
the Freed, and Italian government, to finance their debt. at .ub.tnttttalLy lower rote, than an open international capital markS
 would have denoand.d. Pwhape at that time, the epetem could not have eoo-vived without the., content.: if the French and Italian
goeemmente were Forced to pay the higher olf-.hore rntea, they might have found It ton contly not to devalue. Pr.eumaldy, the
market would have known thie, and would have ch.eg.d even higher intereet rate than those actually ohe,e-vrd in the nfl-shore
market. In other word., with and, low bode of credibility, there simply may not have been on equilibrium inter,nedlatn between
a pure bloat (or erawbceg peg) and irrevocably lIved paritle.. In thi. eenae, cepitab control. may have been a critical Ingredient
tn the avolutle,, of the EMS, seeing tt throogh ite early, unpr.dictnble adolescence.
    °l°rimary eurplusee are compated by eubtr.ctieg an retimnte of lntere.t paymente (the abort-term ieterent rate tuna the
'lock of natstaecrjing government debt) to eeceipta Lou eep.ndituee.. Thie astimate ie likely to be too high, primarily because
gre.. govenment deht is often Ieee than net debt.

                                                               S
compares it with each currency's nominal exchange rate change against the DM.8 Den-
mark, France, and (especially) Italy and Ireland have experienced large real appreciations,
whereas the Netherlands, Belgium, and Luxembourg, have recently more or less anchored
their price levels to that of Germany. The table also shows that since the last realignment
against the DM of January 1987, Italy has experienced a substantial real appreciation of
abont 16 percent.
      A more comprehensive picture of relative price movements can be gained from Fig-
ures 2a-d, which show real exchange rate movements of EMS currencies against an ECU-
weighted basket of consumer prices. The graphs reveal three general types of country
experience: Belgium, the Netherlands, Denmark, and France have all succeeded in stabi-
lizing their real ECU exchange rates in parallel with that of Germany; Ireland has cut its
inflation rate to the point where it has achieved a real depreciaUon of the pound against
the ECU countries; and Italy, Spain, and the U.K. have appreciated substantially in real
terms. While Spain and the U.K. have only recently joined the ERM (Spain in June 1989,
and the U.K. in October 1990), their real exchange rates along with Italy's currently ap-
pear both appreciated and appreciating. Indeed, during its brief participation in the ERM,
the Spanish peseta has already appreciated over 10 percent in real terms (using CPIs)
     Indeed, although inflation rates are converging, these divergences in consumer price
levels are continuing to grow. Even though countries such as Italy, Spain, and the U.K.
have attenuated their inflation differentials with Germany, all three differentials remain
positive at about 3.5, 2.5, and 3 percent per annum, respectively. In fact, as can be seen
from Table 1, the Italian-German inflation differential has not fallen over the last 3 years. If
these cumulated price differentials are to be erased before monetary union without further
realignments, Italy will have to run a substantially lower rate of inflation than Germany
for a sustained period.
     Current account deficits are another measure that might reveal evidence of impor-
tant recent divergences. Table 4            shows    deficits as percentages of ON?. Those countries
with growing price-level gaps are also experiencing deteriorating current accounts. Spain

   The exehang. rate end CPI dnts are throueh January, 19s1.

                                                         C
 and Italy have seen their current accounts fall by 5.5 and 1.8 percent of their respective
 GNPs between 1986 and 1990. Portugal, the U.K., and Germany have also had their cur-
 rent surpluses shrink (the latter apparently associated with German unification, since the
deterioration begins suddenly in the second quarter of 1990).

3. Explaining the real exchange rate puzzle
       As is well known, the growing divergences in price levels and current accounts could
be due to several factors, not all of which require an ultimate downward readjustment in
the level of the real exchange rate. In what follows we consider three likely kinds of sources
which could account, at least in principle, for intra-EMS real exchange rate movements
shocks to government spending or deficits; shocks to productivity; and imperfectly credible
aggregate demand policy.

3.1. Shocks to government spending
       To understand the intra- and inter-temporal effects of government spending on real
exchange rates and current accounts, it is useful to think of a simple Ricardian neoclassical
model of a small country which produces two goods in axed supply.9 (For a technical
discussion, see appendix B helow.) One is a traded international good, the demand for
which is perfectly elastic, so its price can be taken as given. The other is a domestic good
(which may or may not he traded), the demand for which is inelastic, The price of the
domestic good is fully flexible and determined by market clearing.
       Consider first the simplest case — an unanticipated, permanent increase in government
consumption expenditure which falls relatively more on domestic goods than does private
expenditure. This permanently reduces the supply of domestic goods available to the
foreign and domestic private sectors.10 Thus the real exchange rate — the price of domestic
    i., thinking about how Aacnl policiee affect the exchange rate arid current account, it might enem most natural to begin
with the classic Msndetl-Fleming model. Under floating exchange rate., and with a high degree of capital mobility, that model
 predict. that increasei in govwnmeot spending or dncrnacnc in tax,, lead to a real exchange rate appreciation and a current
 account deficit.
      For our present purpoecu, however, the logic behind ihL, ralt ii uneatsefactory for two rexeona. Firet, in that model
nominal goods prices are fixed, an ace increase in the price of domeetic good. relative to the domestic price of foreign goods can
be achieved only Lhrengh an appreriatiem of the nominal exchange rats. The .tioky.prtoe assumption is ext very realintic here,
since to practice any .luggiehnoea in the reuponae at price, in likely to be matched (at the very least) by eluggiehneoc in the
.tate of flecal policy. Moeaoyer, within thu EMS it i. clear that eachangn rates do not float; as Table 3 above .uggeet., nominal
prices acre., EMS cocntrim eeem more flexible orer time than do the aseaciated eechaege eaten. A second problem with the
Muadntt-Flemiog model ic that it igoome the iotsclomporal dimennion vi current account and government budget imbalances.
   to We are implicitly aa.aaiing that both goods are normal.

                                                               7
 relative to international goods — appreciates permanently. There is no effect on the current
 account. 11

        For temporary changes in government consumption, real exchange rate and current
 account behavior are somewhat more complex. Here it suffices to note that an unantici-
 pated but temporary increase in government consumption unambiguously appreciates the
 real exchange rate for the same reasons as discussed above. However, the impact effect
 on the current account is ambiguous, as the change in domestic consumption depends on
 the elasticities of both intra- and inter-temporal substitution. And since the direction of
 change in the current account determines the change in the country's long run indebted-
 ness, temporary changes in government spending also must have an ambiguous effect on
 the long run trade balance and real exchange rate.

 3.1.1. Evidence on the real-exchange-rate / fiscal-policy relation
       As is often the case when it comes to the real exchange rate, we are enriched by the
apparent insights from these models, but impoverished by their lack of empirical cQnfir-
nation. There is very little empirical evidence that any known fundamentals — let alone
government consumption in particular — have reliable effects on the real exchange rateS
Much of the existing empirical work, however, has centered on the major floating exchange
rates.12 Perhaps the much lower volatility of intra-EMS real exchange rates can help re-
veal an empirical relationship between government consumption and the real exchange rate
that cannot be identified when nominal exchange rates float.
       Table 5 shows the results of regressions of the real exchange rate at time t on the
current levels of both domestic and foreign government spending as a fraction of GNP:


                                                                                                                             (1)

where rt is the time-t real exchange rate measured using the CPIs for the EMSS and using
GNP weights, g is domestic government consumption expenditures divided by domestic
   11Tbs real-exchange-rote result ii likely to be quite robust, in 'one Instances, government consumption can be thought of
as nb..oehing tome of lbs acoilahIe enpply of certain good.. Rn .11cm alec;, government consumption draws facto,, awoy from
their alternative use. in production. Since government consumption is l.bor intensive (paying burs.uor.t., educators medical
practitioner., and military poraonnsl) thu raductinn in private labor supply can be sapuotwi to bane • dieproportion.te13' large
negative eWect on the production 0f domestic goods which are typically more labor intensive than international goods.
  '°Soo Manse and RogoIf (19831.


                                                               S
 GNP, and g ls a GNP-weighted average of foreign (other-EMS) government consumption
 expenditure divided by foreign GNP. In Appendix B, we show that the specification in
 (1) comes directly out of a simple neo-clsssical model, with Cobb-Douglas intratemporal
 preferences, and an intertemporal elasticity of substitution of one.'3 To attribute the
 coefficients flu and /3 in the regression model (1) directly to the effects of fiscal policy, it
 is necessary to assume that the shares of government spending are exogenous, and that
 they are uncorrelated with other exogenous determinants of the real exchange rate, such
 as monets.ry policy.
       Table 5 presents three groups of OLS estimates: in the top panel are estimates from
 the cross-section, time-series panel of 11 years and S countries; in the middle panel are cross
 sectional estimates, one for each of the 11 years in the sample; and in the bottom panel are
 time-series estimates for the 8 individual countries, The residuala in the regressions with
 time-series components are highly aerially correlated (note the Durbin-Watson tatistics).14
 As a result, we have allowed for arbitrary serial correlation using the Newey and West
 (1987) covariance-matrix estimator.15 Nevertheless, with so few time-series observations,
one should be careful when drawing inferences from any single time-series coefficient.
       With these caveats in mind, note that the estimates of flu in Table 5 are consistently
positive, and those for fl are consistently negative. Indeed, in the top panel of the table
(which pools the time series and cross section), the estimates of f3 and /2 are of almost
equal magnitude; they say that an increase (decrease) in domestic (foreign) government
consumption of 1 percent of domestic (foreign) CNP yields a real appreciation of about 2
percent. The adjusted standard errors suggest that these estimates are reliably pesitive.16
       In the third and fourth lines of the top panel, we add domestic and foreign government


   "Table 5 ones annual data Irvin 1979 to 1959. In some of the estimates, we coostrain #1 = — in order to conneve on
 degrees of fleedmo and to limit mnLticolline.rity.
   MThe reported Durbin.Wat.on st.tiatk. are croes'eectioeal avaregee of the country time-eerie. Dnrbin-Wst.on statistic.
   'tln eli of the regression, that follow, we tried this enoariance matrix estimator, it, hetaoekeda.tidty-arjnnted counterpart,
both with and Without no adjustment for eont.mporaeeoue correlation, all in addition to the standard 01.5 eowarlanm n,atrin
In all cases wi ham taken the most eotsssrvatioe approach by aslooting the largest of standard errorn estimated across these
various tschniqnen.
   '°w. tited several other onions of these regreesiona, not reported here to nave apace. A time trend was included on the
nght-hand side of (t}, but wee found to be statistically tneigniflcn.rrt. W. also tried revorning that regression, by running
gneemsemot spending on the real eoehangs rate and a time trend, but again found the time trend to he tn.igniflcwt and the
positive covartance between the real eochnngn rote and government upendiog to be atatiatlcnlty iignllirant

                                                               9
budget surpluses (from Table 2 above) as perccntages of GNP to regression (1):

                                       = (5     /3Ut + $2g + .71St + 'lz; + .                                               (2

This regression is more difficult to interpret than is (1) 55 t and 2 are much less likely
to be exogenous. Nevertheless1 if Iticardian equivalence fails, we might expect that an
increase in the surplus (holding constant government spending) leads to an decrease in
total expenditure With a fixed supply of domestic goods, the real exchange rate must
depreciate. In other words, we might expect It C 0 and .72 > 0.
       The data show no evidence of this effect, however. The coefficients on the surplus
measures are not statistically different from zero, and are even of the wrong signs. The
coefficients on foreign and domestic government consumption become larger and even
mote statistically significant when surpluses are included. But the serial correlation in the
residuals remains quite severe.
       One way of mitigating the serial correlation problem in these regressions is to run them
in changes rather than in levels. A potential objection to such a regression is its low power:
if there is independent measurement error in the regressors, it may become accentuated
when the regression is run in changes.17 In this case we would expect the coefficients to
he smaller when estimated in changes rather than in levels. In lines 5 through 8 of the top
panel of Table 5, we run equations (1) and (2) in changes. The coefficients are indeed much
smaller and lose their statistical significance, but nevertheless retain their expected signs;
the Durbin-Watson tests show very little remaining serial correlation in the residuals.
      In the middle panel of the table we use cross-sectional regressions as a second means
of alleviating the serial correlation problem.18 Like the regressions in changes above,
this method suffers from low power. However, it gives us another check on the correct
magnitude of the coefficients, since the expected decline in power comes from increased
standard errors and not decreased coefficient estimates. Of the 11 estimates of/I from this
  "Supponu that measured eovernrnont consumption ii the sun, or (roe consumptIon, g, plus an lid measureoont error term:
   = ; + Ot soppoee aleo that g+ follows an AR(1) process: =                  + ug, where U C 5 C 1 and is, i. lid, under these
essumptione it is easy to show that (ho downwsnt bias in fit is greater for the regreeeinn in changes than far the regewsion in
levels.
   te In these regeessione, bolts the regresenco and regreesand. are dem.an.d by eesniey. This allows far country-apsoiflc lIned
effects. To •ave upace and to conourve on degrees of freedom, we report only estimates from (1), unda' the constraint that
#1          The nmitted estimate. or Ill •ed (21 are not qualitatively dulseent (rote, the other result. reported in Tablet.

                                                             10
 method, only two are statistically different from zero, but both are positive. Moreover, 10
 of the it estimates are greater than zero, with an average estimate of 2.2 - very close to
that for the data set as a whole.
       Finally, in the bottom panel we present the estimates from the individual country
time-series regressions. Of these, 7 out of 8 coefficient estimates are positive. Of the 4
that are statistically different from zero, all are positive as well. Interestingly, the Italian
real exchange rate appears among the most sensitive to changes in relative government
expenditure.19
       The evidence in Table 5 is admittedly sketchy — the EMS experience involves a limited
number of countries over a limited period of time. However, as we show in Froot and Rogoff
(1991), a strikingly similar relationship between the real exchange rate and government
spending occurs during the Bretton Woods period (1950-1973) for a broader group of 17
countries (the EMS8 countries plus the U.K., Greece, Spain, Portugal, Sweden, Switzer-
land, the U.S., Austria, and Canada). The coefficients on government spending (which for
the combined cross-section time-series regressions are roughly the same order of magnitude
as the EMS period estimates) are even more statistically significant in this larger dataset.
Moreover, they remain significant in the first-difference regressions. interestingly, however,
this relationship appears to disappear completely during floating-rate periods, (1973-1989
for non-EMS countries, and 1973-1979 for the broader group of 17 countries). Taken to-
gether, these results suggest a fairly reliable relation between government spending and
the real exchange rate (see Froot and Rogoff, 1991, for more detail). At the same time,
they provide no positive evidence that deficits or taxes themselves have important effects
on real exchange rates.
      What do our estimates suggest about the magnitude of real exchange rate changes
within the EMS induced by government expenditure? Table 6 shows in the first column
the change in g —            from 1979 to 1989 as a percent of GNP. Within the EMS 8, Italy has
had the largest growth in its relative fiscal position, which has increased hy 2.9 percent.

  '°We .Jao estimatS (t) nod (2) cuing total govarnmeet •open±ture which includes govnnment i,wentmcnt and transfer
payments, in addaion to consumption expenditure. If transfer payment. divert labor resources any from production, they tilt
dnve up the pnce of domestic goode provided that the production oF thom goode is rolutivety taboo Intensive, The eutimnte
From them regremionc, not reported here, urn very .imile,rto those in Tablet.

                                                            11
At the other extreme, Belgium, Ireland, and the Netherlands have succeeded in cutting
substantially their relative shares of government spending.
       The second column of Table 6 reports the estimated real exchange rate appreciation
caused by the divergences in government consumption, using a coefficient from (1) of
flu = —Ps = 2.1. Italy has the largest implied appreciation within the EMSS of almost
9 percent. This measure is probably conservativç if we were to use Italy's individual
coefficient from the bottom panel of Table 5 of 7.1, the implied appreciation would instead
be 29.1 percent.
      If government spending patterns can indeed help explain real exchange rates within the
EMS, the question becomes whether there is any reason to believe that recent budgetary
trends will have to be reversed. It is clear from our model above that as long as the two
intertemporal budget constraints — those for the fiscal authority and the country as a whole
—   are satisfied, any increase in government consumption expenditure, and the associated
change in the real exchange rate, can be sustained. The next three columns of Table 6
help shed light on the potential permanence of changes in government consumption by
examining the behavior of government and external debt relative to GNP.
      The third column of Table 6 shows changes in government debt/CNP ratios; columns
four and five try to assess the external constraint by looking at changes in the current
account and intra-EEC trade b&ance.20 It is clear from these measures that Italy (which
has the largest implied exchange rate appreciation within the EMS8) also has had a large
increase in its government debt ratio and a substantial deterioration of its external ac-
counts.21 Of course, an increase in Italian taxes could correct the explosive trend in the
domestic debt burden. But if the added taxes are distortionary (the political situation in
Italy makes it very difficult to raise taxes substantially), and the government attempts to
smooth across distortions, any fiscal adjustment program is likely to combine decreases in
government expenditure with increases in taxes.
      The evidence on the current accounts also provides support for the notion that the

  °°whe,'e.e the cure'm,t secoont lithe correct gog ci debt scoomulcLion, nor emphesie iron elignment wit!,i,, the EMS. For
this ream,,,, the intro-EEC trade balance is also reported.
    only aelgusm hod, larger increloe in lIe government debt ratio during thu period. But over the tnt 4 yesre, Belgium hen
been working dmen lie debt, whereas ltelyo cello continuer In grow, see alec Table It below,

                                                           12
 changes in government spending are likely to be temporary. Recall from our model above
 that permanent changes in government consumption have little effect on the current ac-
 count, whereas temporary increases in spending generally lead to current account deficits.
 It is true that in the non-Ricardian-equivalence version of the model, an increase in taxes
 (without any change in government consumption) can reduce current private expendi-
 ture on domestic goods, thereby permitting an improvement in the current account and a
 depreciation in the real exchange rate. However, this mechanism appears empirically unim-
 portant: the regression results above show no evidence of an effect of deficits (controlling
 for government expenditure) on the price of domestic goods. This reasoning therefore
 suggests both that the real appreciation in column two of Table 6 is temporary, and that
 adjustment will require cuts in government consumption.22

 3.2. Shocks to productivity
      A second, complementary explanation of the divergences in real exchange rates within
 the EMS is that of productivity shocks.
      The usual story linking productivity shocks with the real exchange rate, which is due
to Balsssa and Samuelson, can again he illustrated within the basic model of Appendix B.
Each country produces two goods, international and domestic, with labor mobile between
sectors (capital is assumed to be a fixed factor) but with total labor in fixed supply.
International goods are traded, and compete directly with goods from other countries.
They also have more rapid productivity growth than do domestic goods. Under these
assumptions if productivity growth in the international-goods sector exceeds that of the
domestic-goods sector, the price of domestic goods rises relative to the price of international
goods.23
      The prima facie case for the Balsssa-Samuelson explanation seems reasonable enough.
Table 7 compares the 1979-89 real exchange rate appreciation within the EMS8 against
average annual real growth rates. Those countries which experienced the largest real
appreciations against the DM (Ireland and Italy) hsve indeed enjoyed relatively more
  "The EEC-lags procren ii itielt likely to rorce down the price or Italien do.oeetic good. (end (stun) through inCNsaed
economic ,ntegretion end f.ct,r niobility, even if guonnment spending differential. Ire euslaiced.
 5e Appendix 8 mr • (on,,l dcflvaiicn.
                                                          13
rapid real growth.24 A devotee of this view might even interpret the regression results
in the previous subsection as confirmatory evidence, arguing that changes in the ratio
of government consumption to CNP are highly positively correlated with productivity
shocks.25
       We explored this possibility further in two ways. First, we ran a set of regressions
comparable to those presented in Table .5, but including time trends as additional regressors
in an effort to pick up country-specific differences in rates of productivity growth. The
reported coefficients were qualitatively unaffected by the added time trends. In addition,
almost all of the coefficients on the trend term were insignificant.
       Second, since productivity growth differences during our sample may not be well-
approximated hy constants (which is what is captured in the time-trend terms mentioned
above), we obtained direct estimates of productivity for use as additional regressors along-
side of government spending. Conceptually, the model calls for measures of total factor
productivity in all countries for both the domestic and international sectors. We show
in Appendix B that in the presence of permanent and unanticipated productivity shocks
in these sectors (holding government spending constant), the percentage change in the
domestic CPJ is given by
                                                dpp = daTt — dy1,                                                          (3)

where dppj is the percentage change in the CPI, daTe                          is   the percentage change in relative
(domestic less foreign) total factor productivity in the international-goods sector, and dy1
is the percentage change in total output (i.e., a share-weighted average of output growth
in the international and domestic sectors).
      To measure these productivity changes we employ data on labor productivity for both
the manufacturing sector and the entire economy. (Note that with Ricks-neutral growth,
lahor and total-factor productivity growth rates are equal in any given sector.) In using
       the third column of Table 7, we report real appreciation suing nominal unit labor route rather than consumer prices
lwhith are used in the scsi cnlumnl. The fastest growing cnuntrie.— Ireland and Italy — hays aspsriemad large reel appnmintioee



 '
 as measured hy unit labor cacti as well. It i. interesting to note, hewever, that since the lmt realignment in January 1987,
Ireland ha grewi almoet 2 percent per year more rapi&y than has Iialy yet Italian unit labor cotta hays risen much more
rapidly. (See the lest colon,,, of Table 7.)
           that the rngrneienn in Table 5 are based an the ratio of nominal gorenment npendieg to nominal ON!'. In the model
af Appendix a, an unanticipated permanent tradnd.goode productivity chock has no effect on thu ratia an anticipated (er
partly temporary) shock lowers it.

                                                             14
 these measures, we are therefore implicitly assuming that output from the manufacturing
 sector is traded, and (therefore) that its price is determined internationally.26 The series
 for labor productivity in manufacturing output are computed by taking the ratio of an
 index of manufacturing output to manufacturing employment (both from OECD Main
Economic Indicators); to measure economy-wide labor productivity we used the ratio of
real ON? (from IMF) to civilian employment (from OECD Main Economic Indicators).
       Table 8 presents the results of the regresaion:

                               =a        fi(g — gfl + 6i(z —.4) + 52(Zt — Zfl                   +,
where Zg and Z are indexes of productivity in the manufacturing sector and entire econ-

omy, respectively. The Table is laid out in a manner similar to that of Table 5. However,
the sample period is somewhat different, owing to the more restrictive availability of pro..
ductivity data.27 Clearly, if differences in relative productivity growth explain the simple
correlation between the real exchange rate and government spending, we would expect
/3 = 0,   S >0 and & COin equation (4).
       Table 8 makes several points clear. First, differences between manufacturing and
economy-wide productivity do not seem to have the right effect on the real exchange rate;
if anything, relatively faster productivity growth in the domestic manufacturing sector
appears to be associated with a depreciation of the real exchange rate. Secondly, the
inclusion of the relative productivity regressions in (4) has little effect on estimates of
j3. These remain as statistically significant as before, with point estimates essentially
unchanged. Thua, accounting for relative productivity growth differentials does not seem
to overturn our result that government spending affects the real exchange rate.
      As we have focused on Italy throughout the discussion, it is useful to look more
directly at the Italian experience to see how plausible a productivity-growth explanation
is. Here, a aimple back-of-the-envelope calculation suggested by our model reveals that
only a small fraction of Italy's real appreciation (since the last realignment of January 1987)
  25ro the exte,t tl,st some msn,dactueln output 1.11. intocites   the of dotne.ti, goods (i.e+, trit, price ii at lea,t piztiiJly
determined by domestic eupply ned d.nnnd)k Our ,neseun of ds., — dy will be biased toemod leo.
  °'w. en comparable regrasnionu to those to Tible S for the more re.trtccive simple used for TabI. 8; there uas no uubeta.aivu
change to the coefficients.

                                                               15
 is likely to be due to rapid productivity growth. Between the end of 1986 and the end of
 1990, productivity in the manufacturing sector grew about 17 percent, and economy-wide
 productivity increased by about 11 percent.25 Using equation (a), this implies that the
 predicted change in Italian prices is about 6 percent, which is a little more than a third
 of the increase of 17 percent in the Italian Cl'I (relative to Germany). It seems a much
 higher productivity growth rate in manufacturing would be needed to justify such a large
 increase in domestic prices.
       Evidence on Italian wages similarly suggests that productivity growth cannot be the
 dominant source of Italy's real appreciation. First (as noted in footnote 29), real wage
 growth has been relatively slight. Second, a number of other factors seem to be driving
 nominal wage increases. For example, DeNardis and Micossi (i9i) show that the ratio of
public to private wages has grown by 14 percent since 1980 in italy, while it has fallen by
a comparable amount in France and the U.K. Few would argue that Italian productivity
shocks have been concentrated in the public sector. In addition, progressive increases in
employer social security contributions have added about 7 percent to total labor compen-
sation costs since 1981 and about 3 percent since 1986.


3.3. Imperfectly credible aggregate demand policy
       Another popular explanation of intra.-EMS real-exchange-rate divergences is that cred-
ibility of commitment to established parities has improved only s lowly. The usual argument
is that forward-looking Italian wage setters and lira debt holders used to believe that Jialy
was, and would remain, a high-inflation country. But the increasingly aggressive commit-
ment of the authorities to a fixed DM parity continually surprised the private sector, which


  5ee DeNardie and Micoe.i 115511.
  DOne might hypolheeiae iha some sector within manufactoring ahould be thought or as the international sectee, end that
thin sector grew rapidly indeed. However, thin doe not help prodoctiviLy shook, explain lteJy'n real appreciation in tnnne of
both pnces and wage. To eec thic, eoppoee we pick productivity growth in internelional good, to be just the right aloe to
axplnin the Increase in Italian prices, i.e., do1 = dp + 4.., = 17+11 = 19 percent. Under the assu,npitese shoe, It ja easy to
chow that productivity growth in inl.ereatinnal goods is entirely rreponallde for wags Increases (in tereno or international good.),
4w do5. (See Appendix B below.) From this equality It Follow, that, with .uch large productivity growth in international
goods, Italian wagee should have risen by 28 percent. However, wages over this period have increseed by only 15 percent. In
other worth, iF a large productivity shook was behind the increase in Italian prices, Italian real wages should ieee tnoreed by
 11 percent, much more than the aclual increeee or about I percent. Our calculation, must he qoali5ed to the extent that they
 are based on the ao.umptben that the productivity shocks are both permanent and unanticipated, and that the prnd,sctinn
function Ia Cobb-Douglas.


                                                               16
     only gradually changed its beliefs. As a result, the story goes, expected inflation and nom-
     inal lira interest rates have been high — but falling — as the central bank has demonstrated
     its resolve not to devalue the exchange rate.30
            The evidence supporting this view seems secure enough. Figure 3 shows lira inflation-
     and interest-rate differentials against the DM. The interest rates are 3-month government
     borrowing rates in Italy and Germany. Although the inflation differential ceased improving
     in 1987, the interest differential (which was considerably larger at that time) has since
     continued its steady fall to its current level of about 3 percentage points.

     3.3.1. Interpreting evidence on interest differentials
           To be clear about what interest differentials have to say about credihility requires
     some explanation. As is well known, the nominal one-period interest differential between,
     say, Italy and Germany, 4— 4, can be decomposed into three parts: a country premium,
     cpj; a Lira-DM exchange risk premium, Tp; and expected depreciation of the lira against
     the DM, Asr÷i.31
           The first of these three components, cpj, is a premium required by investors as com-
    pensation for possible default or inconvertibility that might result from capital or exchange
    controls, taxes, or outright default. Variation in this premia across EC countries appears
•
    quite small. We have already seen in Figure 1 that the on-shore location of these instru-
    ments has little impact on their pricing. Second, many European countries borrow in
    dollars and ECU in addition to borrowing in their own currencies. These latter differen-
    tials can be used to form direct measures of country premia, and are indeed very small.
    Table 9 shows Eurodollar floating rate note borrowing rates against the 6-month London
    Interbank Offer Rate (LIBOR). The largest possible pairwiac differential is between the
    U.K. (or Italy) and Portugal, at less than 40 basis points. Most are quite a bit smaller.
           The next two components are the exchange risk premium, rp, and expected currency
    depreciation, &5+i. Several authors have attempted to separate the two by estimating
      SO5,, Cineannini (1990) •nd Dornbuech (1900).
      e1Thi, deeompo,ntjon ,.only eppeoxinata It leaven out potential Interaction nmong premi., and excluded temj associated
    with Jnnaaoe ,nequality. Often the Inflation diffenntial is euhtraeled From the nominal interest differenisal, end the resulting
    real ,ntreeet differential I. need to anniy.e credibility. (clearly, the real differential in comprieed ot the snore country, end
    exchange-rink prereua, In addition to expected real depredationS) Itnweve, any given epeculator will am (ho nominal — not the
    real — interest differential to evaluate altsn,aLion invtmente, no th. nominal differential in more apprepriete for our purponee.

                                                                  17
models of the risk premium and attributing what is left over from the interest differential
to expected depreciation. Giovannini (boo), for example, finds that the risk premium
can explain little, if any, of the differential.32 However, for the purposes of measuring
credibility, it is not really necessary to identify these components individually. If credibility
is high, so that the exchange rate is expected to remain within the existing band, both
components will be small. To the extent that the sum of the exchange-risk premium and
expected depreciation are significantly positive, the peg cannot be fully credible.
       Of course, the DM/lira rate can fluctuate within a band of +2.25 percent, or
1 = 9.3 percent on an annualized basis. As a result, some authors have pointed out that
—
    strictly speaking — one can conclude little about the credibility of tlte bands from short-
term differentials.33

3.3.2, Interpreting evidence on inflation differentials
       There is a sense, however, in which the improved-credibility story has been accepted
too readily, especially as an explanation of the inflation, wage-growth, and real-exchange-
rate data. To see this clearly, let us first take a specific example: that of wage-setting
behavior in the presence of positive shocks to credibility.
       Suppose that nominal wages must be negotiated one period in advance. Suppose for
convenience that initial Italian productivity-adjusted wages are equal to those in Germany,
but that Italian wage earners expect inflation. Specifically, let us assume that Italian wage
earners assign a 50 percent probability to a 20 percent devaluation of the lira against the
DM, and the remaining 50 percent probability to the existing parity remaining in place.
Expected depreciation is then 10 percent, so wage earners set next-period wages 10 percent
higher than those of Germany.
       What happens when the next period arrives and the authorities have not devalued?
We obviously want to assume that credibility improves, so Ict the probability wage earners
assign to (the same size) devaluation falls to 25 percent. Do wages rise now at only a 5
     Equilibrium models of foreign exchange Hit have nuturinuily pour reputaLinn. for explaming interest diflerattiali and
predictable rnrnpnnenL. of ence rethorne on Foreign enchenge lane Froot, 5590).
          for exaenple, Sveneann (5993). while the above point in formally correct, it should not be puehed too herd. if intereet
differentials represent expected exchange-rate movement, within the band, then we would expect there to he a sharp narrowing
in interest differe,itiale at longer moturitke Hoaeoer, there little eppereet narrowing in the the lorrsnr.term differential,
reported below.

                                                              18
    percent rate, reaching 115 percent of German wages in the upcoming period? The answer
    is clearly no. Italy's wages in that period should be 105 percent of Germany's. In other
    words, when credibility improves, the sign of the wage-growth differential must be reversed,
    so as to diminish the gsp between wage levels.34
           But this has not been the case for Italian wages and prices. (Relative nominal wage
    movements have been very similar to those of the Cr1.)35 To salvage the credibility expla-
    nation of the real exchange rate, one would have to argue that Italy has substituted more-
    accommodative-than-expected fiscal policy for less-accommodative-than-expected mone-
    tary policy. But in such a case it is more accurate to say that government spending — not
    improving credibility, per se —lies behind movements in the real exchange rate.
           Notwithstanding the behavior of prices and wages, the narrowing of 3-month interest
    differentials would seem to suggest that at very short horizons, Italian credibility is indeed
    improving. This leads us to look at the behavior of longer-term interest differentials —
    where     forecast horizons are more similar to those relevant for wage and price setting.
•
    Figure 4 shows rates on 10-year government bonds for Italy, France, and Germany. Notice
•
    that in the early lOSOs, the Italian and French long rates were similar, both considerably
    above the German long rate. But by the end of the lQSOs, France'e rates had converged to
    Germany's, while Italy's remain high. This suggests that Italy has been far less successful
    than has France (whose wage/price gap with Germany has not grown nearly as much in
    recent years, see Table 3 above) in obtaining credibility with long-term debt markets.30
    3.4. Debt gaps and credibility
          In addition to the competitiveness gap we have identified, differing debt-CNP ratios
    also present a problem. The authorities might find it optimal to default on government debt
     "Thi. argument apphee to both price. and wags as long a. they Cr, not in.tsnteomuely reepon.ive to nioneta.y policy (in
    which case money is aeutni Anyway). For a ptandaed mode] of monetary arrthoritiee reputation with the printe sector see
    B.no and Cordon (l983aI bI. For applications to the EMS, see Circoannini (lssO) and Llornbuerh (1990).
      In order to salvage a Barro and Gordon (1983) explanation, one would have to a000me that price, nerd wagee are set by
    vey long-tereo contracts with nominal escalator nIacin.. Thnt ti the level of prices in 1990 would nend to be at least partly
    determined by the contracts eel in 1988 and 1987.
      There in large literature on whether the EMS has generated • credibility dividend. Giaveasi end Giovannini (1989) and
    Artre (1990) present evidence that, all else .qoei, actual infintion during the 19805 Ic lower lalboit with borderline itatitical
    signIfIcance) thin would have been predicted on the basin of the earlier data alone. The evidence that a similar hrnk atone, in
    real variables such ae output or unemployment ie, however, moth wenirer. Ciaoani and Ginoanntni (1959) and DeNardis and
    Micoeai (1991). among oth.m, find no evidence of an improved output-Inflation traeteoff which should follow from a creditility
    enhancement. Similarly, Doeobusth (1990) argus that unemployment rate. root moat in those countriee which experienced the
    greatet di.ieflntinnn, again providing ecu eeideeroe that the EMS mode the disinllotioru of high-Inflation oouetriss .rnu.cally
    cheap. Weh.r (tam) attempts to netimate a funeral model of credibility direotip.

                                                                  19
 through devaluation if debt repayment involves distortionary taxation. Indeed, much has
 been made of differing relative debt burdens. Table 10 shows the levels of government debt
 as a percent of GNP. Among those countries with debt burdens in the problematic range,
 three broad groups can again be discerned on the basis of recent performance: Ireland has
 made significant steps toward reducing its debt levels; Belgium, the Netherlands, Portugal,
 and Spain have stabilized their debt ratios, which were growing rapidly in the early part
 of the 1980s; and Italy and Greece have debt levels which are still rising consistently. Italy
 and Belgium also have unusually high debt levels.
       As currency union becomes more likely the debt gap may pose greater problems
for credibility. Monetary union provides the government with a uniquely potent way of
reducing the real value of government debt. Because all lira-denominated contracts must be
re- denominated into new ECU, a twenty percent devaluation translates immediately into a
twenty percent reduction in the real value of all (nominal) government debt.37 Ordinarily
a devaluation is not nearly this effective, because prices adjust slowly and the government
has to pay an interest premium on any expected inflation during the adjustment period.38
As illustrated by our reputation model below, investors will recognize the temptations
offered by currency reform, and they will charge an ever-rising premium on non-indexed
debt as the date of union approaches.
       A country does face one significant drawback to devaluing at or near the time of
currency union, though it would not appear to be large enough empirically to outweigh
the temptation. Other things equal, the Italian government would like its citizens to receive
as many new ECU as possible for their lira; this implies bringing in the lira at a high rate,
not a low one. As Table 11 shows, Italy's current monetary base is 14.6% of CD?, and
indeed accounts for over a quarter of the EC's total monetary base. A twenty percent
devaluation at the time of union would amount to a sacrifice of 3% of CDP.39 However,
 1Tlndeed den to tax regulations and accounting friction., the goo.rn,nent mny well be able to convert different types of
contraoLe at different rates. Ditfersotial indention doringa currency refornn is certainly not without precedent.
     Consider the fultowing simple exampLe: Suppose that aLl of a countey. debt were in the form ci une-yeer acre-coupon bonds,
and that • constant fract,on of the debt nature, each week. If priest were perfectly flexible, then of count at, uoatdlcip.tnd
twenty percent devaluation wuutd tre.oelate join a twenty percent reduction in real debtS regardless of maturity. Suppose
inst'eed• however, that the soonomy is goeerned by overlapping one-year nominal contracts, and (for simplicity), that prices
adjust Iinsaely near the year in response to a devaluation. Then his amy to eve that a tweety percent devaluation wilt produce
approatenalelp a ten percent decrease In the reel value of debt.
 on11 the devaluation ocour, .nlltetsntlp far before acme!, tal, cent disappear, entirely, lists the nominal lire mosey supply

                                                               20
 this effect is probably overstated becausc, as we have argued earlier, Italy's monetary
 base is likely to shrink rapidly after 1992. Unified banking regulations will prevent the
 government from forcing banks to hold large quantities of required reserves.

 4. The finite horizon problem and the transition to monetary union
       Given that the EMS appears to function smoothly even after capital controls have
 been removed, what could be wrong with Debra' plan of seamless gradual transition to
 monetary union? Surely the credibility of the current exchange rate bands can only increase
 as Europe's governments take steps to permanently lock themselves into monetary union.
 Indeed, it is sometimes argued that continual forward momentum is precisely the glue that
 has held the EMS together thus far. (Making the EMS work has sometimes been compared
 to riding a bicycle; if you stop pedaling forward, you fall down.)
       In the preceding sections we have identified a number of countervailing factors that
 might tempt some of the EC countries to devalue their exchange rate. Clearly a devalu-
ation will not improve competitiveness in the long run. The long-run real exchange rate
will fall only once the path of government spending drops or the level of distortionary
taxation is decreased. But a devaluation could make the adjustment to lower government
spending easier, temporarily cushioning the effects on employment and output. effect on
unemployment. This, of course, presumes some Keynesian price rigidity. In auth a case,
there might be a temptation to devalue even with no change in government spending. This
temptation may become especially great as currency union approaches. To the extent that
devaluations improve the terms of trade, twelve-hour devaluations hold out the prospect
of a final, unaaswerable beggar-thy-neighbor gain: He who devalues last, devalues best.
      In the subsection below, we formalize these ideas using a simple off-the-shelf model of
monetary policy reputation in which the central hank has a finite horizon. As long as the
future date of union is far enough away, the central bank will not break its commitment
to maintain the exchange rate. As the date of union approaches, however, the odds of
a devaluation increase. If private agents recognise this, they may push up the price of
multi-period nominal contracts (such as wage and debt contracts). These increases snake
wilt riM by si, amount propontonaJ to 1,. dnJuation.

                                                       21
it more likely that at least one more round of exchange rate adjustments will in fact occur.
       An important insight from this paradigm is that accelerating the date of monetary
union (as many have suggested) will not necessarily temper current interest-rate and in-
flation differentials. Indeed, it could exacerbate them. One way to avoid this problem
is for the high-temptation countries to find ways to signal their commitment, perhaps by
indexing domestic debt to ECU or by taking extraordinary steps to commit not to devalue
(perhapa by tieing exchange rates firmly to other EC agreements).4°

4.1. A model of the temptation to devalue with impending monetary union
       The following finite-horizon Barro-Gordon (1983a) type model captures the two strik-
ing features of monetary union we have identified: the central bank will give up the ability
to change the exchange rate at a known date, and the temptation to devalue will grow as
union approaches. (Our key policy conclusions depend more on the firat feature than the
second.)4' Denote d as the actual rate of devaluation at time t, and                                       as the expected
rate of devaluation based on t — 1 information. Assume further that the government bears
a one-time coat C to reneging on its commitment not to inflate. This cost, which might
have to do with the impact of devaluation on other EC agreements, is known by the central
bank but not by the public. Assume that the central bank has a loss function given by
                                                     T
                                                                                                                               (5)


                        L(d,d,C) —wt(dt —dfl+                              +
where 1/2 -c fi C 1 and R = C if d                          0 for all t > 0; 1? = 0 otherwiae. Each period,
the central hank perceives a gain to surprise devaluation (through either the debt or real
exchange rate channels we have identified).
      The higher Wt, the higher the short-term gain, (It is assumed that w                                         [0,1?.) To
captnre the rising gain to debt default and competitive devaluation, we assume that
  We roust note th.t the modut neglect. the effects of deeolu.tim on. country'. psctneru. For esempte, if It.!1 inflate.
•h.rp& juot prior to rnooetery unicee, it mey domoge the enti-iotlotionery reputation of the poet-union Eueo-benh. But to the
sateS thus infletion relieves the real burden of ltolisn government debt, it could sctuulty iecreuo. the .nti.inlletione,ry resolve
ot the Euro-benic.
  01The nunS.! bore u.n extennion of Rognff (1998), which buitob on the general opproech of Mitgrom end Robed. (1982).
See also Tobellini (1983) sod Bin-a (I9).

                                                               22
 wj. The d2 term denotes the costs associated with changing the exchange rate; these (for
 simplicity) are assumed to he proportional to the square of the size of the devaluation.
 The reneging cost, C, is uniformly distributed on the interval O, .t]; the public knows p
 but not C. It updates its priors using Bayes' rule.
        It is easy to see that once the government has broken its commitment and lost its
 reputation, it will shift to a crawling peg in which d              in all subsequent periods.
 It is similarly easy to check that the one-time gain from reneging is 4/2, so that the
 government will stick to its commitment even in the last period if C 4 . Of course,
 if the public were certain that the government would renege in the final period, then its
reputation would unravel in all previous periods as well. Tn the case of the EMS, it is quite
probable that the public is unsure whether the government's commitment is binding or
not. For example, it may he difficult for the public to judge the general status of inter-
governmental bargaining over economic union issues, and therefore the cost of forcing a
devaluation.
     The basic nature of a solution this problem is as follows. If the time to monetary union
is sufficiently distant, the government will not renege on its exchange rate commitment
even if its fixed cost is zero. The cost in terms of high future expeéted devaluations
outweighs the short-term benefits. However, as the currency merger date approaches, the
government will eventually devalue if its cost is below the critical value a2. It will inflate
sooner, the lower its cost.
    Denote       as the highest cost type that first devalues at time t, and o as the prob-
ahility the puhlk attaches to a devaluation at time t, conditional on not having observed
a devaluation in any period t —   1   or earlier. Then it is easy to show that in a sequential
equilibrium, the puhlic forms inflationary expectations according to Bayes rule
                                                - Ct_i
                                       01= Ct      ..    ,                                 (6)
                                              P — Cg_

where   c is given by
                                                   =         — Wj.                         (7)
Equation (6) simply says that the public's expectations that the government will inflate

                                              23
depend on the range of types who would first inflate in period t normalized by the size of
the remaining pool. Equation (7) says that the highest cost type who would first inflate in
period t is one who is indifferent between first devaluing in period t and first devaluing in
period I + 1. One can show that the public's expectations of a devaluation rise as the date
of currency union approaches. Note that the system need not collapse under a speculative
attack because at no point is a devaluation certain.42 Rather, the government would be
forced to pay a high inflation premium on its debt. The higher the trajectory of w, the
more likely that there will ultimately be a devaluation.45
      A key point from the model is that pushing up the date of monetary union may do
nothing to enhance credibility. Rather, pushing up the date would lead to a sharp rise
in interest rates. Of course, moving the date all the way up to the present, and then
announcing it as a fait accompli, would prevent the possibility of realignment. (We are
certainly not advocating such a policy, since a devaluation may be desirable.)
     As it stands, the model does not permit signaling. If the government knows it will
never devalue (e.g., that the cost C of breaking its commitment is very high), then it should
index its debt to ECU (thereby avoiding the payment of a currency-default premium) or
seek to irrevocably fix the exchange rate immediately. Indeed, the public may expect to
observe some action of this type if the government is serious about its commitment, If
this is the case, then failure to index or to announce a completed union would be seen as
a sign of lack of commitment, and the exchange rate might then become very vulnerable
to speculation. The government would likely have to pay a high premium on non-indexed
debt. As long as the time to union is sufficiently far off, the government might be able
to index its debt gradually, reducing its short- term temptation as the future value of
reputation falls.
     There may be other ways to signal commitment. For example, the Italian central
bank has recently been given a greater degree of autonomy. This may be helpful under the
current system (via the usual conservative central banker credibility argument), but may
not help much in dealing with the credibility problems posed by currency union, which
 "ohetreld (19l explore,  the implication. of .pecu!ative att,ck. it, EMS-typu currency arrangenmnl..
 45The upward-doping trajectory of has an .mbigenus effect on the Liming of deoxineuion.

                                                          24
 involves sharply curtailing the autonomy of national central banks.

 5. Concluding Remarka
      Though inflation rates in the EMS countries have significantly converged over the
 past decade, exchange_rate adjusted price levels have sharply diverged and continue to
 do so, albeit at a decreasing rate. The empirical evidence suggests that high government
 spending in Italy and other high real exchange rate countries may provide a significant
 component of the explanation. TI these levels of government spending are unsustainable
—   and   evidence on budget deficits and current accounts suggests that they are — then
eventually an adjustment will have to take place. The need for this adjustment may
provide some countries with a significant temptation to devalue during the transition to
monetary union the problem is only exacerbated by high debt/GNP ratios.
     We have also argued that the reputation built by weaker central banks over the past
decade will not automatically provide credibility during the transition to a common cur-
rency. We present a simple theoretical model that suggests that the probability the public
attaches to devaluation may become higher and higher as the known fixed date of rnone-
tary union approaches. Indeed, the behavior of prices, wages and long-term interest rates
suggest that this process may already have begun.
     If the government does not intend to devalue, then it can signal this by indexing debt.
Of course, auth signals are costly, because they involve foreclosing a valuable option for
defaulting on government debt. Either way, the model strongly suggests that accelerating
monetary union is not by itself enough to avoid credibility problems. The gradual progreas
of the EMS so far does not ensure a seamless transition to a common currency.
     It is important to note that we have not provided a comprehensive assessment of
the welfare aspects of exchange rate realignments, For stabilization purposes, an early
adjustment of parities may indeed be beneficial. Rather, we show that a plan built around
a seansleas transition without changes in current parities may not be stable.




                                            25
6. Appendix A: Background: the surprising maturation and longevity of the EMS
      When the European Monetary System first went into effect back in March 1979, one
would scarcely have believed that within just ten years there would be serious discuasion
of a single European currency. True, Eurocrats in Brussels have long dreamed of issuing a
EC currency through a European Central Bank. But a decade ago, the ECU (European
Currency Unit) seemed to have little more chance of becoming Europe's curreacy than
the SDR (the International Monetary Fund's accounting unit) did of hecoming the world's
currency Surely no major European country would be willing to relinquish its sovereign
right to the seignorage tax. Besides, some governments such as Italy's were far more
depeadent on aeignorage revenues than others such as Germany's.
      For that matter, there was every reason to he skeptical about whether the EMS
would succeed even in its more modest goal of stabilizing exchange rates across the found-
ing members (Germany, France, Italy the Netherlands, Belgium, Denmark, Ireland and
Luxembourg; Spain joined in June 1989, and the UK in October icco.)44 After all, a
similar attempt in the early 1970s (the "Snake") had been a conspicuous failure45 How
long would a country such as Italy, with an inflation rate well into double digits, be able
to stabilize its exchange rate against low-inflation Germany? The answer, of course, is not
forever.
      Nevertheless, the EMS survived in its early years because it has enough built-in flex-
ibility to handle persistent divergences in inflation. First, members are not obliged to fix
their bilateral rates but only to keep them within a 4.5% band (±225% of a "central" rate);
indeed Italy was originally permitted to use 12% bands.46 More importantly, the bands
can be shifted, albeit only with multUateral agreement. During its first several years, the
EMS experienced frequent realignments. Despite these periodic realignments, the EMS
  '°TechnicaEy speaking, the Unitod Kingdom was also a member of the EMS from the out.et. But until very recently (October
1990), it did not participate in the only eignisonnt aspect or the EMS• the exchange rote mecheniem (ERMI. European Monotasy
Union ii envisioned to ultimatoly incited, the other EC member,, Ores'., and Portugal.
  '"The only loyal member, of tha snake, which began io April 5972, were Germany, the Netherlunde, Belgium and Luxembourg.
France pulled out in February 1973, though it hrie5y rejoined in t575. Italy pulled out in January tt74.
  '"Recently, Italy reduoed ill margine to 2.21%. The newest notion EMS mnmhcro, 5pain and ike U.K., still have e% bands.
Tke bilateral exchange-rate bands are euppinrinntsd by an 'indicator of divergenc? akich eseentially measures the deviation
of a weighted average of a coontry'n EMS-currency eaehangn raLel against a weighted average of iii bilateral central rates.
When the divergence indicator eeachne 71% of ite maximum caloe, a roontry is (in prinoiple) obligated to undertake corrective
changes in Ilecal and monetary policy. In practice, a country often kite a bilateral limit before tha divergence indicator becomes
operative.

                                                               26
 was immediately successful in enhancing exchange rate stability by any measure: nomi-
 nal, real, trade-weighted, conditional or unconditional variance, or mean absolute changes.
 However, the early EMS appears to have owed much of its success to the use of capital
 controls.47 By the mid 1980s, the consensus belief was that without the capital controls,
 the EMS would be ripped apart by speculative attacks.
       In light of this early consensus, the recent performance of the EMS has been nothing
 short of remarkable. It has continued to hold up despite the virtual dismantling of capital
 controls; by mid-1990 the last major capital controls in Italy and France had been removed.
 In fact, as Figure Al illustrates, there has not been a realignment in over four years now;
 the last episode was in January 1987.
       Obviously, with capital controls gone, the continuing survival of the EMS depends
critically on significant coordination of monetary policies. Most would agree that the
current regime is not symmetric; Germany, with its strong penchant for low inflation, is
thc leader. Indeed, one can plausibly argue that Italy and France have used the EMS
to enhance their own anti-inflation credibility. (France's policy of fighting inflation by
religiously pegging the DM has sometimes been referred to as its 4'Franc fort" policy.)48

6.1. Stage lET: a single European currency
                                 with a Bundesbank-style central bink.
       The classic literature on optimum currency areas (Mundell, 1961; McKinnon, 1963) is
based on an implicit Keynesian stabilization framework and emphasizes degree of openness,
and capital and labor mobility.49 Kenen (1969) stresses the importance of industrial
diversification within the union. Since the vast majority of EC countries' trade is with
other EC members, and since there is nearly perfect capital mobility among the major
countries, the EC already meets two of the classic criteria. After 1992, with harmonization

 "See Rogoe (1955), Artia and Taylor (loss)    Ciaceeni and Giovanni,,i (loss).
 "Ciaoaaa, and Fagaao (1955) argue that Italy and France uned the EMS to achieve anti-inflation credibility
        serve as thele                                                                                           by letting
Germany                aaneet-,at,n central banker.' A cynic might argue hat there would have been a revaluation of the DM
over the pest two yenra were it not toe the Inflationary impact of Gee,,,.,, reunification, but thin hardly diminieh the system'.
recent suctese.
   lt ie clearly not our purpose here to provide a comprehensive welfare eoaluatiun of the plnea and minimeu of etage Ill of
the Debra' plan, that ii of uLtimate European Monetary Union. Our main points do ant particularly depend en the precise
final foe,,, nf the onion, en we timit our welfare analynie of stage Ill to the brief dianu.ainn helow, The mont comprehensive
disca,e,nn of the welfare effect. a! EMU In prenented in One Marhet, One Money: An Evaluation of the Potential SaneSt, and
coat,, European Ecaonn,y, October 1990.

                                                               27
of licensing standards, there will also be greater labor mobility.50 Finally, the EC is
highly diversified industrially. Thus, at a glance, the EMS would appear to satisfy the
conventional stabilization criteria for currency union.51
      Aside from stabilization issues, there are also some public finance criteria to consider,
though the size of these effects are probably not huge.52 Some of the EEC countries
(such as Greece, and Portugal) raise 2-3% of CNP via seignorage revenues, but most raise
less than 1%, see Table Al. Since monetary union is envisioned to produce a very low
community inflation rate, the loss in seignorage revenues might be significant for some
governments. However, these governments are going to lose most of these revenues after
Economic Union in 1992, anyway. Because they will be compelled to open their countries
to foreign banking competition and because of new regulation standards, high seignorage
countries will no longer be able to force their own banks to hold large quantities of non-
interest bearing reserves. Also, with the proliferation of alternative financial assets, the
demand for real balances will drop.53
      Obviously, the move to one currency will economize on transactions costs involved
in changing currencies. These are generally thought to be large only for tourists, but a
recent study by the European Commission challenges this view54 The study argues that
by moving to a common currency, the EC could save on transactions costs of from o.zs% to
0.4% of community GD? per annum. The bulk of these savings (roughly 70%) is composed
of exchange margin and commission fees paid to banks. This estimate is obtained using
two approaches, one based on banking revenue data, and one based on estimates of firm
and household foreign exchange operations and their respective average transactions costs.
(The bank revenue data are derived from a comprehensive 1989 BIS survey of major banks
 t°Tha early Iiteratoroe emphasia an labor oobility was bused on models in which nominel wage are permanently Sued.
Meet eccnomiete today would probably place Far Ieee eniphaula an labor mobility hoes in pracuce, nom,n.l wage are prcbably
adjusted more quickly thou workers can be moved.
  See Eicheagreen (19w) ror a more critice.l asuee,ment of whether the EMS is indeed an uptiusal currency area.
    See Onsella (1559) For further di.auseico or sinai aspects oF currmcy oniore.
    It ie nctuelly poaeible that Monetary Union will enable the E countries to garner acme ee,grmrege revenue. From abroed,
if their new currency partly displaces the dollar in the world uodergrouod er000my. Estimate, or 0.5. currency held abroad
are .peeuIative hut • Sgure oF halF the monetary bass, craver $100 billion, in plausible. If 'he EC is able to capture a machat
hair this large, thee EC reignorage revenues could easily amauet to 2 or 3 billion dollar. per year. The mark ie already an
inleroaticeal eurraucy, so uerenany would be giving up puma external reeenue. However, the Bundabank estimates that only 7
tu to billion (out aF total currency holdings of t50 billion) marhe are presently held abroad. Iwo are grateful to tha Dundeebank
For relenaie,g thie data For cur study.) OF course, iTsubstitution between ECUe and dollar. in the undergrn,,ed economy become,
significant, then incremed currency .ubelitution could dentabilire rate. butwean the dollar and the ECU.
   045e, the Cammi.,iuo uf the European communities (1990;).

                                                              28
and foreign exchange dealers in twenty countries.) The remainder of the savings are to
come in the form of in-house accounting savings, and the EC estimates are based in part
on a officially-commissioned study by a private accounting firm.
     It is very likely that the transactions savings would be largest for the smallest members
of the EC, since Germany and France are able to conduct many external transactions in
their own currency. If the transactions gains are indeed as large as the EC estimates, they
could indeed compensate for any loss in seignorage revenues.
     Can the transactions costs really be almost haifa percent of EC CD?? Part of the need
for multi-national companies to keep separate books in different currencies comes from the
need to satisfy different regulatory and tax requirements. But if this is the case, then the
major savings will come not from a move to a single currency but from harmonization
of tax regulations across borders. Similarly, regulatory restrictions on banks' ability to
issue foreign currency instruments may well account for a significant portion of the bank
margin and commiesion estimates. However, it may be difficnlt to reap savings in this area
without going to a common currency.
    It is possible to come up with other arguments for currency union. For example,
imaginative economists at the European Commission have managed to obtain much higher
estimates of the benefits of currency union by using new growth theory models to argue
that the exchange rate risk premium lowers the steady-state growth rate of the economy.55
For the remainder of this paper, we will ignore the normative issues associated with the
gains from monetary union, and instead focus on a positive analysis of potential problems
in the transition.




 '°Again Me Conanlijion of the European Comnunitie. (ISSDo).

                                                       29
  7. Appendix B: Fiscal policy, Productivity, and the real exchange rate
         In this appendix, we present a standard neoclassical model which can be used to
  interpret the empirical results presented in the text on fiscal policy, productivity shocks,
  and the real exchange rate. As we have already noted, a broad range of neo-classica!
  trade models yields the result that an increase in government spending will cause the real
  exchange rate to appreciate. The key assumption is that a larger fraction of government
 spending falls on the home good than does private spending. The model presented here
 emphasizes the distinction between traded and nontraded goods.&t
        Consider a small country that takes the price of tradeables and the world interest rate
    (denominated in terms of tradeables) as given. Assume that the representative agent has
 a utility function given by

                                           u = i!_- (c1cça)                       ',                                         (81)

 where Cjq1 denotes consumption of the nontraded good at time t, and 0T1 denotes con-
 sumption of the traded good. Letting P denote the relative price of nontradeablcs in terms
 of tradeables, the budget constraint of the representative agent is given by

                                      = r(Wt Y + PY111 —                         — PCjq —14,                                (B2)

where W1 denotes wealth entering time t (measured in units of the tradcable good), and
Y and YNE denote domestic production of the tradeable and the nontradeable good1
respectively. For now, we will assume that both types of output are exogenous. r denotes
lump-sum taxes.
       Since Iticardiao equivaleoce holds here, ooe can assume without loss of generality that
the government runs a balanced budget:

                                                             = P1C1.                                                        (Ba)
  ceThe model developed hare follow, Oorobusch (1151] cod Freohel and Ratio (1987), Baxter
                                                                                                and Crucoioi (1989) and
Stoämao and Tear (1910) have used this alan of model, to explore epxn-erooomy real busioa. cyoLae driven by
•hock.. Ahroad(isse) explores a model of flied policy that dielio5oi,he, between exporLahlee •nd importeblei, productivity
                                                                                                              rather than
between tradwi and nontraded goode, Thu lype o(modal geoevally yields qualitatively similar result, for the effacLa afpennanenl
flceil policy changes on the real eochaogn rat., thoogh the dynamics dilfar somewhat for the case of tran.itory disturbances.
Finally, one can al,o get the result that Sheet policy naiad the peio. of nootraded good. ix a model in which goveroceceot .pendiog
is highly sarvLee inteneive, and wt,ere nootraded good. prodoction is more laboe-icteo.ice thoe traded-good. production.

                                                               30
Maximizing (81) with respect (B2), imposing the usual non-Ponzi scheme assumption on
borrowing, and recognizing that the private sector will internalize the budget constraint
(Ba) yields;
                                     ____( YNt a
                        aTt+1 = (rf3)o+a'.-a                        ) na—nc                     (.84)
                                                         —
                          TI                    Nt-t-1        t+1
and
                                               UCTC
                                  .Pt=                                                          (.85)
                                      (1—cs)(YNf—Gt)
      In both (B4) and (B5), we have imposed the equilibrium condition that

                                                                                                (B6)

since the country cannot borrow or lend nontraded goods.

7.1. Government spending shocks
      By inspection of (B4) and (BS), it follows immediately that a permanent rise in govern-
ment spending permanently raises the real exchange rate P. If rfl =           1 and   nontraded-goods
production is constant, there is no imp act on the current account.
      A temporary (unanticipated) rise in C? leads to mnre complex dynamics. Whereas it is
straightforward to show that the impact effect on P is still positive, the impact effect on the
current account is ambiguous and depends on whether a is greater than nne. As Dornbusch
(1983) has shown, a temporary rise in the current price of nontradeables leads to a rise
in the consumption-based real interest rate. Whether current traded-goods consumption
rises or falls depending on the size of the income versus substitution effects.
      The assumption underlying the regressions reported in the text is that the elasticity
of inter-temporal substitution is equal to unity, a =        1.   In this case, lagged government
spending shocks do not affect the real exchange rate, nor do anticipated C shocks.

7.2. Productivity shocks
      An unanticipated permanent rise in productivity in the traded goods sector (a rise in
Y1) has similar effects to a permanent increase in government spending on nontradeables.
In either case, the relative supply of nontradeables falls and P rises. A perfectly anticipated
increase in Y1 has, of course, a much smaller effect on P. Indeed, in the case where output is
                                              31
 exogenous, if rf3 = 1 and tr-° is constant, then an anticipated traded-goods productivity
 shock has no effect on P. Consumption of traded goods is smoothed perfectly over time
 as in Hall (1978). Similarly, a temporary shock to Y has much less of an impact effect on
 P than does a permanent shock. however, the impact effect on the current account of a
 temporary increase in Y is unambiguous; the current account moves into surplus.

 7.3. Eudogenous output
        The above results readily extend to the case where there is a fixed supply of capital
 in both sectors and where labor is freely mobile between them. Suppose that

                                                    YT=AT54                                                       (B6)

                                                  YN=ANtL,                                                        (ii)
 where changes in Are and ANt represent productivity shocks to the traded and nontraded
 goods sectors, and where aggregate labor supply, L = Lq' + Ly is fixed. In this case, P is
 given by:
                                    —   _____________ —              Ar6rLT'                                      (Es)
                                  5(1)(Yc?) ANtONLC'
        When output is endogenous, the effect of a permanent government spending shock on
P is tempered by a flow of labor into nontraded goods production. It is also straightforward
to show that an unanticipated permanent rise in traded goods productivity ATe leads to
a permanent rise in F just large enough to offset any intersectoral movement of labor.
(This is assuming that ths shock is not diversified away internationally.) When shocks
to productivity in both sectors are permanent and unanticipated, then their effect on the
relative price of nontraded goods is given by:

                                               dpe = dart     —
                                                                  daNt,                                           (119)

where lower case letters denote changes in logarithms.57 Letting total output be given by
    =   Y + YJ,r, it is straightforward to show that the rate of change in the domestic C1'I
is given by
                                    dpcp1 = (1 — -y)dpt = dare            —
                                                                             dye,                                (1110)
 "Note, however th.t ' perfectly ant,rtpatvd acreasa lv A, ice, have an effect on J' 'lore there are labor flown between
he nectar.,

                                                         32
where -y is the share of international-goods value-added in GNP.




                                          33
8. References


   Ahmed, Shaghil, 1987, Government spending, the balance of trade and the terms of
      trade in British history, Journal of Monetary Economics 20 (September); 195-
        220.

   Artis, Michael and Mark Taylor, 1988, Exchange rates, interest rates, capital controls
        and the European Monetary System; Assessing the track record. In the European
        Monetary System, eds. F. Giavazzi, S. Nicossi, and M. Miller, London: CEPR.

   Balassa, Bela, 1964, The purchasing power parity doctrine: a reappraisal, Journal of
        Political Economy, 72, 584-596.

   Barro, Robert J. and David B. Gordon, 1983a, Rules, discretion and reputation in a
        model of monetary policy, Journal of Monetary Economics 12 (July): 101-121.

   Barro, Robert J. and David B. Gordon, 1983b, A Positive theory of monetary policy
       in a natural rate model, Journal of Political Economy 91 (August): 589-610.

   Barro, Robert J., 1986, Reputation in a model of monetary policy with incomplete
       information, Journal of Monetary Economics 17: 3-17.

   Baxter, Marianne and Mario Cruccini, 1990, Explaining savings-investment correla-
       tions, unpublished.

   Baxter, Marianne and Alan Stockman, 1989, Business cycles and the exchange rate
       regimes; Some international evidence, Journal of Monetary Economics 23 (May):
       377-400.

   Gasella, Alessandra, 1989, Participation in a Currency Union, mirneo TJ.C. Berkeley
       (November).

   Collins, Susan M., 1988, Inflation and the EMS, Notional Bureau of Economic Re-
       search Working Paper 2599.

   Commission of the European Communities, 1990a, One market, one money: An eval-
      uation of the potential benefits and costs of forming an economic and monetary
                                          34
    union, European Economy 44 (October).

Commission of the European Communities, 1990h, Data Appendix, European Econ-
    omy 44 (December).

Debra, Jacques, 1989, Economic and monetary union and relaunching the construc-
    tion of Europe. In Committee for the Study of Economic and Monetary Union,
    Report on economic and monetary union in the European Community. Luxem-
    bourg: European Communities.

DeNardis, S., and Stefano Micossi, 1991, Disinflation and Re-Inflation in Italy and
   the Implications for Transition to Monetary Union mimeo, Confindustria.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, 1983, Real Interest Rates, Home Goods, and Optimal External
    Borrowing, Journal of Political Economy, 91 (February), 141-153.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, 1990, Problems of European monetary integration. In European
    Financial Integration, eds. Alberto Ciovannini and Cohn Mayer. New York:
    Cambridge University Press.

Eichengreen, Barry, 1990, Is Europe an optimum currency area? CEPR Discussion
    Paper 478 (November).

Frenkel, Jacob A. and Assaf Razin, 1987, Fiscal Policies and the World Economy.
    Cambridge: The MIT Press.

Froot, Kenneth A., On the Speculative Efficiency of Foreign Exchange Markets, MIT,
    1990.

Froot, Kenneth A., and Kenneth Rogoff, Government Spending and the Real Exchange
    Rate: the empirical evidence, mimeo MIT, 1991.

Giavazzi, Francesco, and Alberto Giovannini, 1986, The EMS and the Dollar, Eco-
    nomic Policy, II (April), 456-484.

Giavaszi, Francesco, and Alberto Giovannini, 1989, Limiting Exchange Rote Flcxi 611-
    ity. MA: The MIT Press.


                                      35
 Giavazzi, Francesco and Marco Pagano, 1988, The advantage of tying one's hands,
     European Economic Review 32 (June).

 Ciavazzi, Francesco and Marco Pagano, 1985, Capital controls and the European
     Monetary System. In ed, Francesco Giavazzi, Capital Controls and Exchange
     Legislation. Milan: Euromobilaire Occasional Papers (June).

Giovannini, Alberta, 1990, European Monetary Reform: Progress and Prospects,
     Broolcings Papers on Economic Activity 2 (Fall): 217-274.

Click, Reuven and Michael Rntchinson, 1990, Fiscal constraints and incentives for
    monetary coordination: Implications for Europe 1992, unpublished.

Gros, Daniel, 1989, Seigniorage in the EC: Implications of the EMS and financial
   market integration, unpublished.

Hsieh, David A., 1982, The determination of the real exchange rate: the productivity
    approach, Journal of International Economics, 12, 355-362.

Kenen, Peter B., 1969, The theory of optimum currency areas: an eclectic view.
   In Monetary Problems of the International Economy. Chicago: University of
    Chicago Press.

Krugman, Paul, 1989, Exchange Rate Instability, Cambridge: The MIT Press.

Marston, Richard C., 1987, Real Exchange Rates and Productivity Growth in the U.S.
    and Japan, in Real-Finoncial Linkages Among Open Economies) S. Ardt and 3.
    ID. Richardson, Cambridge: MIT Press.

McKinnon, Ronald L, 1963, Optimum currency areas, American Economic Review
   53 (September): 717-725.

Meese, Richard, and Kenneth Rogoff, 1983, Empirical exchange rate models of the
   seventies: Do they fit out of sample? Journal of International Economics 14
   (February): 3-24.

Meese, Richard and Kenneth Rogoff, 1988, Was it real? The exchange rate- interest
    differential relation over the modern floating rate period, The Journal of Finance
                                       36
      43 (September): 933-948.

 Mundell, Robert A., 1961. A theory of optimum currency areas, American Economic
    Review 51 (September).

 Mussa, Michael, 1986, Nominal exchange rate regimes and the behavior of real ex-
    change rates: Evidence and implications. In Real Business Cycle; Red Exchange
      Rates and Actual Policies, eds. Karl Brunner and Allan H. Meltzer, Carnegie-
     Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 25 (Spring).

 Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West, 1987, A Simple, Positive Semi-definite,
     Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix, Econo-
     metrica, 55 (May), 703-8.

 Obstfeld, Maurice, 1988, Competitiveness, Realignment, and Speculation: The Role
    of Financial Markets, in Ciavazzi, Micossi, and Miller (eds.) The European Mon-
     etary System, (New York: Cambridge University Press).

 Rogoff, Kenneth, 1985, Can exchange rate predictability be achieved without mon-
     etary convergence? - Evidence from the EMS, European Economic Review 28
     (June-July): 93-115.

Rogoff, Kenneth, 1989, Reputation, coordination and monetary policy. In Modern
   Cycle Theory, ed. Robert J. Barro, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Stockman, Alan and Linda Tesar, 1990. Tastes and technology in a two-country
     model of the business: Explaining international co-movements, National Bureau
     of Economic Research Working Paper 3566 (December).

Svensson, Lam E.O., 1990, The Simplest Test of Target lone Credibility, NBER
    Working Paper no. 3394 (June).

Tabellini, Cuido, 1983, Accommodative monetary policy and central bank reputation,
    Ph.D thesis, UCLA.

Weber, Axel A., 1990, Credibility, reputation, and the conduct of monetary policies
    within the European Monetary System, unpublished.

                                      37
                                   Figures is and b
                  Onshore/Offshore Lpcsit rate Differential
                       for the United Kingckn and Oerrrany

        500


Basis      0                                   I       -
Points

    -500



   -1000



   -1500
        1979               1982        1985           1988        1991
                                                             G
                                                             UK




                      onshore/Offshore Depnsit rate Differential
                                 for France   and Italy
         500


           0
Basis
Points
         500


    -1000



    -1500
               1979         1982       1985           1988        199:
                                                             IT
                                                             FR
                                        Figures 2a—h

                           Intra-EMS Real Exchange Rate Indexes

                                        (EGU-based weights)

 1.2


1-Is




       1979 1980 1951            1992 19 1984       1985 1988        1987      1988 1989 1990

               .      OaLacta mast                     4      F!S55c11 franc




                                 1982 1583   1984   1985 1986       1987       1988   1899 1980

           U       haliars Ira                             Spaniafri parsers
                                            Figures 2c—d

                         lntca-EMS Reat Exchange Rate Indexes

                                      (ECU-based weights)

 1.2


1,15



 1.I


ia



0-fl

 5-9



0.89



       II 19 1980      1981   1982   1983    1984   1985 1888 1987 1988          1889   1990


            •       Belgian here                        +      Denies kront


 1.2



1_IS



 I.1


1-Os




9-95


 9-9



9.85


 9.8
             lOaD 1091        1982   1993    1984   985 1988         1987   1989 1989   1990


                4      IvIeS paund                  +       Dutch guIldM
                                     FlQure a
            Italian-German Short-term Interest and Inflation Differentials
     10


     9


     a

£
     7
C
a
0


a.
     5



     4


     3
         1967                 1989           1989                1990


            C intflsj differendol                      +    Inflation dIffaranlial
                                      Figure '
                           Long-Term Interest Rates
    12



    11



    10

E
C
C    9
C

C
C    8
a




         1987              1988                  1989               1990


                Gorniany          4   FrCnce            0   Italy
                                      Figure A].
                    Size and Timing of EMS Realignments


    2.8
    25
t .2.4
    2.2
      2

o 15
C



&   1.4
C
0   1.2
.     I




          1980   1961   1962 1983 1984 1985        1987 1988 1989 1990
                                                 Table 1

                                      Inflation rates In the EMS

                           Germany France      Italy          U.S. EMS8a NnnEMSEnrb
                   1079       4.1      10.7    14.7           11.2    8.7     12.1
                   1980       5.4      13.3    21.3           13.6   12.0     14.7
                   1981       6.3      13.3    19.5           10.4   12.2     14.2
                   1982       5.3      12.0    16.5           6.2    10_s     12.3
                   1983       3,3      9_S     14.7           3.2    7.9      10.7
                   1984       2.4      7.7     10.8           4.3    6.5      10.7
                   1985       2.2      5.9      9.2           3.6    4.9       9.3
                   1986      -0.1      2.5      5.9           1.9    2.5       7.7
                   1987       0.2      3.3      4.7           3.7    2.3       6.7
                   1988       1.3      2.7      5.1           4.1    2.1       6.4
                   1989       2.8      3.1      6.3           4.8    3.7       7,5
                   1990      2.7       3.4      6.6           5.2    3.7       8.2


                           Average Absolute Annual InflatIon Differentials

                          EMS8 NonEMSES' NnnEMSt EMS/NnnEMS EMS/U.S.
                 1979      5.3        9.3              8.5            3.6        2.5
                 1980      7.4        7.6              6.9            2.7            1.6
                 1981      7.0        6.9              6.6            2.0        1.9
                 1982      5.7        7.8              7.7            1.5        4.6
                 1983      5.0        9.6              9.4            2.8        4.7
                 1984      3.5        10.5             9.8            4.2        2.2
                 1985      2.8        LI               7.3            4.3        1.3
                 1986      2.6        8.4              8.1            5.2        0.6
                 1987      2.5        5.7              5.3            4.4        1,4
                 1988      2.0        4.4              4.1.           3.8        1.5
                 1989      2.0        4.7              4.4            3.8        1.2
                 1990      1.6        4.9              4.6            4.1        1.5

     Notes to Table 1: EMS8 is comprised of Belgium, Denmark, Stance, Germany, Italy, the Netlierlancle,
Ireland, Luxembourg. NonEMSEur is comprised of Greece, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland
U.K. NonEMS is comprised of Greece, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, U.K., U.S.
     Source: IMF.
                                                     Table 2

                               Budget Surpluses In (lie EMS as a Perceut of GNP

            Belgium   Denmark Germany Greece Spain Fiance Ireland Italy Lnvbg NIlilds Prtgl U K.
an, 79-82    -10,1     -5.3    -5.1   -9.4  -3.4   -1.4   -12.8 -9.9    -0.9   -5.1   -9.9   -50
au 83-86      -9,5      -2.5        -1,7    -11.2    -5,9      -2.9   -11.0   -11.6            -5.9
                                                                                       3+6             -9.6      -3 1
an. 87-90    -6.5       0.2         -1.8    -16.2    -3,1      -1.6   -5,3    -10.6    2.1    -5.6     -5.5      0_i



                                Prbuary Budget Surpluses as a Perceut of CNP

—
an. 79-82
            Belgim
              1.2
                      Denmark Germany Greece Spain Fiance ireland Italy Lashg Nthlds Prtgi
                        1.0        -0.0     -2.9    0.2
                                                                                                                 U.K
                                                             1.9      0.4     1.0     0.4     -0.1    1.8        5.4
an. 83-86     1+6       5.2         0.5     -1.9    0.1      0.3      2.1             4.9
                                                                              0+6             -2.0    2.6        3.3
an. 87-90     3,9       6.5        0.8      -2.9    3.6      1.6      5.8     0.8     3.3     -0.6    5.9        5.8

          Notes to Table 2: Budget eurpinses are from Commission of the European Communities (I990b). Pri-
     mary enplnsee are computed from simple enrplnsee by adding interest payments on outstanding debt to
     the surpluses in above, Interest payments are computed by maltiplying abort-term interest rates times the
     government-debt / GNP ratio (these data also from the Commission of the European Communities).
                                          flble 3

     Cumulated changes In CPIa and Nominal Exchange Rates Against the DM

                               Logarithmic Percent ChangeR in:

                     CPI       Exchange Rate      C1'I           Exchange Rate
                   1979-1986     1979-1986     1987-1990           1987-1990
     Netherlands       2             4            -3                  0
     Belgium          18            22              2                 0
     Luxembourg       16             22             1                 0
     Denmark          34             23             8                 0
     France           41             27             4                 0
     Italy            74             31             15                0
     Ireland          55             25             6                 0

Sources: Commission ot the European Communities and IMP.
                                            Table 4

               Current Account Surpluses 6 the ZMS as a Percent of CNP

       Belgium Denmark Germany Greece Spain Fl'ance freland Italy Nthld! Prtgl U.K.
1979    -2.9     -4.7      -0.8      -1.9    0.5      0.9    -13.4    1.6   -1.2   -1.7    -0.1
1980    -4.3     -3.7      -1I       0.5     -2.5     -0.6   -11.8   -2.2   -1.5   -5.9     1.5
1981    -3.8     -3.0      -0.7      -0.7    -2.7     -0.8   -14.7   -2.2   2.2    -12,2    2.4
1982    -3.7     -4.2       0.5      -4.4    -2.5     -2.1   -10.6   -1.6   3.2    -13.5    1.4
1983    -0.8     -2.6       0.7      -5.0    -1.5     -0.8   -6.9    0.3    3.1    8,3 09
1984    -0.6     -3.3       1,3      -4.0     1,5     0.0    -5.8    -0.6   4.2    -3.4    -0.2
1985    0.3      -4.6       2.6      -8.2     1.8      0.1   -4.0    -0.9   4.1     0.4    0.6
1986    2.0      -5.5       4.4     -5.3      1.7      0.5   -2.9    0.5    2.7     2.4    -0.8
1987    1.2      -3.0       4.1     -3.1      0.1     -0.3   1.3     -0.2   1.4    -0.4    -1.9
1988    1.0      -1.8       4.1     -1.7     -1.1     -0.4   1.8     -0.6   2.4    -4.4    -4.1
1989    1.0      -1.3      4.7      -4.8     -2.9     -0.2   1.6     -1.3   3.6    -1.2    -3.7
1990    0.3      0.0       2.6      -5.1     -3.8     -0.3   1.2     -1.3   3,3    -1.2    -2.8

  Source; Commission of the European Communities (1990b).
                                                 Table 5

          RegressIons of Real Exchange Rates on Government ConsunipUon / GNP
                and Budget Surpluses / CNP, for EMS countries, 1079-1980

                                    r =a+fiige +fl2g' +7js+7s3 +C,
                          fit     s.c.    $                7     i.e.              s.c.    R2    DW DF

1. In levels         2.103' 0.735 —3.618' 1.959                          0.14 0.81 82
2. In levels         2.iOO 0.791 —2.109' 0.791                           0.13 0.79 83
3. In levels         3,481. 0.880 —3.090 3.595 0.786' 0.333 —0.250 1.393 0.21 0.88 80
4. In levels         3.490' 0.810 —3.49& 0,850 0777' 0.330 —0,777' 0.330 0.21 0.88 82
5. In changes         0.361 0,626 —0.108 1.248                           0.01 1.59 74
6. In changes         0.375 0.622 —0.315 0.622                           0.01 1.60 71
7. In changes         0.471 0.774 —0.289 1.929 0.037 0.209 —0.187 0.664 0.01 1.58 72
8. In changes         0.455 0.762 —0.455 0.762 0.037 0.204 —0.037 0.204 0.01 1.80 74

                             Cross-sectional regressions by year, fl1 =

1979, let levels     6.17& 1.854 —6.178' 1.854                                            0.23 0.85    83
1980                  1.389 1.888 -1,389 1.888
1981                  1.148 2.427 -1.148 2.427
1982                  0.728 2.894 -0.728 2.694
1983                 -1.568 4.452  1.568  4.432
1984                  0.823 4.329 -0.823 4.329
1985                  3.068 3.430 -3.083 3.430
1986                  1.151 2.286 -1.151 2.256
1987                  2.468 3.817 -2.461 3.517
1988                  2.353 2.074 -2.353 2.074
1989                 2.534' 1,562 -2.534' 1.562

                                Time series regressions by country, fit = —

Belgium, In levels 4.117' 1.373 —4.117' 1.373                                             0.50 0.47     9
Denmark              0.967 0.781 -0.967 0.781                                             0.14 0.73     9
Ftance             -3.903' 1.819 3.993' 1.819                                             0.63 1.01     9
Germany              3.218 2.209 -3.218 2.200                                             0.19 1.36     9
Ireland             -1.058 2.100  1.058  2.100                                            0.03 0.42     9
Italy                7.111' 1.137 —7.111' 1.137                                           0,81 0.95     9
Luxembourg           7.137' 2.036      —7.137' 2.036                                      0.67 1.45     6
Netherlands          2.278       0.526 —2.278' 0.526                                      0.76 1.46 9

    Notes to Table   5:    represents statistical iignifcance at the 10 percent level. r, is an index oI the
iaSc'a-EMS real exchange rate (expressed as the price of a domestic CPI basket relative to the price of a
ONP-weighted basket of other EMS countries' OPT). g is the ratio of government consumption to ON?; g
is the GNP-weiglited average of other EMS countries' gee. at and a are comperable ratios of government
budget surpluses to ON?. All variables have country-specific means removed.
     Source; JMF and Commission of the European Communities (1990b).
                                           Table 6

                            Changes In Relative Position of
                     Government Consumption and Current Accounts
                                   1979-1990 percent of GNP

                       Change in    Implied %         Change in Change in Change in
                      Government    Change in           Debt     Current Intra-EEC
                      Consumption Real Exchange                  Account    Trade
                                     kate (relative                        Balance
                                        to DM)

        Belgium          -2.9             3,7           57.5      3.2         0.1
        Denmark          0.5             -3.5           15.2      4.7         4.1
        F\ance           1.2             -5.0           12.2      -1.2        -1.3
       Germany           -1.2             0.0           13-8      3.4         1.8
       Ireland           -2.5            2.8            28.7      14.6        19.9
       Italy              2.9            -8.6           40.2      -2.9       -1.4
       Netherlands       -2.8            3.4            33.6      4.5         3.5



Source: Commission of the European Communities (1990h), IMFI and author& calculations.
                                            Thble 1'

          Logarithmic Percent Changes In Relative Prices and Economic Growth

                Change in CR1           Change in          Change in NUL        Change in NUL
              Real Exchange Rate        Real CNP            Adjusted (or      Since Last Exchange-
               (relative to DM)    (relative to Germany)   Exchange-Rate       Rate Realignment
                                                             Realignments       (relative to DM)
                                                           (relative to DM)

                 (1979-1989)            (1979.1989)          (1979-1989)          (1987-1990)



Belgium              -5.7                  -1.1                 -Si                   2.2
Denmark              10,9                  -6,0                 10.6                  4.5
F\'ance              6.1                   -0.9                  6.0                   4.0
Ireland              24.2                  9.7                  20.4                  -4.1
Italy                31.9                  6.0                  34.5                  15.4
Netherlands          -0.4                  -4.9                 -0.3                  .3.0


 Note: WIlL — nominal unit labor cost!.
 Source: Commiaaion of the European Communities (i990b} IMF, and authors' calculations.
                                                     Table 8

            Regressions of Real Exchange Itates on Government Consumption / GNP
                  and Productivity Differentials, for EMS countries, 1979-1969

                                 = 0 + $6n — gfl + 6, (z, — zt) -I- &4Ze — Zfl + es

                                           u.s.      5,      s.c.      5       s.c.    fl2   OW OF

           I. In levels          2.357    0.631                                     0.18 0.65      83
           2. In levels          1.677  0.758 —0.053 0.044                          0.14 0.69      77
           3. In levels          1.694' 0.754 —0.091 0.049           Q,fl77   0.038 0.19 0.65      73


                                Cross-sectional regressions by year, 5, =

           1979, In levels        4.471 4.006 —0.072 0.179                            0.31 1.85    54
           1980                   2.400 2.798 -0.083        0.138
           1981                   2.363 2.572 -0.025        0.103
           1982                    1.393 2.809 -0.055       0.119
           1983                   0.337 3.932 -0.049        0.118
           1984                   2.872 3.546 -0.052        0.112
           1985                   2.191 1.922 0.012         0.092
           1986                   0.264 0.991 0.028         0.071
           1987                   1.512 2.716 -0.189        0.165
           1988                  4.150 0.641 —0.150         0.055


                                Time series regressions by country, 5, =       —5,


           Belgium, be levels                     —0.058 0.389 —0.058 0.389 0.00 0.51              8
           Denmark                                —0.222 0.077 fl,333 0i377 0,47 0.82              9
           France                                  0.139 0.005 0,139 0.095 0,00 1.91               7
           Germany                                 0.110 0.180 0.110 0.180 0.00 1.53               7
           Ireland                                -0.464 0.297 -0.464 0.297 0.15 0.70              9
           Italy                                  —0.619 0.040 —0.619 0.040 0.57 3.04              7
           Luxembourg                             —0.794 0.612 —0,794 0.612 0.21 0.38              6
           Netherlands                            —0.059 0.032 —0.039 0.052 0.00 2.18              8


       Notes to Table 8: •   represents   statistical signifcance at the 10 perceot level. r, is an index of the
intra-EMS real exchange rate (expressed us the price of a domestic CPI basket relative to the price of a
GNP-weighted basket of other EMS countries' CPI). g is the ratio of government consumption to GM?;
g' is the GNP-weighted average of other EMS countries' g,s. a, and a are indexes of labor productivity
(domestic and C NP-weighted foreign, respectively) in the manufacturing sector. Z, and       are comparable
indexes of labor prodoctivity fur the entire economy. All variables have conutry-specific means removed.
      Source: IMF, Commission of the European Communities (1900b), and OECD Main Economic Indica-
ton.
                                           Table 1)

                     Eurodollar Floating-Rate-Note Borrowing Rates
                             for different EEC goverumenS
         (expressed in basis points as deviations from ILe 6-month LIBOR rate 11/1989)



         U.K.                                                -33.0
         Italy                                               -33.0
         Credit Fonder (Gov't of France)
         Kingdom of Be1gum                                   -19.0
        Kingdom of Denmark                                   -ts.o
        Government of Spain                                  -16.0
        Republic of ireland                                  -2.5
        Republic of Portugal                                 +5.6

Source: Salomon Brothers.
                                                Table 10

                                Government Debt as a Patent of CNP

        Belgium Denmark Germany Greece Spain France Ireland           Italy Luxhg NIhidi PrL8I UK-
1979     71.9      27.6      20.2      32.0    17.1   23.9    12.7    54.0    15.6   42.0   41,0   58.4
1900     80.7      30.3      32.7      32.2   21.9    25.3    75.9    63.5    15.4   40.7   40.6   58.6
i901     80.5      11.0      20.4      36.2   26.7    26.7     86.1   66.4    15.2   53.1   45,7   58.6
1082     98.2      62.6      36.2      40.3   31.5    28.1    91.2    69.2    15,0   57.6   50.9   58.0
1083     107_U     7L3       40.9      44.3   56.8    20.5    97.4    72.0    14.8   62.0   56.0   50.1
108.4    112.5     78.0      41.8      53,2   42.8    31.8    102.4   77.2    15.0   66.1   61.4   60.4
1985     119.6     74.6      42.5      62,5   47.6    33.2    lOt?    84.0    14.0   60.7   69.5   59.0
1086     123.7     67.2      42.7      65.5   48.5    34.2    115.7   88.5    13.8   71.7   68.4   58.1
1087     131.3     63.9      43.8      71.5   48.7    34.9    118.5   92.9    12.0   75.3   71.6   56.1
1088     132.2     64.0      44.5      79,7   44.8    35.0    115.4   96.1    10.2   77.4   74.0   51.0
1989     129.0     63.3      43.6      80.1   45.2    36.0    104.7   98.9    8.8    77.6   71.5   45.7
1990     129.4     62.8      43.7      89.5   44,7    36.1    101.4   100.9   7,8    77.8   67.8   43.0

         Source: Commission of the European Communities (1990k).
                                        Table 11

                   Monetary Base and 01W In the EEC, 1986 (percent)

                  Monetaq Base/GD? Share of GDP in EG Share of Monetary base in EC

    Belgium                7.5              3.2                     2.6
    Denmark                3.7              2.3                     0,9
    France                 5.8              20.0                   12.5
    Germany                9.9              25.3                   26.9
    Greece                 14.9             1.1                     1.8
    Ireland                10.1             0.7                    0.7
    Italy                  14.6             17.5                   27.4
    Netherlands            8.1               4.8                    4.2
    Portugal                                 0.9                    1.3
   Spain                  20.4               7.2                   15.7
   U.K.                    3.3              17.0                   6.0
   TOTAL                   9.3             100.0                  100.0


Source: Glick and llutchineon (1990).
                                                     Table Al

                               Seigniorage in the European Community
                                              as   percent of GNP

                                              1982              1987
                               Belgium         0.0              0.2
                               Denmark        0.1               .1,1
                               Fkance          1.3              0.3
                               Germany        0.5               0.8
                               Greece         3.4               3,0
                               Ireland        0.2               0.6
                               Italy           1.5              0.6
                               Nethetlanda    0.5               0.7
                               Portugal       5.9               2.7
                               Spain           1.9              1.2
                               U.K.           0.2               0.1



     Source; Seigniorage is calculated from the change the supply of currency in circulation plus increases in
required reserves less interest paid on total required reserves, Source; Gross (1989)
