                   NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




              OMITTED—ABILITY BIAS AND THE INCREASE
                    IN THE RETURN TO SCHOOLING




                      Mckinley L. Blackburn
                          David Neumark




                     Working Paper No. 3693




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            May 1991




The authors wish to thank John Bishop, David Card, Bill Carter,
John Chilton, Elchanari Cohn, Andrew Foster, Jacob Mincer, Paul
Taubmari, and seminar participants at the University of
Pennsylvania, the University of Maryland, and Columbia
University, for helpful comments. Sadiq Currimbhoy provided
excellent research assistance. This paper is part of NEER's
research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                          NBER Working Paper p3693
                                          May 1991


              OMITTED-ABILITY BIAS AND THE INCREASE
                    IN THE RETURN TO SCHOOLING


                               ABSTRACT

     Over the 1980s there were sharp increases in the return to
schooling estimated with conventional wage regressions. We use
both a signaling model and a human capital model to explore how

the relationship between ability and schooling could have changed
over this period in ways Chat would have increased the schooling
coefficient in these regressions. Our empirical results reject
the hypothesis that an increase in the upward bias of the
schooling coefficient, due to a change in the relationship

between ability and schooling, underlies the observed increase in
the return to education over the 1980s. We also find that the
increase in the return to education has occurred largely for

workers with relatively high levels of academic ability.


McKinley L. Blackburn                     David Neumark
Department of Economics                   Department of Economics
University of South Carolina              University of
Columbia, SC 29208                         Pennsylvania
                                          Philadelphia, PA 19104
                                               and NBER
I.   Introduction

     In the 1980s, the United States experienced considerable changes in the

structure of wages paid to different demographic and educational groups. The

most notable of these changes is a large increase in wage differences of white

males at different educational levels, as the wages of more-educated workers

increased relative to their less-educated counterparts) For instance, among

white males between the ages of 25 and 34 in 1979, college graduates earned

roughly 15 percent more than workers who had only completed high school; among

25-34 year-olds in 1987, college graduates earned 33 percent more than

high-school graduates.2 Blackburn, Bloom, and Freeman (1990b) show that wage

differences associated with education also increased for white females, while

Katz and Revenga (1989) also point to increases in the 1980s in wage

differences associated with the level of labor market experience of white

males.

     Several studies have attempted to explain why we observe an increase in

education-related wage differentials in the l9BOs. Perhaps the most

commonly-offered explanations have been associated with changes in the

relative demand for workers at different educational levels. For example, it

has been suggested that changes in international trade patterns have shifted

relative labor demand curves in favor of the more-educated. An associated

explanation singles out shifts in the industrial structure of the economy

towards service-oriented production as the important factor. However, the

available evidence suggests that these changes have at most played a minor

role in the changes in earnings differentials. There is more evidence that




1See, for example, Katz and Revenga (1989), and Blackburn, Bloom, and Freeman
(1990).
2These Statistics are taken from Table 1 of Blackburn, Bloom, and Freeman
(1990a).


                                     1
 changes in the supply of workers at different educational levels have

 contributed to the changes in earnings differentials, especially for      younger

 white males, though the magnitude of this effect is sensitive to assumptions

 about the substitutability between more- and less-educated workers.3 An

 alternative explanation (discussed in Blackburn, Bloom and Freeman, l990a) is

 that there are changes in the average level of productive ability of workers

 in different educational classes. One reason for such a change could be

changes over time in the quality of primary and secondary education.4

     There are several theories that suggest that there might be a

relationship between a worker's inherent ability (i.e., ability not affected

by acquisition of schooling) and his level of schooling. In the following

section, we discuss two such theories -- a signaling model, and a hunan

capital model -   - and   explore what might change over time so as to affect the

schooling-ability relationship.5 Since most empirical studies of the increase

in the return to schooling do not attempt to control for the effect of

unobserved ability on wages, any such changes in the schooling-ability

relationship could have led to changes over time in the observed return to

schooling.6 In fact, it could be that the "true" return to schooling (i.e.,




3Stapleton and Young (1988) develop a model in which changes in sizes of
entering cohorts affect the returns to higher education, because
substitutability between young and old workers is higher for low-educated than
high-educated workers.
6Blackburn, Bloom, and Freeman (l990a) rule out changes in the quality of
education as a complete explanation by noting that education-related earnings
differentials increased over the 1980s for older cohorts whose educational
quality could not have changed over the period. However, the fact that
differentials increased more rapidly for younger workers suggests that this
may still be a partial explanation of increased differentials.
5Bishop (1989) suggests that changes in the return to schooling (ignoring
ability) may be due to varying selectivity of colleges and graduate schools,
or changes in the rewards to "credentials" per Se.
6Taubman and Wales (1972) examine changes in the relationship between ability
and schooling over a much longer period, utilizing estimates from a wide

                                         2
the increase in earnings from one more year of schooling for a worker of a

given quality) has not changed over time, and that the observed increase in

earnings differentials is attributable to changes in the correlation between
                           7
schooling and ability.

     We test the explanations of the apparent increased return to schooling

generated by these models. First, we test the proposition -- generated by the

signaling model - -    that    changes in the distribution of the workforce across

education classes underlie the increases in the estimated return to schooling.

We use CPS estimates of changes in returns to schooling, and changes in the

distribution of workers across education levels, coupled with parametric

assumptions about the distribution of unobserved ability, to explore the

plausibility of the signaling explanation.

     Second, we consider the proposition -       - generated   by the human capital

model - -   that,   because of changes in the relationship between ability and

schooling, the omission of ability as an independent variable in wage

equations has led to an "observed" rather than a true increase in the return

to schooling in the 1980s. Our empirical testing uses a sample of young white

males from the National Longitudinal Survey Youth Cohort. The models we

estimate take advantage of scores on several tests measuring academic (or

cognitive) and mechanical ability that are available for each individual

surveyed in the Youth Cohort data. These test scores are used as (potentially

error-prone) measures of ability in wage equations.

     Our empirical findings provide little or no support for the idea that

changes in the relationship between ability and schooling in the l980s are




variety of data sets. They do not, however, relate these changes to variation
in the estimated return to schooling over time.
7Alternatively, an increase in the return to ability could lead to a spurious
increase in the estimated return to schooling.

                                            3
 responsible for the increase in education-related earnings differentials.

 However, we do find evidence that the increase in earnings differentials has

occurred primarily for workers with higher academic ability.


II. Theoretical Discussion of the Ability-Schooling Relationship

     In this section, we consider the effect that the relationship between

omitted ability and schooling has on empirical estimates of the relationship

between education and earnings, and how changes in the ability-schooling

relationship may change the estimated relationship between education and

earnings. Our model for earnings is of the form


     (1)       W   —
                          + fl2A   +


where w is the log of the wage, S is an education variable, A is an ability

variable, and          is an error term distributed independently of S and A.8 Since

A is not observed in the data sets used in recent studies of changes in the

return to schooling, these studies have used the simple-regression coefficient

b5 as an estimate for fl,          (i.e.,   they estimate [1] omitting ability from the

regression).9 The remainder of this section develops two models that show

that a changing relationship between ability and schooling could, in

principle, underlie the estimated increase in b5 that has been found by other

researchers.

     First, a signaling model is developed, in which
                                                               fl2
                                                                     is   zero because

ability is unobserved by employers. In this model,            b5 reflects the combined
effect of the contribution of schooling to a worker's marginal product, and




8The wage equation can be thought of as the partial relation of w with S and
A, the correlation of other variables with w, S, and A having been removed.
9b5 — Cov(w,S)/s2    where Cov(w,S) is the sample covariance between log wages
and schooling, and s is the sample standard deviation of schooling.


                                               4
the information that schooling contains for the employer's expectation of the

worker's ability. We show that changes in the distribution of workers

across education classes can alter this second component of b
                                                                    wS
     Second, we develop a human capital model in which both schooling and

ability appear in the wage equation (i.e., both             and   in equation (1) are

non-zero). In this case,

                                                       S
     (2)   E(bs) —          + flb    —
                                         flu
                                               +
                                                   'AS ——
                                                       sS


where rAS is the (sample) correlation coefficient between ability and

schooling, and SA   and   s are the (sample) standard deviations of ability and

schooling. If         and rAS>O. bw5 is an upward-biased estimate of fl,. As

we discuss below, changes in the distribution of ability and/or opportunity

can lead to E(bs) changing while         remains constant.


A. Signaling Model

     In the signaling model of Spence (1973), high-ability workers obtain more

schooling than low-ability workers because schooling provides a signal to

employers that they have high levels of ability. Arrow (1973) has also

presented a model where education serves a screening function in sorting out

high-ability from low-ability workers. We present a simplified version of

Arrow's model to study the potential importance to earnings differentials of

sorting of workers into educational classes on the basis of their productive

ability.

     We make four simplifying assumptions about the screening process

associated with education. First, the schooling decision is dichotomous; S is

a dummy variable equal to one if a worker is in the "high" education class,




                                          5
and zero if he is in the "low' education class.'0 Second, the single

equilibrium involves education sorting workers perfectly on the basis of

ability such that if A.>A
                      1 C then S.—l, and if A.A then S.—0. Third, ability
                                             1            1 c              1

is completely unobservable while schooling is observable, so that                       in

equation (1) is zero. And, fourth, employers pay log wages equal to

E(MP.IS). where MP. is the log of the marginal product of worker

        If MP is a linear function of schooling and ability,


        (3)    MPi — -y1S   +

then,


        (4)    E(MPiIS1) — y1S. + 12E(AijSj_O).(lSj) + l2E(A1IS—l).S
                          —                          )•(l-S       +
                              y1S. + 2E(A. IAiA               )
                                                                      Y2E(AiIAj>Ac)Sj

Denoting the conditional means of A1 as
                              A

                            j-
                                 af(a)da
        E(AIA.A)-
          ii c            ______            —A
                                              L
                                 F (A)




              ii
                                  af(a)da

        E(A.A >A c)   —


                              l-F(A)


where f() and F(.) are the density and distribution functions for ability,




10For example, S might be a dummy variable for whether or not the worker has a
high school education or better.
"The assumption that employers equate log wages with the E(MPiIsj) is made to
ease the computational burden of the simulations that follow. It does imply
that firms are risk-averse in their assessment of a worker's ability.



                                                 6
equation (14) can be expressed


                 E(MPIS) —          +     + i2(A -
     (5)                     rlSi                         AL)Si

If equation (5), plus a stochastic error term, determines the wage, then the

expected value of the coefficient estimate obtained from the regression of w

on S is


     (6)         E(bs) —   'l +   '2H - AL)

It follows that the usual estimate b5 provides an upward-biased estimate of

the contribution of schooling to the actual marginal product.12

     The estimated partial effect of schooling on wages can change without

changes in the direct effect of schooling on productivity (i.e., y1). In

fact, increases in the educational attainment of a population can cause E(bs)

to change, since a fall in A will affect (AH - AL).                Is it possible that such

a scenario underlies the increase in the return to schooling in the 1980s? In

general, it is not possible to determine how (AH - AL) will vary with declines

in A.13 For instance, if the distribution of ability is uniform with finite




121fl terms of the population counterparts to the sample statistics that
contribute to the bias in equation (2), we have c—p(l-p) and AS
           1/2
[p(1.p)] (A.HAL)/ °A where p is the percentage of the population in the
high-education category. Note that both                   and AS change when A changes,
while       does not change.

t3From our expressions for the conditional means of A, we can obtain



         L
   8E(ABA)               f(A)
                            c                     —   —

                   —                    {FAC-AL - (A-AL)]
    3Ac                F(A)[l-F(Afl

the sign of which is indeterminate.


                                              7
bounds, then it can be shown that (A14           AL) does not depend on A. However,

other distributions for ability do generate a difference between the

conditional means that varies as the percentage of workers in the

high-education class changes. In particular, we consider two single-peaked

symmetric densities for ability -     - the     standard normal distribution, and a

triangular distribution with density

            —    1   -
                         Al   if
            —   o             otherwise

With both distributions, the difference between the conditional means of

ability is at a minimum when A—U, i.e., p..P(AA)_O.5)4 If p<.5, so that

more-educated workers are a minority, then the difference falls as

more-educated workers become more numerous; but once more-educated workers

become a majority, the difference begins to increase again.15 The changes in

the difference are not small; e.g., going from p—.5 to p—.66 would increase

the difference between the conditional means by 13 percent if ability followed

the standard normal distribution.

     However, studies of the education-earnings relationship generally study

more than a simple two-way breakdown of the education distribution. While the




14Numerical simulations revealed that if A follows an exponential distribution,
the differential will follow a U-shaped pattern with respect to Ac However,
the minimum differential is reached at the mean of A, which is greater than
the median.
15Let A(A) —    E(AIA>A).     For any symmetric distribution centered at zero,
E(AIAA) — -E(A$A>-A) —         -A(-A),    so that                               For
the standard normal distribution, A' (A)>O and A'' (A)>O (see Heckisan and
Honore, 1990); in this case the differential will increase with increases in
A when A >0 [since A' (A )>A' (-A )] and will decrease with increases in A
when A<0. We were unable to sign A'' (Ac) for the triangular distribution;
however, numerical calculations showed that the differential was also
U-shaped, with a minimum at Ac_OS



                                            8
restriction to equal logarithmic changes in earnings per year of schooling is

the most common empirical restriction, some studies have also used dummy

variables for various educational classes. For example, Blackburn, Bloom, and

Freeman (1990a) compare the earnings of workers who had less than a

high-school education to those with a high-school education, and to those with

a college education. Their findings (for white males aged 25-64 in the U.S.

in 1973. 1979, and 1987) are reproduced in panel A of Table 1. Their results

show only small changes in these differentials from 1973 to 1979, but much

larger changes from 1979 to 1987.

     Can changes in the percentage of workers in these various classes explain

the observed movements in earnings differentials? Changes in educational

attainment were considerable for white males over this period. For example,

the percentage of working males 25-64 with less than a high-school education

fell from .26 to .13 from 1973 to 1987, while the percent with a college

degree increased from .21 to .32. Assuming that education perfectly sorts

workers by ability and that the distribution of ability remains unchanged, and

choosing a parametric distribution for ability, it is possible to predict how

the observed changes in the percentage of workers in the various classes would

affect the earnings differentials between these classes. These results are

reported in the bottom two panels of Table i).6 For both the standard normal



16These simulations are based on an extreme version of the signaling model in
which    in equation (3) is set to zero. The simulated earnings differentials
are determined only up to a constant factor of proportionality. The
coefficient on ability, T2 was standardized so that the college graduate to
less than high school earnings differential In 1973 was the same in the actual
and simulated numbers. Using this coefficient, the actual and simulated
earnings differences in 1973 are very close for the college to high school
graduate comparison. This experiment may overstate the effect of changes in
the ability differentials between different educational classes, because the
entire earnings differential is attributed to ability.



                                     9
and triangular distributions, the results suggest that only a small part of

the change in differentials over the 1979-1987 period might be explained by

changes in educational attainment.'7

      Of course, the screening model formulation permits other reasons for the

bias associated with using bs to change over time, including a change in the

sorting process of education (e.g. ,   if education becomes a better filter over
time), increases in the dispersion of ability, or an increase in the return to

ability.


B.   liuman Capital Model

      In the human-capital model of the relationship between schooling and

earnings offered by Mincer (1974, Ch. 1), all workers have identical

opportunities for, and receive identical rewards from, human-capital

investments. In contrast, a model suggested by Becker (1975) allows ability

to affect the rate of return to human capital investment, as he assumes that

workers with higher levels of innate ability will also receive higher returns

to their human capital.18 Following Becker, we assume that for each

individual the marginal benefit and marginal cost of education take the form


           MB(A.,S.) —   exp(kA.)S


17
  Jacob Mincer points out that the screening model suggests that the earnings
of college graduates relative to all other workers should be falling over the
1973-1987 period, since college graduates were a growing minority
(among 25-64 year-olds) throughout this period. While this differential did
fall from 1973 to 1979, it increased from 1979 to 1987.
     The simulations were also performed for changes in educational attainment
for 25-34 year-old white males. Since there was almost no change in
educational attainment for this group over the years 1979-1987, these results
provide even less support for the importance of signaling explanations for
the change in earnings differentials.
18The model is discussed in his Woytinsky Lecture of 1967, which is reprinted
in Becker (1975).




                                       10
           KC(P1,S1) —     exp(-P)S

where P1    represents    the ith individual's opportunities for investing in human

capital.19 Assuming that       b<d,    the optimal level of investment in schooling is

equal to


       (7) S — exP[(ii+Pi)/(d-b)1

so   that workers with higher ability (or higher opportunity) will invest more
                                                             *
                                                       '-S
in education. The wage is given by W —                                       which leads to the
                                                       j 0MZ(A1.x1)dx    ,




log-linear wage equation


       (8) w — log(W1) — -log(l+b)              ÷ (l÷b)log(S1) +
                                                                   kAi

This form for the wage equation shows that if ability is held constant, then

the empirical relationship between w and S reflects the (logarithmic) slope

of the marginal benefit function for schooling.20 However, if ability is



19   .
  A similar framework is used in Behrman, Pollak, and Taubman (1990). We
assume that benefits and costs are expressed in constant per-period flows
corresponding to the period for which the wage or income variable is measured.
2°It is not possible, in this framework, to derive a marginal benefit function
for schooling that leads to the commonly-used semi-log specification for the
wage equation. To see this, note that the expression for W. would have to be


       W.—exp(f+gS+hA1)
which implies the marginal benefit function

       MB —           —   gexp(f   +        +
              dW/dS                    gS       hA1)

 But this marginal benefit function, when integrated from 0 to S, does not
 yield the required form for W.. At the least, this suggests that one should
 try more than one specification in estimating the effects of schooling on
 wages. Because we do not use log schooling, we do not impose the restriction
 in equation (8) that the negative of the log of the intercept is equal to the
 schooling coefficient.

                                                 11
omitted, a positive correlation between S and A would lead to the estimated

return to schooling tending to overstate the marginal benefit of schooling, as

those workers with higher levels of observed schooling will also be those with

higher marginal benefits of education.

     From equation (7), the covariance of log schooling and ability is


     (9)   Olog(S*),A —               +
                                          'P,A]


where o, A is the covariance of ability and opportunity. If ability and

opportunity are uncorrelated, or positively correlated, the covariance between

log schooling and ability is positive, and the omission of ability from wage

equations should lead to upward-biased estimates of the return to schooling.

However, if A and P are negatively correlated, the sign of the covariance is

not clear. Since opportunity represents anything that shifts the marginal

cost curve for schooling, and since high-ability individuals are likely to

face high foregone-earnings costs at the margin, P and A may be negatively

correlated. In particular, if we allow wages to be a direct determinant of

the marginal cost of education, we have


                          —
   (10) MC —
               exp(C)W1       exp(Cj)J MB(A.x1)dx1 —        exp(kA+C)S
In terms of the earlier expression for marginal cost, d—(l+b) and

P—-kA-C.+log(l4-b). With this restriction, Cl              —           so the sign
                                                   (s*)A       °C,A'
is still indeterminate. If more able individuals have lower costs of

education, net of opportunity-wage costs (as seems most plausible), the

covariance between ability and log schooling will be positive, and the OLS

schooling coefficient estimate will be an upward-biased estimate of the




                                          12
marginal benefit of education.21

     The human-capital model suggests an interesting result for how changes in

the distribution of opportunity will affect the bias in schooling

coefficients. Assuming ability and opportunity are uncorrelated, an increase

in the variation of marginal costs across individuals (i.e., an increase in

a) should increase the variance of log schooling, but have no effect on the

correlation between ability and log schooling.22 From equation (2), it follows

that the bias in the schooling coefficient (using the logarithm of schooling

rather than the level of schooling as the independent variable) will fall as a

result of the increase in the variation of opportunity. The intuition is that

with higher variation in opportunity a smaller part of observed differences in

schooling are due to differences in ability. Increases in the variance of

ability will increase both the variance of schooling and the covariance

between ability and schooling, but the net effect is that the bias in the

schooling coefficient will increase.23 Not surprisingly, increases in k -   - the


21Strictly speaking, this discussion implies that if we controlled for ability,
the schooling coefficient would be unbiased. However, if the ability controls
are imperfect, or if there is measurement error in the schooling variable,
then the schooling coefficient may remain biased once ability is included.
Griliches and Mason (1972) argue that measurement error in the schooling
variable should lead to a downward bias in the schooling coefficient once
ability is included as a regressor.
22
   The variance of schooling can, from (7), be expressed as

     a
         2     *   —
                                     f22
                                     ikaA +a2P
         log(S               (d-b)2 L

if ability and opportunity are independent.
23The partial regression coefficient (bAs) from the regression of A on log S
satisfies


                   Ulog(S*) ,A               (d-b)ka
                                        —
     E(bAs)_           a
                           2    *            22 +a 2
                                            ka
                           log(S )            A    P



                                                 13
return to ability      in this model -       - will   increase the bias in the usual

schooling coefficient estimate (though it will also increase the variance of

schooling, and the covariance between schooling and ability).24 Finally,

increases in the "true" marginal benefit of schooling (i.e.,         b)   will increase

the usual schooling coefficient estimate. However, the increase in the

estimate will be less than the increase in b, because the bias in the

schooling coefficient falls as b increases.25

     The conclusions reached in the previous paragraph follow under the

assumption that ability and opportunity are uncorrelated. However, if we

assume that wages directly affect MC, as in equation (10), and we assume

0 A<0   the results of the previous paragraph are essentially unchanged. The

one exception is that changes in b will no longer affect the bias in the

schooling coefficient. A summary of the effects of changes in the

human-capital parameters on the bias in b is provided in Table 2.

     The human capital model offers several ways in which the observed

wage/schooling relationship may change without there being changes in the

"true" effect of schooling on wages. Of course, the extent to which the joint




                                        2
which increases with increases in

24For example, Juhn, Murphy, and Pierce (1990) have suggested that recent
increases in the residual variance in wage equations for males reflect
increases in the returns to ability. If so, one consequence could be that
observed increases in the return to schooling overstate true increases in


25The bias falls because E(bAs) falls as b increases. However,


        aE(b)
                —                   0
         3b         k2a +

so that the usual coefficient estimate will increase when b increases.


                                            14
distribution of schooling and ability may have changed over the l980s is en

empirical question. In the following section, we estimate models that attempt

to control for the effects of ability on wages in order to ascertain the

importance of omitted ability bias for recent increases in education-related

earnings differentials.


III. Empirical Analysis

A.   Data

      The data we use come from the National Longitudinal Survey Youth Cohort.

This cohort was first surveyed in 1979, when the respondents were between the

ages of 14 and 22. They have been reinterviewed each year since 1979; we use

data through the 1987 interview. The information extracted for each year

includes wages on the current job, schooling status, labor market activity

over the previous year, and industry, occupation, and union coverage on the

current job. The 1979 interview also collected several    variables associated

with the family background of the respondent, which we use in our empirical

analysis.
      Most importantly, the data set includes scores of each respondent on the

Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB) tests. Ten test scores are

available, for a variety of cognitive and mechanical aptitudes.     The test

 areas are: general science; arithmetic reasoning; mathematics knowledge; word
                                                                  numerical
 knowledge; paragraph comprehension: mechanical comprehension;

 operations; electronic information; auto and shop information;    and coding

 speed. The ASVAB tests were administered to all survey respondents      between

 the 1979 and 1980 surveys, with a 94 percent completion rate.     The

                                                                         which the
 availability of these test scores, along with the time period over

 data were collected, make the NLS Youth Cohort a useful data set    for studying

                                                       for young white males in
 changes in education-related earnings differentials


                                      15
the early 1980s, and whether shifts in the ability-schooling relationship

underlie these changes.26

     There is more than one manner in which the NLSY data could be used to

measure earnings differentials for young workers. One possibility is to

estimate wage equations for each year from 1979 to 1987, using any respondent

in the year who was working and was not in school.27 One problem with this

type of analysis is that the sample in the later years will be increasingly

made up of workers more established in their labor market positions; signaling

and learning models suggest that schooling may become less important for

wages, and ability more important, as workers accumulate experience,28 so that

this analysis could confuse age (actually, experience) effects in the return

to schooling with the desired period effects. To minimize this problem, we

instead construct our sample so that we use only one wage for each respondent;

the wage we choose is the first wage available after the respondent has

completed his schooling (i.e., the respondent does not return to school by the

1987 wave of the survey). With this sample, we hope to capture the schooling

effects among workers competing for their first jobs, for it is among this

group that the effects of relative demand and supply shifts should be most

important. However, the restriction to using only one wage per respondent

makes it impractical to try to carry out an analysis of bias in schooling




26The NLS Youth Cohort has also not suffered from sample attrition to the same
degree as earlier longitudinal labor-market surveys; by 1987, roughly 90
percent of the original cohort was still responding to interview requests.
27Bishop (1989) uses a restricted version of this setup, in which coefficients
in wage equations are allowed to vary along a linear trend over the sample
period. Also, he does not restrict the sample to individuals who are out of
school.

28See, e.g., Harris and Holmstrom (1982) and Farber and Gibbons (1990).
Indeed, Farber and Gibbons derive a further restriction that returns to
ability will increase with experience, while returns to schooling will remain
constant.


                                     16
coefficients in regressions estimated separately for each year from 1979 to

1987, so we allow our schooling coefficients to vary along a linear time trend

over the 1979-1987 period.29

     Sample means and standard deviations for many of the variables used in

our wage-equation estimation are presented in the first column of Table 3.

The average age of our sample of workers on their first post-schooling job is

fairly young, though the amount of labor-market experience (i.e., hours worked

in year-equivalent units) shows that on average our respondents had worked

over 2 years before they enter the sample.3° The educational-attainment

statistics for our sample show slightly lower average education levels than

other estimates for this cohort, largely due to the fact that some of the

eventually more-educated members of this cohort are still in school in 1987.

     In column (2) of Table 3, we report coefficient estimates from an

individual-level regression of some of the variables on a constant and a time

trend. These estimates show how the composition of the sample changes as we

move through the 1979-1987 period. The wage variable we use is a measure of

hourly earnings (in current dollars) on the primary job held at the time of

the interview; the trend coefficient shows that this wage has increased by

almost 8 percent per year over the 1979-1987 period. While part of this

increase is due to inflation, the increase also reflects the fact that the

individuals in the later years have a higher average level of education, have

more experience at the time of the first post-schooling job observation, and

are older at the time of the first job. Wages in the later years may also be




290ur sample size for white males is 2451. We exclude the self-employed, farm
laborers, and respondents reporting a wage lower than one-half of the federal
minimum wage prevailing in the year from which the observation is drawn.
300f course, much of this experience may have been obtained in jobs held while
still in school.



                                     17
higher because returns to education (and experience) increased over the

period.

       Table 3 also reports sample Statistics for averages of three subsets of

the ASVAB test scores. Since the individuals in the cohort were of different

ages when the tests were administered, age effects were removed from the

scores by regressing each of the individual (normalized) test scores on a set

of individual-year age dummies. The residuals from selected tests were then

averaged to form the three composite test scores identified in Table 3.

Following Bishop (1989), we dropped the coding speed test, and classified the

remaining tests as either academic, technical, or computational; details of

this classification are provided in the footnotes to the table. As our

wage-equation estimates suggest that the technical and computational

composites have very similar effects on wages, we also present sample

statistics for the sum of these two composites (i.e., the non-academic test).

The trend coefficients for the test scores show that all three composites tend

to be higher for those individuals whose first jobs were in the later years,

with the increase over time largest for the academic test and smallest for the

technical test.


B.         Equation Estimates

       Using our hourly wage variable, we initially estimate equations of the

form


     (11) log(w) —   flS.+      fl2(T.S.) + $3X. + fi4(T.X.) + 5Y. +

where w is the wage, S is years of schooling, T is the value of the time trend

for the year in which the observation is taken, X is a vector of other factors

that affect the wage, Y is a set of year dummies, and c is an error term. The

trend has a value of zero for the first year (1979), and increases by one for



                                        18
each following year. Including year dununies effectively controls for

variation in wages due to inflation, productivity growth, or other cyclical

factors. The other variables included in X are experience, age, a union

membership dummy, a marriage dummy, and an urban dummy; the estimated trends

in the coefficients for the marriage dummy and the urban dummy were

essentially zero, so in our reported estimates we constrained these trends to

be zero.

     Ordinary least-squares estimates of         and      in equation (11) are

reported in column (1) of Table 4. The results replicate the increased return

to schooling in this period found in other data sets.31 The estimates suggest

that the linear return to schooling was .032 in 1979, and that this

coefficient has increased by .0034 in each following year; by 1987, the

estimate for the return to schooling is .059. This estimate for the increase

in the return to schooling is somewhat larger than estimates suggested by

previous studies, though other studies have used samples of workers that are

older and more established than the workers in our sample.32

     To further explore the robustness of the increased return to schooling in

the NLSY, in the remaining columns of Table 4 we include other




31We also estimated separate wage equations for each year, using our sample of
first wages. The schooling coefficient estimates (and standard errors) are:

                            1979          .021   (.011)
                            1980          .048   (.011)
                            1981          .039   (.011)
                            1982          .051   (.012)
                            1983          .041   (.012)
                            1984          .039   (.013)
                            1985          .062   (.015)
                            1986          .050   (.015)
                            1987          .050   (.021)
32While we do not focus on these coefficients in this paper, the OLS estimates
show the coefficients for age and union membership to have declined over time,
while the coefficient for experience increased.


                                     19
education-related variables as regressors to pick up nonlinear effects, while

continuing to interact the years-of-education variable with a time trend. The

linear specification could lead to incorrect inferences concerning the sign or

magnitude of the increase in the return to schooling if the true relationship

between schooling and log wages is nonlinear.33 This is potentially a serious

problem in analyzing our sample, since the individuals whose first jobs are

from the earlier years tend to be less educated than the individuals from the

later years. For example, if the return to schooling were higher for college

than high school, our finding that the return to schooling is higher in the

later years studied could entirely be due to the fact that individuals from

the later years have more years of college education.

     In column (2) of Table 4, we add years of college as an additional

regressor; the estimates suggest the return to college years is higher than to

pre-college years, but including this variable only marginally reduces the

years-of-education coefficient trend. Including years of high school along

with years of college (column 3) reduces the education-coefficient trend by

considerably more (though it provides an unlikely negative coefficient for

high-school years). In column (4) we include a college graduate dummy, and in

column (5) we include both a high-school graduate and a college graduate

dwnmy; estimates of both specifications continue to provide evidence of an

increasing return to schooling. In sum, nonlinear effects of schooling on log

wages, combined with the nature of our sample, may explain some of the large

increase in the return to schooling suggested in column (1), but even after




330ne possible nonlinear relationship between wages and schooling is the
log-linear model for wages suggested in section II. Empirical results using
the log of schooling in place of the level of schooling in our wage-equation
estimations uniformly provided poorer fits, so we continued to use the level
of schooling. Conclusions about the trend in the education coefficient,
however, were very similar for both schooling specifications.


                                    20
controlling for these effects we continue to see a reasonably large rise in

the schooling coefficient.

     As discussed in Section II, all of the schooling coefficient estimates in

Table 4, and in particular the years-of-education coefficient trend,

potentially suffer from biases resulting from the error term being partly

composed of individual abilities not captured in X, and from changes in the

correlations between these abilities and schooling. In Table 5, we attempt to

provide some idea of the importance of omitted-ability bias by including our

test score measures as proxies for this omitted ability. In column (1) we

include the individuals academic, technical, and computational test scores as

independent variables. As the coefficient estimates for the technical and

computational tests are very close, and the coefficient estimate for the

academic test is negative and statistically insignificant, we estimated a

specification that excludes the academic test, and includes the sum of the

technical and computational tests; these results are in column (2). Both

regressions provide highly significant coefficient estimates for the

non-academic test scores, and inclusion of the test scores reduces the

estimates for the schooling coefficient at any point in time (e.g. ,   in   column

(1) the coefficient estimate for 1979 is .013, and for 1987 it is .051).

However, the magnitude of the estimated increase in the schooling coefficient

does not decline after including the test scores, but rather slightly
             34
increases.

     Simply including the test scores as regressors may not be the best way to

use the information in these variables to control for "ability." It seems




       result is due to the fact that, in our data set, the partial
regression coefficient in the auxiliary regression of ability on schooling
displays a (statistically significant) negative trend for each of the
individual and composite test scores that we use.


                                     21
reasonable to expect that the productive ability that employers value is at

least partly reflected in our test scores but that several other factors also

affect the outcome of the tests (e.g.. test-taking ability, sleep the previous

night, etc.). We might write this process as


     TSj —      1A.1       +   u.1

where TS is the test score, A is ability rewarded in the labor market, and u
is other factors that affect the test score. If we assume that A and u are

uncorrelated, we have the classical errors-in-variables setup, suggesting that

Table 5's OLS estimates of the test score coefficients, and coefficients for

variables correlated with the test scores, are inconsistent. As a remedy, we

assume that ability is correlated with the family background of the individual

through the equation


     A —       Fi      +


where F is a vector of family-background variables.35 Instrumental-variable

estimation of the wage equation when the test score is included as a

regressor, using F as an instrument for TS, should eliminate the inconsistency

in the wage-equation estimates resulting from measurement error in the test
          36
scores.




35We assume that F and u are uncorrelated. Prior research suggests that it is
reasonable to exclude family-background variables as regressors in a wage
equation (see the discussion in Blackburn and Neumark, forthcoming). Note
that equations (7) and (8) imply that variables that determine P are obvious
Instruments for schooling, but not necessarily for test scores. While family
background may seem most directly related to P, family-background variables
may also be highly correlated with TS (and especially if Ai is directly
determined by these variables).
36Thjs method for controlling for unobserved ability was originally suggested
by Griliches and Mason (1972); see also the surveys in Griliches (1977, 1979).


                                     22
     Schooling and test-score coefficient estimates from an estimation in

which the test scores are treated as error-ridden are presented in columns (3)

and (4) of Table 5. The family-background variables used as instruments are

listed in the appendix table, along with the coefficient estimates in the

first-stage regressions for the test scores.37 The wage-equation estimates

show the estimate of the "ability" effect to be larger than without

instrumenting, as would usually be expected if the OLS coefficients suffered

from measurement-error bias. The schooling coefficients also decline, for any

given year, and appear to be essentially zero in the earliest years. But the

increase in the return to schooling is slightly larger as a result of

instrumenting for the test scores, again suggesting that omitted ability plays

no role in explaining increases in the return to schooling. We also performed

specification tests (suggested by Hausrnan, 1978) for the presence of

measurement-error bias in the ability coefficient; the probability values for

the null hypothesis of no measurement-error bias are also reported in Table 5.

The specification tests actually suggest that instrumenting is not necessary

for the test scores.

     Our instrumental-variable estimates may also be inconsistent if the level

of schooling is not exogenous with respect to the post-schooling wage. Models

in which schooling decisions depend upon the wage (such as the human-capital

model of section II, with a fixed effect in the wage-equation error not

captured by the test scores), or measurement error in the schooling variable




37For observations in which a family-background variable is missing, we set the
variable to zero; we also include dummy variables for each family-background
variable being missing. This is essentially a first-order regression method
for handling missing regressors. This method is likely to provide
inconsistent coefficient estimates (see Kmenta, 1986), so the coefficient
estimates we report in the appendix table are likely biased estimates of A.
However, the inconsistency in these estimates should not affect the
consistency of our estimates of the wage equation.


                                     23
(Criliches and Mason, 1972), suggest that schooling should be treated as

potentially correlated with the wage-equation error. Given the young age of

our sample, endogeneity is a potentially serious problem, since the wages we

observe are likely highly correlated with those relevant to their schooling

decisions. To explore this possibility, we use our family-background

variables to instrument for both the non-academic test score and education;

these results are reported in column (5) of Table 538 This technique does

affect the point estimates for the schooling and ability coefficients, but it

also leads to a considerable increase in the standard errors associated with

these coefficients; the increase in the return to schooling implied by the

point estimates is even larger. If we instrument for schooling but not the

test scores (column 6), we find similar results to those in column (5).

Hausman tests provide no support for the joint hypothesis of endogeneity (or

measurement error) in schooling and measurement error in ability, or for the

simple hypothesis that schooling is endogenous or measured with error.

     We were concerned that our results may be partially driven by the failure

to adequately control for interactive effects among the determinants of the

wage. For instance, there may be an interaction between education and ability

in wage equations, e.g., education may have a larger impact on the wages of
                     39
more able workers.        This may be particularly important given that, in our

sample, individuals observed in the later years have both higher test scores




38Rather than instrumenting for the education/trend interaction, we used
the first-stage predicted value for education and interacted it with the trend
variable in estimating the wage equation, since there is no reason to expect
the trend variable to be correlated with the error term.
39An interaction between ability and log schooling would arise in the
human-capital model if
                                b+hA
     MB(AjSi) — exp(kA1)S1             i(l+b+)


                                          24
and more schooling.

     The first column of Table 6 presents estimates for the specification in

the second column of Table 5 with an interaction between schooling and

non-academic ability as a regressor.40 The education/ability coefficient

estimate is statistically significant, and the education/trend coefficient

estimate is reduced considerably. This result suggests that our finding of an

increase in the return to schooling may be partly due to a combination of an

ability/education interactive effect and the fact that average levels of

ability are increasing over time in our sample. However, the estimates in

columns (2) and (3) suggest that this interactive effect is much less

important if we allow the education/non-academic-test coefficient to vary over

time, and also add interactions of the non-academic test score with age,

experience and a trend. For example, in column (3) the education coefficient

estimate still displays an upward (although statistically insignificant)

trend, though there is also some (slight) evidence that the

education/non-academic-test coefficient is increasing over time.

        It is perhaps not surprising that there appears to be little evidence of

an interactive effect of education and non-academic ability, since there is no

clear reason why non-academic ability would be expected to increase the

beneficial effects of education. In columns (4)-(6) of Table 6, we repeat the

estimations of columns (l)-(3) using the academic test score in place of the

non-academic. Including an interaction between the academic test and




40We estimated these specifications by OLS using the test scores as ability
measures. This method of estimation is supported by the insignificant Hausman
test statistics of Table S when using the test scores. Using different data,
Blackburn and Neumark (forthcoming) found that instrumenting was necessary
when using an IQ test score; the difference in findings may be due to the
ASVAB test scores being less error-prone than the IQ test scores in the other
data.



                                        25
education provides a significant coefficient estimate for the interaction, and

leaves the estimated increase in the schooling coefficient at essentially

zero. This interactive effect of academic ability and schooling appears to

primarily be present in the later years of our sample, as the

test-score/education trend coefficient is significant in columns (5) and (6).

If we include all interactions for both the academic and non-academic test

scores in the same equation (column 7), the academic-test/education trend

coefficient estimate is still large, but becomes statistically insignificant

because of a much higher standard error. In column (8), we exclude all

variables with clearly insignificant coefficient estimates, leaving the

academic-test/education trend coefficient estimate virtually unchanged but

with a much smaller standard error. While any hypothesis testing associated

with column (8) does suffer from pretest bias, the t-statistic of 2.9 is

rather large. In addition, in both columns (7) and (8), an estimated increase

in the coefficient on education is no longer present.

     To summarize the findings from Tables 5 and 6, the increase in the return

to education over the l980s persists when account is taken of the potential

relationships between ability, schooling and wages. However, our

investigation leads to a refinement of the finding: the increase in the

return to education occurred for workers with relatively high academic

ability. Existing estimates of the increase in the return to schooling, from

data sets without ability measures, overstate the relative wage gains that

education would have imparted to a randomly chosen (or marginal) worker.

      Several checks of the robustness of our findings to changes in the sample

used in estimating the wage equation were performed, and the results are

 reported in Table 7. The first two columns report the OLS estimate of the

education coefficient and its trend in specifications without ability




                                      26
controls. The next two columns report these coefficients' estimates from

specifications that include the test-score interactions included in column (8)

of Table 6. We also report the academic-test/education trend coefficient

estimate, and the estimate for the coefficient on the non-academic test score.

     We tried two alternative restrictions in selecting the sample. First, we

excluded any individual with labor market experience greater than three years,

to avoid using individuals who may be firmly ensconced in the labor force and

therefore not competing for a new job, and to reduce the potential confounding

influence of learning. Second, we excluded observations whose first job

observations were in 1982 or 1983, to enhance the comparison between the low

schooling-return and high schooling-return periods, and to eliminate severe

recession years. Both redefinitions of the sample lead to similar conclusions

as with the full sample, with the sample with the maximum-experience

restriction providing a larger estimated increase in the

academic-test/education interaction effect than was provided by the full

sample. The fourth row of Table 7 presents results from estimations that

include a college graduation dummy; again, conclusions are essentially

unchanged.

     We also estimated wage equations that include twelve industry and eleven

occupation dummies as regressors; these results are reported in the bottom

three rows of Table 7. These estimates suggest that occupational shifts (but

not industry shifts) can explain a considerable portion of the schooling

return increase if we omit ability from the specifications.41 Occupation (and

to a lesser extent industry) shifts also appear to account for at least part




       findings differs from that of Blackburn, Bloom, and Freeman (l990a), who
found that changing industrial composition of employment explains up to 25
percent of the increase in education-related earnings differentials, but that
occupational changes played no role in the schooling-return increase.


                                     27
of the increase in the interactive effect of academic ability and education,

suggesting that at least part of the increased importance of education to

wages for high academic-ability males is due to demand shifts towards

occupations (and industries) that tend to employ high-education/high-ability

individuals.



IV.   Summary
      Much attention has been paid to explaining recent increases in the return

to schooling among males in the U.S. Estimates of these increases are

generally obtained from wage regressions that are potentially biased by the

presence of "unobserved" ability in the wage-equation error. We have shown

that both a signaling model and a human capital model suggest that changes in

the relationship between ability and schooling could underlie the increases in

the schooling return. We offer evidence on the plausibility of these

explanations, with a particular focus on using test scores as a proxy for

ability in wage regressions. Our results provide little or no support in

favor of the hypothesis that the increases in the return to schooling reflect

an increased upward bias in the schooling coefficient estimate due to a change

in the ability-schooling relationship. But our results do provide an

interesting refinement of the stylized fact that education returns have been

increasing in the l98Os - -   the   increase in the return to education has

occurred largely for workers with higher levels of "academic" ability.

      What can explain an increase in the return to education for high-ability

workers only? Supply-side explanations can be constructed. For example, if

it were the case that education and ability were becoming less correlated over

time, then there would be relatively fewer of those workers with both high

levels of education and ability; also, if the average level of ability were to




                                        28
fall, this could create a growing scarcity of high-education, high-ability

workers. But at present it is difficult to assess the existence or importance

of such supply-side changes.42 While occupation shifts appear to be of some

importance, what is causing these shifts is still an open question.

Skill-biased technical change is one possibility, though the evidence in favor

of this argument is still limited.43




     fact. Bishop (1989) refers to results that suggest that average test
scores of young individuals were increasing over the l980s.
43Davis and Haltiwanger (1990) offer evidence on changes in wage dispersion
across manufacturing plants that, they argue, supports the skill-biased
technical change hypothesis.




                                       29
                                REFERENCES


Arrow, Kenneth. 1973. "Higher Education as a Filter." Journal of Public
   Economics. 2: 193-216.

Becker, Gary. 1975. Human Capital. Second Edition. Chicago: University of
  Chicago Press.

Behrman, Jere, Robert Pollak and Paul Taubman. 1990. "The Impact of Ability
   and Parental Income on Wages and Schooling." Unpublished paper, University
   of Pennsylvania.

Bishop, John. 1989. "Achievement, Test Scores, and Relative Wages."
   Unpublished paper, Cornell University.

Blackburn, McKinley, David Bloom, and Richard Freeman. l990a. "The Declining
   Economic Position of Less-Skilled American Men." In A Future of Lousy
   Jobs? The Changing Structure of U.S. Wages. Edited by Gary Burtless.
   Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.

________   1990b.   "An Era of Falling Earnings and Rising Inequality?" The
  Brookings   Review. Winter 1990-1991: 38-43.

Blackburn, McKinley and David Neumark. "Unobserved Ability, Efficiency Wages,
   and Interindustry Wage Differentials." Forthcoming in Quarterly Journal of
   Economics.

Davis, Steve J. and John Haltiwanger. 1990. "Wage Dispersion Between and
   Within U.S. Manufacturing Plants, 1963-1986." Unpublished paper,
   University of Chicago.

Farber, Henry, and Robert Gibbons. 1990. "Learning and Wage
   Determination." Unpublished paper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Griliches, Zvi. 1977. "Estimating the Returns of Schooling: Some
   Econometric Problems." Econometrics. 45: 1-22.

_______    1979. "Sibling Models and Data in Economics: Beginnings of a
   Survey." Journal of Political Economy.  87: S37-64.

Griliches, Zvi, and William Mason. 1972. "Education, Income and Ability."
   Journal of Political Economy. 80: S74-l03.

Harris, Milton and Bengt Holmstrom. 1982. "A Theory of Wage Dynamics."
   Review of Economic Studies. 44(3): 315-333.

Hausman, Jerry A.  1978. "Specification Tests in Econometrics."
   Econometrica. 46(6): 1251-1271.

Heckman, James and Bo Honoré. 1990. "The Empirical Content of the Roy
   Model." Econometrica. 58 (5): 1121-1149.

Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin Murphy, and Brooks Pierce. 1990. "Wage Inequality and
   the Rise in Returns to Skill." Unpublished paper. University of Chicago.
Katz, Lawrence, and Ana Revenga. 1989. "Changes in the Structure of Wages:
   The United States vs Japan." Journal of the Japanese and International
   Economies. 3: 522-553.

Kinenta, Jan. 1986. Elements of Econometrics. Second Edition. New York:
   MacMillan.

Mincer, Jacob. 1974. Schooling. Experience, and Earnings. New York:
  Columbia University Press.

_______   1991. "Human Capital, Technology, and the Wage Structure.'
  Unpublished paper, Columbia University.

Spence, Michael. 1973. Market Signalling: Information Transfer in Hiring
   and Related Processes. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Stapleton, David C. and Douglas J. Young. 1988. "Educational Attainment
   and Cohort Size." Journal of Labor Economics. 6(3): 330-361.

Taubman, Paul and Terence Wales. 1972. "Mental Ability and Higher
   Educational Attainment in the 20th Century." National Bureau of Economic
   Research Occasional Paper 118.
                                    Table 1
           Actual and Predicted Changes in Logarithmic Differentials
                    for White Males in 1973, 1979, and 1987



                                Differential                 in Differential
     Comparison          1973        1979      1987   '73 to '79     '79 to '87

                *
A:     Actual

     CC to LTHS          .47         .46       .63      - .01           .17
     US to LTHS          .19         .20       .25        .01           .05
     CC to US            .28         .26       .38      - .02           .12



B:     Standard Normal

     CC to LTHS          .47         .48       .50        .01           .02
     HS to LTHS          .20         .20       .20        0             0
     CC to US            .27         .28       .30        .01           .02



C:     Triangular

     CC to LTHS          .47         .47       .49        0             .02
     US to LTHS          .20         .19       .19      - .01           0
     CC to US            .27         .28       .30        .01           .02



     *These numbers are taken from Table 1 in Blackburn, Bloom, and Freeman
(1990a), and refer to workers aged 25-64. CC refers to college graduates,
US to high school graduates, and LTHS to workers with less than a high
school degree.
                     Table 2
 Summary of Results from the Human-Capital Model



                 MB—exp(kA1)S

                  MC_exp(Ci)Wj

                    °C,A <


                    Sign of partial derivative of
Parameter           bias with respect to parameter

   k                             +

   b                             0

     2
                                 +
    °A
     2
    aC

                                 +
  IUCAI
                                       Table 3
                   Descriptive Statistics for First Post—schooling
                              Labor Market Observation
                                                             Mean
                                                     (Standard deviation)            Trend
                                                            1.616                     .077
    Log wage
                                                            (.451)                   (.003)

    Years of eójcation                                     12.729                     .558
                                                           (2.449)                   (.016)

    High school graduate                                      .423
      (12 years)
    College graduate                                          .156
      (16 years)
    Experience                                              2.180                     .395
                                                           (1.754)                   (.012)
                                                           20.975                     .685
    Age
                                                           (2.740)                   (.017)

    Married, spouse present                                   .166
    Urban                                                     .710
    Union                                                     .176

    Wi,,er    of   observations                               2451
      1979                                                     463
      1980                                                     315
      1981                                                     309
      1982                                                     341
       1983                                                    287
       1984                                                    228
       1985                                                    185
       1986                                                    168
       1987                                                    155

    Test scores (age-neutral):'
    Academic test3                                             .012                    .140
                                                             (.857)                   (.006)
                                                           1- .61. .693
                                                             - .010                    .065
    Technical test
                                                             (.840)                   (.007)
                                                           (-.54, .611


     Conxjtationat        test                                .010                     .119
                                                             (.976)                   (.008)
                                                           (-.65,.77)
     Non-academic test                                         .000                    .184
       (technical     •    cjtetlon.L)                      (1.541)                   (.012)
                                                          (—.91,1.161

1. Coefficient from regression on intercept and time trend. The time trend is defined as zero in 1979.
Standard error, reported in parentheses.
2. Residuals from regressions of normalized test scores on individual year age duiriy variables. Lower and .ç'per
quartiles are reported in square brackets.
3. Average of residuals for tests of arithmetic, mathematics, word knowledge. par.grapfl coeprehension, and
general science.
4. Average of residuals          for   tests   of auto and shop knowledge,   electronics,   arid mechanical knowledge.
                                        Table 4
                            OLS Log Wage Equation Estimates1

                                        (1)               (2)          (3)             (4)            (5)

Years of education                   .032             .029            .054           .028            .030
                                    (.007)          (.008)          (.014)          (.008)         (.008)
Years of education                   .0034           .0030           .0018           .0027           .0023
  x trend                           (.0017)         (.0017)         (.0018)        (.0017)         (.0018)
Years of high school                                                —.013
                                                                    (.006)

Years of college                                      .002           .001
                                                    (.002)          (.002)

High school graduate                                                                               —.011
                                                                                                   (.017)

College graduate                                      •   ..          .. ..          .080            .075
                                                                                    (.024)         (.025)
                                     .393            .393           .394            .396           .396


1. Specifications .(so inc1ie experience. age and LW Ofl status (each interacted with a time trend defined as
zero in 1979), dirrvy variables for urban residence and married, spouse present, and an intercept and iingte year
dumvy vsrlsbles. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.
                                     Table 5
                    OLS and IV Log Wage Equation Estirates,
                Including Test Scores with Constant Coefficients'

                                                            IV for        V for Test Scores     IV for
                                        OLS               Test Scores       and Schooling     Schooling
                                                (2)


Years of education               .013          .012     -.000    -.001         .031             .020
                            (.008)            (.008)    (.013)   (.013)       (.035)           (.016)

Years of education               .0048         .0048     .0062    .0057        .0064            .0095
    trend                   (.0017)           (.0017)   (.0023) (.0018)       (.0034)          (.0031)

Academic test
                             -
                                 .010          ...      -.057
                             (.017)                     (.152)

Technical test                   .044
                             (.013)
CouçutetionaL    test            .041
                             (.010)
Non-academic test                ...           .038      .094     .064          .025            .028
                                              (.006)    (.081)   (.020)        (.043)          (.009)
                                 .404          .409


Measurement errorf
  endogeneity tests:
   p-value2                      ...           ...       .331     .170          .418            .136



1. Specifications also incIe experience, age and .riion    status (each interacted with a time trend detined as
iero in 1979), duitny variables for urban residence and married, spouse present, and an intercept and singLe year
&,miy variables. Standard errors are reported In parentheses. Instrunental variables are listed in Table Al.
2. P-value from Ftest of significance of coefficients of residuals from first-stage instrunentat          variables
regressions, In log wage equation estimated with OLS.
                                     Table 6
                        OLS Log Wage Equation Estimates,
                Alternative Trend and Interactive Specifications'

                                   1fl iL LL LL                                  L LZL L
Years of   educanon               .026     .025      .019      .031     .029      .025      .025      .023
                                 (.009)   (.009)    (.009)    (.009)   (.009)    (.009)    (.009)    (.009)
Years of education                .0015    .0015     .0022     .0001   - .0003   - .0001   - .0003    .0004
 x trend                         (.0018) (.0018) (.0019) (.0019) (.0020) (.0021) (.0021) (.0020)

Non-acaoemic test                 .038      .036     .052      ...      ...       ...       .067      .061
                                 (.006)   (.006)    (.009)                                 (.0)6)    (.012)

Non-academic test                 .009      .006     .002      ...      ...       •..       .005
 x years 0f education            (.002)    (.003)   (.004)                                 (.007)

Non-academic test                 ...       .0008    .0010     ...      ...       ...      - .0005
 K years of education                     (.0008) (.0008)                                  (.0015)
 K trend
Non-academic test                 ...       ...     -.0041     ...      ...       ...       .0057    - .0037
 x trend                                            (.0028)                                (.0050) (.0027)
Non-academic test
 K experience
                                  ..        ...     - .005
                                                    (.004)
                                                               ...      ...       ...      . .002
                                                                                           (.006)
Non-academic test
  x age
                                  ...        ..      .010
                                                    (.003)
                                                               ..       ...       ...       .006
                                                                                           (.005)
                                                                                                      .006
                                                                                                     (.003)

Academic test                     ...       ..       ...       .048
                                                              (.011)
                                                                        .043
                                                                       (.012)
                                                                                  .058
                                                                                 (.020)
                                                                                           -043
                                                                                           (.032)
                                                                                                     -.021
                                                                                                     (.017)
Academic test
  5 years of education
                                  ..        ...      ...       .015
                                                              (.004)
                                                                        .005
                                                                       (.007)
                                                                                 . .003
                                                                                 (.007)
                                                                                           - .004
                                                                                           (.014)
Academic test                       ..      ...      ...       ...      .0029     .0032     .0034     .0029
  x years of education                                                 (.0014) (.0015) (.0028) (.0010)
  x trend
Academic test                      ...      ...      ...       ..       ...      - .0022    .0068
 x trend                                                                         (.0054) (.0094)
Academic test                      ...       ..      ...       ...      ...      -.012     -.007
 K experience                                                                    (.007)    (.011)
Academic test                      ...      ...       ..       ...      ...       .019      .009      .009
 K age                                                                           (.005)    (.009)    (.007)
                                  .409      .409     .411      .402     .403      .405      .413      .414
1. Specifications also inc1ue experience, age and i,iion status (each interacted with a time trend defined as
zero in 1979), ôjmiy variables for urban residence and married, spouse present, and n intercept and single year
ó.rmiy variables. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.
                                                   Table 7
                   Schooling and Schooling x Ability Coefficiente and Trend lnteractione
                                 for Alternative Samplee and SpecificatiOn&

                                         Tears of tducat ion coefficients        Tears of eó..cation     ac.deeic   ion-ac.desslc   test
                                      _____________________________________         test   trend coefficient        score coefticent

                                                             T.ble 6 (8)                   Tab(e 6 (6)                Table 6 (8)
£pec if (cat ion                        Table 4 (1)
                                                 Tr                                           Trend                      LL
lesulti   (toss                       .032       .0034      .023      .0004                   .0029                       061
  earlier tables                     (.007)     (.0017)    (.009)    (.0020)                 (.0010)                    (.012)
                                      .03.4      .0041      .027      .0008                   .0045                      .064
kaoi.a .operi.nce
  of three y..r$ (N1856)              (.008)    (.0020)    (.009)    (.0024)                 (.0012)                    (.012)

1982 aM     1963 socluded             .030       .003.6     .018      .0009                   .0026                      .058
   (N• 1823)                          (.006)    (.0017)    (.009)    (.0021)                 (.0011)                    (.013)

                         &.sss         .028      .0027      .018         .0001                 .0030                     .064
College gr.o.sat Ion
  variable      included              (.008)    (.0017>    (.009)    (.0020)                 (.00)0)                    (.012)

                                       .038      .0033      .028         .0009                 .0023                      052
One-digit industry                                                                           (.0010)                    (.012)
 órrsy variables                      (.007)    (.0016)    (.009)    (.00)9>
   tncli4ed    (N2297)
                                        .029     .00)3      .021     .                         .0017                      .045
One-digit      occsçattOn
                                                                     (.0018)                  (.0010)                   (.0)2)
   &.rvwy variables                   (.006)    (.00)7)    (.009)
   included     (5.2297)
On.edfgit Ins6.etry and                .032       .0016     .022       .0003                    .00)4                     .047
   occs.çatlon siy variabLes          (.007)    (.0016)    (.008)    (.0019)                  (.0010)                    (.011)
   included (5.2297)

 1. See footnotes     in corresponding TabLes 3-6.
                          Appendix Table
Coefficients of Instrumental Variables in First—stage Regressions'

                                       (fl                              (2)                 (3)
                         Non-Academic Test2                   Academic Test2          Schooling

Magazines in                          .231                             .149               .484
  home (age 14)                      (.060)                           (.030)             (.073)

Newspapers in                         .311                             .108               .152
  home (age 14)                      (.077)                           (.038)             (.095)

Library card in                       .067                             .076                .145
  home (age 14)                      (.061)                           (.030)             (.075)

Father's education                    .029                             .015               .080
    (1979)                           (.010)                           (.005)             (.012)

Mother's education                    .072                             .036               .094
    (1979)                           (.013)                           (.006)             (.016)

Number of siblings                   —.047                            —.037              —.151
    (1979)                           (.019)                           (.010)             (.022)

Number of older                        .015                            .015               .086
  siblings (1979)                     (.024)                          (.012)             (.029)

Highest grade of                       .029                            .012                .105
  oldest sibling                      (.014)                          (.007)             (.017)
    (1979)

 Foreign language                      .011                           —.052               .177
   spoken in home                     (.082)                          (.041)             (.100)
    (age 14)
 Father and mother                   -.062                            -.029                .387
   in home (age 14)                   (.082)                          (.040)              (.100)

 No adult male                       —.024                            —.021                .187
   in home (age 14)                   (.106)                          (.052)              (.130)

                                      .368                            .502                .625

 1. Coefficients.rc  reported for first-stage regressions using linear schooLing. Specifications also 1ncLt.e
                                           .11 other variables 4ncltsed In specifications of wage equations In
 intercepts. single year dutrty variables, these
 T.ble 2, aM druv variables for each of          set equal to one when data were missing on the instrr*ntS (In
 which case the variables were set equal to zero). (We distinguish between the highest grade of oldest sibling
 missing in the usual sense, and missing because the respondent is the
                                                                         oldest sibling.) Standard errors are
 reported in parentheses.
 2. SpecifIcation   incli4es schooling and   Its trend Interaction.
