                    NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




     THE EVOLUTION OF BUYOUT PRICING AND FINANCIAL STRUCTURE




                         Steven N. Kaplan

                         Jeremy C. Stein




                     Working Paper No. 3695




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                             May 1991




Cedric Aritosiewicz provided excellent research assistance. Paul
Asquith, Robert Gertner, Merton Miller, Joseph Rizzi, David
Scharfstein, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny have provided
helpful comments. This research is supported by the Center For
Research in Security Prices (Kaplan) and International Financial
Services Research Center (Stein) .   This paper is part of NBER's
research program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics.
Any opinions expressed  are those of  the authors and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper 43695
                                             May 1991


       THE EVOLUTION OF BUYOUT PRICING AND FINANCIAL STRUCTURE


                                 AflSTRACT



       This paper presents evidence on systematic changes in the

pricing and financial structure of 124 large nanagernent buyouts

completed between 1980 and 1989.       We find that over   tine   (1)

prices increased relative to current cash flows with no

accompanying decrease in risk or increase in projected future
cash flows; (2) required bank principal repayments accelerated,

leading to sharply lower ratios of cash flow to total debt

obligations;   (3)   private subordinated debt was replaced by public
debt while the use of strip-financing techniques declined; and

(4)   management teams invested a smaller fraction of their net
worth in post-buyout equity.      These patterns of buyout prices and
structures suggest that based on cx ante data, one could have

expected lower returns and more frequent financial distress in
later buyouts.       Preliminary post-buyout evidence is consistent
with this interpretation.



Address correspondence to:

Steven Kaplan                                Jeremy C. Stein
Graduate School of Business                  Sloan School of
Universiy of Chicago                          Management
1101 East 58th Street                        M.I.T.
Chicago, IL 60637                            Cambridge, NA 02139
1.      Introduction

        The value of leveraged buyouts (LBOs) grew dramatically in the 1980s, from just

under $1 billion in 1980 to over $60 billion in 1988. More recently however, leverage has

fallen out   of favor. The value of going private transactions dropped below $20 billion in

1989 and declined even further in 1990.1 The enormous run-up and subsequent sharp

decline has been interpreted by many observers as a sign that the dealmakingpace of the late

1980s was fundamentally unsustainable,i.e., that the increase in volume came at the expense

of a deterioration in transaction quality. Both academic research and press accounts have

suggested that the LBOs of the early and mid-1980s generated high returns for debt and

equity investors,and rarely failed to make debt payments.2 In contrast, the LBOs of the

later 1980s have drawn widespread criticism as having been unsoundly financed.3 And, as

we show below, a larger fraction of the later transactions have been unable to meet their

debt service requirements.

        In this paper, we examine detailed evidence from a sample        of 124 large buyouts

completed between 1980 and 1989. Our goal is to determinewhether there were important

systematicex-ante differencesbetween the deals done in the latter part of the decade and

those done earlier. Itt other words, were there cx ante reasons to believe that the later deals

were more likely to run into difficulties,   or must   any such difficulties   be attributed to

unforcseeableex-post "bad luck" or poor performance?

        We consider three potential sources of problems for buyout investors. The first is

the overall price paid to take the company private. Regardless of the details of the capital



   1 See WI. Grimms
                       Mergerstat Review. The figures in this paragraph referto buyouts of
public companies only.

     2 See
           Kaplan(1989b),Smith (1990a). Smith (1990b), and the roundtable discussion (1990).

      Sec Smith (1990b); mie takeover game isn't dead, it's just gone private," Forb, October
1, 1990, p.64; "Many firms find debt they piled on in 1980s is a cruel taskmaster,"Wall Street
Journal, October 9, 1990, pal; "Hard lessons from the debt decade," Fortune, June 18, 1990,
p.76; Leveraged huyouts fall to earth," Business Week, February 12, 1990, p.62.
                                                 2

structure, or the extent to which there are costs of financial distress, it is clear that investors

will earn lower returns as the prices paid increase relative to the fundamentalvalue of

company assets.

       A second potential source of problems is a capital structure that is poorly     designed in

terms of containingcosts of financial distress. Even if the price paid to take a company

private is a "reasonable' multiple of cash flow, a high probability of costly distress will

obviously lower the prospective returns to some classes    of investors.   In evaluating this

possibility, it is important to go beyond such aggregate measures of leverage as total debt to

capital and interest coverage. While these measures can provide useful information about

the likelihood that a company will be unable to meet its contractual obligations, they have

much less to say about the attendant costs. in principle, very low coverage need not impose

large costs as long as the debt is structured in a way that makes renegotiation frictionless.

(See Jensen (1989)). Thus it is critical to focus not just on the absolute magnitude of the

debt burden, but also on its contractual features -- seniority, maturity, and the division

between private and public lenders. As emphasized in recent theoretical papers by Gertner

and Scharfstein (1990) and Diamond (1991) the complex interaction between these features

can play a key role in determining costs of financial distress.

       The third and final source of potential problems concerns the incentives of buyout

investors. One of the supposed spurs to improved performance in buyouts is the increased

equity stake of management. Managers who invest a large portion of their wealth in and own

a large percentage of post-buyout equity might be expected to manage better. Conversely,

managers who "cash out" a large fraction of their pre-buyout equity investment at the time of

the buyout may have more of an incentive to take part in overpriced or poorly structured

deals. We examine whether these and other incentives changed over time.

       Our results are consistentwith each of the three "problems" worsening        over time. We

find that in the late 1980s: (1) prices increased relative to current cash flows with no
                                                 3

accompanying decrease in risk or increase in projected future cash flows; (2) required bank

principal repayments accelerated, leading to sharply lower ratios of cash flow to total debt

obligations;   (3) private subordinated debt and bank debt were replaced by   public

subordinated debt while the use of strip-financing techniques declined; and (4) management

teams invested a smaller fraction of their net worth in post-buyoutequity.

       We also present preliminaiy evidence on cx post buyout performance. This evidence

confirms that buyouts have been increasingly unable to meet debt payments over time.        Our
evidence also fails to find strong differencesin ex post operating performance between

earlier and later buyouts suggesting that cx ante pricing and structuring have indeed played

an important role in buyout success.



       One interpretation of our results is that the initial success of early buyouts generated

increased competition for later transactionswith the resulting higher prices and more poorly

structured deals. Our results strongly suggest that, in aggregate, investors should reasonably

have expected lower returns in later deals.4 This raises the question of which classes of

investors bore the brunt    of the changes in expected returns. It appears that banks reacted to

the higher pnces by reducing the fraction of total debt they provided accelerating required

principal repayments,and raising their fees substantially. In light of this behavior by banks,

the increased involvement of public subordinated lenders in these transactions is puzzling,

and would seem to represent either a degree of miscalculation or incentive problems at the

institutions making the loans.



       The paper is organized as follows. Section    2 describes our sample and data.   Section

3 examines     the pricing question by looking at the relationship between buyout valuationsand




       It is harder to gauge whether later deals were "overpriced"       or earlier deals were
"underpriced" in any absolute sense.
                                                  4

such fundamentalsas cash flow, risk, and growth expectations. Section 4 takes a first cut at

the capital structures of our sample companies,presenting aggregate data on debt ratios and

coverages. The next threesections focus more closely on individual components of the

capital structure: Section 5 on senior bank debt; Section 6 on subordinated debt; and

Section   7 on the composition of equity ownership and the associated managementincentives.

Section   8 presents our results on ex post   performance. Finally, Section 9 summarizes and

integrates   the findings.



1      esgtion
       2.1              Buvout Companies

       Our sample of buyouts is taken from companies listed as leveraged buyouts or as

acquisitions by private companies in Securities Data Corporation's merger database, in

Morgan Stanley's merger database, and in W.T. Grimm's Mergerstat Review from 1980 to

1989. We restrict this sample   to management     buyouts (MBOs) in which at least one

member of the incumbentmanagement team obtains an equity interest in the new private

firm. We focus on MBOs because ex ante data for these transactionsare generally more

readily available and more complete. The final sample satisfies the following criteria:

       1. The Wall Street Journal    (WSJ contains     an announcement that   the company

proposes to go private and the transaction is completed by the end of 1989.
       2. The newly private firm is an independententity, not a subsidiaryof another private

company.

       3. The proxy statement, 14D statement or WSJ confirms that       at least one member of

the incumbent managementteam obtains an equity interest in the new private firm.
                                                  5

         4.   The total transactionvalue exceeds $100 million.5

         5. Because loans involving leveraged ESOPs receive an interest rate subsidy, we

 exclude LBOs that receive the majority of their financing through a leveraged ESOP.

         We obtained 124 buyouts completed between 1980 and 1989 that satisfy these

 criteria.6   The total value of these 124 transactions exceeds $132 billion. Over the same

 period, W.T. Grimm's Mergerstat Review identifies $170.0 billion in going private

 transactions. Our sample, therefore, represents over three-quarters of the dollar volume of

going private transactionsduring this period.

         Throughout the paper, we classify MBOs by the year in which the final transaction

terms of tlse buyout are set. Although this date is often the buyout announcement date, it

can be some time after the initial announcement date. We use this classification because the

transaction setting date is the date on which capital investors commit to provide capital to

the buyout at the actual deal price. Column 1 of Table 1 summarizes the distribution of

MBOs by the year in which the final transaction terms are set.



        2.2             Pre-buyout and Post-buyout Data

        For each successful MBO, information describing the transactionsis taken from

proxy, 10-K, 13-E and 14-D statements and from the WSJ.7 Stock prices two months before

the buyout is announced and at delisting are obtained from the Center for Research in




      The intent of this size criterion is to restrict the sample to larger, more fully disclosed
transactions. This criterion also lowers the likelihood that the reduction of regulatoiy costs is
a major source of value. Savings on the Costs of preparing documentsfor
                                                                             public shareholders
and the SEC are likely to be small in relation to value in these transactions.

    6
      The sampleincludesthe buyoutof RJR Nabisco. We considerthis a management buyout
becausethe buyoutsponsor, Kohlberg, Kravis and Roberts, explicitly noted that they would offer
equity to the ultimate managementteam.

     One company did not file any SEC statements. The relevant information is taken from
the WSJ article.
                                                 6

Security Prices (CRSP) database and Standard & Poor's Daily Stock Price Record. Other

financial data are obtained from the COMPUSTATTapes.

                                                                                  the list of
       Post-buyout information is available for 81 of the 124 MBOs in the

SEC filing companies available from Disclosure, and Going Public: The IPO Reporter.



3.     Buyout priciflg_

       3t            Price to cash flow measures

       The first question we ask is how buyout prices have varied over time relative to

fundamentals. We measure the buyout price (which we also refer to as "total capital") as the

sum of (1) the market value paid for the firm's equity; (2) the book value of the firm's

outstanding debt; and (3) the fees paid in the transaction; less (4) any excess cash removed

from the firm to finance the buyout.

       In computing the market value paid for the firm's equity, we value non-cash

distributionspaid to stockholders (usually debt or preferred stock) using the market value of

the securities as recorded in the   Capital Changes Reporter. When we cannot obtain a value

from the Capital Changes Reporter, we use the last traded price of the stock to estimate the

combined market value     of the cash and securities distributed to old shareholders. We also

value shares retained by insiders at the same price as the shares purchased from outside

shareholders.

       We consider two primary measures of cash flow. The first is earnings before interest,

depreciation,amortization, and taxes (EBITDA). EBITDA is a measure of gross cash

generated from operations, and thus represents an upper bound on the cash available to pay

investors.8 The second measure, net cash flow, equals EI3ITDA less capital expenditures.

In a worldwithout taxes, net   cash flow would   be the primary component of the numerator in




       EBITDA is also referred to as operating income before depreciation and amortization.
                                                  7

a discounting   analysis that sought to value a company under its current operating strategy.

        We calculate the two cash flow measures for the most recently completed fiscal year

availablewhen the proxy statement or 14D describing the buyout is released. Because some

of the huyouts are announcedwell into the following fiscal year, we also have recalculated

the cash flow measures for the most recent 12 months using quarterly financial statements.

Unfortunately,these computations are less reliable because some buyout firms do not report

capital expenditures, depreciation, or both in those quarterly reports. Nevertheless, both

sets of measures generally produce qualitatively similar results. In order to conserve space,

we only report the results based on complete fiscal years in what follows.



        3.2           The behavior of cash flow to price ratios over time

        Columns 2 and 3 of table   1   display yearly median ratios of net cash flow and

EBITDA to total capital (or price). The ratios are broadly consistentwith the popular

notion that buyout prices rose relative to fundamentals in the late 1980s. The ratio of net

cash flow to total capital declines sharply from a median value of 8.39% in 1985 to a low of

4.48% in 1987, before recovering somewhat to 7.27% in 1988. The EBITDA-based measure

confirms that 1987was the worst year in our sample in terms of cash flow to price, and that

1988 was also well below par.

        Here and in much of the analysis that follows, we use two methods to quantify the

statistical significance of the temporal patterns in the data. First, we measure the non-

parametric (or rank) correlation between our variables and a simple annual time trend.

Second, we use non-parametric rank tests     to compare the median values of the variables in

three distinct periods: 1980 to 1982 (or the "early 1980s"; 1983 to 1985 (or the "mid-1980s");




    '  When firms do not explicitly report depreciation and amortization in their quarterly
report, we assume that depreciation and amortizationequal their values for the preceding fiscal
year.
                                                       8

and 1986 to 1988 (or the "late 1980s"). We do not include the 1989 deals among the late

1980s buyouts because they appear different from those in 1986 to 1988, and there are too

few such buyouts to warrant consideration as a distinct regime.

         Table 1 shows that over the entire sample period, both cash flow to price ratios

exhibit a statisticallysignificant downward trend. Furthermore, both cash flow ratios are

statistically lower   (at the 5%   level   or better) for late   1980s buyouts than for mid-1980s

buyouts, and are statistically lower (at the 5% level        or better) for mid-1980s buyouts than for

early 1980s buyouts. We repeated all these tests using means and t-tests rather than medians

and rank tests. The results are qualitatively unaffectedand the patterns are somewhat more

pronounced. Net cash flow to price ratios average 5.77%, 4.85%, and 5.81%, respectively, in

1986, 1987, and 1988. All other yearly averagesexceed 8.07% except for 1983 buyouts which

average 6.90%.

         The temporal patterns of the cash flow to price ratios in columns 2 and 3 appear to

reflect two distinct sets of forces. First and most obviously, buyout valuationsmoved with

the general   level   of the stock market. Column 4        of table 1 shows    the earnings to price ratio

of the S&P    500 over the sample period. The fluctuations           of cash   flow to price ratios for the

buyout companies mirror market-widemovements in earnings-priceratios.

         The tendency for buyout      prices to track the level     of the market as a whole can be

seen more explicitly by regressingour cash flow to price measures against market E/? ratios:


         CF/V                   =          -0.93%       + 1.00 E / P.             R2 = .15          N=120
                                           (1.84)           (0.22)

         EBITDA / V             =           6.71%       + 0.82 E / P.             R2 =   .21        N=124
                                           (1.12)           (0.14)


where CF equals net cash flow, V equals total capital, and El? equals the earnings-priceratio

of the   S&P 500 in the month the buyout is priced. (Standard errors are in parentheses.)

These regressions suggest that whatever factors drove the overall stock market boom in 1987
                                                 9
 also played a role in the increased buyoutvaluations.

         But it also appears that there was a separate, buyout-specificset of forces at work in

 the late 1980s. Column 5 of table 1 presents the yearly median premiums
                                                                         paid to
 shareholders. The premiums are measured as the percentage difference between the price

 paid for a firm's equity and the price two months before the first announcement of buyout or

 takeover activity. Buyout premiumsin the 1980s generally trended upward
                                                                         although this
 trend is not significant. However, the overall trend masks     a significant   decline in buyout

 premiums from the early to mid-1980s, and then a significant increase in the late 1980s.

 Median premiumsrose steadily from 25.7% in 1985 to 48.1% in 1988, almost
                                                                          doubling over
 this period. The increased premiumsin the late 1980s are consistent with         a more
 competitive   or overheated buyout market at this time.
        The decline   in premiumsfrom the early to mid-1980s is more difficult to explain,

although several possibilities exist. Pre-buyout stock prices may have reflected an increased

probability of takeover in the mid-1980s. The mid-1980s also saw        the introduction of tender
offers initiated by the buyout investors and managers. Initially, this
                                                                       may have improved the
relative bidding position of buyout investors by giving competingbidders less time to react.

Whatever the reasons, the higher premiums of the early 1980s occurred when market E/F

ratios were high. The late 1980s were unique in terms of the combinationof
                                                                           high premiums
and low market E/F ratios.



       3.3      Changes in buyout company risk over time

       In tables 2 and 3, we make a crude attempt to assess two possible "fundamental"

explanationsfor the trend increase in buyout prices in the 1980s: lower discount rates and

higher growth expectations. All else equal, buyout price to cash flow multiples should

increase if the overall risk of the company'scash flows (and, therefore the relevant discount

rate) decrease, or if expectations of future growth increase.
                                                10

       Table 2 presents four different measures of risk. First, we calculate asset betas for

the sample companies, where the asset beta equals the product of the equity beta and the

ratio of the market value of equity to the value of total capital two months before the first

buyout announcement. We calculate equity betas using the Scholes-Williams estimation

technique, daily returns, and the CRSP value-weighted index over the period 560 to 40 days

before the buyout announcement.10'11

       Column 1 presents the yearly sample median asset betas. The asset betas trend

downward over time, but this trend is small and not significant. Furthermore, the asset betas

in the early, mid-, and late 1980s subsarnples are not significantly different from one

another -- there is no indication that buyout firm risk is significantly low in the late 1980s.

In fact, the median asset beta for 1987 of 0.76 is greater than   the unconditionalsample

median of 0.63.

       The second measure of systematicrisk we use is the industzyearnings beta calculated

by Bernanke et al. (1990). This beta is the coefficient from a regressionof the growth rate

of (two-digit SIC code) industry real earnings on the growth rate of real GNP      from 1970 to

1988. These earnings betas trend upward over time, but this trend is small and not

significant. The earnings betas in the early, mid-, and late 1980s, again, are not significantly

different from one another. The earnings betas, therefore, also fail to provide evidence that

buyout companies in the late 1980s were less risky than those involved in earlier deals.

       Column 3 presents a measure of total risk (both systematicand unsystematic)

calculated using financial data for the buyout companies -- the standard deviation of the

growth rate of operating margins (where operating margin equals the ratio of EBITDA to



        Thirteen sample companies either do not appear in the CRSP database or do not have
a sufficient number of returns available to calculate equity betas.

        Our results are similarwhen we use an equal-weighted index to calculate betas. Our
asset beta calculation assumes that pre-buyoutdebt betas equal 0. The results, however, are not
sensitive to this assumptionbecause pre-buyout debt is only 22.7% of pre-buyout total capital.
                                                  11

sales).    This is calculated using up to ten years, but not fewer than six years of pre-financial

data. This measure trends upward throughout the 1980s, but not significantly. In addition,

the late 1980s buyouts have significantly greater risk (at the 5% level) than those in the mid-

1980s. Again, this is clearly not consistentwith a decrease in the risk of late 1980s buyout

companies.

          Finally, column 4 presents a measure of industiy total risk used by Bernanke et al. --

the standard deviation of the growth rate of industry real earnings. The pattern of this

industry measure is almost identical to that of our firm-specific measure. The trend is

positive (and significant   at the 5% level), and the risk is significantly higher for buyouts of

the late 1980s than for those in the mid-1980s.



          An essentially similar story, therefore, emerges from all four risk measures. None

give any indication that buyout firm risk was lower in the late 1980s than in the earlier

periods. Indeed, the total risk measures suggest that buyout firm risk increased throughout

the 1980s, and particularly in the late 1980s.



          3A     Projected growth over time

          An alternative explanationfor changing buyout prices relative to cash flows is

increased growth expectations, It is possible that over time, as practitioners became more

experienced with buyout structures, they revised their forecasts as to how rapidly buyout cash

flows could be expected to grow. All but 19 of the companies in our sample include some

post-buyout financial projections in the 14D or proxy statement describing the buyout. The

projections include forecasts of future sales in all cases, forecasts of EBITDA (or EBIT) in
                                                   12

 most cases, and, less frequently, forecasts of capital expenditures.12

          In what follows, we divide projected growth into two components:       the total projected

 growth from    the last pre-buyout year to the   first post-buyout   year and the compound annual
 growth   rate from the first post-buyoutyear to the nth post-buyoutyear, where n is the last

 post-buyoutyear with forecast sales. The former measure can be interpreted as expected

immediate operating changes or short-term growth while the latter measure can be

interpreted as expected long-term growth. We exclude projectionsof pre- to post-buyout

growth when the post-buyoutprojections assume that asset sales have taken place and no

comparablepre-buyout measures exist. Similarly, we exclude projectionsof post-buyout

growth when they include asset sales.

          Columns 1 to 4 of table 3 present our two growth measures for both sales and

EBITDA. The patterns are generally inconsistent with the hypothesis that growth

expectationsare systematically more optimistic in the late 1980s. The trend for all four

measures is negative. And, none of these growth measures is higher in the 1986 to 1988

period than in the two earlier periods. Columns 5 presents the expected short-term growth

in operating margins. Unlike the sales and EBITDA measures, this measure includes

transactionswith planned asset sales. Again, there is no significant time trend.

        Columns 6 and 7 present projected short-term growth rates in capital
                                                                             expenditures
and capital expenditures to sales for those companies that reported capital
                                                                            expenditure

projections. We find that the medians for the entire sample are negative -- companies enter
into buyouts planning to cut capital expenditures. Again, however, the 1986 to 1988
                                                                                    buyouts
are not characterizedby significantly greater projected capital expenditure cuts than those in




   12
        The projectionswe present are nominal projections. in most cases, we do not have the
inflation forecasts used by the buyout investors. Except for the early 1980s when expected
inflation is high, the variation in the growth rates of the nominal projections is probably much
larger than that of expected inflation.
                                                 13

the earlier periods13 Although we do not present them separately, the trends of short-term

growth in net cash flow are not significant.



         Taken together, the results in this section suggest that buyout prices rose over the

1980s relative to observablemeasures of fundamentalvalue such as cash flow, risk, and

growth expectations. Part of this increase reflects the same market-wideforces that drive the

S&P 500 to historically high levels in August 1987. But there is also some evidence of a

separate, buyout specific componentto the run up after 1985.



4.       Aggregate debt burdens of buyout companies

         Higher buyout prices may lead to lower returns for buyout investors,but they do not

necessarily lead to a higher likelihood of financial distress. That likelihood also depends on

buyout financial structure, which we examine in this section. As a first cut, we lump all
forms of debt together and examine some simple statistics on the proportion of debt to total

capital and on the coverage of contractual obligations.

         Column 1 of table 4 presents the yearly medians of total post-buyoutdebt     to total

capital where total post-buyoutdebt equals the sum of (the market value of) new debt issued

to finance the buyout and (the book value of) pre-buyout debt retained4 The market

value   of most new debt is equal to its face value.   When it is not, usually in the case of new




    13
       The projections for EBITDA and operating margins are slightly higher than the actual
results reported by Kaplan (1989b). He finds that EBITDA in the first (second) post-buyout
year is 15.6% (30.7%) higher than in the last pre-buyout year. Similarly, operating margins in
the first (second) post-buyout year are 7.1% (119%) higher than in the last pre-buyout year.
The overall sample median projections -- 12.8% and 22.9% cuts in capital expenditures and
capitalexpendituresto sales respectively -- are roughly consistentwith Kaplan (1989b) who finds
actual reductions of 21.1% and 23.3%.

   14 The use of the book value rather than the
                                                marketvalue of pre-buyout debt has a very
minor effect because the median book value of retained pre-buyout debt to total debt is only
6.7%.
                                                 14

debt issued directly to selling shareholders (so-called "cram down" debt), we obtain the

market value from the Capital Changes Reporter.

       The median debt to total capital ratios appear remarkablyconstant between 1980 and

1988, never dropping below 86% (in 1985) and never rising above       907% (in 1986). The
relative uniformity of the debt ratios goes beyond the pattern in the yearly medians. Over

our entire sample, the 25th percentile debt ratio is 83.8% while the 75th percentile ratio is

92.0%. Although the changes in debt to total capital ratios do not appear to be economically

meaningful,the ratios in 1986 to 1988 (90.5%) are statisticallygreater than those in 1980 to

1982 (88.0%) and 1983 to 1985 (86.5%). The time trend is also positive at the 5% level.

       Our measure of total debt may understate the amount of debt in the capital structure

because it excludes preferred stock with fixed commitments. In several cases, such preferred

stock is exchangeable into subordinated debt. Accordingly, column 2 of table 4 presents the

yearly medians of post-buyoutcommon stock to total capital, where post-buyout common

stock includes preferred stock convertible into common stock (but not straight preferred

stock or preferred stock convertible into debt). Thcse medians appear to vary somewhat

more over time than those for debt to total capital. The median percentages of common

stock in buyout company capital structure are lowest from 1986 to 1988, reaching      a low of

only 4.04% for 1987 deals. Again the median ratio of 5.5% from 1986 to 1988 is

significantly lower than the medians   of 9.1%   and 8.8% for early and mid-1980s buyouts.

       The slight increase in the debt ratios is an interestingand somewhat puzzling aspect

of buyout financial structures. For example, in spite of the projectionsdata presented in

section 3.4, the high prices paid relative to cash flows in 1987 will no doubt strike many as

prima fade evidence that 1987 buyouts were associated with more optimistic growth

expectationsthan those in other years. But if the benefits of the 1987 deals were more

"back-loaded" in time, shouldn't firms have taken on less debt relative   to total value, so that

they could afford to meet interest payments with their comparatively lower short-term cash
                                                15

flows?

         To explore this issue further, the remainder of table 4 presents several measures of

the adequacy of current cash flows relative to contractual obligations. These measures use

net cash flow and EBITDA in the last full year before the buyout. We calculate expected

interest payments from the interest rates and debt amounts projected in the proxy or 14D

statements describing the buyouts. Because most of the bank debt in these transactions is

priced at a spread over the London Interbank Offering Rate (LIBOR) or the prime rate, we

calculate expected interest payments on the bank debt using the rates in effect at the date

uncertainty about the bid is resolved. This may underestimate true expected interest

payments in the later deals because many of the later buyouts involved interest rate swaps

that effectively converted some floating rate debt into fixed rate obligations. Because the

yield curve has an upward slope during most of the sample period, the fixed swap rates are

greater than the floating rates.
         Columns   3 and 4 compare net   cash flow and EBITDA to expected total interest

payments in the first post-buyoutyear. Consistentwith the lower cash flow to price ratios

and constant leverage ratios, we find a negative time trend for both interest coverage

measures,with both net cash flow and EBITDA to interest reaching       a minimum in 1987 and
1988. However, because the ratios in 1986 are at least as high as those in previous years,      the
time trend is not significantfor net cash flow, and is significantonly at the 10% level   for
EBITDA.15




        The high 1986 ratios may be due to the fact that long- and, particularly, short-term
interest rates reached a minimum in 1986. The median ratios for 1987 and 1988 buyouts of 0.60
and 1.11 are significantly lower than the ratios of 0.75 and 1.25 for pre-1987 buyouts at the 6%
and 1% levels, respectively. The relative lack of variation in the interest coverage ratios may
surprise some readers. Wigmore (1990) presents similar EBITDA to interest ratios for all junk
bond issues (not just buyout related issues) in the 1980s, and finds a steady decline. His annual
ratios exceed 2.73 before 1983, average 1.74 between 1983 and 1985, and drop to 1.26 between
1986 and 1988. It is likely that the largedecline in his sample is caused by a shift to merger and
buyout related issues over time,
                                                16

         The ratios in columns 3 and 4 use total interest obligations, which include both cash

and non-cash interest. Non-cash interest    is associated with   deferred interest debt which

includes zero-couponand pay-in-kind (P1K) bonds. Including non-cash interest payments

may present a misleading picture because the use of such payments increased significantly in

the second half of the 1980s (as we show below, in section 6). In fact, they may have been

introduced precisely to allow firms with more "back-loaded" cash flows to safely assume high

levels   of debt.

         Columns 5 and 6 of table 4 repeat our coverage calculations using cash interest

payments that exclude interest payments on deferred interest debt. As expected, this

adjustment improves the relative standing of the coverage ratios of the later deals. None of

the time trends or period comparisons presented in the table is significant.16

         Although interest coverage is an often-used measure of financial soundness, it does
not fully capture a firm's abilityto meet all its debt-related obligations. Cash flow must also

be devoted to making principal     repayments. Ninety of the transactions in our sample report

a principal repaymentschedule for the bank debt portion of the capital structure. Column 7

displays the ratio   of required debt repayments to EI3ITDAin the first two post-buyoutyears

for these ninety transactions. Required repayments rise sharply over time, with an especially

pronounced break between 1985 and 1986, when principal repayments rise by a factor of

more than 2.7. The time trend and period comparisons all show increases in this ratio that

are significant at the 1% level.

         Columns 8 and 9 repeat our coverage calculations, but now consider how net cash

flow and El)ITDA compare to total cash obligations, which we define as the sum of cash

interest and one-half of the first two years' required principal repayments. These eoverages

are now substantially(and significantly) lower for buyouts of 1986 to 1988 than for earlier



    16
       However, the EBITDA to cash interest ratio is still significantly   lower   (at the 10% level)
for 1987 and 1988 buyouts than for pre-1987 buyouts.
                                                   17

deals.   For example, the median ratio of EBITDA to cash obligationsis always above one

before 1986, but falls to between .66 and .76 for the 1986-88 period. Similarly, the median

ratio of net cash flow to cash obligations, which was always above 0.56 before 1985, does not

exceed 041 during 1986-88.

         The cash coverage ratios after 1985 imply a sharp deterioration in the ability of

buyout firms to meet their total debt-related obligationsout of operating cash flows. For

example,   a buyout with the 1988 median net cash flow to cash obligation ratio of 0.41 -- the
highest median of the 1986 to 1988 period -- would need to increase net cash flow by 144%

(0.5910.41) to meet cash obligationswith net cash flow. This is a much larger increase than

those found in Kaplan (1989b) for a sample of managementbuyouts announced between

1979 and 1985. He finds net cash flows in the first three post-buyoutyears are 41%, 59%,

and 96% higher, respectively, than net cash flow in the last pre-buyout year.17       1 light of
this historical performance data, it is hard to see how operating cash flows could be expected

to meet required debt service   payments.

         These coverage numbers, however, present only part of the overall picture on financial

soundness. First, as Shleifer and Vishny (1991) emphasize, asset sales represent an

alternative means of generatingthe cash to make debt-related payments. The acceleration in

principal repaymentschedules in the late 1980s almost certainly led to an increased reliance

on (and expectationsof) asset sales Second even if planned asset sales fail to matenahze

and required payments cannot be met, this need not necessarily spell disaster. The costs at

this point will depend critically on the ability   of creditors to restructure their claims in an

efficient manner.



         In sum then, the data in this section suggest that the buyouts of the late 1980s may



   17
      Holding assets constant, Kaplan (1989b) finds increases of 43%, 66%,and 79% over the
same post-buyoutperiods.
                                                18

have had a higher ex-ante probability of winding up in a restructuring situation, particularly if

asset sales plans were subject to some uncertainty. The data have thus far had less to say

about the possible costs involved   in such restructurings.



5.     Senior bank debt and the role of asset sales

       We now focus our attention on specific components of buyout capital structures. The

most senior part of the capital structure for most of our MBOs takes the form of a term

loan (and, often, an accompanying revolving credit loan) arranged by one or more

commercial banks. We referto these loans as bank debt.'8 Table 5 presents the annual

medians   for several bank debt characteristics.

       The first column in the table shows the median value of the ratio of bank debt to

total debt by year. Bank debt represents over 70% of the debt in 1982, 1983, and 1984. In

1985, this pattern breaks distinctly, with bank debt dropping to 42% of all debt.   After 1985,
the ratio stabilizes, ranging between 52% and 57% from 1986 to 1989. Interestingly, the

decline in bank debt ratios coincides with an increased usage of public low-grade debt. We

discuss this issue in more detail in section 6 below.

       In the second and third columns, we report the interest rate terms of the bank loans.

In most of the deals, the interest rate on the bank debt is set as the minimum   of a spread

over the prime rate or a spread over LIBOR. We report both the median spreads over

prime and LIBOR by year. (In the few cases the term loan and revolving credit loan spread

differ, we use the value-weighted average of the spreads.) The spreads are statistically

significantly higher in the late 1980s than in the mid-1980s. However, in economic terms, the

spread differencesappear to be remarkably stable over time. The median value of the

prime-based spread rises gradually from 1.25% in 1982 to 1.50% in 1985, and stays at exactly



   18 We also
               classify similarly structured term loans made by bank-like organizationssuch as
General Electric Credit as bank debt.
                                                 19

150% for the remainder of the      1980s.

       The lack of variation in spreads shows up strongly in the cross section    as well. When

we pool alt deals between 1985 and 1989, both the 25th and 75th percentile prime-based

spreads equal 1.50%. The uniformity in loan pricing in conjunction with the uniformity in

total debt to capital ratios from the previous section is puzzling. If we take a heterogeneous

group of companies, and impose the same aggressive capital structure on all of them, one

might expect a great deal of variation in the riskinessof the debt, and, hence, a good deal of

variation in its pricing.

        There are several possible answers to this puzzle. First, it might be the case that

some banks are simply not doing a very good or sophisticated job of pricing their LBO loans.

The successes enjoyed in some of the deals of the early 1980s may        have led banks to become

more optimistic about the prospects for later deals. Given the inherent incentive problems

associated with deposit insurance, it is possible that an underpricingof risky loans took place.



        A second factor which might help explain      pricing behavior is the developmentof the

inter-bank loan sales market. As documentedby Gorton and Pennachi (1991), the volume of

loan sales grew enormously in the 1980s, from $27 billion in the second quarter of 1983 to

$291 billion in the third quarter of 1989. By facilitating the diversification of LBO loans,

loan sales may have made it rational for banks to accept lower expected returns.

Alternatively,to the extent that moral hazard problems exist for risk-taking in banks, the loan

sales market may have allowed larger banks that originated LBO loans to sell them to

smaller banks more eager to accept high risks     for lower returns.19

        A final,   and related factor, is the level of fee income earned by banks in buyout

transactions. Columns 4 of table 5 shows a dramatic rise in the level of fees over time, going



    19
       Another important aspect of the loan sales market concerns its implications for the
renegotiation of distressed loans. We touch on this issue below.
                                                 20

from .40% of the bank loan in 1983 to 2.49% in 1988. The increased fee income may be

economicallyequivalent to higher interest rates. Accordingly, we calculate a fee-adjusted

interest rate and a correspondingfee-adjustedspread to the reference rate. For example, if a

bank loan requires a 2.49% up front fee, the "fee adjusted spread" on a 7 year loan with level

principal repayments is 2.37% over prime (when prime is 10%), not the unadjusted spread of

1.50%.

         Column 5 of table 5 reports the annual median fee-adjustedspreads over the prime

rate. The fee adjusted spread over prime jumps noticeably from 1.59% in 1984 to 2.13% in

1985 and remains between 2.12% and 2.24% from 1985 to 1988 -- there           is both   a statistically

and economicallysignificant increase in this spread over time.

         There are, however, two reasons why treating fees and interest income as

economicallyequivalent can be misleading. The first relates to the loan sales market.

Although hard data are not available, conversations with bankers indicate that when a loan is

sold, some of the fee income is retained by the originating bank. This appears to have been

the case even when the originating bank sold off most of the loan.      If so, the fee-adjusted

spreads reported in table 5 overstate the returns to banks that actually fund the loan and

bear the risk. In the extreme case, the unadlusted spread    is   the correct measure of the

funding bank's return.

         Second, banks might plausibly prefer fee income because of capital regulations --

banks care about the book value     of their net worth. Since fee   income shows up in earnings

(and hence flows to net worth) in the first year of the buyout, it can have a higher shadow

value to banks than an economically equivalent interest rate. The greater fee income we find

in late 1980s buyouts may have tempted banks into making buyout loans that offered a less

favorable risk-return tradeoff.2°



    20
       Although we are unaware of them, we acknowledge that tax or other considerationsmay
also have come into play.
                                                   21

         Thus far, our narrow focus on interest spreads has led us to ignore a
                                                                               potentially
 important set of "non-price terms of credit." Bankers have a number of tools other than

 interest rates at their disposal that can be used to improve their risk-return tradeoff. For

 example,   as deal   pricing became more aggressive relative to cash flow, banks may have

 required more collateral or tighter covenants. We have already seen that banks reduced the

 amount they loaned in later deals. Non-price credit terms are particularly relevant
                                                                                     given that
 banks are the senior lenders in the buyout transactions. Because bank debt is typically
                                                                                         only
 50% of the value of the company, it     is possible   that the banks could structure their loans to

virtually eliminate default losses. If so, it would make sense to lend at the same relatively

low interest rate in all deals. Interestingly, this logic   is   consistent with Diamond (1991). He

presents a model in which the senior lenders, i.e. banks, react to changes in credit quality by

adjusting the sue of the loan rather than the interest rate.

        We do not have comprehensivedata on non-price credit terms for the bank loans in

our sample. I lowever, the     principal repayment schedules       for the bank debt examined in the
previous section do provide some evidence that banks were, over time, increasingly taking

some steps to protect themselves.      As noted earlier, the acceleration of repayment schedules

appears to reflect an increased reliance on asset sales. Indeed, the more rapid repayment

schedules (and the correspondinglytighter coverages)seen in manydeals in the late 1980s

would seem to be a mechanismfor forcing buyout companies              to sell assets in order to raise
cash.

        We have some data that allows us to examine the role of asset sales more
                                                                                 explicitly.

Many of the proxy and 14D statements describing the buyouts note post-buyout asset sales

intentions,although these intentions are not necessarily obligations. Columns 7 and 8

present annual medians for both (i) the fraction of deals where there are explicit plans to sell

assets; and (ii) the amount of anticipated asset sales as a percentageof total capital for those

deals whcre asset sales are planned. The numbers indicate a moderate increase in
                                                  22

importance for expected asset sales over time. Asset sales are expected in 214% of the pre-

1983 MBOs, 27.0%     of the   1983 to 1985 MBOs, and 40.9% of the 1986 to 1988 MBOs.

These differencesare not, however, statistically significant. The asset sales are a roughly

constant fraction of total capital, at a median 15.5%, 19.8%, and 18.5%, respectively, for the

three periods.

       The time series trend towards deterioratingcoverage of debt-related obligations is

thus matched to some extent by a trend towards increased reliance on asset sales. This

correlation appears more strongly in the cross-section. In columns 1 and 2 of table 6, we

regress the ratios of net cash flow and EBITDAto expected cash debt obligationsagainst         a

dummyvariable that equals 1 for buyouts with expected asset sales, Both regressions also

include dummy variables that control for the year of the buyout. RegressionI shows that

buyouts with expected asset sales are associatedwith coverage ratios 0.26 lower (significant

at the 1% level) than buyouts without expected asset sales. For example. a 1987 buyout
without expected asset sales is associatedwith a net cash flow to cash debt obligation ratio of

0.39 (0.90- 0.51) while one with expected asset sales is associatedwith a ratio of only 0.13

(0.39-0.26). Regression2 indicates that expected asset sales are associatedwith a 0.27

decrease (significant at the 1% level) in the ratio of EBITDA to cash debt obligations.

       A correlation between tight coveragesand the use of asset sales is not, in itself,

terribly surprising -- the two featuresseem clearly complementary. More striking is the fact

that asset sales are also associatedwith more aggressive pricing of buyout transactions.

Table 6 also presents regressions in which our pricing measures are regressed against the

expected asset sale and yearly dummyvariables. The table documents that expected asset

sales are associatedwith   a statistically significant   decline in net cash flow and EBITDA to

total capital ratios. Regression3 associatesasset sales with a decrease in net cash flow to

capital of 2.4% (significantat the 5% level). For example, a 1987 huyout without expected

asset sales is associatedwith a net cash flow to total capital ratio of 5.9% (11.6 - 5.7) while
                                                   23

one with expected asset sales is associatedwith a ratio of only 3.5% (5.9-2.4).

         Regressions 3 and 4 in table 6 are interesting because it is not obvious on theoretical

grounds why plans to sell assets should make a firm more valuable in the aggregate. The

first order effect of asset sales would seem to be to transfer value from junior to senior

creditors, not to create new value.21 It   is   understandablewhy senior bank lenders would be

willing to lend to more aggressively priced deals if they could force asset sales.   It is less

clear why junior lenders would be willing to participate in such deals.



         To summarize the results of this section: senior bank lenders appear to have placed a

small emphasis on interest rate spreads in their structuringof buyout loans. Rather, it seems

that they attempted to protect themselves by reducing the fraction of the total debt they

provided and by imposing more rapid repayment schedules (which could only be met by

firms selling assets and giving the proceeds to the banks) on the more aggressively priced

deals. While these adjustments may have made sense from the banks' senior perspective,

they raise two sorts of questions: (1) who and why were the junior lenders agreeing to this

type of structure; and (2) what are the implications of such a structure for the likelihood       of
financial distress?




6. Subordinated debt

         We now turn to an examination of the subordinated debt in our sample transactions.

In what follows, we focus on non-price attributes of this debt -- private placementversus

public issuance, the use of deferred interest securities, and the use of "strip" financing



    21 This is easily seen by considering the polar case where the asset sale generates enough
cash   to completely repay the senior debt.  In this case, the use of asset sales makes the senior
debt riskless, thereby increasing its value while shifting more risk Onto the junior debt.

       See, however Shleifer and Vishny (1991) who offer a theory that a liquid asset-sale
market can lead to higher asset values for companies that can readily sell off assets.
                                                24

techniques. In contrast to our analysis of the senior bank debt, we pay very little attention to

promised coupon yields. Given the extremelyjunior nature of some of this debt, variations

in promised yields are likely to be relatively uninformative about variations in expected

returns. In other words, promised yields probably do not give an accurate picture of "true

subordinated debt pricing.

       Table 7 presents yearly averages of several characteristicsof the subordinated debt

used to finance the sample buyouts. Column 2 shows the fraction of buyouts financed using

publicly issued low-grade,   or junk bonds -- bonds rated less than BBB   by Standard and

Poor's or Baa by Moody's. Only one pre-1985 buyout used public junk bonds. In contrast,

over 54% of the subsequent buyouts used them. To the extent that free-rider and

information problems make it more difficult to renegotiatewidely-held public debt than

closely-held private debt, the increased reliance on junk bonds may be expected to increase

the costs of financial distress. Gilson, John, and Lang (1990) find evidence consistent with

this -- financially distressed firms are more likely to restructure debt outside of bankruptcy

the higher the proportion of private bank debt to total liabilities and the fewer the classes of

debt outstanding.

       Many buyouts also issued a second type of widely-held debt as part of the buyout

financing -- commonly called "cram down" debt. Cram down is debt issued by the new




       An example helps make this clear. Suppose we have two LBOs. In the first, the senior
debt has a slow repayment schedule, and the subordinated debt receives cash interest starting
right away. in the second, the senior debt has a vcry fast repayment schedule and the
subordinated debt receives no cash interest for several years. Suppose further that the coupon
on the second LBO's subordinated debt is 200 basis points higher. This does not say much
about the relative expected returns on the two junk bonds. The subordinated debt in the second
deal is effectively more junior and will expect to suffer greater losses in adverse states. For
evidenceon the returns and risk of low grade debt, see Asquith, Mullins, and Wolff (1989) and
Kaplan and Stein (1990).
       Interest rate spreadswill also be unreliablewhen subordinateddebtholders invest in post-
buyout equity. Such debtholders may be willing to take accept lower interest rates in exchange
for the equity "kicker." As we document below, the use of such arrangements changed over
time.
                                                 25

buyout firm as part of the payment to the pre-buyout shareholders to take the company

private. Because the pre-buyout shares are widely-held, so is the cram down debt. Column 3

also shows an increased reliance on the use of "cram down" debt, particularly after 1984.

         Column 4 of table 7 presents the ratio of new public buyout debt -- combined junk

and cram down debt -- to total capital over time. Consistentwith the previous two columns,

the ratio rises sharply in 1985. Before 1985, new public debt is a small fraction of total

capital; from 1985 and beyond, it always exceeds 17.5% of total capital. The increase over

time is significant at the 1% level. Note that these are unconditionalaverages,including

buyouts both with and without widely-held debt. These averages,therefore, understate the

importance of new public debt in those transactions which utilize such debt.

         As we noted earlier, the increased use of public subordinated debt, particularlyjunk

bonds, coincides with the adjustment by banks to reduce the size of their loans. The time-

series relation is very strong. Without controlling for the year of the transaction, the ratio        of
bank debt to total debt is 11.8% lower (significant at 1%) in buyouts that rely on junk bonds

than in buyouts that do not. Column 1 of table 8 presents a cross-sectional regression that

uses year-dummiesto control for the time series variation. In this regression, the ratio of

bank debt to total debt is still 6.2% lower in buyouts using junk bonds. This is significantat

the 7%   level using a one-tailed test (but only at the 13% level using a two-tailed test).

       Table 7 points out two additional trends in subordinated debt financing, both

significant at the 5% level   or better. First, columns 5   and 6 show that   the use   of deferred

interest debt increases after 1984. Such debt is used in only 12% of pre-1985 buyouts, but in

more than 50% of the buyouts after 1984. Similarly, deferred interest debt as a percentage

of total capital increases as well, exceeding 8.5% in all years after 1986.

       The increase in deferred interest on the subordinated debt has, all else equal, a

similar effect to the faster senior debt repayment -- it further ')uniorizes"the subordinated

debt, potentially transferring value to the senior bank lenders. In buyouts that use deferred
                                                  26

interest debt, most of the bank debt is scheduledto be paid off before the buyout firm

begins cash payments on the deferred interest debt.

         Interestingly, this juniorization appears to have occurred disproportionatelywith

public subordinated debt. The majority of deferred interest debt is public debt -- either junk

or cram down. Of the 59 buyouts that do not use junk or cram down debt, only 3 issue

deferred interest debt. In contrast, deferred interest debt is issued by 44 of 65 buyouts that

issue public debt.

         The juniorizationof public subordinated debt also appears to have had consequences

for the overall   pricing   of transactions. There is a strong time series relation between our

pricing measures and the use of junk debt. This relation also appears, albeit moderately, in

the crosssection. Columns 2 and 3 of table 8 regress our pricing measures against the junk

debt and yearly dummyvariables. The regressions indicate the use of junk debt is associated

with a decline in both net cash flow and EBITDA to total capital ratios of 1.6%. The

coefficient in the EBITDA to capital regression is significant at the 5% level.24

         Finally, at the same time public subordinated debt became more juniorized, the use of

strip financing declined. The last two columns of table 7 present the percentage of

transactions using some form of strip financing and strip debt as a fraction of total capital.

Strip financing   is   present when lenders invest in post-buyoutequity. In most cases of strip

financing,   it is the subordinated debtholders who hold the equity.    However,   we also include

several cases in which the senior lender or lenders purchase equity. Over 70% of the

buyouts before 1984 utilized some form of strip-financing. The debt owned by strip holders

equalled at least 24.5% of the total capital of these buyouts. In contrast, fewer than 25% of

the post-1985buyouts used strip financing, with strip debt worth at most 12% of total

capital.



    24Our results are economically similarwhen we dislinguish between buyouts financedwith
junk or cram down from those financed with no public debt.
                                                   27

           As in the case of deferred interest debt, the use of strip financing is related to the use

 of widely-held debt, although in this case the relation goes the opposite way. Over 59%

 (35/59)   of the buyouts that did not use   public debt used strip financing, compared to fewer

 than 22% (14/65) of the buyouts that did use public debt.



       Overall, the patterns in table 7 indicate that over the later part of the 1980s,

managementbuyouts dramatically increased their use of public subordinated debt. At the

same time, the public subordinated debt appears to have been juniorized through an increase

in the use of deferred interest payments and an acceleration in the principal repayments on

senior debt. This juniorization is associatedwith both a time-series and cross-sectional

decline in the ratio of operating cash flows to price.

       Our analysis also raises questions about possible value destruction associatedwith

costly financial distress. The fact that buyouts using public subordinated debt were less likely

to use strip financing than those using only private subordinated debt would seem to further

increase the potential for problems in a renegotiation situation. We return to these issues in

section 9.




7.     Equity, management and buvout investor incentives.

       The third and final source of potential problems concerns the incentives of buyout

investors. One of the supposed spurs to improved performance in buyouts is the increased

equity stake    of management. Managers who invest a large portion of their wealth in and own

a large percentage of post-buyout equity might be expected to manage better. As we noted

in table 4, the percentage of common stock to total capital declined after 1985, just as

pricing and coveragesbecame more aggressive. Table 9 considers the change in equity

ownership in more detail.

       Columns 1 and 2 present the median percentage of pre-buyout and post-buyout equity
                                                 28

(fully diluted to account for stock options) owned by the post-buyout managementteam.

Before the buyout, the new managementteam owns a median of 5.0% of equity. This

percentagetrends upward, peaking at more than 8% in both 1987 and 1988. The median

management equity ownership     of the    post-buyout company is 22.3%. This percentagealso

trends upward. Column 3 combines the information in columns I and 2 by calculating the

ratio of the percentage of post- to pre-buyout equity owned by the management team. This

ratio provides a measure of the change in the intensity of the relationship between

managerial effort and compensation. The median ratio for the 102 buyouts with pre- and

post-buyout information is 4.14. The ratio trends downward, but not significantly so.

      Although buyouts are almost always associated with increases in management's

percentagestock ownership, it   is also   important to recognize that managers typically "cash

out" in dollar terms at the time of the transaction. This cashing out could have important

adverse incentive effects. In particular, managers may be more tempted to go along with (or

encourage)an overpriced or poorly structured deal the larger the capital gain they are able
to realize on the shares they sell at the time of the buyout.

       Column 4 of table 9 presents the ratio of the dollar value of post- to pre-huyout

equity owned by the managementteam. The median ratio is 0.460, indicating that the

management team typically invests less than half as much in post-buyoutequity as it invested

in pre-buyout equity. This ratio drops sharply after 1984. Before 1984, the median ratio is

0.57. From 1985 to 1988,   the ratio is 0.35.   This difference is significantat the 5% level.

The time trend of this variable over the 1980s is also significantly negative at the 10% level.

These results, therefore, provide evidence that management "cashed-out"more and risked

less in managementbuyouts in the late 1980s.

       It has also been suggested that managers       increasingly used buyouts as a mechanismto

escape from hostile takeovers. According to this view, as hostile takeover pressure increases,

managerswill want to maintain control at any cost. Column 5 of table 9 presents the annual
                                                   29

 fraction of transactionssubject to overt hostile pressure. We define hostile pressure as
                                                                                          (1)
 the presence of a competing takeover bid; or (2) the presence of a stockholderwho owns at

 least 5% of the company's stock and is opposed in some way by managementin the six

 months before the buyout. Surprisingly, we do not find a significant time trend in hostile

 pressure for these firms -- such pressure has always been present in larger buyouts.

        Management investors are not the only parties driven by incentives. So are buyout

 promoters, investment banks, and lenders. Most buyout participants are compensated both

 with long-term security interests and with up front fees. As up front fees increase, the

 incentive to produce long-term payoffs decreases, other things equal. As we showed in

 section 5, banks required higher up front fees in the later 1980s than before. Column 6 of

table 9 indicates that the same is true for total buyout related fees. The largest
                                                                                   portion
of these fees are paid to buyout promoters, investment banks, and commercial banks. The

upward trend in fees is significant   at the 1%   level, The column indicates that total fees to

total capital make their largest jump in the late 1980s. They range from 2.05% to 2.66%

before 1985, rise to 3,69% in 1985, and peak at 5.97% in 1988.



       The results in this section suggest that the more aggressive pricing and financial

structure in later buyouts were accompaniedby weaker incentives to insure that the deals

would succeed. Buyout managers apparently cashed out a larger fraction of their net worth

while other buyout participants extracted larger up front fees in the late 1980s.



8.     Ex post results

       Until now, we have restricted our analysis to information available at the time of the




         Total buyout related fees are almost always listed in the proxy or 14D statement
describing the buyout. We do not present separate fees for different parties because these fees
are not always disaggregated.
                                                 30

buyout.    Our results suggest that the ex ante likelihood of financial distress increased over

time. The cx post incidence of financial distresswill    be determined by both the cx ante

likelihood   of distress and unexpected (poor) post-buyoutperformance.      In this section, we

present preliminaryevidence on (1) the extent to which managementbuyouts have been

unable to meet debt payments and (2) cx post performance over time. We stress the

preliminarynature of these results, particularly for buyouts undertaken in the last several

years of our sample period. The ultimate success or failure of many of these later deals is

still unresolved.

          Column    I of table 10 presents the percentage of each year's buyouts that have
subsequentlybeen unable to meet their post-buyoutdebt payments as of February, 1991.

We determine whether a buyout has missed a debt payment by consulting 10-K filings, the

WSJ index, and the Nexis database. Consistentwith our cx ante analysis, defaults

increase significantly (at the 10% level) over time. None of the pre-1983 deals, four of 39

buyouts in 1983 to 1985, and 14 of 66 buyouts in 1986 to 1988 have defaulted. Buyouts

completed in 1986 appear to have been unusually unsuccessful, with 6 of 15 defaulting on

post-buyout debt payments. These measures clearly understate the number of post-1985

deals in distress.27

          Column 2 of table 10 presents the percentageof buyouts that have filed for Chapter

11 bankruptcy. One-half of the companies that have defaulted on debt payments also have

filed for Chapter 11. Because defaults usually precede a Chapter 11 filing, this number may

increase over time, particularly for later transactions.



    26
       Buyout companies that default after a post-buyout releveraging are not considered to
have defaulted because the original buyout did not default.

    27 Two additional post-1985 buyouts appear on the verge of &stress: one is negotiatingwith
creditors after a failed exchange offer,whileone is attemptinga distressed exchange offer. Four
additional buyoutshave all their public debt currently rated at CCC or below. When we exclude
1988 buyoutswhose distress is less likely to have been fully resolved, the time trends toward
more defaults in later deals become more strongly significant.
                                                31

         The increase in defaults may be caused by a combinationof cx ante changes in pricing

 and ex post surprises in performance. Columns 3-5 present the annual medians      of changes
 in EBITDA, net cash flow, and capital expendituresto sales in the first
                                                                         post-buyoutyear.
 For the entire sample, these ratios change by 9.1%, 36.5%, and -37.6%,
                                                                        respectively. There
 are no significant differences in these operating changes over time. The default and

 performance patterns are, therefore, consistentwith the cx ante changes in buyout pricing

 and financial structure playing an important role in the increased number of defaults over

 time.

         We do not intend to suggest that cx post surprises have not contributed at all to the

increases in defaults. The 1986 buyouts exhibit particularly poor performance cx post that

undoubtedlycontributes to their high default percentage. Furthermore, short-term interest

rates reached a minimum in 1986 and rose steadily thereafter, Because most
                                                                           buyouts have
some unhedged floating rate debt, cx post rate increases may have increased the incidence of

default.

         Again, we emphasizethe preliminarynature of these ex-post results. At this time, we

do not have post-buyout EBITDA results for approximately one-third of the sample

companies. We recognize that this leaves open the possibility of a selection bias. We have

post-buyout financial data on eight of the sixteen late-1980s buyouts that have defaulted. In

contrast, we have such data on 34 of 50 the late-1980s buyouts that have not defaulted. This

may ultimately affect our conclusions on the trend   of cx post performance for this

sample.




       See, also, Long and Ravenscratt (1991) for more recent evidence on es-post buyout
performance.
                                                     32

   Summary and discussion

       9.1       Costs of financial distress

       Although we have discussed the evolution of buyout financing techniques in some

detail, we have not yet fully addressed a central question: to what extent did changes in

buyout capital structure affect expected costs associated with financial distress? The increase

in price to cash flow ratios over time,      the deterioration of coveragesand the correlation of

those ratios with ex post distress suggest that the likelihood of financial distress increased

over time. Our results, thus far, have less to say about the costs conditional on such distress.

       It is   difficult   to quantify the costs of financial distress since that would require

disentangling exogenous shocks         to operating performancefrom those caused by financial
structure.     1-lowever, even without attempting to      measure financial distress Costs directly, we

can draw some tentative and qualitativeconclusions. There is a well-developed body of

theoretical work that suggests a number of factors that might be expected to increase costs of

financial distress, and we can examine        our data in light of these theories.   In other words, we

can try to gauge the extent to which the theoretical'pre-conditions" for costly financial

distress change over time.

       We already have noted two of the more obvious pre-conditions. First, the dramatic

shift from privately-placed to widely-held subordinated debt that occurred in 1985 points

towards higher expected costs of financial distress. With widely dispersed creditors, free-

rider problems are more likely to impede efficiency-enhancing actions. For example, it can

be in the    collective interest of subordinated debtholders to contribute new funds for

investment, but any single holder may find it individually rational not to do         so.   In this

regard, it is also worth noting the rapid emergence of the secondary market for senior bank

buyout loans. Althoughwe do not have accurate data for buyouts, conversationswith



      See Bulow and Shaven (1978) and White (1980 and 1983) for early models that show
how the inability to renegotiatewith public debtholders leads to inefficiencies.
                                                 33
 commercial bankers suggest that, over time, the ownership       of senior bank loans has become
 more fragmented. Gorton and Pennachi (1991) present evidence that this is true for bank

 loans in general.

        A second change in the pre-conditionsfor costly       financial distress is the decline of the

 strip financing technique common in earlier buyouts. When a firm is in distress, conflicts       of
 interest between lenders and equityholderscan lead to the types of distortions discussed by

 Jensen and Meckling (1976) and Myers (1977). By partially
                                                           resolving conflicts of interest,

 strip financing arguably reduces these distortions. Some observers have singled out strips as

 an important innovation that made highly leveraged capital structures more
                                                                            prudent than
 they otherwise appeared. Jensen (1988) writes "because every securityholderin the highly

leveraged firm has the same claim on the firm, there are no conflicts between senior and

junior claimants over reorganization of the claims in default. Thus the firm will not go into

bankruptcy; a reorganization can be accomplished voluntarily, quickly, and at a lower cost

than in bankruptcy proceedings" If this logic is correct, the decline of strip financing in the

late 1980s   is surprising.

        In addition to the movement towards public debt and away from strip financing, other

changes in buyout debt structure may also have important implications for expected costs of

financial distress. One such change is the acceleration of principal repayments on senior

bank debt. This acceleration may have especially significant effects in those transactions

where the junior tier of debt is widely-held.

        Gertner and Scharfstcin (1990) point out that the combination of senior bank debt

and junior public debt can have an adverse impact on the ability of distressed firms to invest.

The logic is as follows. Suppose a firm   is in tinancial difficulty   and needs an infusion of new

money   to make a positive net present value investment. On the one hand, hank lenders

would seem to be the best hope for putting up the new money, since they do not face as

severe a free-rider problem as the widely-dispersed junior lenders. On the other hand, the
                                                34

banks' senior status probably reduces their incentive to invest -- the banks may already be
                                                          further investment.
well-protected, and may not have much upside to gain from

       Now consider what happens if the bank's principal repayments are moved forward in

time. This has two negative effects. First, the higher debt service burden raises the

                                                   --
probability that there will be a distress situation it is more likely that
                                                                           the firm will be

unable to meet its contractual obligations. Second, the fact that the banks extract value

more rapidly effectively enhances their senior status relative to the subordinated dcbt.'0

This further protects the banks, and may correspondingly further reduce their incentives         to

contribute new money. It seems possible, at least in theory, that the faster repayment

schedules might increase expected costs of financial distress.

       in summary, although our    cx   ante data do not allow us to draw any definitive

conclusions about expected costs of financial distress, they are, nonetheless,suggestivein this

regard. The buyouts of the late 1980s seem to be characterizedby more of the theoretical
                                                                              the decreased
pre-conditions for costly distress. The increased use of widely-held debt and

use of strip-financing are relatively unambiguous examples of this trend. The acceleration of

principal repayments   on the senior bank debt could also have adverse consequencesalthough

this effect is more subtle and, perhaps, less robust.



        2      Summary

        We now come back to our original question: are there       ex   ante differencesin the
                                                                          that might have led
 pricing and financial structure of management buyouts in the later 1980s

 to disappointinginvestor returns relative to those in the earlier deals? In brief, our analysis

 of 124 larger managementbuyouts completed between 1980 and 1989 supports the              following




         This is true so long as the firm does not immediately file for bankruptcy protection. In
 this case, she repayment schedules would no longerbe relevant, since all debt would effectively
 come due immediately.
                                                35

 conclusions:

        (1)     Prices rose relative to current cash flows, with no evidence of an accompanying

 decrease in risk or increase in projected future growth. In part, this movementreflected

 trends in the stock market as a whole, but there also appears to have been a buyout-specific

 component to the increased price levels.

        (2)     The more aggressive pricing was coupled with more precarious financial

structures. Debt to total capital ratios rose, leading to somewhat lower cash flow to interest

ratios. More strikingly, bank principal repayments accelerated dramatically, leading to

sharply lower ratios of cash flow to total cash debt obligations.   In later buyouts, the low

coveragesnecessitated an increased reliance on asset sales.

       (3)      Private subordinated debt was in large part replaced by widely-held public

subordinated debt. The public subordinated debt, in particular, may have been reduced in

value by the combinationof increased deferred interest payments and faster senior debt

principal repayments. Correspondingly, the use of public debt was also associated with

somewhat higher ratios of buyout prices to cash flows.

       (4)      The public subordinated debt also made significantly less use of strip financing,

financing that can facilitate debt renegotiationsin financial distress.

       (5)      Finally, other interested parties such as managementand deal promoters took

more money out of the transactionsup front. Arguably, this increased the incentives to

simply get a deal done and decreased the incentives to ensure that a buyout was correctly

priced and structured.

       Many of these trends can be interpreted in different ways. In one view, the pricing

and (some of the) structuring adjustmentsmay have been a natural competitive response to

abnormal positive returns earned in earlier buyouts. In this view, investors in later

transactions may have received cx ante competitive returns. Alternatively, our results are

consistent with some investors in later LBOs systematically overpaying. Given the defensive
                                             36

reaction by senior lenders over time, it would appear that public subordinated debt holders

may have borne the brunt of any such overpayment. Well-known agency problems at

institutionsmaking such investments-- including insurance companies and savings and loans

-- could help explain this phenomenon.
                                              37

                                         Refcrcnces


Asquith, Paul, David Mullins and Eric Wolff. 1989, Original issue high yield bonds: Aging
       analyses of defaults, exchanges and calls, Journal of Finance 44, 923-952.

Bernanke, Ben, John Campbell, and Toni Whited, 1990, U.S. corporate leverage:
      Developmentsin 1987 and 1988, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 255-286.

Bulow, J. and J. Shoven, 1978, The bankruptcy decision, Bell Journal of Economics,Spring,
      437-456.

Diamond,D., 1991, Seniority and maturity structure of bank loans and publicly traded debt,
     Working paper (University of Chicago, Chicago, IL).

Gertner, R. and D. Scharfstein, 1990, A theory of workouts and the effects of reorganization
      law, Working paper (Universityof Chicago, Chicago, IL).

Gilson, S., K. John, and L, Lang, 1990, Troubled debt restructurings,Journal of Financial
      Economics27, 315-354.

Gorton, G. and G. Pennachi, 1991, Banks and Loan Sales: Marketing Nonmarketable
      Assets, National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 3551.

Harris, Mitt and Artur Raviv, 1990, Capital structure and the informational role of debt,
       Journal of Finance 45, 321-349.

Jensen, Michael, 1989, The eclipse of the public corporation, Harvard Business Review No
       5, 61-74.

Jensen, Michael and William Meckling. 1976, Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior,
      agency costs, and ownership structure, Journal of Financial Economics3, 305-360.

Kaplan, Steven, 1989a, Managementbuyouts: evidence on taxes as a source of value, Journal
      of Finance 44, 611-632.

Kaplan, Steven, 1989b, The effects of managementbuyouts on operations and value, Journal
       of Financial Economics24, 217-254.

Kaplan, Steven, 1989c, Campeau's acquisition of Federated: Value destroyed    or value
      added? Journal of Financial Economic.s 25, 191-212.

Kaplan, Steven and Jeremy Stein, 1990, How risky is the debt in highly leveraged
      transactions?, Journal of Financial Economics27. 215-246.

Long, William and David Ravenscraft,1991, The financial performance of whole-company
      LBOs, Working paper (University of North Carolina).

Myers, Stewart, 1977, The determinants of corporate borrowing, Journal of Financial
      Economics5, 147-175.
                                             38

Roe, Mark. 1987, The voting prohibition in bond workouts, The Yale Law Journal 97,
      232279.

Roundtable discussion, 1990, The economic consequencesof high leverage and stock market
     pressures on corporate management,Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 3, No. 2,
      6-37.

Scholes, Myron and Joseph Williams, 1977, Estimating betas from nonsynchronousdata,
       Journal of Financial Economics5, 309-328.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny, 199], Asset Sales and Debt Capacity, Working paper
        (University of Chicago, Chicago, IL).

Smith, Abbie, 1990a, Corporate ownership structure and performance: The ease of
       management buyouts, Journal of Financial Economics 27, 143-164.

Smith, Roy, 1990b, The money wars: the rise and fall of the great buyout boom of the 1980s
       (Treman Talley Books, New York, New York).

White, Michelle, 1980, Public policy towards bankruptcy: Me-first and other priority rules,
      Bell Journal of Economics11, 550-564.

White, Michelle, 1983, Bankruptcycosts and the new bankruptcy code, Journal of Finance
       38, 477-487.

Wigmore, Ban-ic, 1990, The decline in credit quality of new-issue junk bonds, Financial
     Analysts Journal, September-October,53-62.
                                                           Table it PRICING

Medianbuyont pnren relative to lundamentats. market earningspore mItes, and bnyont premiumsfor 124 managementbuyouts completed
in the petiod1980-1989. tanyontalisted b year is which littat transaction terms set,


                      Year         (1)             (2)                (3)               (4)             (5)
                                   Number          Net Cash Flow      EBITDAto          Market          Premium
                                   of MOOs         to Capital         Capital           El? Ratto       (as 18)
                                                   (as%)              (as%)             (an%5

                      1988 +                   6             8.85              16.30          11.25            51.1
                      1981

                      1982                     8            1327               17.18          13.24            64.6


                      1983                    tO             7.10              13.54             8.07          34.4


                      1984                    17             7.85              14.34             9.86          40.8


                      1985                    12             039               12.98             8.53          23.7

                      1986                    15             774               13.40             toOt          38.7


                      1987                    28             4.48              10.81             5.03          41.2


                      1988                    31             7.27              11.40             6.93           48.1


                      1989                     5             9.16               1332             7.66          56.7


                      Total                124               7.56               12.75            7.vS           430

                                                           120                 124            1Z4              122




                      Time Trend                   (--)"               (-)              (--)"            (±)

                      1980-82vs. 1983-85           (                   (. )'            (   -"          (
                      1983-85 vs. 19546-fIg        5                   (                (               (+)'

Net rash flow equals EBITDA tesscapital apenditurcoto the lust full year before the management buvout announcement, EBII'DA equals
opeeuttngIncome before inteeest, tours, depeectattonand ttttoeeizutton. EBIT equals EBITDA tens depreciation and amofllz.atton. Capital
equals the sum of (1) the market value patd for the fires's costly, (2) the book value of the hem's oututandiog debt; and (3) 160 fees potd
in the teonnaction; lena (4) any acesu cash removed 1mm the ftrsn to finance the buyeut. Peemtum equals the percentage dtffcrcncc
between the pncepaid torn firm'sequity and the pricetwo months hrlore the first unnouncement of ho out or takeover activity. Market
fl/P ratio is the ratio of earntugs to pricefor the Sd/P 500 in the month uncertainty about the bayout pnce is resolved,           vtgniticu
medians are stgoificantly dtfferent over time or in comparison pertods at the 1% tevel;      nt the 5% level; and • at the 10% tend.
                                                              Table2: RISK

Mediansol curopuny risk for 124 management brtvouts completed in thenerical 194(14909 (Dotiarn in millions). tiuyoutslisted         S   your
in whtch lOcal transaction terms set. The two tows In each cell are the median and number of observations, respectively.


                                   I                                       Measures of Risk

            Your                       (1)            (2)                       (3)                    (4)
                                       Ausel          Bernsnke.Csmpbett         Std. Dev. fractional   tlernaske-Campbeli
                                       Beta           Eatimated Iudaatey        change its             tOatimatedStd. Dec.
                                                      Earnings Beta             operating margin       Industry Earnings

            1980   +                          040                    2.60                      018                     0213
            1985                                                     6                         6                       6

            1902                              4.02                   2.22                      0.19                    0.249
                                                                     7                         8                       7
            1983                               0,31                  1.09                      0.17                    0.074
                                                                     9                        19                       9
                                       .——-—
            1904                               0.75                  1.35                      0.13                        0,249
                                              16                    16                        16                       16


            1980                               0.72                  107                        0.13                       0.249
                                              12                    12                         11                      12


            1986                               0.66                  3.55                       0.t9                       0.348
                                              13                    13                         12                      13


            1707                               0.76                  1.07                       0.20                       0.249
                                              10                    18                         17                      10


            1980                               0.60                  3.26                       0.18                       0249
                                                                    210                        24                      29


            1989                               0.45                  7.17                       0.16                       0.7412
                                                                     5                          3                          3

            Total                              0.63                  2.16                       0.57                    0.249
                                             105                   114                        108                     114




            moe Trend                          by                   (+)                       (+)                     (+)"
             1980-82vs. 1983-85              (+)                     (-)                        (-)                        (.)
             0903-85vs. 1986-80                (-)                  0+)                       (+)ra                   (+)

(1) Asset beta equals the prodact of the equity beta and the ratio of the market vatan of equityto the vnlae of total capitaltwo orrroths
before the lest buyoat announcement. Equity betas are estimated by the Scholes-Wiltiamn estimation technique, daily returns, cod rho
CROP valae.worghted odes over the period 560 to 40 days before the bayous announcement. (2) and (4) Bernr.aoke-Campbnllindustry
oarnisaes betas and standard deviations are taken fromBeroanke et at. (t990). (3) Standard deviation of fractional change In operating
morgto is calculated from at toast stxyears and up to ten yearsof pre-bayoutfinancial data.   signifies medians are nigniScaotly dillrrorrt
over time or to comparison periods at the 1% level: at the 5% level; and • at the 10% level.
                                                  Table 2. PROJECTED GROWTH

 Summary   staoaltcs oh projected growth for 124 management bayoatscompletedin the peeled 1980-1989(Dedlatsin
  totedby year in which Onat transactionterms set. The two rcms in each cell are the median                        millions1. Buvouts
                                                                                            and number of observations. respectively.


                                                                Measares of ExpectedGrowth
   Year                  (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)        (5)                     (6)        (7)
                         Proj.           Proj. Growth    Proj.              Growth Proj. Growth
                                                                        Prci.                              Proj.         Growth
                                                                                                                      Proj.
                         Growtn          Sued            Growth         EBITDA     EBITDAI                 Growth     CAPX/
                         Sales           T+i loT+n       EBITDA        T+1 loT+o       bairn               CAPX       bairn
                         T-1 to T±1                      T-j toT+t                     T-t to   T+1        Ti to T+l 5 Ito T+1
   1980 +                26.3            11.2            28.6           14.6            3.2                 24.4      -37.4
   1981
                         6               5               5             4                5                  1          1
   1982                  22.4            12.4           47.2           14.2            15.2                -33.3      -30.2
                         6               6              6              5                5                  1          1

   1983                  20.4            7.7            3t.5           10.3             8.3            - 6.7          -17.9

                         7               7              6              7                5                  3          3
   1984                  26.3            9.0            29.6           11.7             6.3            -17.0          -33.4

                         14              14             17             13              13                  6          6
   1985                  11.0            9.3            44.5           ILS             20.3                30.3       17.3
                         9              10               0             9               9                   3          3
   1986                  14.7            5.5            25.0            73             16.5            -51.1          -60.5

                         11             15               9             13              12                  4          4
   1987                  14.7            8.1            27.6           10.1            11.0                 2.3       .149
                         18             19              19             19              19                  r,

   1986                  23.7            74             39.3           103             0.0             -
                                                                                                            5.9       -20.9

                         26             .5              23             21             24                   12         12
  1989                   12.9            99             34.1           12.9           22.2            -12.9           211
                         4              4                4             4              4                    2          2
  Total                  20.4            0.3            33.2           108            12.2            -12.7           -22.0

                         101            103             93            95              96              38              37



  Time Trend             (-)             (-)             (-)           (-)             (+)             (+)            (-4-)

  1980-82 vs. 1983-85    (-)             (-)"           (-)            (-)"            (-4-)           (+)
  1903-85 cv. 1986-88    (-)             (-)             -)            1)              ()              (-)
All projections are obtained trout proxy of 1401 slalemeots
                                                               dutotibing buyout traosaoltons. E13ITDA equals operotingtvcotuc heroic
interent. laueu, depreciation nod aruortrz.0000, CAPX
                                                     equalscapital apetiditurm on property,pant. aod equipment. Year T-1 is thelast
lull year before the bovout aonouocemeot. Year F+i is the oh full year alter the buyaul a0000ecement.
                                                                                                                 sigoiflea mcdiansare
significantlydifferent over rote or to ooaspavsoopot-toils at the 1% level;                      •
                                                                               at the 5% lend; acd at the 10% level.
                                      Table 4 AGGREGATE DEBT AND COVERAGE RATIOS

Sumnsarv etatistica of capitalstructure for 124 management beyotfla cempleted in the tseeiod 1980-1989 (Dollars in tailbone), luvouta
listed 66 year in which final transactionterms set. The two rot., in each cell are the median and number of observations,ronpcctivoly.


  Yvar             (1)       (2)      (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)           (8)            (9)
                   Pont-     Common Net             EBITDA       Net         EBrIDA Resfd Debt          Net Cash       EBPIDA
                   Btayout   Stock to Cash          to           Cash        to       Repay in 2        Flow to        to Cash
                   Debt to   Capital  Plots to      Interest     Flow        Cash     yes to            Cash            interest -1-
                              (on %)  loterest                   to Cash     Interest EBtTDA            interest       (Rcpov iv
                   Capital
                   (as %)                                        Interest             (as %)            (Repay in 2    2 yr.) (2
                                                                                                        yrs) (2

  1980    +          88.3       10.53        0.63        1.15     0.63         1.15              0           0.56          1.15
  1901
                      6           6          5           6        5            6                 6           5             6

  1992               87.3         6.67       0.79        t.28     0.90         1.28              0           0.70           1.16

                      8           8          7           0        7            8                 6           5             6

  1003               87.2        11.04       0.67        1.26     0.67         1.26              22.3         0.69          1.18


                     10          tO         10          tO       10           10                 7            7             7

  1984               88.7         7,91       0.74        1.29     0.74         1.29              32.3         0.66          112

                     17          17         17          17       17           17                 11          11            11

  1985               86.0         7,03       0.75        1.22      0.82        1.30              59.2         0.59          1 09

                     12          12         12          12       12           12                 11          11            Ii
   1986              90.7         5.60       0.73        1.50      0.73        1.75             160.0         0.36          11.77


                     15          15         13          15       13           10                 tO           0            111



   t987              80.9         4.04       0.43         1.12     0.52        1.27             103.5         0.21          1)76

                     20          20         19          20        19          20                 14          14            1.1


   1980              90.5         6.13       0.61         1.11     0.70        1.16             103.5         8.41           11.0,


                      31         31         29          31        29          31                 21          20            21


   1989               83.2       13.26       0.83         1.27     0.83        1.27              43.3         51.112         55.89


                       5           5         5            5        S           9                  4           4              4

   Total              89,1         6.52      0.68         1.20     0.74            1.27          60.0         8.46           1589


                     124        124        117          124      117         124                 90          85            915




   'Fime

   80-2 vs. 83-5
                     (4).a
                      (-)
                                 .
                                 (+)
                                             (.)

                                             (-)
                                                        (.)•
                                                         (-)
                                                                       ()
                                                                       (+)
                                                                                    (.)

                                                                                   (+)
                                                                                                (i-)"
                                                                                                (+)"
                                                                                                             (-)"
                                                                                                              (-)
                                                                                                                           (-)"
                                                                                                                                L)

   83-Svs.86-8      (+)"       (-)"          (-)         (-)           (-)          (-)         (+)"        (-)"           ("
Table4 (continual)

Capitat eqaals the Sam of (1) the nraeket vatae paid foe the hrm'a equity; (2) the hookvatae at the Bratsoutatanding debt; and (3) the
teen paid in the transaction; boa (4) anymoancaah removed fromthe Item Ia finance the buyout. Pont-baynut debt tnctadeanew bnyout
debt and pre-bayout debt that a not rehoanced. Net cash flow equals EBITDA Ian capitat mpenditarm in the ant tall year before the
management boyout 000ooncement. EBITDA equats operattng tncome before mterent, taxes, depreetation and amortization. Expected
interest payments are calculated uning theintermtcalmand debtamounts pymected in the proxy oe t4D ntatementadmcnbing thebavoota,
 Becausemeat of the bank debt in thesetransactions in priced at a npread over the Loodon InterbankOfferingRate (LIBOR)or the prime
 rate, we culcolate mpected iotermt payments on the bank debt uutng the eaten in effect at the date uncertainty aboutthe bid is emotred,
 Canhintecmt eqoala ioteeent mu non-ashinterest payments. Requteed debt repay in two years equals the principal amount at bankdebt
 requtred in the first two pcnt-bayour years.   sigoifim medians netnignil'tcantty differentaver time ot io compansen petioda ot the t%
 levet;   at thr 5% lecet; and • of the tO% leert.
                                                                    Table 5
                                                                  BANKDEBT

Annual medtansof bank debt variables for 124 managementbuyoatacompletedin the period 1980-1989
                                                                                                     (Dollars in millions). l5uyoutn
tEed byyear in which final tranaacuon terms set. The two rows in each cell are the median and number of olmervations, rrspvctivelv.


  Year               (1)          (2)            (3)               (4)         (5)              (6)          (7)         (8)
                     Bank         Baek           Bank              Bank Fees   Fee Ad1usted     flank        Asnet       Asset Sale
                     Debt         Interest       Interest          to Bank     Bank interest    Luau         Sales       Amount an
                     to Total    Rateversus      Rate versus       Debt        Rate versus      Maturity     (% of       of Capital (if
                     Debt        Prime           LIBOR                         Prime                                     Aouct Sale
                                                                                                (years)      dealv)
  19813   +           39.0                0.75             1.25       0.21               N.A         0.0     50.0                    15.5
  1981
                       6                  5              2            1                  0                    6                       3

  1902                72.9                1.25           2.50         1.28               1.31        8.5      0.0                    NA.
                       8                  7              2            5                  5                   0                       0
  1983                75.7                1.38           2.25         0.48               1.44        8.5     33.3                    21.1

                      10                  0              6            8                  8                   9                       3
  5904                73.1                1.44           2.25         0.79               1.59        7.75    18.8                    13.2

                      16                 16             13           14               13                     16                      3
  1985                44,7                1.50           2.25         1.94               2.13        7.25    33.3                    14.2

                      11                 11              7            7                  7                   12                      .1

   966                52.8                1.50           2.75         2.06               2.21        6.0     60.0                    19.3

                      15                 13            12            13               12                     tO                      0
  1987                54.7                1.50           2.50         2,86               2.13        7.0     48.0                21.4
                      18                 17            14            15               15                    28                       0
  1988                56.1                1.50           2.50         2.49               2.24        7.0    32.3                     1.50

                      28                 27            25            22               22                    31                   10
  1909                57,1                1,50           230          2.38               1,98        8.0    28.0                     11.4

                       5                  5              4            4                  3                   5                       1

  Total               57,1                1.50           230          1.93               2,12        7.5    33,6                     18 1

                     117                109            85            89               05          112       122                  40



  lime Trend           (-)"         (+)"           (+)"             (+)"         (+)"             (-)"           (+)           (-)
  88-82ov83-85         (+)              (+)          (+)              (-)          (+)             (-)           (+)           1.)
  83-85us. 86-88       (-)"         (+)"           (+)"             (+)"         (+)"             (-)'           (+)           (-)
Bank debt a debt provided to finance Lhe baynat in the turn of asenior tern lean or revolving credit loan. Bank iotrrcot rare is the
tttterest rote chargedfur the bankdebt an a
                                            spread over the primerateor user LIBOR -- the London lnterbaek Offer Rate. Sank fees
are spfrnnt fees paid to the lenders of bank debt. Fee-adjusted bank interest role calculates the effective interest rote on the hank debt
after reductng the bunk debt by the apfroer bank fees and amortizingthe bank debt. Annetsales are present if
                                                                                                                    they are mentioned as
espeered ti the penny nr 14D statement dmaribing the buyoat Iransacliun.        signifies medium are significantlydilfervol over timo or
in comparisonperiodsat the 1% level: at the 5% level; and • at the 10% levet.
                                                      Table 6
                                 ASSOCIAI1ONOF ASSETSALESTO COVERAGE AND PRICING

Regressionsofcash flow to debt obhgstionsand cash flow to total capitalas a function of expectedasset salesfor124 managementboyouls
completedin the perIod 1980-1989.



                 (1)                          (2)                        (3)                   (4)
                 Net CashHow to Cash          ESITDA to Cash             Net CashHowin         EBITDA to
                 Debt Obligations              Debt Obltgattons           Total Capttat(%)     Total Capital (%)

                    Caeff.             SE.     Cool!.             SE.    elf.          S.E.   .oeff.             SE.

  onsiant                0.90'"        0.16        1.26"          0.13   11.6"         2.3      17   4'"         04
  1982 MBOx             -0.46"         0.23       -0.12           0.t8    -0.5         3.0       0.0             1.4

  1983 MBOs             -0.17          0.21       -0.09           0.17    -3.7         2.8       37"             1.4

  1984MBOs              .0.11          0.19       -0.06           0.16    -2.5         2.6       -2.6            1.2

  1985 MBOo             -0.20          0.19       -0.19           0.16    -2.7         2.7       -4.2'           1   4

  1986 MBOs             -0 34'         021        -0.20           0.t6    -4.3         2.7        2.8'           1.3
  1987MBOs              -0.51"         8.19       -0.42"          0.15    .57"         26         5 7"           1.2

  1988MBO5              .038"          0.18        041"           014     -49"         2.0       .5 6"           1.1

  1089MBOs              -827           024        .030            0.20    -2.7         00        .4.0"           1.8



  Expected              -0.26"         0.09       -0.27"          807      24"         1.1       -1.2'           0.7
  AuselSales



  N Ohis.                         95                        '10                  120                       124

  N-squared                        8.28                      0.45                  1.15                      0.28

Net cash 11amequals EBITDAless capitalapenditures in the last lullyear before the nacagementbuvout aonouocement. EBITDA equals
operatingincome before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization.Cash debtohttgaiioasequal the sum of espectedpcat-buyoutcash
inlerect payments and bank debt principal repaymentto the first pcoi-buyoutyear. Capital equals the sum of (1) the market value paul
forthe hrtns equity; (2) the book valueof the firm's outstandingdebt; and (3) the lees paid in the transaction;less (4) any recess cash
removed Icons the hem to finance the buyout. EupecledAuuet Sales variable equals 11proxyor 141) Statementackoowledges plans to
sell assets after the baynsl; il equals 0 otheensiue.
    Significant at 1% level.
                             "                          '
                                 Sigtaficant at 5% level. Signthcani at 10% cart.
                                                            Table 7
                                                       SUBORDINATEDDEBT

Soromury   ntatiutiraott nohordiooteddebt for 124 management bnyouao completedin the period 1900-1909 (Dotturn iv rvilliono(.


  Year            (1)        (2)             (3)            (4)                  (5)            (6)         (7)         (8)
                  Number     % of Deala      % of Deala     AverageJunk          86 of Drain    AverageP1K Stripe       Aog
                  of         with Pubtio     with Cram      and Cram             with PIE or    or Dma.     (% of         Dvbt
                                                                                                                        Strip
                  MBOo       Jook Debt       Dome Debt      Down to              Ditto. Debt    Dohtto      draIn)      to Capital
                                                            Capital (%)                         Capital (%)             (%)
  1980+               6                0.0          0.0               0.0                0.0          0.8      83.3 j           36.6
  1981


  1992                8                0.0          12.5               t.2               23.0         3.0      73.0             24.5




  1983               10                0.8          10.0               1.1               18.0          1.1     70.0             27.5




  5984               17                5.9          23.5               5.7               11.8         2.1      47.1             17.3



  1900               52             58.3            58.3              25.9               50.0          7.6     50.0             597


  1986               15             40.0            26.7              17.5               25.7          5.6     33.3              74


  1987               20             50.0            40.0              24.9               00.0          9.7     10.0              4.4



  1900               31             61.3            38.7              22.5               61.3          0.0     29.0              2.0



  1989                5             60.0            40.0              21.5               60.0         10.6     20.0              9.4



  Total             124             37.1            32.3              16.1               37.9          6.1     39.5             14.8

                                   124             124             124                  124          124       124             124
                                                                             -


  Time trend                    (+)"'           (+)             (+)"                   (+)"       (+)"        ()              a...
  1980-62 no, 1983-85            (+)             (+)            (+)"                   (+)          (+)        (.)             (.)
  1983-85 no. 1906-80           (+)"             (+)            (±)                    (+)"       (+)"        ••              1.)
Junk debl in publicly-innued debt toted below BBB-by Standard& Poort or below BaaS by Moodv'n. Cram dt,wo dok in dohr isuvd to
pro-bavoutrhaeehaldernan part of the going prrvare payment. P1K (pay-ire-kind) and discount debt are dobt obligariooo which do tot
require conh inlerentpayrnentu. Strip Snancing refers to transactionsitt whiohrome dehtholderohold at trout 151 of poothayout rquoy.
    signiBeremediansare significantly differentover time or in compatironperiodnat the 1% tract;   at ho 5% knot; and at the 10%
level.
                                                Table 8
                   ASSOCIATIONOF JUNK DEBT TO BANKPARTICIPATIONAND BUYOUTPRICING

Regreaaions of back debt to total debt and cash flow to total capitalasa Sanction of use of jack debt for 124 management buyoutn
completedin the period 1980-1989,


                  (1)                     (2)                     (3)
                  Bank Debt to            Net Cash Flies to       EISITDA10
                  Total Debt (%)          Total Capital (%)       Total Capttal (%)

                    ConK          S.D       Coteff.         SE.     CoeD.        SE.

  Constant         40.6"         7.0      tO.4"             2.1   16.8"          1.3

  1982MBOs         21.9"         9.3        0.7             27     1.3           1.7

  1983   MBOs      25.3"         8.8       -3.4             2.6    -3.6"         1.7

  1984   MOOs      19.3"         0.2       -1.8             2.4    -12           1.5
  1985   MOOs       -1.9          9.0      -1.4             2.6    -3.0          1.7

  1986MBOs          7.4          0.4       -2.4             2.5    -1.6          1.6

  1987MBOs          6.3           8.4      -4.7             2.4    .4.8"         1.6

  1988MOOs         11.4           8.1      -3.6             2.4    -4.4"         1.5

  1989MOOs          7.5          10.6       15.9            3.1     30           2.8

  Use Jock          -6.2          4.0      -1.6             1.1    -1.6"         0.7
  Debt


  N Ole.                   117                        120                  124

  R-sqaored                  0.25                      0.86                  0.26

Bookdebt to total debt in the ratio of the senior debt (termloan and revolving credit loan) providedbythe senior lender to the total debt
of the boyout company. Regression 1 escludes transactionsnot oning bank debt. Net cash loss equals f0rfDA lena capitalcspcndttarre
in Ike last full year before ihe managementbovoat announcement. EBI'IDA equals operoiiogincome belore interest.Loom, depreciation
and amortization. Capitalequals the sum of (1) the market noIse paid br the firm's equity: (2) Ike bookvalue 01 the firm's outstanding
debt; and (3) the fees paid in the transaction;lens (4) any memo cash removed from the hem to Itnunvethe kovout. Use Junk Debt
variableequals one if the boyout to financed usingpubltclyheldjunk debt; it equals 0 otherwtue.Jade debt is publiclyioaueddebt rated
below BBB-by Standard & Poet's or below Oao3by Moody's.
    Significant at 1% level.     Significant at 3% level, Significant 0118% lend
                                                          Table 9
                                              INCENTIVESAND EQUITY OWNERSHIP

Attttualmeajiana ofpee-and peat.buvoutpercentageaatd dollarmanagementequityownerehip, and total free to eapitlofor 124 toanugeatrot
buyontscompleted in thu pet-sod 1900-1989. Number of obveraationa a below median.


  Year                       (1)                 (2)                (3)                       (4)               (5)             (6)
                          Old Mgmt.        New Mgmt.                  /
                                                               New % Old 90             New I Old $           Hawtile        Total Fern
                          Equity (%)       Equity(%)           Mgmt.Equity              Mgmt.Equity           Presnure       to Capital
  1990+                         1.5                     10.1                 7.50                     0.707       50.0                   2.05
  1981
                                6                        6                   6                        6               6                  6
  1982                          2.0                     23.1                 6.79                     0.958       50.0                   2.66

                                8                        8                   8                        8               8                  8
  1983                          5.2                     05.5                 3.42                     0.524       30.0                   2.58
                                10                       9                   9                        9           10                     9
                                                                                                                              '
  1984                          4.4                     27,5                 3.01                     0.670       23.5                   2.21

                                17                      17                  17                       17           17                 l7
                                                                                    ,

  1905                          3.5                     22.5                 4.51                     0.334       41.7                   3,69

                                12                      11                  11                      11            12                     2
  1986                          5.1                     20.0                 6,20                     0.314       46.7                   .5.19,


                                12                      13                  11                       11           15                 15

  1987                          8.1                     19.0                 3.54                     0.410       50.0                   4,32
                                17                      14                  14                      14            20                 211

  1988                          8.4                     28.5                 2.06                     0.349       38.0                   5.97
                               25                      24                  22                       22            30                 31
  1989                          6.2                     153                  2.93                     0.542       25.0                   5,73
                                4                        4                   4                        4               4                  5
  Total                         5.0                    22.3                  4.14                     0.460       37.7                   3.91

                              111                      186                 182                      102         122                 123



  iSme trend                ('I-)"             (+)                   (-)                      (-)               (-1               (±)"'
  1990-82 vs. 1983-85       (+)               (+)"                   (-)                      (-1               (-)                (+)
  1983-85 vs. 1986-88        (+)               (+)                   (.)                   (-)"                (+)                (+)"
 Old managementequitypercentageta the
                                             percentageof pre-buyout equityheld by the prct-bnyoat managementteam. Newmanagement
equity percentageis she percentageuf post-bayouteqalty held by the pont-buyoutmanagementteam. New % / Old % Mgmt.Eqoity in
the rattu of new managemeatequitypercentageto old managementequitypercentage. New S Old S Mgmt.           /              to the ratio of the
dollarvatun of pont- to pre-buvoutequityheld bythe post-buyoutmanagementteam. Oldequity in valuedat the Equity    haul buyaut equityvalue.
Total fern include all fees repeat-leo in the prosy or 14D stalemeet deacribing Ihe buyoat transactian. Capitalequals the sum 06(1) the
market eatac paid fur the ftrm'n eqnity (2) the bookvatueof the hirm'n outntaediagdebt; and (3) the fees paid in the tranvaction;
                                                                                                                                          (4)
any recess caah removedteam the Oem to tinancethe buvout.           signifies mediansare significantlydifferent over time or in comyanvon
periads at the 1% level; at the 5% level; and at the 10% level,
                                                Tabte lOt POST-OUYOUT          PERFORMANCE

                                                                                                       for pnnt.bayoat performance
Percetstage of t muactionudefaulting on debt pymenta and tiling for Chapter 11 bankruptcy, and medians
mrauares for 124 management bayoutn completed m the period 1980-1989. Number of ofeeevationu on second hue.


  Year           (1)         (2)             (3)          I   (4)           (5)
                 Default     Chapter         Aotuat           Actuot        Actual
                 on debt     11              Growth           Growth        Growth
                 payment                     Opernung         Cash blow     CAPX
                                             Margina          Margins       Margins
                                             T-t to T+1       T-t to T+1    T-1 toTi-i
  1980   ÷        0.0            0.0              2,5               22.7       -26.0
  1981            6              6                3                  2           2

  1982            0.0            0.0              1.6               29.4       -37.3
                  8              0                5                  4            4


  1983            0.0             0.0             9.2               55.7       -41.9
                 10              10               8                  7           7

  1984            5.9             5.9            -1.3               20.4        -41.1
                 17              17              12                 12           12

  1985           25.0            16.7            14.3               30.2        -19.3
                 12              12              11                 11           11


  1986           40.0            26.7            -16.7              -7.6        -63.9
                 15              15                8                 7            0

  1987           25.0            15,5            17.1               53.2        .306
                 20              20              16                 14           15


  1988            16.1            0.0            13.9               373         -433
                  31             31              15                 16           17


  Total           16.8            0.4             9.1               36.5         37.6
                             T
                 119                             01                 73           76
                             L119



  Time Trend                          (--)       (+)                 (——)       (—-)


   1980-82 vs.         (+)            (+)        (+)                 (+)        (-F)
   1983-85

   1983-85 vs.      (+)               (+)        (+)                 ()
   1986-88




   Time Trend      (+)"           (+)"           (+)                 (--)       (+)
   (No 1988)
   1983-85 vs.     (+)"               (+)        (.-)                (--)        f--)
   1986-07

 Firms that default on debt payments have been unable to meet debt service requirements incurred under the terms of the going private
 transaction. Net cash flow equals EBITDA Iran capital rapeoditures (CAPX) a the last foil year before the muoagemeot buyout
 announcement. EBITDA equals operutiog ocome beiore interest. taxes, depreciation and amortization. Year Ti-i is the iih lull fiscal
                                                                               is the percentagechange us the rulio of EBtTDA to Sues from
 year of peet-buyout operations. Growth in operating margins T-t to T+1
 the last fult fincul year of pre-buyout operations to the first full Uncutyear of pont-bavout operations. Growth in cash flow uod CAPX
 margins are the percentage changes    for the rHine of net  cash flow  to sales
                                                                                                                     •
                                                                                                                         itt.
                                                                                 and capital to cairo 1mm year 3-1 10 year         vigoilTues
 mealianaare significantly differentveer time or in comparison periods at the t% met: at the 5% level;nod at tOo 10% level.
