NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES

GROWTH, MACROECONOMICS AND DEVELOPMENT

Stanley Fischer

Working Paper No. 3702

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1991

This paper is part of NBER's research programs in Economic
Fluctuations, Growth, and International
Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3102
May 1991.

GROWTH • MACROECONOMICS • AND DEVELOPMENT
ABSTRACT

The 1980s were both

the

lost decade of growth for much of

Latin America and Africa, and the period in which --

through

the

growth theory -- macroeconomists returned to the study of
growth and development. The new growth theory is production
function driven and concerned primarily with steady states, and
new

has

paid little attention to the role of macroeconomic policy --

as reflected for instance in the rate of inflation and the
budget
deficit --

in

determining growth. This paper presents a variety

evidence that macroeconomic policies matter for long-run
growth. First, macroeconomic variables enter the typical new
of

growth

theory cross-country regressions with statistical

significance and the expected signs. Second, evidence from large
multi—country case studies, and from case-studies of Chile and
Cote d'Ivoire presented in the paper, shows that macroeconomic
policy choices have

had

a significant impact on growth over

periods of more than a decade. The conclusion is that
macroeconomic policy choices, including the budget deficit, the
exchange rate system, and those choices that determine the
inflation rate, matter for long-term economic growth.

Stanley
E52—2 BOA

Fischer

M.I.T.

Cambridge, MA 02139
and
NBER

nbmf in. 91

April 22 1991
GROWTH, MACROECONOMICS, AND DEVELOPMENT

Stanley

Fischer'

"When Keynes solved 'the great puzzle of Effective
he
made it possible for economists once more to study Demand',
the
progress of society in long-run classical terms--with a clear
conscience..." (Swan, 1956, p334)

For most developing countries, in Africa and Latin America, the

eighties

are known as the lost decade; for many it was a decade of negative growth.
Developing

country economic

policy in the eighties focussed on structural

adjust,ent, a combination of macroeconomic stabilization measures to
restore

domestic and external equilibriun, and structural changes

in policies

institutions designed to make the economy more efficient and flexible

and
and

thereby increase growth (World Bank, 1988, 1990a).

As the decade progressed, and the consequences of macroeconomic
disequilibria became clearer, development economists and practitioners
increasingly accepted the view that broad macroeconomic stability is

necessary

for sustained growth.2 For instance, at the start of the new decade, heavy
weight has to be placed on likely macroeconomic --

particularly

fiscal - -

developments in analyzing growth prospects in countries as diverse as the
Soviet Union, India, Turkey, tote d'Ivoire, and Brazil.

1professor of Economics. MIT and Research Associate, NBER.
I am grateful to
Ben Cohen of MIT for research assistance, Dani Kauf,nann and Ross Levine
the
world Dank for colmuents and data, and to Olivier Blanchard, Jose De Gregorio,
Rudi Dornbusch, Richard Eckaus,
Anne Krueger, Xavier Sala-i.Martin, Lance
Taylor, and Sweder van Wijnbergen for comments and suggestions.
2See, for instance, Williamson (1990), Fischer and Thomas (1990), and the World
Development Renort (1991).

-2The eighties were also the decade in which macroeconomists returned
to

growth theory and turned to development
Romer (1986) and Lucas (1988), deals

The new growth theory, starting with

explicitly with development, seeking to

account for the apparent non-convergence of

per capita income levels between

developing and industrialized countries.3 A hallmark of much of the new
literature is the demonstration that distortions and
can be shoitn to affect the level of income in

the steady state growth rate in the new models

policy interventions that

conventional models, can affect
-

- thereby

backing for assertions that had routinely been made

providing analytical

by development economists.

Although existing models, such as the Harrod-Domar model4 or its multi-sector
fixed coefficient extensions, or the Solow model without the Inada condition,5
also produce such results, it is clear that

the new growth theory is

responsible for the recent interest in the determinants of

long-run growth

among macroeconomjsts.

The new growth theory has also returned to some of the classic themes of
the development literature,

trade, human
ordinated

capital,

among them the roles of technology, international

economies of scale, and the possible need for a co-

big investment push to break out of a low income equilibrium.6

The empirical work associated with the new growth theory consists largely

of

cross-country regressions, typically using the Sujiimers-Heston

(1988) ICr

3While it is a convenient
problem on which to deploy the new theories, their
aim is more ambitious than to account for
non-convergence, which can in any
case be explained in the Solow framework. (Mankiw. D. Romer and D. Well
p990)). See also the references in the next footnote.
Since a version of this model has been used
as the standard model in World
Bank country analyses, many development economists had routinely been assuming
that the saving rate affects the growth rate.
5For the latter, see Solow (1956), Jones and Manuelli (1990), Raut
and
Srinjvasan (1991).
6See for example, Romer
(1990). Grossman and flelpman (1990), and Murphy,
Shleifer and Vishny (1989).

-3.
data.7 Those results have been reviewed and their robustness examined in an
extremely useful paper by Levine and Renelt (1990W; the strongest results are
that investment in physical capital, and either the level or the rate of

change

of human capital, increase the rate of growth.
The new growth theory is production function driven and

concerned

influence

primarily

with steady states. There has been remarkably little focus on the
of riacroeconomic policies on growth: for instance, it is striking

that measures of political stability, but not macroeconomic policy, have been

included in new growth theory-based regressions.8 Swan's (1956)
concentrating on the long run -

- that

control short run macro problems -

- is

excuse for

with the help of Keynes we know how to
less plausible now than it was in the

fifties and sixties, especially for the developing countries.
The aim of this paper is firmly to establish --

or

re-establish -

macroeconomic policies matter for economic growth and development.

-that
In

Section I discuss the relationships between macroeconomic policies and growth.
In Section II I present several types of evidence suggesting that macroeconomic

policies do matter for growth: that countries that manage short-run

macroeconomic policies better, tend to grow faster. In addition to extending
the conventional cross-country regressions to include macroeconomic

indicators.

7For examples, see Barro (1989a,b) Mankiw, D. Romer and D. Well (1990), and P.
Romer (1989).
8crier and TulJ.ock (1989) do include macroeconobic variables in cross-country
growth regressions, but their work is not inspired by the new growth theory,

taking off rather from an earlier paper by Zormendi and Heguire (1985). Levine
and Renele (1990b) also include macroeconomic variables in their
growth
regressions; so does De Gregorio (1991) in a study of Latin Anerica. A
valuable start in analyzing the links between short-run macroeconomic
management and growth, and in attempting to draw policy implications from the
new growth theory, has been made by Vittorio Corbo and his associates at the
World Bank; see for instance World Bank (1990).

.4I include the results of pooled time-series cross-section
regressions that
supposrt the basic findings.9 In Section III I present and discuss evidence on
the mechanisms through which macroeconomic policies matter, examining whether
they have any independent influence on growth, or whethar rather they

operate

almost entirely by affecting investment. In Section IV I draw on the evidence
from major case studies to examine and amplify the conclusions
policy drawn

on macroeconomic

from the previous sections. Conclusions and issues for future

research are presented in Section V.

I. Macroeconomic Policies

By macroeconomic policies I mean monetary, fiscal, and exchange rate
policies that help determine the rate of inflation, the budget deficit, and the

balance of payments. In particular, I will be examining partial correlations
between growth and inflation and growth and the budget deficit. I expect that
countries that permit high inflation rates and large budget deficits grow more
slowly.

The potential links between inflation and
developed in Fischer (1983) and

by

growth are discussed and

implication in Fischer and

l4odigliani

(19Th). While the Mundell-Tobin effect'° implies that an increase in expected
inflation increases capital accumulation, a variety of other mechanisms

produces the opposite correlation. The negative effect of inflation on the
9zecause the focus of the paper is on the role of macroeconomic policy, I do
not address in any detail questions of alternativ, development strategies - for exaip1e, outward versus inward orientation -- that
are frequently analyzed
ing cross-country regressions of the type that are presented in this paper.
As noted in Fischer (1988), the mechanisms producing the Mundell and Tobin
effects actually differ, though both imply that an increase in expected
inflation increases capital accumulation.

-5efficiency of the exchange mechanism suggests that higher inflation reduces tile

level

of income; by extension through the new growth theory mechanisms, this

interaction would produce a negative relation between inflation and

growth.

Similarly, all the costs of inflation detailed in Fischer and Hodigliani
--

including

the impact of inflation on the taxation of capital

would imply

a negative association between the level of income and inflation, and

the new growth theory mechanisms between inflation and growth. This
also discusses the positive Association between the level and

(1978)

through

paper

variability of

the inflation rate, and the likely positive association between inflation and

uncertainty about future price levels. This uncertainty too is likely to
reduce Inflation.

Probably as important as the above mechanisms is the role of inflation as
an indicator of the overall ability of the government to manage the economy.
Since there are no good arguments for very high rates of

inflation, a

government that is producing high inflation is a government that has lost

control. Economic growth is likely to be low In such an economy.
This same argument is the main reason to expect a negative association

between budget deficits and growth. Governments that run large budget deficits
are governments out of control. In addition, in many models budget deficits
crowd out private investment.

In the short run, neither the inflation rate nor the budget deficit are

unaffected by the growth rate. A supply shock will both reduce the growth rate
and raise the inflation rate; and given government spending a reduction in

growth will increase the deficit. The length of tine period in the regressions
in this paper is fifteen years. The government can certainly set the inflation
rate and

the

deficit independently of the growth rate over such a long period.

-6Nonetheless, the possible endogeneity of monetary and fiscal policies has

to be dealt with. That is done both through instrumental variable estimation
and through the case studies presented in Section IV,

II. Cross-sectional Evidence

Forty cross-sectional growth studies published since 1980 are listed by

Levine and Renelt (l99Oa).1' Each study regresses the growth rate

over a given

period against a variety of variables; well over 50 regressors have been used

in these studies (Levine and Renelt (199Gb)). AJong the regressors are
variables relating to trade and trade policy, and exchange rates; fiscal
policy; political and social stability and rights; human capital; and

macroeconomic policy and outcomes. Early studies tended to focus on trade
policy and investment; studies associated with the new growth theory

typically

include initial real income And some measure of human capital as well as
investment.

For a sample of 101 countries, over the period 1960-89, Levine and Renelt
(3S9Ob) present a basic regression

(1)

CYP —

- 0.83

-

0.35 RCDP6O - 0.38 CN + 3.17 SEC + 17.5 INV

(0.98) (2.50)
—

0.46;

(1.73)

(2.46

(6.53)

t-scatjstics in parentheses

where GYP is the growth rate of real per capita income (from the World Bank
data base), RCDP6O is (Sumsers-}Ieston) real income in 1960, CM is the rate of

Their list is necessarily incomplete; in particular, it does not include the
comparative cross-country analysis by Morris and Adelman (1988), which is based
on work dating back to the 1960s. Several other earlier cross-country studies
are listed by Chenery, (Chapter 2 in Chenery, Robinson and Syrquin (1986),
(p.27)). Reynolds (1986, p.lOl) also presents a cross-sectional growth
regression, despite his general preference for time-series studies.

-7population growth. SEC is the 1960 rate of secondary school enroLlment, and DiV
is the share of investment in CDI'. Applying Learners extreme bounds

analysis

to equation (1), the robust relationships are shown to be those between

growth

and initial income, and between growth and inyescnlentj2

They then extend the analysis to include a variety of other variables.
Their two broad findings are, first, that several Pleasures of economic policy

are related to long-run growth; and second, that the relationship between
growth and almost every particular macroeconomic indicator other than the
investment ratio is fragile.

There are two standard interpretations of such regressions.

First, they

can be interpreted as attempts to estimate a time differenced production
function of the general form

(2) t

— F(At. a( ) b( )H)

where At is an overall efficiency factor, including not
technology,

management

but

of

only the level of

also for example representing the quality of goverment

the economy, or institutional factors; K and H are physical and

human capital respectively; and a( ) and b( )

are

efficiency factors. Except

for some initial conditions, the regressions deal with averages of the
variables over long periods, treating countries as the population from which
the observations are drawn.

Differentiating equation (2). we can interpret the coefficients in (1):
(3)

CV —

q1 A/A +

2

(a/a +

K/k)

+ 73 (b/b + H/B)

l2De Long and Suimners (1990) present evidence that growth is linked primarily
to the share of manufacturing investnent in CNP.

where

is the elasticity with respect to argument i in equation (1), and C?

is the growth rate of aggregate output. The coefficient on investment in (1)
should be related to the average marginal product of capital over the nearly
three decades represented by each observation; this coefficient very robust •-

is

- which

is

typically in the range of 10-20 percent.13 The negative

coefficient on population growth in (1) is (noisily) related to the growth rate

of the unaugmented stock of human capital. H if population growth were equal
to labor force growth, then the coefficient on labor in an equation for

aggregate growth would be 0.62. In any case, equation (1) suggests that per
capita income grows less rapidly the more rapidly population grows.

An

alternative interpretation starts from the assumption that the

economy

is tending towards a steady state income level, Y. The steady state income
level

is determined

by the rate of saving (or investment). investment in human

capital, and the rate of population growth. Thus

— f(INV. SEC. GN)
Then, given some initial level of income, Y0, and some final income level Y

(4)

-

— fly*.y)

where # > 0 is related to the returns to scale properties of the underlying

production function with respect to the variable factors. If # C

I,

the

coefficient on Y0 in a regression like (1) will be negative, indicating
convergence of income levels among economies with the same rates of investment,
human capital, and population growth.

1However, the investment coefficient falls to 6 percent in some regressions in
Zarro (1989b) that also include measures of political instability.

-9Equation (4) makes clear the role of initial income in equation (1). An
interpretacion of cross-country regressions based on equation (3) has the
benefit of not requiring that the economy be approaching a steady state

-.

and

given the fluctuations seen in growth rates and income levels in many
developing countries in the period since 1970. it is hard to take the steady
State interpretation seriously)-4

Returning to regression (1). the negative coefficient on the initial
level of real income provides evidence of convergence; it indicates

some type

of diminishing returns for the production function expressed in terms of per

capita output.15 The variable SEC in (1) is included as a proxy for the
country's ability to implement technical change; however, the 1960 secondary
school enrollment rate must be a noisy measure of a country's ability to
implement technical change over the period 1960-89.

Note further that since

it is the rate of technical progress rather than the level of technical

sophistication that matters for growth we would under the equation (3)
interpretation expect some measure of the change in human capital to affect
growth. 16

4Despite some theoretical papers dealing with growth among open economies,
e.g. Grossman and Helpman (1990), new growth theory regressions typically treat
each country as a single closed economy tending towards its steady state income
level.

15As argued by P. Romer (1989), measurement error in initial income will bias
its coefficient to be negative (since positive measurement error in RGDPGO
reduces the level of the dependent variable); he also presents some evidence
yggesting this problem may be present.
The change in enrollment is typically not included in growth regressions
because of mutual causation between it and the growth of income, and the
unavailability of instruments to deal with that problem. However Rower (1989)
shows that the coefficients on both literacy and the change in literacy are
significant when instruniented using the consumption of newsprint and the number
of radios per capita. In this case initial income becomes insignificant.

10

The range of RGDP6O is from 0.21 ($208) to 7.38 (57380).
is that the poorest country In the group would catch

The iniplication

up In 142 years if It had

the same secondary school enrollment ratio (and other variables in (1)) as the

richest country)7 A country starting at $1000 in 1960 would catch up in 90
years, ceteris naribus. Initial real. income and secondary school enrollment
would be strongly negatively correlated if social and religious factors did not
intervene; probably these two large coefficients between them isolate a
particular group of countries, for example countries where females
did not receive a secondary education, whose

typically

growth experience differs from the

average.18

The significant divergences in economic performance across countries that
underlie regression (1) are summarized in Table 1.19

The growth rates are for

OP, with countries weighted by their relative CDP's measured in dollars in

1980. Over the period since 1960, economic growth has accelerated in Asia
while slowing in Latin America and Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA); the slowdown in
the l9SOs was greater in Latin America than in Africa, even when measured on
the basis of the growth of per capita CD?.

The association between growth and investment in Table 1 is

broadly

positive, across both time and regions. However, in each region there was a
17This calculation (a) assumes a growth rate difference of 3.5% per annum, and
does not present the confidence interval around the estimate.
f)
Levine and Renelt (1990b), Table 1, show that the secondary school enrollment
ratio becomes insignificant if an Africa dummy is included; De Cregorio (1991)
finds that school enrollment (primary or secondary) is insignificant in growth
f;gressions for Latin America alone.
The similarities of experiences across countries within regions call for
explanations; among them must be the common influence of particular
industrialized country partners (e.g. Japan in Asia, the United States for
Latin America), similarities of historical experiences, and learning from
neighbors. There are of course also real differences
among countries within a
region, for instance, the development strategies and growth performance of
Kenya and Tanzania, or Korea and India, differ greatly.

- 11
sharp increase in the rate of investment between the first two periods without
an increase in the

growth rate. 20

Inflation

increased

region, but the increases were much greater in SSA and

between periods in each

particularly in Latin

America than in Asia; there is a predominantly negative relationship between
inflation and growth in Table 1. However low growth Africa has generally

not

had the very high inflation rates of Latin America; in part this is because the
fixed exchange rate of the Francophone CFA zone has been maintained

throughout.

The negative relationship between growth and inflation is pri ma fade evidence
that the quality of macroeconomic management affects growth.

Supporting

evidence comes from the apparently negative relationship between growth and the
increase in the size of the budget deficit, although here data for SSA are
incomplete.

The data suggest, but only weakly, that countries that grow faster do
better on the current account of the balance of payments; the weakness of the
association derives in part from variations in the tightness of constraints on

borrowing. The association between the growth of exports and GD? growth is
striking: rapid growth in Asia in the 1980s is associated with an extremely
rapid rate of expørt growth, which can with further disaggregation be tracked
down not only to the tilEs, but also to the increase in exports fron, China

during its growth spurt in the l9SOs. The relationship between export and GD?

20The inverse of ICOR is frequently used as a measure of the efficiency of
investment, but because of depreciation is seriously biased for this purpose.
Conventionally measured ICOR is (I/Y)/(AYfY).
true" Icon, designated ICOR* is
equal to (aKfY)/(AY/y)
Let
be the rate of depreciation, and g — aYfY the
growth rate. Then Icon — ICOR* + (&/g)(K/Y). Measured ICOR exceeds ICOR* by
an amount that is inversely related to the rate of growth. Accordingly the
inverse of measured ICOE. tends to be higher the more rapid the growth rate.

This argwent

of capital.

would have to be modified to take account of the non-homogeneity

- 12

-

growth supports the argument that outward orientation is a route to growth.21
Each region shows depreciation of the exchange rate in the 1980s relative to
the seventies; but it is striking that the depreciation was greatest in Asia.

Nominal devaluations were greater in other regions, but their real impact was
not

maintained

as well as in Asia.

Table I is suggestive of the role that madoeconomic factors and policy
may

play in determining aggregate performance. Further evidence comes from

Table 2, reproduced from Levine and Renelt (1990b). The black market exchange
rate premium is the average premium over the official exchange rate, as

measured from Picks Currency Yearbook. The black market premium is an
indicator of the extent of capital controls and expectations of devaluation.

and must be correlated with

the

degree of overvaluation of the currency.

Dervis and Petri (1987) obtain similar results, based on the growth

performance of twenty middle-income developing countries. They show that
countries that grow faster than average tend to: invest more than average; have
smaller current account deficits; have lower shares of government spending; And

had more rapid export growth than other countries. The rapid growers did not
have particularly small budget deficits, and the extent of their real
depreciations and terms of trade changes were average.

Indicators of macroeconomic performance enter cross-sectional regressions

with significant coefficients. Regressing per capita real (Summers-Heston)
growth over the period 1970_8522

against

the standard new growth theory

variables, plus indicators of macroeconomic performance, yields:

21Although there is much evidence that outward orientation is positively
associated with growth, as noted above I will not pursue that relationship in
tis
2 Thepaper.
period was chosen in a tradeoff between the length of period and number
of macroeconomic variables that could be included in the regression.

13 -

(5)

C? — 1.36
0.52 RGDP7O + 2.51 PRIH7O + 11.16 DiV - 4.75 INF
(1.75) (5.90)
(2.69)
(3.91)
(2.70)
-

+ 0.17

SUit -

(4.36)

—

0.60

n — 73

0.33

DEBT8O -

(0.79)

2.02
(3.71)

SSA -

1.98 LAC
(3.76)

t-statistics in parentheses

where PR1P470 is the enrollment rate for primary school, INF is the average

inflation rate over the period 1970-85, sug is the ratio of the budget surplus

to CKP over the period 1975_6023; DEBT is the foreign debt to CNP ratio in
1980; and SSA and LAC are sub-Saharan Africa, and Latin M,erica and the

Caribbean dummies, respectively. The sample includes all countries for which

data were avai1ab1e.2
The rates of investment and inflation, and the budget surplus enter
regression (5) significantly. The signs of all variables are as expected.
When the continent dwmnies are e,ccluded25, the coeffient on inflation and the

debt rise.26 Recalling that several of the mechanisms relating inflation to

23The period is chosen to increase the number of countries included in the
have also run similar regressions for the period 1974-89, using
sample.
Levine and Renelt's (1990b) data, provided by Ross Levine. No major
ifferences in conclusions emerge using the Levine-Renelt data.
It can be argued that the developing countries are sufficiently and
systematically different from the industrialized countries that the latter
should be excluded from the regressions. While it is easy to agree with this
view at the extremes, it is hard to know where to draw the line, and I
therefore worked mostly with all countries for which there were data. For some
regressions (not reported here). I excluded all countries that in 1970 had an
income level above Italys; if anything, this gave stronger results with
espect to macroeconomic variables, particularly the debt.
5Continent dummies enter most growth equations significantly. Lance Taylor
has suggested that the negative coefficients for Africa and Latin America may

I

1eflect their particularly adverse terms of trade shocks in the l980s.
6mere

was relatively little experimentation in arriving at equation (5). In

some versions, the variance of inflation was entered along with the rate of

inflation; it was not significant and was excluded because it is highly
correlated with the rate of inflation (R—O.94). The SEC7O variable was
initially included but was dropped since its exclusion made little difference
and since PRIM7O was generally more significant. The budget surplus variable
is available for the period 1975-85 for a smaller sample of (56) countries; the
t-statistic on the budget surplus is siiialler in that sample, but the
coefficient is still significant at the 5% level. However in those regressions
the significance level on the inflation rate drops below 5%, while that on the

- 14

-

growth that were discussed in Section 1 operate by affecting investment, it
should be noted that the coefficients on both inflation and investment in

equation (5) are statistically significant. This Implies that inflation has
effects other than those that operate through investment. For instance,
inflation could affect the efficiency of operation of the given factor inputs.

Regression (5) strengthens the argument that macroeconomic indicators are

correlated with growth, at least over the period 197O8S.27
As discussed in Section I, the macroeconomic indicators included in (5)

cannot be regarded as truly exogenous. In this respect their status is no
different than that of investment. Instruments are difficult to find; for
instance, such natural candidates as measures of political instability not only

cause but also are caused by inflation. Instrumental variable estimation of
equation (5) using as instruments initial GDP and primary enrollment, the

frequency of crises and riots, military spending, foreign aid, and the debt in
1980, resulted in a regression in which no coefficient was significantly

different from zero. Instrumental variable regression using the above
instruments plus the variance of inflation, the frequency of constitutional
changes, and government consumption spending, produced results very sirailar to
(5). except that primary education lost its statistical significance.

The regression, which does not include the continent dummies, is

(6)

U? —

0.55

-

0.33 RGDP70 + 2.32 PRIN7O + 12.79

INV

- 7.10

INF

debt rises. The inclusion of the black market foreign exchange premium is

3scussed below.
Regressions in Dervis and Petri (1987) show that the macroeconomic variables
are less significant in cross-country regressions for the period 1960-73 than
subsequently. As suggested by the discussant of that paper. Arnold Harberger,
this may be be a result of their smaller variability in the earlier period.

- 15
(0.28) (4.33)
+ 0.28

(1.31)
StiR

(306)
— 0.41

(3.51)

(4.45)

- 0.03 DEETSO

(0.04)

n — 54

t-statistics (with White
in

Given

-

parentheses

correction)

both the si..ilarity between equations (5) and (6). and the difficulties

of choosing instruments, I will focus in the remainder of this section on
equation (5).

Relatively little of the cross-sectional variance in growth rates is

accounted for by the macroeconomic variables alone. When only the inflation
rate, debt, and the deficit are included, the (corrected) squared correlation

coefficient is only 0.16. When the continent dummies are added, 32% of the
variance is accounted for.

Table 3 presents the correlation matrix of the variables in (5), as well
as their means and ranges. Several of the simple correlations are of interest:
the

simple correlation between investment and growth is high; the correlation

between the primary school enrollment rate and the share of investment in CDI'

is high;

the correlation between the budget surplus and inflation is non-

negative; the correlation between investment and inflation is negative; that

between external debt and the budget surplus is negative. Because investment
levels in Latin America are relatively high, the debt-investment correlation is

The

external debt to 014P ratio serves in (5) as an indicator of the

exchange rate overvaluations of the late 1970s. The average black market
28The simple correlations among

the

non-dummy variables in Table 3 are

sensitive to the inclusion of the high-income countries. For instance, debt

and income are more negatively correlated in table 3 than they are in the same
sample excluding industrialized countries.

- 16
foreign exchange premium could serve as

suggests it

-

another

such indicator: and Table 2

might be strongly related to growth. The simple correlation

between the average growth rate over the period 1970-85 and the average black
market premium for the same period, for a group

the

of forty countries for which

data are available, is -0.24. The simple correlation between the premium

and investment is -036, and between the premium and the budget surplus -

03429

However, the coefficient on the average black market premium is never

significant in any regression that includes the other macroeconomic variables,
and this applies also to various non-linear transformations of the premium.
Its major impact seems to be to reduce the coefficient on the external debt,

but because its inclusion also changes the sample size, not much can be deduced

from any such effect. We return to the role of the black market premium in
Section III.

Cross-sectional regressions such as (5) ignore information that might be

available in the time series of data within each country. Running a pooled
cross-section time-series regression of the general form of (5), for the period
1972.S5, and including lagged as well, as current values of the rates of
investment and inflation, we obtain:

29The premium is available for 67 countries for the period 1970-85, but there
are only forty countries for which the variables in equation (5) plus the
premium are all available. The weakness of the simple correlation between
growth and the black market premium may be a result of the wide range of the
premium, from zero to an average of 717% (for Nicaragua). The premium is high

for African countries, excluding those in the CFA zone, and for Latin Anerica.

Nicaragua

aside, the highest premia, frequently exceeding 100%, are found in
North and Sub-Saharan Africa.

- 1?

(1)

OYj

— Year

Dtnisoies -

0.23

-

RCDP7O1 • 1.40 FRIM?Dj + 36.5
(1.64)
(5.53)

lNV

(2.82)
-

3.83 1i(t-l) - 19.9 1i(t-2) - 3.55
(0.49)

+

(4.27)

INF

(3.19)

2.22 INFL(tI) - 2.08 DEBT8Oj + 4.30 SURft

(255)
— 0.201

(2.26)

n — 1059

(113)

t-ststistics in parentheses

Investment variables retain their strong statistical significance in the pooled
regression, which also gives some evidence on the dynamics of the relation

between output and investment. The large contemporaneous coefficient, 36.5
(percent). must represent primarily the demand effect in which an increase in

investment demand causes a more rapid increase in output. The coefficients on
the investment rates can also be expressed in the form (12.8 INVit +

23.7

AINVit + 19.9 AIi(tl)). suggesting that increases in the investment ratio
have a large temporary effect on growth, which can be associated with the
demand effect, leaving 12.8 percent as the estimate of the longer-term impact
of investment on growth.

Both the regression evidence presented in this section and the data
presented in Tables 1 and 2 demonstrate the existence of suggestive
correlations between macroeconomic-policy related variables and growth over

periods as long as fifteen years. The evidence supports the view that the
quality of macroeconomic management, reflected in these regressions in the
inflation rate, the external debt ratio, and the budget surplus, matters for
growth
It would be logical at this point to try to tie down

precisely

which

macroeconomic indicators are most robustly associated with growth in—the cross-

- 18 country regressions. However, that exercise is unlikely to be instructive, as
the results of Levine and Renelt (199Gb) show. There are at least two reasons

for this. First, none of the standard indicators -.

the budget surplus, the

current account, the inflation rate, the real exchange rate -

- is

truly

exogenous with respect to growth. Nor is the instrument problem readinly

soluble. Second, cross-country egressions such as (5) have no clear
structural interpretation. While

they

are very useful ways of summarizing the

correlations in the data, and they suggest that countries that manage the
macroeconomy

well

grow faster, they do not explain how.

III. Why Do Macroeconomic Variables Matter

Suppose we accept the argument that inflation and other factors related

to short-run macroeconomic management affect economic growth. In terms of the
production function (1). there are two possible routes of influence. First,
hlacroeconomic management may affect the rate of investment, and thus the rate

of change of IC3° For example, large budget deficits may crowd out physical
investment; or high and uncertain inflation may both reduce investment and

induce capital flight. In addition, macroeconomic factors may affect the
efficiency with which factors are used, i.e. by affecting AC ).
in equation (].):

for

a(

)

and b(

instance, by distorting price signals, inflation may

reduce the rate of return on physical investment; or inflation may produce
distortions that reduce the real wage.

New growth theory based cross country investment regressions are
presented in larro (1989a, 1989b) and Romer (1989), and their robustness

3OShortte_, macroeconomic management will also affect the number of employed,
H, but is less likely to affect the rate of growth of population over long
periods.

- 19
examined in Levine and Renelt (1990h). These regressions generally show that
some measure of initial human capital has a positive impact on investment, that
measures of political instability have negative impacts, that investment is
higher the lower the relative price of investment goods, and the mare the price

of investment goods diverges from the world level. Zn addition, government
investment appears to be complementary with private investment. The robustness
tests by Levine and Renelt (199Db) show that none of the relationships in the
basic regression equation - investment goods -

- is

which

does not include the relative price of

robust: the cross-sectional results provide little

guidance on the determinants of investment.

Table 6 presents estimates of a number of cross-sectional investment
regressions, all for the average share of investment in CNP over the period
1970-85.

Equation (8) in Table 4 is both simple and has the highest explanatory

power for cross-country variation in investment, There are no clear causal
reasons that the initial level of per capita GOP and school enrollment enter

the equation. The significant coefficient on the growth rate is consistent

the typical finding that accelerator type investment functions perform
well (Clark (1979)). However the direction of causation in this equation is
with

difficult
When
removed,

to establish.31

the macroeconomic

variables are added and the growth rate of output

inflation and the budget surolus are signficantly negatively related

to investment. The negative relationship between inflation and the share of
investment is robust. Equations (10) and (11) suggest important interactions
310f

course, the same can be said for the cross-country growth regressions that
include investment as an explanatory variable.

- 20

-

between the initial level of income and primary enrollment, and the continent
dujimiies.32 Finally, in equation (12). ye see strongly statistically

significant coefficients on the black market premium (SLAV)

and

the relative

price of investment goods; the inclusion of these variables leaves the budget
surplus as the other macroeconomic variable that is significant at the 5%
level, but in the a priori wrong direction, if the surplus is interpreted as a
measure of the quality of macroeconomic measurement, or if deficits are thought

to crowd out investment33
The relationship between the investment share and the black market
premium is reasonably robust, in the sense that the black market premium

large and statistically significant in most penmitations of investment
equations that are based on the forty-country sample.34 The coefficients on
remains

the other macroeconomic variable are not stable. The coefficient on the debt
is typically not significant, and it is frequently (though not significantly)
positive, implying that countries that borrowed bore in the seventies generally
invested more, ceteris paribus.

The black market premium can be interpreted both as a measure of
expectations of depreciation of the currency, and as a crude index of

distortions. Expectations of depreciation may

affect

investment through

several channels: first, it is more attractive to hold foreign assets when

can be seen from Table 3 that the simple correlations between the SSA
drimy

and PRIM7O and RGDP7O are high.

Sweder van Wijnbergen has suggested that the positive coefficient on the
budget deficit may reflect the role of government investment, which increases
both

the overall rate of investment and the budget deficit. The coefficient on
the surplus is reduced when the dependent variable becomes private rather than
aggregate investment, but it does not become positive.
Solimano (1989) finds, using quarterly data from 1977:1 to 1987:IV, that the
black market premium is strongly negatively associated with investment in
Chile.

21

depreciation is expected3; second, economic uncertainty is higher under such
conditions; but third, for those who can obtain foreign exchange at the

official rate, foreign capital goods are cheap to import. While the first two
factors suggest a negative relationship between the black market premium and

investment, the third suggests the opposite. To the extent that the black
market premium serves as a general index of distortions and therefore of an
unsustainable situation, it is likely to be negatively correlated with
investment.

The black market premium is both strongly negatively correlated with
investment, and in Section II did not appear to affect the rate of growth
significantly. The

explanation

would seem to be simple: that the black market

premium affects the rate of investment directly and thereby the rate of growth
indirectly. In terms of equation (5), the black market premium can be

interpreted as affecting the rate of investment but not the efficiency of
investment.

Unfortunately, this argument does not stand up to further examination. A

priori, it is difficult to see why an index of distortions would
rate

of investment but not the rate

there

of

return

on

investment.

affect the

More important,

is direct evidence that the black market premium is correlated with the

efficiency of investment. Table 5 presents ax post estimated rates of return
on investment projects in developing countries, cross-categorized against
measures of distortions and macroeconomic variables including the real interest
rate, the black market premium, and the inflation rate.36

35This assumes domestic interest rates have not adjusted, which is implied by
the presence of a black market premium.
36The data are from Kaufnann (1990); Kaufmann's preliminary regressions suggest
that the black market premium is the main macroeconomic variable that affects
project rates of return. This presumably means that it is the best summary
indicator of macroeconomic distortions.

- 22
The interpretation of the role of the black market premium must therefore
be Left as something of a mystery: it is negatively associated with the rate of
investment; it is not clearly associated with the growth rate, except perhaps

in extreme cases;3 but there is direct evidence that it appear5 to affect the
rate of return on investment. Whether these results can be explained by the

relationship

between the black market premium and other measures of

macroeconomic policy remains to be seen.

Although none of the regressions in Table 4 presents a satisfactory
account of the determination of investment, this evidence as well as that in
Levine And Renelt (l990b), again shows that macroeconomic variables --

particularly

the black market premium and inflation --

affect

investment. Zut

because the relationships between investment and macroeconomic indicators,
except the black market premium and, to a lesser extent, inflation, are not
robust, it is unlikely that further cross-sectional regressions of this type
will pin down the transmission mechanism between macroeconomic variables and
growth.

Time series evidence for individual countries may help do so. For the
industrialized economies, investment equations generally show investment being

affected by the cost of capital and by demand variables. The theoretical
literature has emphasized the option value
37The qualifier is based on results
Development Report (forthcoming).

of waiting

as a factor that makes

reported in Chapter 2 of the 1991 World
In that study rates of total factor

productivity growth for 68 countries are regressed against several variables,
including the black market premium, which is interpreted as a measure of
macroeconomic instability. The authors find that TFP growth is significantly
lover for countries for which the lagged black market premium exceeded 500%.
but that total factor productivity growth was otherwise unaffected by the
premium.

- 23
investment especially sensitive to uncertainty; quantity of credit impacts have
also been identified.38
The same variables that affect investment in industrialized countries

should also affect investment in developing countries39 In addition, foreign
exchange and credit rationing may be more prevalant in developing countries.
Investment equations for developing countries have also paid considerable
attention to possible complemencaricies between public and private sector
investinenc.0 Rama (1990) sunmiarizes the results of separate investment
regressions for thirty nine developing countries, nineteen of them Latin

Mberican. Aggregate demand variables are almost always positively associated
with investment, as are measures of the availability of credit; measures of

uncertainty or instability are negatively associated with investment. Cost of
capital variables usually enter investment equations with the right sign, but

are typically not statistically significant. Public investment mare often
appears as a substitute for private investment than a complement in the studies
be reports, though this result in not typical of the investment literature.
Cardoso

(1990) presents regressions on panel data for six Latin Anerican

countries. Changes in the tens of trade, the growth rate of CD?. and the
share of public investment in GOP are all significantly correlated with
investment. Public and private investment are positively associated. Other
variables that might be expected to affect investment, including a measure of
380n irreversible investment and the value of waiting, see Bernanke (1983) and
Pindyck

(1988); on finance and investment, see for example Fazzari, Hubbard and
(1988).

Serven and Solimano (1989) survey theories and evidence on investment,
prticular1y with respect to the implications for developing countries.

issue is also examined in Sarro (1989a), who finds that private
investment is higher, the higher is governient investment.

'4Uflj5

24 -

economic instability, the stock of internal government debt, and exchange rate
depreciation, do not enter investment equations significantly; only the debt to
exports ratio makes a significant entry in one equation.

Solimano (1989). in a careful study of the determinants of Chilean
investment, finds strong evidence that uncertainty or instability -

- of

output,

the real exchange rate, and the real interest rate -- reduce investment. His

evidence also shows a complex relationship between the level of the real
exchange rate and investment: an overvalued exchange rate tends to encourage
investment, but the higher investment is non-sustainable.41
The

time series studies of investment point to several macroeconomic-

policy related variables as affecting the rate of investment: increased
stability of output, the exchange rate, and the cost of capital increase
investment; so does the availability of credit; and in several studies, the

external debt has a negative impact on investment.42 The impact of public
investment on the overall rate of investment has not been firmly tied down in
investment

studies. The black market premium reduces investment,

as shown in

equation (10); and a reduction in the price of investment goods increases the

quantity of investment. Thus

the

bulk of the evidence suggests an important

role for macroeconomic policy in determining the rate of investment -

- even

treating the role of income in investment equations with due circumspection.

The new growth theory has focussed on the determinants of physical
investment, even though the theory frequently relies on the accumulation of

41The complexity of this relationship may account for the weak
relationship
btween the exchange rate and investment found in Cardoso's study.
Schmidt-Rebbel and Muller (1990) find the debt to GNP ratio has a significant
impact on investment in Morocco; they treat the debt as an indicator of
macroeconomic uncertainty.

- 25
human capital to generate endogenous long-run growth. T. Paul Schultz (1988,
p.569) examines
income

the

determinants of schooling for an 89 country sample. The

elasticity of primary school enrollment is 0.31, while that for

secondary

school is 0.63. The relative price of teachers has a strong negative

impact on enrollments. Schultz's estimates show urbanization increasing
primary

school enrollment but reducing that for secondary school. The teacher-

student ratio also increases with income, more so for primary than for

secondary school. The positive association between

income and school

enrollment suggests a feedback effect between growth and its determinants --

including

macroeconomic policy -- and schooling.3

It would be interesting as well to examine the policy-related

determinants of the efficiency with which human capital operates, and therefore

how much it contributes to output and growth. Schultz (1988, pS?5) provides
estimates of these returns by continent and level of schooling, which generally

show the highest returns to primary education, and higher returns in Latin
America and Africa than elsewhere. Taken at face value, the tatter findings
are

hard to reconcile with the typically negative coefficients on dummy

variables for those regions.
rates

Part of the

explanation may be that the estimated

of return are based on data from before the 1980s. Both the puzzle of

the rate of return results, and the relationship between the return to human
capital and macroeconomic performance, must be subjects of further study.

IV. Case Studies

43Although the regressions in Section II show the level of enrollment as
affecting growth, as noted there, other regressions in the literature, as well
as the production function (3), suggest that the increase in enrollment should
affect growth.

- 26
While the cross-sectional results on the determinants of both growth and
investment rates suggest that macroeconomic factors have important effects,

they do not tie down the channels of influence, nor the precise macroeconomic

factors that matter most. Nor do they give any real sense of the macroeconomic
policy decisions that have to be faced in practice.

An interesting alternative is presented by Scholing and Tinaermann
(1988). who use a path model in which the growth rate is affected by "inner"
(latent) variables --

physical

capital, human capital, the growth of labor.

international competitiveness and political instability -

- that

are estimated

as linear combinations of measureable outer" variables.46 Essentially, the
approach allows for the creation of an index of. for example. macroeconomic

instability. Both the robustness of this approach, which is closely related to
the work by Adelnan and Morris (1988). and the clarity of the interpretations

it provides, remains to be seen.45 But by potentially putting structure on the
reasons variables enter a model, it does present one possible way out of the
difficulty that a never-ending array of alternative plausible variables can be
entered in cross-country regressions.
The case study approach presents another, less formal,

method

of dral4f.ng

conclusions about the role of macroeconomic factors. Corden (1991) summarizes
the results of a World Bank study of macroeconomic policies, crisis, and growth

44The Analysis allows for degrees of latency, with some latent variables being
affected by other latent variables.
example, Scholing and Timm.rIEAnn include the rate of inflation as an
outer variable determining international competitiveness; in this paper it has
been taken as an indicator of macroeconomic performance.

- 27

in

-

seventeen developing countries, including nine of the twelve developing

economies whose 1987 CNP exceeded $30 billion.46

Fifteen of the countries studied by Corden experienced a public

boom between 1974 and 1981. Only India and Chile did not. While the

spending

timing

and extent of the spending booms varied across countries, the cause appears to
have been either a rapid increase in export receipts, or the increased

availability of foreign financing. Many of the countries built up their
foreign debt rapidly. Growth in the countries with public spending booms was
high up to the end of the seventies. For many of them, the investment ratio

and growth fell in the 1980's. Corden points to three lessons from the
experiences of the boom period: smooth spending relative to income48; appraise
investments carefully (this advice is offered to creditors as well); and beware
of euphoria -- be cautious.69

Almost all the countries in the sample went into a recession or crisis at
the end of the seventies or In the first years of the eighties; Pakistan is the

exception. The macroeconomic story of the eighties is the story of the policy
successes and failures in dealing with the shocks that took place at the turn

of the decade. There is no uniform pattern of success: Korea

adjusted

46corden discusses Korea, which was not in the original study, and omits
discussion of Argentina, which was. The larger developing economies included
in the World Sank study are Argentina. Brazil, Coloibia, India, Indonesia,
Mexico, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Thailand and Turkey. Egypt, Korea, and Venezuela
are the remaining three. (China is excluded because the study was confined to
non-socialist economies.)
47corden states that there is a negative cross-country correlation between
vestment booms in 1974-80 and growth from 1982 on.
°Corden expresses this advice in different language.
It has to be recognized
though that commodity exporters in the late l9?Os, especially oil exporters,
were in good company in believing the good times were forever.
49Aaong the euphoric cases mentioned by Corden, Cote dIvoire, which is
examined below, raised public sector investment from Ill of GN? to 21% in the
four years following 1974.

28 -

immediately and hard: Chile and Indonesia adjusted later and hard; Mexico
adjusted later yet. Colombia and Thailand adjusted gradually and successfully.
Turkey appeared to have adjusted veil in the mid-eighties but has still not
dealt with its budget deficit, and suffers from rising inflation, Other
countries in the group are still struggling. The general lesson from these
episodes is that growth does not return until the adjustments fiscal adjustments --

are

- especially

the

made.5°

A complex relationship between inflation and growth emerges from the

cross-country study. The simple correlation between inflation and growth in
the sample in the eighties is weak, because the three low-growth African
countries have low inflation, and because high-growth turkey had high

inflation. Brazil during the period up to the l980s (and Israel up to 1973) is
the main exhibit for the case that high inflation is not inconsistent with

high

growth; however there is no case of high growth being consistent for any length

of tine with triple digit inflation, Several

of

the high growth countries

suffered from inflation in excess of twenty percent for a few years during the
early eighties, but the inflation tended to come down quickly -- as Corden
argues, it is important that inflationary expectations not become entrenched
and

that

the government's commitment to low inflation be established.

Exchange rate systems among the seventeen countries in the study and over

time within the countries vary widely. Periods of overvaluation associated
with capital inflows were a common feature of the macroecDnomic instability at

the turn of the decade. Corden draws the lesson that nominal exchange rates

50corden does not specify the conclusions on the timing of adjustment that
should be drawn from the study; the conclusion in the text is consistent with
the examples he presents.

- 29
should be adjusted frequently, and that non-inflationary

monetary policy should

generally be attained through a commitment to fiscal discipline rather than a

nominal exchange rate. He also notes that there hav, been many instances of
ineffective inflationary, nominal devaluations: nominal devaluations

should

generally be accompanied by a policy package that includes monetary and fiscal
adjustments.

Most of the lessons of the comparative study are

completely obvious, but

were nonetheless violated not only by government officials but also

by

supposedly hard-nosed bankers in the lace seventies. Others, for instance the
finding that a commitment to a nominal exchange rate target is not

usually

effective, are less obvious, and nay also be less certain.31 To provide
examples illustrating both that the lessons are nonetheless of value and the
largely political economy issues they raise, I turn to two of the countries

examined in the study.52
Cote d'Ivoire.

For the first fifteen years of its independence, until 1975, Cote

dlvoire was an outstanding performer

anrnng developing countries.53 Output

growth averaged 7.7 percent per annum, with no major macroeconomic imbalances.
As a member of the CPA zone, with a fixed exchange rate against the French

franc and its Francophone neighbors, it

had

low inflation throughout the

5¼eynolds (1986, pS) notes "there are hardly any general statements to which
one cannot find exceptions in one country or another - - a conclusion that
becomes harder to dispute the more often one tries to draw general lessons.
52Dervis and Petri (1987) examine the macroeconomics of two of the
more
successful developing countries, Korea and Turkey, pointing already then to the
gngers raised by Turkeys inability to deal with its fiscal deficit.
This account draws on World Bank (1990b), and
Berthelemy and Bourgouignon
(1989).

- 30

period.

-

Population growth averaged Over 4 percent. one quarter of that a

result of immigration from lower income neighbors.

Over the period 1980 to 1989, CDP rose by less than 1 percent per year.

and per capita CUP fall more than 25%. etween 1975 and 1960 the economy was
derailed by a massive public investment program, whose fiscal implications were
for a time

covered by a sharp but temporary improvement in the terms of trade.

It has not yet recovered from that and subsequent shocks and policy mistakes.

Some of the developments seen in Table 6 and in Charts 1-3 are similar to
those that took place in Latin Ajuerica at the same time. A massive improvement
in the terms of trade in 1977 combined with rapidly increasing

governoent

spending and borrowing resulted in a fourteen percent increase in CNP in 1976.
The currency

while

appreciated as domestic prices rose more rapidly than abroad,

exchange rate remained fixed -- as it

the

has

been since 1946. Despite

the improvement in the tenis of trade, and a more than doubling of
value

of

the dollar

exports between 1974 and 1980, the current account went into large

deficit. Zy the end of the decade, the foreign debt to GDP ratio was above
fifty percent, making the country vulnerable to

the real interest

rate shock of

the early eighties.
Cot.

d'Ivoire was also hit very

hard

by the decline in commodity prices

in the early eighties, with the terms of trade in 1982 being less than half the
1976 level. Public sector investment was cut fast, but government revenues

declined pan passu, leaving a double digit budget deficit. Although the
appreciation

of

of the dollar in the early eighties produced a real

depreciation

the CFA franc, the current account deficit remained in double digits in the

early eighties.

- 31
Further public investment cuts and revenue measures reduced the
deficit after 1984; together with a temporary improvement in the

budget

terms of

trade this led to a turnaround in the current account after 1984.

Growth

however remained slow, failing to keep up with population growth of 4.1

percent. In 1988 and 1989 the terms of trade worsened, governaent

spending

rose and revenues fell, and the budget deficit returned to double digits.

The

currency continued to depreciate slowly, as tight domestic policy and massive

unemployment reduced domestic prices. But the current account deficit
worsened,

leading to payments arrears and

Aggregate

growth

the suspension of debt servicing.

turned negative, while per capita income declined by more than

5 percent a year. Declining incomes and rising unemployment led to political
difficulties, and the appointment of a new government in 1990.
One

source

of Cot. d'Xvoire's budget difficulties was a government

coIitaent to fixed CFA franc prices

for the main

export crops, coffee and

cocoa, that by 1989 were nearly double the world level. These prices
in the second half of 1989. Civil service salaries are

were cut

a major budgetary

expenditure, amounting to twelve percent of CDP, which has been difficult to
cut despite the need to adjust internal prices to the fixed exchange

rate.

The exchange rate system is a key issue for tote d'Ivoire and other

countries in the franc zone. The

fourteen countries of the zone have

capital movements within the zone and with France for over forty
had relatively Low inflation, and until the late seventies,

had free

years, have

grew rapidly. For

most of its existence, the franc zone has benefitted its members, who

are

reluctant to give it up. Devaluation of the CFA franc against the French franc
would be difficult, not only because of the inevitable loss of credibility of

- 32 the exchange rate commitment • but also because the countries of the zone are
overvalued to differing extents.

The new Ivoirian government is committed to pursuing a rigorous

adjustment

program. It will attempt to restore macroeconomic balance by

cutting current government expenditures, including wages, and by reforming the

tax system. Cutting current government expenditures is urgent, since the rate
of public

investment

is incompatible

with

sustained growth. The government

also intends to increase the efficiency of public enterprises, in part through

privatization. It will also have to make a variety of regulatory And incentive
reforms, using non-exchang, rate measures to provide incentives to export.

Cote d'lvoire provides an example of a country where macroeconomic
policies and

mistakes,

impact on growth

especially the

euphoria

over a sustained period.

during 1976-80,

have had a major

The decision to stay with the fixed

exchange rate has been extremely important, and may not be sustainable. The
inability of the government to cut current government spending, especially

civil service salaries, has been an important macroeconomic factor, with roots

that lie in the political economy of tbe country. Of course, macroeconomics is
far from being all that matters: the countrys growth suffered in the first

instance

from, tens of trade shocks, and suffers also from most of the familiar

microeconomic distortions and inefficiencies, including inefficient public
enterprises.

Chile

The story of Chile's economic recovery is worth retelling, for both its
negative and positive lessons.56 Chile has been through two extremely tough

5in this section I draw on Douglas (1989), Corbo and Solimano (1991), and
World Bank (199Db).

- 33

-

adjustment periods. The first came after the i1itary government took power in
1973.

confronting an

price

controls, devalued, and

in

economy in near-total

disarray.

The government

moved the budget from a deficit of

removed

thirty

percent

1973 to a surplus by 1976. An import liberalization program reduced tariffs

to a uniform 10 percent by 1979. Companies and banks that had been
nationalized under the Allende government were privatized. The fiscal squeeze,
accompanied by a nearly forty percent decline in the terms of trade between

1974 and 197S, created a massive recession. Due partly to monetary tightening.

the real interest rate exceeded 60 percent in 1976.
The inflation rate was however slow

to come

down, remaining in triple

digits through 1977. Regarding the inflation as largely inertial, particularly
because of the budget surplus, the governaent instituted a pre-announced
schedule of devaluations at less than the current inflation rate, in the hope
of causing expectations to stabilize around the nominal exchange rate Anchor.
With imports liberalized, foreign competition was expected to assert a
disinflationary impact, reinforcing the expectations effect of the nominal

exchange rate anchor. In June 1979 the exchange rate was fixed to the dollar.
While inflation came down, it did not come down fast enough; as can be seen in

Chart

6. the real exchange rate appreciated rapidly from 1978. The tern of

trade began declining after 1979. The current account worsened rapidly.
reaching

14.5 percent of COP in 1981, the external debt increased, and Chile

had once again to adjust, even before the debt crisis struck at the end of
1982.

55corbo

and Solimano (1991) examine the controversy over the stance of monetary

policy in

1975, concluding that monetary policy was restrictive.

- 34
Chile

-

devalued in 1982. helping precipitate a financial crisis for banks

and firms that had borrowed abroad. In 1981 and 1982 the domestic real
interest rate exceeded 30 percent. The fiscal deficit (including the quasifiscal deficit of the central bank) rose to near 9 percent of CDP in 19B256
The cutting off of external lending, the adverse changes in the terms of trade,
and the domestic financial crisis, resulted in a 14 percent decline in GD? and
an increase in the unemploynenc rate to 33 percent. For a time the governiiient

raised tariffs, to 35 percent. for revenue reasons. A generally tight fiscal
policy was accompanied by targeted employment programs.

It took two years for the recoYery to begin. Between 1981 and 1986 the
government succeeded in producing a real devaluation of nearly 40 percent.

Inflation rose temporarily to more than 30 percent in 1985, but then came down
to the low 20 percent range, where it has stayed since; the real interest rate

has also declined to near 10 percent. In 1985 the government adopted an
adjustment progrm.. which not only privatized. liberalized, and began to cut

tariffs again, but also provided targeted assistance to alleviate poverty. The
program was designed to diversify exports and make the econony less vulnerable
to external shocks, in part by instituting a copper stabilization fund which

smooths government use of funds from copper export revenues. The current
account improved as exports boomed, helped in 1988 and 1989 by improving terms

of trade. GOP growth increased from 1985 to 1989, reaching a probably
unsustainable 10 percent in 1989; by 1987 GDP had returned to its 198]. level
and by 1988 unemployment was below 7 percent.

563ee Corbo and Solimano (1991) for an estimate of the total deficit. The
total deficit peaked at 9.8 percent of COP in 1985; there was a surplus by
1981. The data shown in Table 7 and Chart S do not include the quasi-fiscal
deficit.

- 35
The Chilean

policy

experience has been mined for more than its macroeconomic

lessons. But there is little doubt that macroeconomic policy mistakes,

especially in the late seventies and early eighties, had a major impact on

Chilean growth during the last two decades. The attempt to deal with inflation
through the exchange rate turned into a disaster, which was amplified by the

international debt crisis. The rigorous macroeconomic policies pursued since
provide a stable background against which iuicroeconomic distortions have been

effectively removed. The empirical work by Solimano (1989) suggests also that
macroeconomic stability has been an essential ingredient in the zecovery of

investment. The continuing double digit inflation remains a problon, one which
is common

to

many other countries that have stabilized fran very high

inflation.

Lessons can be learned also by contrasting Chilean experience with that

of Argentina And Brazil. Those countries failed to deal with their
macroeconomic imbalances during the eighties, growth has not resumed, and
attempts

at efficiency-enhancing adjustment programs have for the most part

failed as macroeconomic instability leads to frequent policy reversals.

It

remains

in this section to comment

d'lvoire and Chile

respectively.

on Charts I. and

4,

for Cote

These confirui in a tine series context the

very strong relationship between growth and the share of investment seen in

Sections 1 and II. However, it is difficult to see these relationships as
reflecting purely the supply side impact of increased capital on output, rather
than -- as in equation (1)

-- both

a supply side effect and an accelerator

effect in which increased demand leads to higher investment.

The restoration of growth in many countries requires an increase in

investment. Chile is one of the few non-Asian countries badly hit by the

- 36

crisis

-

of the early 1980s in which investment has increased significantly and

growth has returned. But the recovery of investment takes time, evidence of
increased returns to capital, and £

period

of economic stability. Here too

macroeconomic policy matters.

V.

Concludine Co,ents

The primary aim of this paper was to establish that a country's
macroeconomic policies matter for long run growth. Provided the inflation

rate,
policy

external debt, and the goverrent deficit are accepted as macroeconomic
indicators both the cross-sectional regressions and the case studies

support that contention. The results are less clear on the mechanisms through
which macroeconomic policy affects growth, but the case studies and much other

evidence suggests they have a powerful impact on investment. The separate role
of macroeconomic policy variables in the growth regressions imply the existence
of other channels, which need further investigation.

It could be argued that the case studies show only that macroeconomic
policy affects growth in the short run, and that the effects of such policies

are transitory. It is difficult to deal with this contention over very lung
periods --

for

instance, the rapid growth of the post-world War II period can

be seen as a catch-up from the absence of growth in the Great Depression, so
that by 1973 the world was back where it would have been had growth proceeded

smoothly since 1929. This is a unit root issue. But it would be a mistake to
focus exclusively on the very long run: it was only in 1989 that Chilean per

capita income recovered its 1970 level. That long period of unnecessarily low
income certainly had welfare consequences for many, even if by 2010 Chile is
back where it would have been.

37

The simplicity of the iuactoeconomtc policy lessons that can be drawn from

country studies raises the question of why those lessons Are so frequently not

implemented. Here is the role for political economy, both in recognizing the
particular circumstances of individual countries, and in seeking to develop

more general theories.57 The theories may contribute understanding, even if
they do not suggest how to change the policies.

This paper contends that macroeconomic policy matters for growth, but not

that only macroeconomic policy matters. Reasonable macroeconomic stability is
probably necessary for sustained growth, but beyond that the overall economic
strategy pursued by the country --

market and outward orientation, the size and

role of government both in providing physical and social infrastructure,

especially for human capital, and in limiting its role in other areas --

is

crucial

The new growth theory and the associated empirical work has focussed on

these more structural factors. The empirical work characterizes high-growth
countries: for instance, they invest a lot, they have higher school enrollment,

they are more open. But it has not explored with any care the mechanisms that
are central to endogenous growth theory -

- for

instance, whether the process of

human

capital

accumulation bears any similarity to the production functions for

human

capital

typical in that literature. Nor has it yet succeeded in

identifying the underlying deteninants of investment, though the relative
price effect emphasized by de Long and Sumners (1990) must be an important part
of the story.

Identifying the determinants of investment, and the other factors
contributing to growth, will probably require a switch away from simple cross-

575ee for example Alesina and Drazen (1989).

- 38
sectional regressions to time series studies of individual countries, of the
type discussed in Section III.

Solow (1989) discusses the difficulties of integrating short-run

macroeconomics with growth theory.58 There are indeed formidable problems in
constructing a tractable theoretical model of this type. Eut any model that
includes a production function and that accounts for the accumulation of
factors of production and the efficiency of their use can be used to analyze

long-run growth. Each of these elements has been modelled And estimated; they
can be brought together to provide a coherent empirical account of growth.

58See also Orphanides and Solow (1990). The same point is made in the
development context by Arida and Taylor (1989).

- 39 BIBLIOGRAPHY

Alesina, Alberto and Allan Drazen (1989).
NBER Working Paper # 3053.

Why

are

Stabilizations Delayed?

Arids, Persio and Lance Taylor (1989), "Short-Run Macroeconomics", in H.
Chenery and TN. Srinivasan (eds). Handbook of Development
Economics. Vol.2, North-Holland.

Into, Robert J. (1989a). "A Cross-Country Study of Growth, Saving, and
Government", NBER Working Paper * 2855.
(1989b). "Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries", mimeo,
NBfl Working Paper # 3120.
and Xavier Sala S Martin (1990). "Public Finance in Models of
Economic Growth", NBER Working Paper * 3362.

Bernanke, Ben (1983). "Irreversibilities, Uncertainty, and Cyclical
Investment", quarterly Journal of Economics, 98, 1 (FeW, 85-106.
Berthelemy, J.C. and F. Bourguignon (1989). "Growth and Crisis in Cote
d'Ivoire, country study for World Bank project Macroeconomic
Policy. Crisis and Growth in the Long Run, mirneo, World Rank.
Cardoso, Eliana (1990). "Macroeconomic Environment and Capital Formation in
Latin America", ,aimeo, Tufts University,
Chenery, Hollis B., Sherman Robinson and Moshe Syrquin (1986).
Industrialization and Growth. New York: Oxford University Press.

Clark, Peter K. (1979). "Investmez,t in the 1970's: Theory, Performance and
Predictions', Brookinn PaDers on Economic Activity, 1, 73-113.

Corbo, Vittorio and Andres Solimano (1991). Chile's Experience with
Stabilization, Revisited" World bank Working Paper WPS
Corden, Max

579.

(1991).

Macroeconomic Policy and Growth", Proceedins of the
World Bank Annual Conference on Develoonent Economics,
forthcoming.

De Cregorio, Jose (1991). "Economic Growth in Latin America", mimeo, IMF
(March).
De Long,

J.

Bradford and Lawrence H. Summers (1990). "Equipment Investment,
Relative Prices, and Economic Growth", presented at NBER
Conference on Economic Growth, April.

- 4Q

Dents,

Kemal and Peter Petri (1987). The Macroeconomics of Successful
Developmenc: What are the Lessons, NEER Macroeconomics Annual.
211- 255.

Douglas, Hernan Cones (1989). "Chile Country Study, for World Bank project
Macroeconomic Policies, Crisis and Growth in the Long Run, mimeo,
World Bank.

Fazzari, Steven, Glenn Hubbard and Bruce Petersen (1988). "Financing
Constraints and Corporate Investment" • rookinps Papers on
Economic ActivIty, 1, 141-195.
Fischer, Stanley (1983). "Inflation and Growth". NBER Working Paper # 1235
(published as "Inflacion y Creciemento", Cuadernos de Economia,
Dec. 1983).
(1988). "Recent Developments in Macroeconomics", Economic Journal,
98. (June), 294-339.

and Franco Modigliani (1978). "Towards an Understanding of the Real
Effects and Costs of Inflation", Welrwirtschaftliches Archiv, 810832.

and Vinod Thomas (1990). "Policies for Economic Development". World
Bank. PRE Working Paper #459.
Crier, Kevin B. and Cordon Tullock (1989). "An Empirical Analysis of CrossNational Econoimic Growth, 1951-80" • Journal of Monetary Econoaics,
24. 2 (Sept). 259-276.

Grossman, Gene and Ethanan Uelpnan (1990). Comparative Advantage and Long-Run
Growth", Anrican Economic Review, 80, 4 (Sept), 796-815
Jones, Larry E. and Rodolfo Manuelli (1990). "A Convex Model of Equilibrium
Growth: Theory and Policy Implications". Journal of Politcal
Econon, 98. 5 (Part I) (act), 1008-1038.
-.

Kaufmann, Daniel (1990). "The Productivity of Investment Projects", World
Bank, forthcoming.
Kormendi, Roger C. and Philip C. tleguire (1985). "Macroeconomic Determinants of
Growth: Cross-Country Evidence", Journal of Monetary Economics.
16, 2 (Sept). 141-64.

Levine. Ross and David Renelt (1990a). "Cross-Country Studies of Growth and
Policy: Methodological, Conceptual, and Statistical Problems",
mimeo, World Bank.
(1990b). "A Sensitivity Analysis of Cross-Country Growth
Regressions". mimeo, World Zank.

- 41

-

Lucas, Robert E. Jr. (1988). "On the Mechanics of Economic Development
Journal of Monetary Econosics, 22, 3-42.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer, and David N. Well (1990). 'A Contribution to
the Empirics of Econowic Growth", presented at an NEER Conference,
October.
Morris, Cynthia t. and Irma Adeltuan (1988). ComDarative Patterns of Economic
Develonment 1850-1914. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.
Murphy, Kevin N., Andrei Shleifer, and Robert 14. Vishny (1989).
"Industrialization and the Big Push", Journal of Political
Econo,y, 97, (Oct), 1003-1026.

Orphanides, Athanasios and Robert N. Solow (1990). "Money, Inflation and
Growth", in EM. Friedman and PH. Hahn (edt), Handbook of
Monetary Econo,ics.1 V01. 1, North-Holland.
Pindyck, Robert H. (1988). "Irreversible Investment, Capacity Choice, and the
value of the Firm", /.aerican Economic Review, 78. 5 (Dec), 969-85.
Rama, Martin (1990). "Empirical Investment Equations in Developing Countries".
World Bank Working Paper WPS563 (Dec).
Raut, Lakshiij. and TN. Srinivasan (1991). 'Endogonous Fertility. Technical
Change and Growth in a Model of Overlapping Generations", mimeo,
Yale University.
Reynolds, Lloyd C. (1986). Economic Growth in the Third World: An Introduction.
New Haven: Yale University Press.

Rower, Paul M. (1986). "Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth", Journal of
Political Economy, 94, (Oct), 1102-1037.
(1989). "Human Capital and Growth: Theory and Evidence", USER Working
Paper * 3173.
(1990). "Endogenous Technological Change', Journal of Political
Econov, 98, 5. Part 2 (Oct.), S71-102.

Schmidc-Hebbel,

Klaus and Tobias Mueller (1989). "Private Investment under
Macroeconomic Adjustment in Morocco" • World Bank, mimeo.

Scholing,

Eberhard and Vincenz
Measuring

(Soy),

Timmerman (1988). Wby LEC Growth Rates Differ:

'Unmeasurable' Influences". tor1d Development, 16, 11

1271-1294,

Schultz, T. Paul (1988). 'Education Investments and Returns", in H. Chenery
and TN. Srinivasan (eds) Handbook of DeveloDment Economics,
Chapter 13. New York: North-Holland.

42 -

Serven, Luis and Andres Solimano (1989). "Private Investment and Macroeconomic
Adjustment". World Bank Working Paper WP3339.
Solimano. Andres (1989). "How Private Investment Reacts to Changing
Macroeconomic Conditions: The Case of Chile in the Eighties".
World Bank Working Paper LIPS 212.
Solow, Robert Ii. (1956). "A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth",
Ouarterly Journal of Econo.Lcs, 70. 1. 65-94.

(1989). "Growth Theory". mimeo, MIT.

Swan, Trevor (1956). "Economic Growth and Capital Accumulation". Economic
Record, 32, 334-361.
Williamson. John (1990). "What Washington Means by Policy Retort.", in J.
Williamson (ed), Latin Aserican Adiustuent. Institute for
International Economics.
World Sank (1988). "Adjustment Lending: An Evaluation of Ten Years of
Experience" * Country Economics Department.

(1990a). "Report on Adjustment Lending II: Policies for the Recovery
of Growth".
(l990b). Trends

in

Deve1oDin Economies 1990.

(1990c). World Tables, 1989-90 edition.
(1.991). world Develuonent Retort.

Table 1: SUMMARY STATISTICS, BY REGION

Africa

Asia

Latin America*

60-73 73-80 80-88

60-73 73-80 80-88

60-73 73-SO 80-88

CD? growth rate
Popn.. growth rate

4.5

0.3
3.2

5.6
2.4

5.7
1.9

7.8
1.7

6.0

Inflation
Budget deficit/GD?
Real exchange rate

5.8 14.1 25.1

2.0

6.0

6.9
3.7

5.7 24.1 111.2

90.3
-0.8
13_a
30.1
9B.9

83.0 91.9
-2.6 -3.1 -2.4

2.6

3.2
2.8

6.3

82.6
Current account/OCr -3.6 -3.6
4.4
Export growth (real) 1.0
14.0 21.5
I/GDP (real)
External

debt/XCS

98.6
-6.1
-1.9
15.6

96.6 365.0

3.9

64.7
-1.7 -1.1
5.2
8.0
19.4 26.5
89.8

5.1
2.4

2.7

2.2

2.4 20 5.5
5.4

3.0

5.5

18.9 23.5 18.6
196.2 316.6

*

Latin America and Caribbean
Growth rates are per cent per annum; inflation race, of GOP deflator, is
calculated on a continuous (1oarithmic) basis; all ratios are expressed as
percentages; base year for all indices is 1980; increase in exchange rate
index indicates devaluation; external debt/XCS (exports of goods and
services) ratios are for 1980 and 1988 respectively.

Table 2: COUNTRY CIIARACTUtISflC$, BY GROWTh RATE (1960-1989)
characteristic

Fast growers
0.23
0.16
0.32

Investment/CD?
Govt. C/GOP
Exports/GD?
Inflation rate

1234

Black nrket ER. premiuw*

13.57

Secondary enrollment (1960)
Primary enrollment (1960)

*

0.30
0.90

Slow growers
0.17
0.12
0.23
31.13
si_is
0.10
0.54

c-stat
5.18
3.26
2.31
-1.74
-3.79
5.46
6.10

Averageblack market exchange rate premium
Source: Levine and Renelt (l990b), Table 2. Sanple consists of 109
countries; fast growers are the 56 countries whose growth rate of per
capita income exceeds the mean; slow growers are the remaining 53
countries.

Table 3:

MEANS • RANGES • AND CORRELATIONS OF VARIAELES*

C?

Mean
Max
MEn

1.76
8.21
-4.15

RGDP7O PRIM7O
2.99
9.46
0.27

0.87
1.29
0.13

0.S5
0.55

0.54

'NV

INF

0.20
0.39
0.05

0.16
0.39
0.05

SUIt

DEBT8O

-0.05
0.01
-0.18

0.19
2.02
0.00

RCDP70 0.11
PRIMIO

WV
11ff

SUB

DEITSO
SSA
LAC

*

a,

0.38
0.46

-0.35 -0.21
0.25 0.19
-0.23 -0.27
-0.37 -0.48
-0.23 -0.12
Dlv, INF are

0.04

-0.29

0.14

-0.09

0.05

-0.16

-0.06

0.15

-0.33

-0.54
0.16

0.10

-0.09

0.19

-0.15

0.28

0.07

0.14

-0.39

for the period 1970-8S; RC0P70, PRIM7O, and DEBT8O are

the specified dates; SUIt is th. average budget surplus over the period
1975-80. correlation coefficients that exceed 0.23 are significant at the
percent level.
for

Table 4: aoss-cowrrRY
Equation

Constant

(8)
0.097
(6.40)

0?

1.23
(3.19)

RGDP7O

0.012
(4.68)

INVESThFJIT RECRESSIONS*

(9)
0.077
(3.11)

(10)

0.087
(2.96)

0.009

0.008

(2.98)

(2.32)

(11)
0.236
(13.70)

(12)
0214
(970)

0052

0.115

0.118

(1.72)

(3.94)

(3.77)

11W

-0.174
(3.05)

-0.148
(2.61)

-0.133
(2.33)

-0.075
(1.79)

SUR7580

-0345

-0.305
(1.69)

-0.174

-0.546
(2.45)

PRIM7O

(2.02)

DET8O

0.013
(0.98)

0.018
(1.30)

(0.78)

0.010
(0.73)

-0.008
(0.59)

SlAV

-0.018
(3.95)

PINV

-0.043
(2.63)

SSA

-0.016
(0.90)

-0.080
(4.65)

LAC

-0.030
(1.67)

-0.046

0.45

0.21

0.21

13

73

40

0.46

N

*

73

0.44 •

73

(2.14)

Dependent variable is INV, average share of investment in GM' over the
period 1970-85 in the Suimers-Heston data. SLAV is the average black
aarket premium (as a multtple of the offical rate) over the period 1970-85;
PIta is the average price of investment goods in the country (relative to
the US) over the period; other variables are as in Table 3.

Table 5: RATES OF RETURN ON INVESTMENT PROJECTS*

Private sector

Public sector
Black markel: premium

4.5

high

( > 200%)
Medium (20-200%)
Low ( C 20%)

8.4
12.2

lii.?

Real interest rate
Negative
Positive

8.1
12.6

10.9
16.0

Inflation

rate

14.?

6.5

Higt C > 100%)

79

Medium (20-100%)
Low ( < 20%)

113.9
13.5

11.2

Trade once distortions
High
Low

8.9

9.4

11.7

16.1

*

From Kaufmann (1990): rates of return on public sector projects based on
sample of estimated a post rates of return on 1600 World Bank projects;
private sector projects are IFC financed, sample size is 150. All data are

a

preliminary.

TabLe 6. MAQWEGONOMIC PERFORNMJCE.

CDP

mv Invc

growth

con

D'IVOIRE (j97339)*

Terms
Real Ext. Inf I
def. a/c def of trade
ER
debt

Bud. Curt

--

1973-76

5.9

22.1

13.8

2.9

4.0

100.9

125.9

16.5

1977-80

5.2

28.3

18.1

6.5

11.3

141.9

156.5

55.2 14.5

1981-83

0.9

23.2

10.7 12.7

13.5

81.3

110.1 124.8

3.5

1986-87

1.6

11.6

6.3

4.5

1.8

106.5

103.0 130.7

3.0

1988

-1.8

15.2

6.7

8.4

6.2

79.7

110.9 131.5

1.5

1989

-1.3

10.3

3.1 11.3

9.7

68.6

104.3 139.0 -2.0

sources: World Eank (199Db and 1990c); Barthelemy and Sourguignon (1989)

denoted BE).

is

Columns 2, 3, 4. 5 And 8 are variables as ratio to CD?; mv0
public
sector investment, including public enterprises; terms of trade series
(1984 — 100) is from BE spliced from 1986 to World Bank (1990b): real
exchange rate series is from BE. spliced from 1987 to World Bank (1990b) - increase represents appreciation: debt ratio is for the last year in the
period; inflation rate is for the GD? deflator.

Table 7. MAGROECONOHIG PERNBNANCE, CHILE
GD?

mv

(l97389)*

my0

Bud.

2.8

187.2

70.9

1.9

4181

74.1

6.8

191.8
113.5

696.2

63.3

342.6

growth

Curr.

Tents

dot. a/c dot of trade

Real Ext. Intl

ER debt

1973

-5.6

7.9

1974

1.0

21.2

8.4
12.5

1975

-12.9

13.1

9.2

30.5
5.4
2.0

7.5

16.8

6.0

-3.1

4.5

114.3

71.4

45.2

97.3

-0.3 14.5

50.1
76.7
98.8

12.2
13.3
26.6

1976-80

5.5

22.7

5.1

84.3

108.1

-14.1

11.3

4.7

-0.7

3.4

9.5

9.8

80.4

4.8

3.3

5.6

99.0

87.5

89.1

1984-86

4.8

143

6.9

3.0

8.6

79.8

86.6 141.6

22.1

1987-88

5.6

17.0

6.8

2.0

2.8

86.5

63.3

96.3

21.2

10.0

20.4

3.6

97.3

62.5

78.3

13.2

1981
1982
1983

1989

Sources: World Bank (199Db and 1990c); Corbo and Solimano
Guaranty
* ColumnsTrust (for real exchange rate)
2, 3, 4, 5 and 8 are variables as ratio to COP;
sector investment, including public enterprises; increase
rate index represents appreciation; debt ratio is for the
period; inflation rate is for the GD? deflator.

(1991); Morgan

Inva is public
in real exchange
last year in the

Chart 1: Cote d'Ivoire
COP GROWTH

MO IIESUtNT

32
30
20
26

24
22
20

I!
Is

I,
12
10
a
6
4
2
0
—2

I
1975

I
1977

dl!

I iollI2I3
I

1979

0 GOP amwth

+ I/V

l5 I7I iaI9I
I

Chart 2: Cote d'Ivoire
20
18
16

I.
12

(0
B

6

4
2
0
—2
—4

0 GOP w°'

+ tjdeL deruclt

0 Oannt c/c deficit

Chart 3: Cote d'Ivoire
REM. EXCHANGE RATE *110 TEm4s OF TRADE

I 70
I 60

ISO

lb
I 30

'20

to
SOC

90
10
70
60

I I2 1fl3
I 1984 I98t iths l7I 'tha 1989I
di. I IéG I 19711ISiS
1980 1981
'375

1977

0 Real nxholQe

rate

+ Tent., or ttod@

Chart 4: ChHe
GOP GROWTH MID IWS1IiNT
25

20

Is
ID

5
a

—5

—Ia

—15

0 GOP 9r0.tl

+ l/t

Chart 5: Chile
OROWTH. aUOGET.

MID cVRRCNT A/C DEFiCIT

35
30
25
20
5
10

5
0
—5

—ID

—Is

0 GOP growth

+

&JdetdeIlcIt

* Ojn.nta/c denca

Chart 6: Chile
REM. CXD4AMOE RATE MID TEAS OF TMOE

210
200
ISO

I 80

hO
I50
140

130
120

lID
'Do

go
ED

70
60

C Real exchalr mte

+ Twns Cf Irode

