                    NI3ER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




          PRIVATIZATION IN EAST EUROPEAN TRANSFORMATION




                         Stanley Fischer




                     Working Paper No. 3703




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                             May 1991




This paper is part of NBER' research program in International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                             NEER Working Paper #3703
                                             May 1991


              PRIVATIZATIOr IN EAST EUROPEAN TRANSFORMATION

                                AB S TRACT

         Privatization of state assets is an essential step to the

 creation of a viable private sector in the formerly socialist
economies of Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. A standard
approach to the problem has rapidly emerged. Small firms are
being privatized by sale very rapidly. The strategy then turns
to larger industrial firms, which are to be corporatized as soon
as possible, moved out of the shelter of the ministries that now

in principle control them, and put under the direction of
corporate boards; at the next stage the intention is to
distribute shares, through sale or free transfer, to some
combination of current workers in the firms, current management,

mutual funds, holding companies, banks, insurance companies,
pension funds, citizens, and the government. I analyze the
standard approach and alternatives, as well as progress in

implementing privatization, with emphasis on Poland, Hungary, and
Czechoslovakia. Progress in privatizing small firms has been
rapid in several East European countries, but privatization of
large firms has been slow, with most success to date in Hungary.

Stanley Fischer
E52-2 BOA
M.I.T.
Cambridge, MA 02139
       and
NBER
                                                                      prague04.91
                                                                         04.20.91


                   PRIVATIZATION IN EAST EUROPEAN TRANSFORMATION


                                  Stanley Fischer1

       The creation of a viable private sector, owning and managing the bulk of
 the   economy's assets, is the essence of the transformation problem in formerly

 socialist economies (FSE5). And since virtually all production is currently

 carried out in the state sector, privatization of state assets is an essential

 step in the creation of the private sector.

       Advice from most Western institutions and economists on how to privatize

 has rapidly converged on a standard approach. Small firms should be

 privatized by sale almost immediately, perhaps with some financing provided by

 the state. Larger industrial firms should be corporatized as soon as

 possible, moved out of the shelter of the ministries that now in principle

 control them, and put under the direction of corporate boards; shares should

 be distributed to some combination of current workers in the firms, current

 management, mutual funds, holding companies, banks, insurance companies,

 pension funds, citizens, and the government.2 Plans envisage the


1Professor of Economics, MIT, and Research Associate, NBER and Institute for
Policy Reform (IPR). This paper was prepared for the IRIS-IPR conference on
Transition to a Market Economy, Prague, March 24-27 1991.
2For a review of such plans, see Borensztein and Kumar (1990), and Milanovic
(1990); see also details of proposals and analysis in Blanchard et al (1990),
Feige (1990), Frydman and Rapaczynski (1990), Crosfeld (1990), Lipton and
Sachs (1990), and Tirole (1991). Tirole (1991) draws on the industrial
organization literature in analyzing principles that should guide the
privatization process. The absence from this paper of plans presented in
languages other than English is unfortunate: the richness of the debate within
each country can be discerned by reading authors familiar with those
literatures, for example Kornai (1990) on flungary.
                                     -2-

  corporatization phase being completed within a year or two. In most variants

  the initial post-corporatization ownership structure is transitional, because

  the government retains a large ownership share, and because the holding

 companies (or their equivalent) are to be phased out. The period from

 corporacizacion to full private ownership of firms that are to be privatized

 is generally expected to last several years, and in some instances, up to a

 decade.

      Ownership reform in agriculture, housing, and land, has drawn less

 attention than industrial and commercial restructuring. The issues are less

 difficult in the cases of housing and land than for operating enterprises; in

 agriculture, there is already a significant private sector to build on in

 Poland, and some private sector activities in other FSEs. While Bulgaria and

 Romania passed land reform laws early in 1991, there has as yet been little

 privatization of land.

      The standard advice does nor draw complete agreement. Kornai (1990),

 along with others, argues that state assets should be sold and not given away.

 The role of the holding companies or mututal funds has not been entirely

 clarified (Hinds, 1990): privatization plans for Czechoslovakia place less

 emphasis on holding companies than those for Poland, which in any case are

 more eclectic concerning the role of financial institutions than some earlier

 proposals.3 Hungary is relying more on privatization from below, initiated by

 the firm, than other countries. Some, basing their advice on the finding by

 Vickers and Yarrow (1988) and others that successful privatization in the U.K.

 required the privatized firm to operate in a competitive environment, believe


3Gontrast for instance, the proposals in Lipton and Sachs (1990), with the
program of the Government of Poland (1990).
                                     -3-

that demonopolization should precede privatization. Other questions remain

open. What is the role of foreigners? How should firms that are not yet

privatized be managed? Is it necessary, as argued for instance by Brainard

(1990), to build up the banking system before privatizing? What other sources

of finance can be created?

     The debate over privatization has been intensely practical, conducted in

real time with real interactions between the academic literature and policy.

By early 1991 major legislation had been passed in Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia,

Hungary, Poland, Romania, and Yugoslavia, and of course the former East

Germany; significant small case privatization and some large firm

privatization is taking place.4 While it cannot yet be claimed that there is

a wealth of experience of privatization in FSEs on which to draw, the

experience -    and certainly the legislation --   is   growing.

     In this paper, I reexamine the main issues in privatization in the PSEs,

drawing on experience of privatization in Poland and Hungary, and to some

extent in Czechoslovakia.5 In Section I I set Out the standard approach in

more detail, and discuss privatization of small and medium scale enterprises.

Then in Section II I discuss the privatization of the core of large industrial

 and commercial firms. The privatization of financial intermediaries, housing,

 agriculture, and land, are discussed briefly in Section III. Conclusions are

 presented in Section IV.




4Developments in Hungary, Poland, and Yugoslavia through late 1990 are
reviewed in Milanovic (1990).
   do not describe the privatization process in Yugoslavia, where
implementation has been heavily affected by political instability. The
Yugoslavian approach was interesting because labor management and ownership
was most heavily entrenched there. See Milanovic (1990).
                                    -4-



I. The Standard Approach


     The sheer scale of the privatization needed in the FSEs makes the problem

very different front that faced by other countries that have undertaken major

privatization programs. Table 1 presents data on the share of the state

sector in value added in commercial and industrial activities in different

countries during the 1980s. The largest completed privatization program so

far is that of post-Allende Chile, which moved firms producing about 25

percent of Cr11' into the private sector, some of them firms that had only

recently been nationalized. The much-studied U.K. program shifted only about

4.5 percent of CNP and employment out of the state sector.



Table 1: SHARI OF STATE SECTOR IN VALUE ADDED

Czechoslovakia (1986)                       97.0
East Cermany (1982)                         96.5
USSR (1985)                                 96.0
Poland (1985)                               81.7
China (1984)                                73.6
Hungary (1984)                              65.2

France (1982)                               16.5
Italy (1982)                                14.0
West Cermany (1982)                         10.7
United Kingdom (1983)                       10.7
United States (1983)                         1.3

Source: Milanovic (1990)


    Reforming governments have opted for the principle of rapid

privatization. This choice reflects their commitment to move decisively from

socialism to capitalism, avoiding as far as possible any detours into a third

way. The experience of privatization in almost all developing countries has
                                     -5-

 been disappointing:6 the loss of patronage and political rents attendant on

 privatization reduce its attractiveness to the political system.7 This

 experience, along with the political need for a credible reform program in the

 face of the unprecedented scale of the privatization necessary in FSEs,

 accounts for the decision to go for rapid privatization. Even though

 credibility demands that an irreversible program be put in place as rapidly as

 possible, it is clear that the process of privatization will take many years.

 It is also likely that the relative decline of the state sector will after a

 few years result more from an increase in production by new private firms than

 from privatization.

      The issue of the ownership rights of current employees confronts all the

 reforming countries, particularly because the decentralization programs of

 former communist governments typically moved in the direction of worker

 management. The issue arises most forcefully in considering spontaneous

 privatizations, in which current employees in one way or another privatize the

 firm for their own benefit. The standard approach argues that existing

 workers have no special claims on the firm's assets on fairness grounds. For

 instance, why should industrial workers obtain larger claims on capital than

 workers in less capital intensive industries, such as teaching? Or why should

 workers in successful firms become wealthier than those in less successful

 firms? Although it is likely in the latter case that workers in more


6See the special issue of World Development, Hay 1989, that focuses on
developing countries, but also examines lessons from the U.K.
7Any political economy model of slow or halting privatization would have also
to account for the fact that state sectors stopped growing in the eighties,
and that many of them began to recede. Any such model would include a
political tradeoff between the efficiency of production and the availability
of rents; the perceived terms of that tradeoff must have changed in the 1980s.
                                        -6-

successful firms have on average worked harder and invested more than those iii

less   successful firms, the general point is correct. However political power

as well as fairness shapes privatization programs, and it has already been

decided that existing workers will receive special treatment, at least in

Poland and Hungary.

       Similarly, the issue of the rights of former owners is a live one in

several countries, most notably East Cermany, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia.

Explicit legal treatment of the rights of former owners not only strengthens

the credibility of a country's commitment to the rights of private property,

but also prevents the legal confusion over ownership that could arise if the

issue were left to be settled later in the courts. However, redress can be

provided to former owners in a way that does not slow the privatization

process: to achieve this, the original owners would be given the right to

compensation, by the state, rather than rights to the property itself. New

owners will find it difficult to get on with running their businesses if they

face the possibility of claims for restitution by former owners.

       The standard approach summarized in Table 2 is not monolithic. ft is

standard in rejecting a case-by-case approach to privatization along U.K.
lines - -   on   the grounds that the process would take far too long, in

separating as the heart of the issue the core of large commercial and

industrial enterprises, and in insisting on rapid progress in establishing the

principle and the fact of private ownership. It has not yet devoted as much

attention to the privatization of other assets and industries. There are

however many important details on which different plans, including those

already embodied in legislation, differ. Borensztein and Kumar (1990) list
                                    -7-

six different distributive plans;8 if they were writing now they would have to

add the programs passed by the Czechoslovak and Polish parliaments, which do

not exactly coincide with any of their six.


Table 2: THE STANDARD APPROACH


1. Small commercial and industrial firms.

     Privatize fast, by sale, if necessary with special financial
arrangements, including leasing.
     1. "Micro" enterprises, such as small retail stores can
        be sold very rapidly.
     2. "Small and medium" scale enterprises can either be (a) first
        corporatized and shares then disposed of through sale to an
        individual or group, or (b) the assets sold or leased after
        liquidation of the state enterprise (as in the 1990 Polish
        legislation).

2. "Core" of large industrial and comniercial firms.

     1. Corporatize or commercialize, setting up corporate boards
        Issue: Membership of boards and control of firms
     2. Privatize by distributing or selling shares.
        Issues: Speed of privatization, types of firms privatized, and
                  extent of restructuring before privatization
                Share sales or free distributions
                To whom (roles of foreigners and former owners)
                Role of financial institutions (mutual funds, holding
                  companies) between corporations and households
                Does the government hold back shares for later sale,
                  and role of stable core of investors.

 3. Financial institutions, housing, land, agriculture..



 Small commercial and industrial firms.

     Existing small firms, typically in retail trade and distribution, are

 being privatized fast. The privatizing agency may be the local rather than a


8These six are presented under the headings: citizen shares (Feige); vouchers
(Romania); financial intermediaries (Frydman/Rapaczynski); financial
intermediaries (Lipton/Sachs); privatization agencies (Blanchard); and self-
management.
                                     -8-

 higher level of government. Very rapid progress has been made in this area in

 Poland, where most shops had been privatized by the end of 1990; governments

 in Czechoslovakia expect to sell over 100.000 small firms in 1991 -   - with
 auctions having begun in February; and Hungary expects to privatize most of

 retail trade this spring. More public sales of small firms, especially in

 transportation and distribution, can be expected as larger vertically

 integrated firms are restructured, and parts are sold off separately. The

 number of new privately owned small firms in the reforming countries far

 exceeds the number of privatized firms. For example, by one estimate there

 were 200,000 small firms in Poland in November 1990, of which more than 80

 percent were newly created rather than privatized.9

      Despite the rapid increase in the number of firms, problems of both

 financing and red tape are frequently reported. Any banking system would have

 difficulty in appraising small firms headed by new entrepreneurs wanting to

 operate in a new and highly uncertain economic environment; all the more so

 would the underdeveloped banking systems of the FSEs. The red tape is a

 holdover from socialism and underdevelopment. The financing problem for

 privatizations can be mitigated if the state or local government provides term

 loans or leases that enable the purchasers to pay for their assets slowly.

 The financing problems of new firms can be addressed through rapid banking

 sector reform, for instance by creating new banks or separate entities within

 existing banks to finance new firms, perhaps using externally provided

 finance.


9mese data are taken from Jackson (1990), who warns of their likely
imprecision.
                                     -9-

      There is an intermediate class of "small and usediwn" scale
                                                                    enterprises,
 about 5,500 of them in Poland (where the core group of the largest
                                                                       companies
 consists of 500 firms.) Polish legislation proposes an extremely eclectic

 approach for the privatization of these companies, to be carried out by

 representatives of the government with the firms taking the initiative. The

 legislation envisages some firms being corporatized and shares distributed.

 The privatization may be initiated by a prospective buyer, who will buy a

 significant bloc of shares; employees will be entitled to some of the shares,

 free. Other shares may be sold through auction, public offer, or negotiated

 sale, with stock exchange listings to follow. Alternatively, small and medium

 scale firms may be liquidated and the assets disposed of through sale,    through
 absorption of the assets into a new company, or through lease, which may also

 offer the right of purchase. The legislation envisages few restrictions     on
 these sales, aside from the setting of a minimum price. Under this heading.

 firms could also be sold to their current employees. Important issues that

 will arise in the privatization of the largest firms, such as the treatment of

 the firm's debt, will have to be handled here too. Presumably the firms that

 are more heavily indebted are likely to be liquidated before being disposed

 of, though it is not yet clear how the creditors will be compensated, if at

 all. The eclecticism of the approach to the privatization of these small and

 medium scale enterprises in Poland is justified by the need to move fast.1°

     While the privatization of small firms has received less attention than

 that of large firms, its importance should not be underestimated. Future

 growth is more likely to come from firms in this size class than from the


10The eclectic approach described in this paragraph is being followed also for
larger firms in Hungary (see Bokros, 1990), as will be discussed below.
                                     - 10   -




 larger   firms, so that the rapid progress that has already taken place in the

 development of micro enterprises, and the rapid pace of privatization that is

 possible for small and medium scale enterprises, can make a key contribution

 to the development of market economies in the FSEs.


 11. Core of larte industrial and commercial firms.


      The core of largest firms (500 firms in Poland. 5000 in the USSR)

 accounts for the bulk of industrial output. Typically these firms are larger

 and more vertically integrated than they would be in a market economy. In

 considering such firms, we distinguish those that are close to being natural

 monopolies and are publicly owned in many market economies, such as the

 railroads and telephone company, from firms that have no such claim, such as

 heavy industry. The latter are likely to face competition from new entry and

 from imports, while the former are not. Given the need to develop a

 regulatory framework for the quasi-natural monopolies,11 and the time

 pressures on competent government bureaucrats, the privatization of such firms

 is likely to be left for later.

 Corporatizat ion.

      Corporatization (or commercialization) of the core firms is expected to

 take place quickly. In Poland, it is estimated that over half of the largest

 500 firms will be corporatized in 1991 and the remainder in 1992. At the end

 of the corporatizatjon process, the firm has a legal structure similar to that

 of most state-owned enterprises in market economies. The Board of Directors


11They are described as quasi-natural monopolies because there is a potential
role for competition in many such industries -- such as telephone
communications.
                                     - 11   -




will   be primarily responsible to the goverruuent12, which will appoint the bulk

 of the members. Workers are also to be represented on corporate boards in

 several countries: while this can be seen as a vestige of worker management,

 it is also a feature of Cerman corporations.

       The performance of the newly corporatized firms will depend on the

 quality of both management and corporate boards. Current management is likely

 to be retained initially, but both management consultants and management

 contracts can be used to improve the quality of current management. Technical

 assistance funds are likely to be available to help finance the use of foreign

 consultants and managers. Management training on a large scale is also

 beginning; foreign financing is likely to available for this purpose as well.

 There is nonetheless no doubt that the quality of management should improve

 over time as more experience is gained of working in a market environment.

       The quality and independence of the boards of directors will also be an

 important influence on the performance of the firm and the completion of its

 privatization. Civen their knowledge of the operations of the firm, it would

 seem natural to put the bureaucrats who were formerly responsible for the

 firms onto the boards. Where exceptional individuals are involved, that will

 help; but in general the practice is unlikely to be productive. New directors

 can be trained, as is happening in Poland. Foreign experience can be drawn on

 by putting one or two foreign businessmen on the more important boards. The


12The government agency to which the SOEs will be responsible differs from
country to country. Czechoslovakia and its constituent States will set up
Funds of National Property to which the assets will belong, and which will be
responsible for privatization. In Poland, the commercialized firms will
belong to the Treasury but their privatization will be carried out by the
Ministry of ownership Transformation. In Hungary, the State Property Agency
has to approve privatizations.
                                      - 12   -




 quality   of the boards will improve with experience, and government will have

 to keep a watchful eye at the early stages.

      There is a general issue of the extent to which (a) firms and (b)

 industries, should be restructured before privatization. This "triage" phase

 of the privatization program has not received much attention, but the

 difficulties that beset the Treuhandanstalt, which draws on a large stable of

 former west German business executives, suggest that it could take longer and

 be much more difficult than expected. Some of the newly corporatized firms

 will lose money. It is not at all clear how the government will decide which

 firms to subsidize before privatizing, and which to close down or liquidate.

 Given that many of the largest firms in FSEs are excessively vertically

 integrated, there is a good case for attempting a relatively rapid

 restructuring of the firm before privatization. The separate pieces will

 probably be easier to sell than the whole. Restructuring of an industry will

 not be necessary so long as the firms that are privatized face potential

 competition from abroad and from new entries; as argued above, there are

 advantages to privatizing firms that are likely to remain monopolies

 relatively late, after a regulatory framework is in place.

      The government and corporate boards will also have to decide how far to

 restructure firm balance sheets before privatization)-3 The firms'

 liabilities to banks, inter-enterprise credits, and the treatment of implicit

 or explicit pension liabilities, will be at issue. Direct sales of some firms

 are anticipated in all countries, and in these cases balance sheet

 restructuring will be part of the negotiations and will help determine the


13This is the key problem in privatizing bamks, to be discussed below.
                                   - 13   -




sales price. There is less need to restructure the balance sheet where firms
are being given away, provided the shares in different firms are distributed

equitably over the population. However, the management of newly privatizeci

firms will have enough on their plates in operating in the new market

environment without also having to engage in extensive debt negotiations, so

that cleaning up of balance sheets would be helpful -   - and offsetting
cancellations of inter-enterprise credits should not be too expensive for the

government.

Sale or Distribution of Shares.

    The first choice after commercialization is whether to sell shares or

give them away, or both. This decision involves tradeoffs among the speed of

privatization, the amount of revenue that can be raised, and the ownership

role of foreigners. Because of the difficulties of valuation of companies, a

commitment to rapid sale on a large scale would imply low revenues; because

domestic financial intermediaries are weak, and there are few individuals with

the necessary resources, rapid sale would imply a large ownership share for

foreigners. Accordingly most countries envisage rapid free distribution of

some shares to the public. Thirty percent is being distributed in Romania, a

complicated formula applies in Poland, and Czechoslovakia is using its voucher

scheme to distribute between 40 and 80 percent of each privatized company to

the public.

    Free distribution of shares would be unattractive if the main motive for

privatization were to raise government revenue. The revenue motive has been

important for governments in other countries, including the U.K., and added

revenue would no doubt be welcome to FSE governments at the start of the

reform process. Nonetheless, revenue is not the main goal; rather it is to
                                   - 14   -




move firms rapidly into the private sector, with the intention of increasing

their efficiency and that of the economy. With an eye on future revenues,

governments generally plan to hold back some shares for later sale.

     In Poland shares will be distributed 30 percent to the public, 20 percent

to the pension system, 10 percent each to commercial banks and workers, and

the remaining 30 percent will be held by the government. The distribution to

the pension system makes sense as a means of funding existing pension

liabilities and thereby reducing future calls on general revenues; further, by

funding the pension system the government encourages the principle of funded

rather than transfer pension schemes.

     Two arguments can be made in favor of bank share ownership. First, the

banks have some financial expertize, so that their ownership of equity will

help improve the efficiency of the stock market. Second. share distribution

to banks is a means of building up banks' assets and correspondingly their

capital in advance of the balance sheet restructurings and writedowns that

have to come. Since some of the assets written down will be loans to the

firms whose shares are being distributed, there is some logic in compensating

the banks in advance.   However, share distribution gives the banks assets of

highly uncertain value at a time when the value of their assets is in any case

unknown, and when the main need is to restore the safety of banks and

confidence in them. Bank share ownership would also give them inappropriate

incentives to lend to firms in which they have an ownership interest. If

shares are to be distributed to banks, it would be possible to hold the shares

earmarked for banks in a separate general fund, which could be used later to

infuse funds into banks that need them, and to restructure bank balance sheets

with safer assets.
                                      - 15   -




     In    Czechoslovakia vouchers for the purchase of shares will be distributed

to all citizens, with the government retaining at least 20 percent to deal

with claims on the firms made by former owners. The proportions are reversed

in Romania, where the government retains 70 percent. Although there are

fiscal reasons for the government to retain shares, the more it does so, the

less credible is its commitment to move rapidly to a private ownership market

economy.

     The voucher schemes have to be completed by a pseudo-market to establish

the initial voucher prices of firms. Triska and Jelinek-Francjs (1990)

discuss alternative schemes for the initial allocation of shares, favoring a

pro-rata allocation method in which the number of shares an individual

receives in a given company is equal to his or her pro-rata share in the total

bids for that firm.

     While this method would clear the market, some alternative schemes being

considered would not, at least not rapidly. A "tatonnement" is proposed for

Czechoslovak privatization: initial prices will be set for 2000 companies.

individuals will then tender vouchers for shares in individual firms, prices

will be changed on the basis of the excess of supply or demand of shares, and

the process repeated. Despite its conformity with the textbooks, this process

has few benefits to recommend it. The information on which individuals base

their bids for shares must be extremely imperfect, and the final prices

correspondingly poor guides to investment decisions. Under these

circumstances, there are advantages to the alternative of distributing shares

in mutual funds to individuals, on an equitable basis, and allowing the mutual

funds to trade in the shares of individual companies. Individuals would be

allowed to sell mutual fund shares after a specified period, say two years.
                                   - 16   -




The role of foreigners

     The potential role of foreigners has been a matter of concern in all the

FSEs. Countries want the benefits of foreign expertize and foreign finance.

But they are concerned that, in the absence of domestic sources of finance,

foreigners will acquire a large part of industry at fire-sale prices.

Accordingly at the same time as countries seek foreign expertize. for instance

in the form of technical assistance or management contracts, they make

provisions to control the share of foreign ownership. For instance, in the

auctions of small firms in Czechoslovakia, foreigners were not allowed to bid

in the first round. Similarly the distribution of ownership shares or

vouchers to citizens or residents limits the initial extent of foreign

ownership.

    These limits may appear redundant at present when there is no large flow

of foreign finance into the FSEs. However some limits may be necessary since

large scale foreign purchases at low prices could discredit the entire

privatization process. Further, governments have shown their interest in

negotiating or encouraging joint ventures and other means of foreign

participation. Contraints on foreign ownership can be relaxed once the

privatization process is well established.

The Hunmarian difference.

     Practice in Hungary will differ from that in the other countries in two

major respects. First, there will be greater reliance on privatizations

initiated by the firms themselves. These "privatizations from below" continue

to be referred to as spontaneous privatizations (e.g. Bokros, 1990). However,

the spontaneous privatizations that led to an outcry in Hungary and other

countries in 1989 usually referred to a particularly favorable deal that
                                      - 17   -




 involved   either the current management or other members of the nomenklatura.

Since 1989 all Hungarian privatizations have had to be approved by the State

Property Agency, which has exercised its right of refusal in almost one third

of the cases it has considered. The State Property Agency also intends to

initiate privatizations, and will consider proposals originating fron

potential purchasers. Hungary hopes to privatize one-third of state assets

within the next three years.

     Second, Hungary has hardly accepted the principle of free distribution of

shares. Kornai (1990) argues strongly that property should be purchased, and

that the basis of the new system will be undermined if it starts with     a free

gift. Bokros (1990) allows for some distribution of vouchers, but refers to

free distribution of shares as a marginal solution that is part of a social

compensatory scheme rather than a series attempt at privatization, adding

(p.7) "it is not considered seriously as part of any 'grand design' even by

social researchers and leftist intellectuals". The arguments in favor of free

distribution on an equitable basis are that the property has already been paid

for by the population, and that those currently able to purchase assets     may
have obtained their wealth illegitimately. Countering the argument that

property acquired freely is unlikely to be treated seriously. Hinds (1990)

points out that individuals who inherit property do not seem to mistreat it.

While the argument against free distribution is not compelling, Hungary does

avoid the complication of the free distribution schemes that some form of

concentrated ownership or control has then to be introduced, for example the

holding companies.

    The pragmatic Hungarian approach is making progress more rapidly than the

alternative approaches being followed in other countries. There is a tradeoff
                                      - 18   -




between the speed with which the privatization process takes place and the

fairness of the process. Speed matters.

The development of a stock market.

    All privatization programs envisage a major role for a stock market.

While there has been considerable scepticism about the absolute efficiency of

the U.S. stock market in the academic literature (e.g. Shiller, 1989), the

question is one of relative rather than absolute efficiency -   - and here it is

difficult to envisage any other arrangement that will perform the information

processing and corporate control functions that a stock market provides.

However the importance of the stock market varies across countries, with the

banks playing a relatively more important role especially in Germany.

     It will take some time to develop stock markets with the necessary depth

and efficiency. Hungary has already institituted a stock market. Poland has

decided to follow the French model of the stock market, stock registration.

and clearing, in part because of the technical assistance offered. A

securities commission is also being set up, with training assistance from the

United States SEC. The Securities Commission will register securities to be

traded, license brokers and mutual funds, promulgate and enforce regulations,

and attempt to educate the public. Limited trading on the Polish market has

already begun.

Mutual funds and holding companies.

     It is unlikely that an efficient stock market can be developed until

shares begin to be exchanged for money rather than vouchers or other shares.

The share or voucher distribution schemes lead to widely dispersed share

ownership, and raise concerns about both the efficiency of the stock market

and the role that shareowners can play in corporate control. If all
                                    - 19   -




shareholders are small, none of them has much incentive to do the research
that will lead to efficient asset pricing. Further, small widely dispersed

shareowners cannot exercise control over corporate boards and management

because they lack the financial resources to back their judgment with sales     or

purchases of shares.

     Two approaches have been suggested to deal with these problems. The

first is to develop institutional investors, such as pension funds and mutual

funds. The second is to set up self-liquidating holding companies. For

simplicity we refer to these as the mutual fund and holding company proposals

respectively. It is taken for granted that it would in any case be desirable

to encourage institutional investors such as pension funds, and that can be

done immediately under any approach in which shares are distributed rather

than sold. Pension funds will also develop over the course of time as newly

privatized firms have to provide pensions for their employees. The sooner

these institutions can begin trading in the stock market for money, the more

rapidly the stock market can develop.

     The difference between the-mutual fund and holding company approaches is

that the mutual funds are expected to take a more passive role in management.

The creation of mutual funds will solve the problem of uninformed investors.

The mutual funds can be set up either (a) by allocating shares in companies to

them, and then allocating shares in mutual funds to individuals, or (b) by

allocating vouchers to individuals to bid for shares in mutual companies.

Scheme (a) would be preferable, since there can at the beginning be   very
little information on the basis of which individuals would bid under scheme

(b). Some thought has also been given in Poland to the establishment of

financial intermediaries, such as mutual funds, that will obtain outside
                                          - 20

capital (including foreign capital) and purchase shares rather than be given

them (Jedrzejczak, 1990). In any case, foreign experts are expected to take

part in the management of financial institutions, including mutual funds.

     Mutual funds would exercise discipline over company management by sales

and purchases of shares. Managers should be given stock options to ensure

that stock price movements affect their actions, though the question of

whether they would act in an excessively short-sighted (supposedly American)

rather than long-term (supposedly Japanese) fashion is open. A sufficient

number of mutual funds --      at   least 15 in the smaller countries, more in the

Soviet Union -   - will   have to be created for the stock market to operate

efficiently. The efficiency of the market will depend also on the composition

of the funds' share holdings. Each firm should initially be owned by more

than one mutual fund, but shares should be distributed in a way that allows

mutual funds to specialize in gathering information. After a short while the

mutual funds should be allowed to purchase or sell whatever shares they want.

Over the course of time specialized funds can be expected to develop.

     An important question arises of when trading for money can begin, and how

liquidity is to be infused into the stock market. Mutual funds would need

initial financial capital to be able to buy and sell shares for money rather

than other shares. The Source of this capital is not clear; the State could

provide mutual funds with initial capital, other institutions such as pension

funds, or individuals, could invest in the mutual funds. It would probably be

advisable to limit both the volume       of   trading and the participation of

individuals in the early days of the stock market. For example, the mutual

funds could be kept as closed end funds, and individuals allowed to sell only

sore portion of their initial holdings, during an initial period such as the
                                        - 21   -




 first   year after the stock market is opened, or after shares are distributed

 (since not all shares will be distributed at the beginning).

     Holding companies would take a more active role in the management of

companies. The holding companies would be represented and take an active role

on corporate boards. Shares would be distributed so that each firm is

allocated predominantly, but certainly not exclusively, to one holding

company. To prevent monopolization, the holding companies should not be

specialized in particular industries. The number of holding companies should

be sufficiently large to make collusion difficult. This would require at

least 20 companies in a country like Poland.

          The holding Companies would be set up not only to concentrate

information in the stock market, but also because effective management in a

market economy - -   particularly   financial management --   will   be scarce in the

early transition stages in the FSEs. The holding companies would be expected

to include the best corporate managers, and also to draw on foreign experts in

managing Companies.

     There are two major fears about the holding companies: first, that if

they are badly run, they can create more difficulties than they solve; and

second,    that they will end up essentially reproducing the ministries that they

are designed to replace. There is no way of ensuring that the holding

companies run well. They face a formidable management task in bringing a

large number of companies into the market economy, and in closing the firms

that will not make it. Management incentives that tie compensation to stock

market performance or the profitability of their firms will help, but cannot

substitute for management skills that operatives in market economies have

acquired through on-the-job and academic training over long periods.
                                       - 22   -




     It is inevitable that the holding companies would in part be managed by
those who have managed companies in the past. The holding companies could

also have enormous power. This means there is a real possibility the holding

companies would end up acting like the ministries that they are in effect

replacing. This danger can be mitigated by ensuring that there is competition

among holding companies within each industry, and by supervising the holding

companies. However their possession of superior information makes supervision

difficult.

     Blanchard (1990) suggests that the holding companies should be self-

liquidating, required to sell off their companies over the course of time and

with a specified end-date. They would thus serve as privatization agencies.

This is a worthwhile suggestion for preventing the economic dominance of

holding companies, even though the example of the industrial groups in Japan

tempts the thought that holding companies may also be an efficient way of

organizing industry.

    There is no need to use only one or the other method -.     mutual funds, or

holding companies -   - exclusively.   Larger firms can be privatized

individually, smaller ones can be privatized through holding companies (with

the shares distributed to holding companies without creating cartels or

monopolies), and mutual funds can hold shares of both the larger companies and

holding companies.

The remaining shares.

     In each of the share distribution proposals, the government retains a

significant percentage of ownership, sufficient to make it the largest

shareholder. A benevolent government would be able to use this power to

improve firm performance, but there is no reason to expect the governments of
                                       - 23   -




 FSEs to behave differently than other governments, It is unwise for the

 government to continue to hold these shares for very long. Governments should

 commit themselves to divesting through some mechanism as soon as possible,

when it is clear that a company is operating successfully in the
                                                                    private
 sector.

     Lipton and Sachs (1990) suggest that the government seek out a "stable

core" of investors who   will   constitute the ownership and management nucleus of

each company, and sell its shares to them. The possibility of the
                                                                      government
at any time being able to sell off 30 percent of the shares, at a price of its

choosing, would subject any other negotiations for share sales to great

uncertainty. Thus it would be appropriate for the government to seek out

purchasers during the early phases of privatization, in collaboration with the

corporate managment, but not to continue to exercise its implicit control

after the firm is established in the private sector.

Financing needs.

     One major difficulty with the proposal to distribute rather than sell

shares is that companies are very likely to need financial capital as they

begin operating in a market environment. Depending on how the     government
treats the proceeds of sales, companies that are sold can acquire this capital

automatically. This is certainly one advantage of the Hungarian approach.

     Alternatively, other sources of finance could be made available through

the banking system. Brainard (1990) argues that financial sector reform is

essential for rapid transformation. Rapid financial sector reform would

certainly assist the privatization effort. However, it cannot take place very

rapidly, because the value of existing assets and liabilities of the banks

will not be known until the economy settles down to a more rational set of
                                    - 24   -




prices   and the restructuring of the real side of the economy is complete. The

fear, based on experience, is that banks will make loans designed to save

existing assets rather than develop new ones if they are encouraged to lend

before their balance sheets are cleaned up.

     Banks can help newly emerging companies by segregating financing of new

investments from their ongoing relationships, and governments may want to

funnel financial assistance from abroad through the banking system.


III. Other Privatizations.


     Financial intermediaries, housing, agriculture, and land, will all have

to be privatized before the economies of the FSEs can be regarded as having

made the transformation to private market status. The FSEs have moved to two-

tier banking, with the central bank separated from commercial banks. Unless

the government is willing to guarantee the value of assets transferred at the

time of privatization, the banks will not find buyers until their balance

sheets are cleaned up. Cleaning up their balance sheets is likely to take

significant injections of funds and time. But the banks should in any case

not be privatized until an adequate regulatory apparatus is in place. Because

this too will take time, progress is urgent. Rapid development of the

regulatory framework is needed also so that new banks, including foreign

banks, and other financial institutions can begin to develop.

    J'hile there is some private housing in all the FSEs, the bulk is state

owned, and there has been little attempt at privatization in the last few

years. It is well understood that until rents are raised to realistic levels,

and wages adjusted accordingly, there is little incentive for renters to buy

their houses or apartments. Because there are so many units to privatize,
                                         - 25   -




because cooperative arrangements in apartment buildings will have to be

developed, and because mortgage financing will have to be provided, the sale

of housing is likely to be very slow.           It is nonetheless surprising that it

has received so little attention so far.

     Agriculture is substantially private in Poland, but agriculture remains

mainly collectivized in Czechoslovakia and Hungary. There has been little

progress in decollectivization, and in land reform, and there is no agreed

strategy in these areas. By some reports, there has also been relatively

little pressure for reform from within the agricultural sector.


IV. Concluding Comments.


     The progress that has been made in analyzing privatization options in the

FSEs and moving the analysis into legislation is remarkable. So is the

progress that has been made in dealing with the privatization of small

commercial and industrial firms. It remains true though that privatization of

large-scale firms has barely begun, and that the evidence is not yet in on

whether the ambitious Czechoslovak and Polish approaches will result in more

rapid privatization than the more piecemeal Hungarian approach. There are

great uncertainties about how the Czechoslovak and Polish approaches will

work, particularly when the stock market can begin to play a role, whether the

holding companies or mutual funds will be successful, and how rapidly it will

be possible to move on a major scale from commercialization to privatization.

The experience of the former East Germany, where the privatization process - -

based on negotiated sales -   - is   gravely bogged down, is warning that there may

be major disappointments in store. It should also be emphasized that
                                     - 26   -




privatization has   soon to be tackled in other areas --   financial   institutions,

housing, and agriculture and land.

    Given the magnitude of the task, it would be a mistake to discourage any

any potentially viable forn of privatization that is not theft. The pragmatic

apptoach being followed in Hungary, and in the privatization of medium scale

firms in Poland, gives promise of faster privatization than any monolithic

alternative.

     What if privatization turns out to be slower than hoped? That will be a

setback setback to hopes for the rapid creation of a private sector. But the

success of small-scale privatizations, and the extraordinary growth of very

small firms, suggests that the key to the long-run transformation of the FSEs

may lie less in the privatization of the very large industrial firms - - some

of them dinosaurs --   than in the development of new firms and the growth of

existing smaller firms. For that reason, rapid progress in other areas, such

as the creation of a suitable legal environment, price decontrol, industrial

deregulation, and trade liberalization, is as important to the development        of

a vibrant private sector as privatization of large firms.




                                     BIBLIOGRAPHY


 Blanchard, Olivier, Rudiger Dornbusch, Paul Krugman, Richard Layard and
         Lawrence Summers (1990). "Reform in Eastern Europe", mimeo, MIT and
         WIDER.

Bokros, Lajos (1990). "Privatization in Hungary", mimeo, National Bank of
         Hungary.

Borensztein, Eduardo and Manmohan S. Kumar (1990). "Proposals for
         Privatization in Eastern Europe", mimeo, 11fF.
                                        - 27 -

Brainard,   Lawrence J. (1990). "Strategies for Economic Transformation in
            Eastern Europe: The Role of Financial Reform", mimeo, Bankers Trust
            Company.

Donahue, John ID. (1989). The    Privatization   Decision. New York: Basic Books

Feige, Edgar (1990). "A Message to Gorbachev: Redistribute the Wealth'
         Challenge (May-June), 46-53.

Frydman, Roman, and Andrzej Rapaczynski (1990). "Markets and Institutions in
         Large Scale Privatizations", mimeo. New York University.

Government of Poland (1990). "Program for the Privatization of the Polish
         Economy", mimeo, Warsaw (December).

Crosfeld, Irena (1990). "Prospects for Privatizat ion in Poland", European
          Economy, March. No. 43, 139-150.

Hinds, Manuel (1990). "A Note on the Privatization of Socialized Enterprises
            in Poland", minleo, World Rank.

Jackson, Marvin (1990). "The Privatization Score Card for Eastern Europe",
         mimeo, Leuven Institute for Central and East Europen Studies,
         Catholic University, Leuven.

Jedrzejczak, Gregory T. (1990). "Privatization in Poland", mimeo, Ministry of
         Ownership Changes. Warsaw.

Kornai, Janos (1990). The Road to a Free Economy. New York: Norton.

Lipton, David, and Jeffrey Sachs (1990). "Privatization in Eastern Europe: The
         Case of Poland", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 293-334.

Milanovic, Branko (1990). "Privatization in Post-Communist Societies", mimeo,
            World Bank.

Shiller, Robert J. (1989). Market Volatility. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Tirole, Jean (1991). "Privatization in Eastern Europe: Incentives and the
         Economics of Transition", forthcoming, NBER Macroeconomics Annual.

Triska, Dusan and Charles Jelinek-Francis (1990). "A Study of Privatization in
         the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic", mimeo, Prague.

Vickers, John and George Yarrow (1988). Privatization: An Economic Analysis.
          Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
</ref_section>
