                     NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




              THE DEMAND FOR AND RETURN TO EDUCATION
              WHEN EDUCATION OUTCOMES ARE UNCERTAIN




                         Joseph G. Altonji




                      Working Paper No. 3714




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                             May 1991




This paper is part of NBERs research program in Labor Studies.
Any OPiflOflS expressed are those of the author and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                         NBER Working Paper 37l4
                                         Hay 1991


              THE DEMAND FOR AND RETURN TO EDUCATION
              WHEN EDUCATION OUTCOMES ARE UNCERTAIN

                             ABSTRACT

     The vast literature on human capital and earnings assumes
that individuals know in advance that they will complete a

particular program of schooling. This paper treats education as
a sequential choice that is made under uncertainty. A simple two
period structural model is used to explore the effects of
ability, high school preparation, preferences for schooling, the
borrowing rate, and ex post payoffs to college on the probability
of various post secondary college outcomes and the ex ante return
to starting college. The model provides the basis for a simple
empirical method of accounting for uncertainty about educational
outcomes and for nonlinearity in the relationship between years
of education and earnings when estimating the expected return to

the first year of college. I present estimates of the effects of
gender, aptitude, high school curriculum, family background
characteristics, and other variables on the expected return to
starting college.


                                        Joseph G. Altonji
                                        Department of Economics
                                        Northwestern University
                                        Evanston, IL 60208
                                             and
                                        NBER
               I. Introduction and Suary

        Most of the enormous empirical literature on human capital and
                                                                         earnings
 that has grown out of the wot-k of Jacob Mincer (1958. 1962. 1974), Becker
 (1975), and other pioneers of the human capital approach to income distribution
 and earnings abstracts from uncertainty about whether a program of schooling will
 be completed. An individual chooses the education level that maximizes the
 present discounted value of wealth given her borrowing rate and the effect of
 education on earnings, completes her education, and receives the expected return
 in the market place associated with the chosen schooling level. A rich
 literature on the returns to education attempts to account for various biases
 that may arise If education choices are systematically related to other factors
 (such as aptitude) that influence earnings.'   But this literature also views the
individual as able to choose a future level of education with no uncertainty
about actually completing the level. Furthermore, most of the literature on
returns to education does not address the fact that there are large differences
in earnings by field of study or the fact that choice of college major often
changes during college.2
       This paper examines some implications of the view that educational
decisions are made under uncertainty. I analyze a simple structural model of
education choice and implement a method for accounting for uncertainty about
educational outcomes and for nonlinearity in the relationship between years of
education and earnings when estimating the expected return to a year of school.
I provide estimates of the effects of aptitude, high school curriculum, and
family background characteristics and other variables on the expected return.
       The work is motivated by three facts that suggest that uncertainty may
have important consequences for the demand for education and for measurement of
the returns to education. First, many individuals attend but never finish
college even though they report that they plan to complete college or graduate
work at the time that they begin college. In the National Longitudinal Survey of



        See for example, CrUtches (1977), Willis and Rosen (1978), and the
surveys by Rosen (1978) and Willis (1986).

     2 Among the recent studies that do examine differences in earnings by
college major are Berger (1987), and Paglin and Ruffolo (1990), Brown and
Corcoran (1990), and Bamberger (1986). As noted below, Bamberger's model of
choice of major explicitly takes into account the fact that individuals who
start college in a particular major may switch to another major or drop out of school.
                                                 2
  the   High   School Class   of 1972 (NLS12) sample, 89 percent of high school
                                                                                seniors
  who   plan   to complete college or graduate school
                                                start college but only 58.1 have
  completed college by l919. Compariso,s of plans with actual majors indicate
  that individuals are also quite
                                       uncertain about what they will major In
                                                                                   during
  college.
          Second,   for some demographic groups the returns to     education are
  nonlinear, with much of the return associated with
                                                     completing high school or
  completing college. For young men I find that
                                                 attending college for less than
  two years or for 2 or more
                             years but not receiving a degree changes the log wage
  by - .0076 and .057 respectively, while
                                          obtaining a degree raises the log wage by
  .179. Nonhlnearities are much less important for women in the NLS72 and
 undoubtedly vary across time.4 However, the general point is that nonhinearities
 in the returns may produce substantial
                                         differences between ex ante and ex post
 returns to the first year or two of college.
                                                As Weisbrod (1962) pointed out, the
 return to the first year of college is not the
                                                 earnings differential between
 individuals with 12 and 13 years of
                                     schooling who are the same in other
 dimensions that affect earnings. Rather, the return is the difference between
 the earnings of the person who stops at 12 and the expected earnings net of
 education costs of a person who attends the
                                              first year of college, where the
 expectation is taken across earnings associated
                                                  with 14 years, 15 years, 16 years
and higher education levels weighted
                                      by the probability that the individual who
has completed year 13 will
                            successfully complete those higher levels. The
coefficients on years of education and on interaction
                                                        terms involving years of
education and school or background
                                    characteristics in a conventional
                                                                       earnings
regression may provide misleading estimates of both (1) the value cx ante
                                                                            of the
additional year of schooling and (2) the effect of school characteristics and
high school curriculum on that value. This
                                             is because such regressions
condition on the ultimate educational
                                       outcome, which is uncertain at the time

        This result is for a sample of 9,032 for
                                                  whom valid data on educational
attairunent in 1979 and educational plans
available. The small fraction does        as of senior year of high school are
                                     not appear to reflect unreliability of the
responses to the question about education
obtained a college or graduate             plans: 93.5 percent of the people who
                                degree indicated in 1972 that they planned to
obtain a college or graduate degree.

     '. Many
                studies find evidence of acollege diploma effect or of higher
returns   to the latter years of college than to the early years. See for example,
Hungerford and Solon (1987) and Card      and   Krueger (1990, Figure 2).
                                         3


that the decision about whether to pursue an additional year of schooling 1.
made.    Variables that affect the probability that an individual will actually
complete the program may play en important role in the decision to start college.
        Third, there are large differences across fields of specialization in the
earnings differential between college and high school graduates. The estimates
in Table 1 indicate, for example, that engineers receive high returns in the
labor market. The differences across fields are reflected in surveys of the
salaries of college graduates and in studies using other micro data sets.5
Specificity of the knowledge acquired in particular fields of study, such as
mathematics or English. end the importance of pre-requisites in some fields,
particularly mathematics and the sciences, may mean that course selections in
high school or the early years of college condition the options available later
in much the same way that occupation specific on the job training conditions
future employment options.6 Decisions to change fields because of new
information about preferences for particularly types of work and study or poor
performance, or other factors may be very costly. As Bamberger (1986) points
out, to the extent that individuals are uncertain about the probability that they
will be able to and will want to complete a program in a particular field, they
must take into account the alternative options that starting a particular program
of study might lead to.
        There are a few studies in addition to those mentioned above that have
examined the implications of uncertainty about education outcomes. Manski
(1989) uses    series of models of education as a sequential decision to analyze
the properties of policies designed to reduce the drop out rate from post


         See Berger (1988). who uses the National Longitudinal Survey of Labor
Market Experience Youth Cohort. Paglin and Ruffolo (1990) cite several surveys
of starting salaries of college graduates. They find a strong relationship
between the salaries in different fields and the average Math GRE scores of
persons who took the GRE and majored in the field. They attribute much of the
difference in wages across fields to the market returns to the math aptitude of
those who go into the various fields, but do not examine whether the returns to
math and verbal aptitude depend upon the major one graduates in. The present
paper does not focus on the sources of the differences in returns across fields,
but it is worth noting that the estimates below indicate that there are large
differences in the cx post payoffs to various majors even after one conditions on
the aptitude and achievement scores and other high school and family background
variables.

     6 See Shaw (1987) and Sicherman and Galor's (1990) discussion of
occupations.
                                           4

   secondary school.7 Similar ideas arise the
                                                 occupational choice models of Miller
   (1984) and Shaw (1987). Ranburger
                                       (1986) explicitly accounts for the fact that
   individuals must take account of the
                                         probabilities of having to switch majors or
  drop out of school and the
                              resulting payoffs when they consider the present value
  of future earnings associated
                                 with an initial choice of
                                                             major. He formulates and
  estimates a model of the choice of
                                      major in which students base decisions about
  major on both the expected returns if
                                          they successfully complete the major and
  the probability that they will do so given past educational
                                                                 choices and outcomes.
 However, the theoretical and empirical
                                           literature treating education as a
 sequential decision under
                            uncertainty is very limited, and uncertainty about
 completing school has been ignored in
                                         empirical studies of the returns to
 education.

        Section II provides a simple 2
                                        period structural model that captures most
 aspects of the schooling decision problem
                                            mentioned above. I use to the model to
 illustrate the effects of
                            aptitude, high school preparation, tastes for
 schooling, and the cx post returns to
                                        various college degrees on the ex ante
 internal rate of return to
                             starting college and on the probabilities of various
 post secondary outcomes.
        Section [II presents an
                                  empirically estimable reduced form version of an
  equation for the cx ante rate of
                                    return to starting college presented in section
  II. An implication of the
                             structural model in section 2 is that prior to
  choosing whether to start college each
                                           individual faces a set of probabilities
  that she will ultimately
                           complete a particular level of education in a particular
  field conditional upon
                         starting college. There is also a set of market payoffs
 to completing an education
                             program of a particular length in a particular field.
 Personal characteristics affect
                                   the expected rate of return to
                                                                   starting college
 both by altering the market
                              payoffs associated with completing particular
 postsecondary programs of study and by
                                          altering the probabilities that the
 individual will complete the programs.
        In Section IV I discuss the data
                                           and the specificajns of reduced form
equations for the Probability (conditional
                                              upon starting college) of 18
education outcomes.   I also discuss the variables
                                                     that are included in the wage
equation that is used to estimate the
                                        ex post payoffs to various education
outcomes
            Section V presents estimates of
                                              the expected internal rate of return


     7. See also Comay et al (1973).
                                         5

to starting college for various groups. In section VI I discuss the sensitivity
of the results to treatment of unobserved heterogeneity in the payoffs to various
education outcomes and to assumptions about the information set available to high
school seniors.
       The main empirical results are as follows. First, the ex ante return to
starting college evaluated at the sample mean for male high school graduates is
2.8 percent in the base case considered below, while the cx post return is
actually slightly negative.8 The cx post and cx ante returns for female high
school graduates are closer ((8.5) versus (7.4)), and are much larger than the
return for men. The cx ante returns for both men and women are substantially
higher if one allows the cx post payoff to education to increase with labor
market experience.
       Second, the differences between men and women in the cx post payoffs to
various post secondary outcomes explain most of the gender difference in
returns. (Women who do not attend college earn much less than comparable men.)
Differences in the characteristics of men and women do not make much difference.
However, gender differences in the equations for education outcomes tend to raise
the return to college for men relative to women.
       Third, high aptitude individuals have a substantially higher cx ante
return to starting college than low aptitude individuals. Aptitude raises the
return for men both by increasing the cx post payoffs to college and by
favorably altering the probabilities of the various education outcomes
conditional on starting college. For women the link between aptitude and the cx
ante return to education is dominated by the effect of aptitude on the cx post
payoffs to college.
       Fourth, an academic high school curriculum and a favorable family
background raises the cx ante returns in the case of young men but makes only a
small difference for young women.
       Fifth, those who start college are estimated to have a substantially
higher cx ante internal rate of return to doing so than those who do not.
       In section VII I close the paper with a research agenda.
                       II. Education as a Sequential Choice
       This section uses a simple two period model of education choice under


     8 The estimate of 2.8 refers to the base case En which the returns to
education do not depend upon labor market experience. I report estimates 4.1 and
7.3 under alternative assumptions about the size of the interactions.
                                              6

  uncertainly to flesh out some of the ideas in the
                                                        introduction and to provide a
  theoretical foundation for the reduced form
                                                  equations for education outcos used
  in the empirical analysis of ex ante
                                           returns to education. In section ii.i I set
  up the model. In Section 11.2 and Appendix 1 and
                                                       2 1 discuss comparative statics
  concerning the value of starting college, the
                                                   ex ante Probability of various
  education outcomes, and the ex ante internal
                                                  rate of return to starting
  11.1 The Model                                                                college.

         In period 0 an individual decides
                                              whether to work or to begin college in
  either math/science or the humanities.
                                             The field of study influences the mix of
  science and humanities courses taken.
                                            Knowledge in math/science and humanities
  at the end of a year of college
                                   depends upon the field chosen, aptitude, the
  stock of knowledge at the start of
                                       the year, and an error vector.
                                                                        The monetary
  return to the second year of college is
                                            degree specific and is 0 if the
  individual does not attain the minimum
                                           (field specific) knowledge requirements
  for a degree in either field.
                                  Furthermore, a person who attends
                                                                      college
  discovers whether she dislikes
                                 college relative to working and her relative
  preferences for math/science and the
                                        humanities. At the end of the first period
 a student may change her field of
                                     study or drop out of school. Her decision
 reflects new information about
                                 preferences, the probability that she will be able
 to complete a degree in math/science
                                        or humanities given her stock of knowledge
 after the first year of college,
                                   and the payoffs associated with the different
 education outcomes. If she attends
                                      school a second year. she finds out whether
 she completed degree requirements at the end of the year. She then
                                                                        goes to work
 at the appropriate wage.

        I now turn to the details of the
                                           model. I first discuss the stock of
knowledge, ability, and fields of
                                    study and then earnings and preferences.
       The Stock of KnowJeg In
                                  primary school, secondary school, and
POstsecondary school individuals acquire
                                           knowledge in field m and field h. Let
knowledge at the end of school
                                year s be denoted by K    K —(K    IC.
                                                           $         ns ), where Kma
                                                         ,

is math and science knowledge,                         S       ms  ,



                                    is humanities/social sciences knowledge at the
end of s, and s — 0,
                      1, and 2 refer to high school, the
                                                          first year of college,
and the second (final)
                        year of college respectively.
       jjj At the end of high school
                                          individuals differ in two dimensions
of cognitive ability that have value in human capital
                                                      investment and in
production. Let
                A_(Aa A.) where Am is math/science ability and A. is verbal
ability. Presumably A is more important for the production of
                                                                  and    is
                                                                           A.
                                               7


more important for the production of K..
          Fields of Study: A poatsecondary school program is a field specific
function relating K41 to K, A, and a stochastic component. The field of study
in year a is denoted by c5, c—ia or h. Field m is math, science and engineering.
Field h denotes humanities and social sciences. The distribution of K+i is
stochastically increasing in K5 and in A regardless of what field is chosen.
          A specific example of such a function is


(1)       Ks+l—H caK S +wCS A+c a
          The matrices Hf and irf capture the fact that the particular courses
associated with a field of study influence the evolution of knowledge. The
first term in the equation captures the idea that K5+1 will depend not only on
the program of study but also on what one already knows. In fields in which
prerequisites are important, such as math and science, one would expect c5 to
place a large weight on the component of K5 that is a major part of the field.
The second term in the equation captures the idea that math and verbal ability
will, influence how much an individual learns from a given program of study. The
error vector        captures the influence of particular teachers and courses and
unforcastable individual specific shocks (such as Illness, emotional problems)
that affect how much the student learns in the year.9 The aptitudes Am and An
are fixed and known to the student when s—0, so L       affects   K but not A.
          Degree Reoutrements: A college degree in field h or in m requires that a
field specific function of knowledge K2m K2h exceed a threshold degree
requirement. The level of K (K.) is presumably more important in field m (h)
than in field h (m). Given that the links between K0 and             and between    and
      are stochastic, there is uncertainty about whether an individual who sets out
to complete a degree in field c will succeed. The probability              that a person
who is studying in field c in the second year will complete the degree

requirements depends upon              Kib. A, and A according to

(2a) g2 —       02(1(1,    1(lh' Am• Ab)
            —
(2b)
                02hl   '
                           1(lh' Am Ah),
where both functions are strictly increasing in all arguments. The graduation


         One would not expect c to enter additively or to be independent of field.
                                          8

  probabilities g2 and      have a distribution conditional on          A, and the
 choice of field in the first year of school. (This is
                                                      because K1 is random). Let
 F(g2g2       K0, A. c1) be the joint distribution function of
                                                               g2 and      and
 let F(g2 I K, A, c1) be the marginal distribution of           assume that both
 joint distribution and marginal distribution have a monotone likelihood ratio
 property in the elements of K0 and A. In the bivariate case this means that

                                                 ICo", A", c1),
        dFh(xl, x2    Ks', A', cl)/dFh(xl, x2
 is strictly increasing in both x1 and x2 over the range of
                                                                and g2 if
       A') >
               O"' A"), where dFh is the density corresponding to
                                                                        F. The
 monotone likelihood ratio property implies first order stochastic dominance.
        I assume that the programs of study and the requirements for field m and
 field h are sufficiently different that students who choose to study in field a
 (h) in the second period have a negligible chance of
                                                      completing the degree
 requirements in h (a).1°

       Earnings: The discounted present value of earnings is Y0 for persons who
enter the labor market after high school,    —
                                                 Y(l r1)/(l
                                                    +
individuals who leave school after 1 year of college, Y1/(l +
                                                              + R) for

                                                               R) for persons who
attend college a second year but fail to get a degree, Y2 —
for persons with a math/science degree, and
                                              2h — Y0(1 + r2h)(l.
                                                                   +
                                                                 Y0(1
                                                                    + R)
                                                                           r)(l + R)2
                                                                             for
persons with a humanities degree. R is the discount rate.     I assume

    '2m' '2h >   'l   '


       These
             inequalities guarantee that persons who are indifferent between
school and work will choose to complete
                                        college if they are certain of being
able to meet the requirements. I
                                  assume the experience profile of wages is
independent of years in school and field of study)    I also assume here that no

     10 This
             assumption is a statement about the values of the parameters of the
knowledge accumulation equation function, including the degree of randomness,
about the levels of degree requirements in the math/science and in humanities.

          One may regard the earnings
                                       parameters r1, r,.,,, and r, as
conditional on A and K0. The comparative statics
and K0 below hold the earnings                     results reported below for A
                                parameters constant while varying A and K0. This
focuses attention on the fact that these
                                          variables influence the value or
starting college and the cx ante rate of return even if they do not affect the cx
post payoffs to education. One
                                 may easily calculate the total effects of A and
K0 by allowing the earnings parameters to
                                           vary with them. See also the
discussion in footnote 33. In the empirical work I allow the link between
education and earnings to depend on ability and experience. One might also wish
to allow earnings to depend in a more continuous way on the stock of knowledge
                                                              9

 new information about Y              ,   Y        ,   and Y arrives until education decisions are
                                 2w           2h            1
made. In Appendix 3 I analyze a variant of the model in which new information
about 2 and 2h arrives after the first year of college, and the empirical
analysis below allows for the possibility of new information.
            Preferences: Utility depends on the present value of income, a taste
parameter j summarizing nonpecuniary preferences for education program and the
job types it leads to, and the type of job and education program an individual
chooses. There are three types of people, with j —                        0, 1, and 2. Type 0 people
dislike the school and white collar jobs sufficiently that they receive a minimal
increase in utility to completing a degree even though they would earn higher
wages if they complete college and take a white collar job.
            Type I people are indifferent between spending time at work or at school
in the humanities. They are also indifferent between jobs that do and do not
require postsecondary education. However, type 1 individuals hate spending time
in field in        in   school or on the job. Their dislike is sufficiently large relative

                               1 that they never choose field in in year 2.
to Y        - Y            - Y
                       and Y
       2m         2h   2w
            Type 2 individuals are indifferent between the type of jobs and between
time spent in school and at work.
            At the end of high school the probability that a given individual with
characteristics X is type j is equal to e(X) where j—l, 2, or 3.                         Individuals
learn their preferences after the first year college.12
11.2 The Return to College and the Probability of Completing College
            I now use the model to examine the effects of various factors on the


rather than simply upon the thresholds for a degree. This would complicate the
theoretical analysis because one would not be able to summarize the effect of
and A on V, as operating through g2. As noted in the conclusion, one           K1
could modity the empirical analysis of ex ante rates of return to allow earnings
to depend upon grades and courses using data from postsecondary school
transcripts.

     12• I am assuming that all individuals have no nonpecuniery preference
between spending a year working, spending the first year of college In math, and
spending the first year of college in humanities. This could easily be relaxed.
To keep the dynamic program problem simple I have ruled out the possibility that
those who choose not to go to college because they think they are type 0
individuals revise their prior beliefs and then choose to attend school. There
are no conceptual difficulties in relaxing this assumption. One might also wish
to assume that the new information about preferences that an individual acquires
depends upon the field that he tries, as in the matching models such as Miller
(1984). This would dramatically complicate the decision problem because the
choice of field also conditions accumulation of K.
                                                10

  value of starting college, the probability of various education outcomes
 conditional on starting college, and the ex ante return to starting college.
        At the end of period of 0 the individual must choose
                                                             between going to
 work, attending the first year of college in field is, and attending the first
 year of college in field h. The value of going to work is
                                                                     simply Y0. The value
 of attending the first year of college in field m or field h is
                                 2

 (3)                  0, is1) _
       V1(K0, A ,
                                     e   E(V2(g2, j)K0,A.m1)


 (4)   V1(K0, A       0, h1)
                                     81 E(V2(g2, j)IK0.A,h1


 where the expectation E is taken over the
                                            distribution F(g2I I(o, A, c1) of
 conditional on K0, A, and the choice of field c in the first period and
                                                                         V2(g2, j)
 is the value having attended school for 1 year and obtained graduation
 probabilities g2 for a person who is type
        Type 0 persons drop out school and receive
                                                           Y1, so
 (5)   V2(g2, 0) — Y1.
 For type 1 individuals (who hate is),
                                        the value function is the max of the
 return to staying in college and studying humanities
                                                       and leaving school and
 receiving Y:


 (6)   V2(g2, 1) —
                      Max(Ig2 2h + (1 -        2)
                                            Y1/(l +
        Type 2 individuals either stay in school and
                                                            R)J, Y1)
                                                             major in h, stay in school
and major in is, or drop out and receive
                                               Y1, so
(7)    V2(g2, 2)— Max t2h T2h + [1 -                Y1/(l + R)J,

                  Y2 + l-gJ Y,/(1 + R), Y1).


       An individual starts college if
(8) llax(V1(K0, A ,   8(X),    h1), V1(K0, A, 0(X), II) > Y0.


       A person starts college in field h if (8) holds and in addition


     13 Keep in mind that g — (g
                                      I is determined by K1 and A in
accordance with equations (2 and ) g2
                                           ,

                                    an that Fh is determined by the equation
of motion for knowledge and
                                 graduation requirements.
                                            11

(9) V1(K0, A ,   8(X),   h1) > V1(K0, A, 8(X),

       In proposition 1 I summarize      a few properties   of the value of starting
college. (See Appendix 1 for proofs.)
Proposition 1: The value of starting college relative to           is increasing in
A, 021(01 +   02),         '2h"10'   and 2m"1'O and decreasing in 80 and R.
       The intuition for these results is simple.        I(o and A shift out the
distribution of the probability that the individual will be able to satisfy
graduation requirements in math, science, or both. An increase in the cx post
payoffs to the completing 1 year of college (Y1) and to completing two years of
college with a degree in math           or humanities          also raises the value of
starting college. 00 raises the dropout probability, lowering the return. An
Increase in 82/(01 +
                         °2   (holding 80 constant) raises the odds that a math degree
will be a viable option in the second period. This raises the return to starting
college. An increase in the discount rate R lowers the return to starting
college even when "/o' 2h"O' and ''2m"0 are held constant because it lowers
the present value of earnings associated with attending college a second year but
failing to graduate. Of course, most of the negative effect of R on the value of
starting college Is due to the fact that an increase in R lowers Y1/Y0, Y2h/YO.
and
       Due to space limitations, I do not analyze in detail the determinants of
the value of starting college in m relative to h. The relative value depends In
part upon how the field in year 1 and the relative values of Kob, Køm A. and Am
influence the distribution of K1 and as a consequence the distribution Fh of
and g2 in year 2. The return to is      relative   to h is a negative function 81/(81 +

82) and is likely to be a negative function of 2h"12m' KOh/KO and Am/Am•
       Finally, it is interesting to note that sensitivity of the value of

college to knowledge and ability depends upon preferences. The variables               and
A are relevant to the decision to start college because they increase the
probability that the individual could actually meet graduation requirements if
she were to choose to try. However, the expected value of the option is
diminished if the individual believes that she will turn out to be type 0 and
will choose to drop out anyway. if 80 is close to 1, then individual does not
expect to complete college, and the contribution of I( or A to the knowledge
accumulation process in college is of little value.
Education Outcome Probabilities end the Ex Ante Return to Starting Collep.e

       The internal rate of return        to starting college in field c is the
                                                     12

  value of p that solves

  (10) 1 —               (1 +                +
                Plc1.           r1)/(l+p             (1 +
              + Plc2hU    +
                                r2h)/(l+p)   +
                                                 (P12)(l    +

  where

  1'lcl —       probability      of leaving college after the first year

   C2 —         probability      of spending 2 years in college but fatling to complete
                  degree
 lc2h —         probability      of completing a degree in humanities
          —
               probability       of completing a degree in math
        c —    h or a.
              In general, the cx ante internal rate of
                                                                 return to starting college is
 different from the cx post return to the first
                                                                year. In particular, even
 r1 —   0,    the ex ante internal rate of return to
                                               starting college is positive
 provided that r2h and r2 are positive and there is some possibility of
 completing college.
        In appendix 2 I derive expressions for the education outcome
 probabilities as a function of 8,
                                       A, 'Yo Yi '2m and 2h' and the interest
 rate   used
          to discount earnings. I summarize a few properties of these
probabilities in the following propositions.
                                               (See Appendix 2 for proofs.)
Proposition 3a. The probability
                                 p11 of dropping out of college after one year
La a positive function of
                          r1 and 0. It is a negative function of 02/(61 +
r2h, r2, K0, A, and 1/(1 + R).
          The taste probability
                                       0 increases P11 because it increases the odds
that the person will find out that she
                                       dislikes college and dislikes the types of
jobs that reward a college degree and thus decide to drop out.
                                                                82/(81 +
the conditional probability that the person can accept both engineering and
                                                                             is
                                                                                         °2
humanities, rather than simply humanities.
                                                          The possibility of majoring in
either humanities or mathematics raises
                                         the expected value of attempting college.
The higher
            r2h and r2 (holding r1 constant) and the lower R, the lower the
critical value
                g2 (the pass probability) for the individual to remain in
                                                                           college
after the first year. Increases in
                                     1(0 and A increase the probability that
will be high enough to warrant
                                staying in college, lowering the dropout rate
after the first year.
Proposition 3b. The probability
                                           1'1c2. of attending college for a second year and
                                                        13

fatling to get a degree is negatively related to 00 and r1. The effects of
A, Oi/(Oi + 02) are ambiguous. r2m has a positive effect when r2 > r2h. r2
and r    have a positive effect when r —r
      2h                              2m 2h
        The negative effect of 80 on lc2 is obvious given that all type 0
individuals leave school after 1 year. The ambiguity underlying K0 and A is
interesting. Increases in these variables shift out the distribution of the
vector of graduation probabilities g2.                       This shift increases the likelihood
that the realization of                 or          will be large enough to justify attending
college for a second year. This will tend to increase lc2 •                                 assuming that the
probability of graduating conditional on attending the second year is unchanged.
However, the shift will also increase the conditional graduation probability.
This will lower P
                      1c2.
       The ambiguity in the effect of 02/(81 + 02) is also interesting. As
noted in proposition 3a, the probability of dropping out after the first year is
negatively related to 02/(81 +                       which means that the fraction of students who
                                             02).
attend a second year of college rises. This will tend to increase                                      as well
as P     and P       Furthermore if r > r
                          .                     some individuals who would have
    lc2m       lc2h                   2m    2h
chosen humanities if they were type 1 will choose math even though     <
This will tend to lower the probability of completing degree requirements
conditional on attempting the second year and raise P12 as well. On the other
hand, the distribution of the maximum of g2 and                                    stochastically dominates the
distribution of                   and this will tend to increase the conditional graduation
probability for type 2 individuals relative to type 1 individuals.14                                 The
intuition here is that individuals who are only marginal in the humanities but
are very good at math/science will have a higher graduation probability if their
preferences are such that math/science is a viable option.

Proposition 3.c The graduation probability lc2h + 1'lc2m is decreasing in 80, (1
+ R),and r1. It is increasing in r2h if r2h   r2 and is increasing in r2m if
r2m> r 2h   .   It   is increasing in r
                                               2h
                                                     and r
                                         2m holding r 2h
                                                         -
                                                           2m
                                                              constant. If              r
r2mr2h. the graduation probability is increasing in K0, A, and 02/(81 + 02).
       The effect of 8, (I + R), r2 and r2h are obvious. An increase in r2h
or r2 will lower                    by raising the ex post payoff to those who complete
college. However, the effect of r on P                              +   P           is ambiguous without
                                                2h           lc2h           lc2m
further assumptions because the increase may lure students with high g to take


     14 If r2 —       r
                      the conditional graduation probability is definitely
                              •

higher for type 2 lan for type 1 individuals.
                                                                 14

  a chance on graduating in humanities, raising the failure rate. The possibility
  can be ruled out if r1 <
                                     r2,
                                 in which case students choose humanities
                                                                          over math
  only if     >
                 g2.  The same argument applies to
                                                                              r2m.
          Increases in Ko, A, and
                                                02/(61           8) lower P11•• However, they could
  lower the graduation probability by increasing the fraction of type
                                                                       2
 individuals who opt for the high risk,
                                          high return major. This possibility is
 ruled out if r2ffi_r2h. Below I find that increases in
                                                            and A (as measured high
 school courses, grades, and tests) increase
                                               the graduation probability.15
 Comparative Statics Analysis of the Exoected Internal Rate of Return
         One can analyze the effects of
                                                            ability, preferences, and the ex post
 payoffs to college by substituting the
                                         equations (A2.2), (A2.3), (A2.4) and
 (A2.5) into (10) and performing comparative
                                                                       statics. The comparative statics

                                                                     lc2m r2h
 relating the pc to P        ,   P               P               P
                      lcl.           1c2.
                                            ,
                                                     lc2h   ,            ,      and r        and r
                                                                                        2m           1 are
 straightforward. Given the assumption
                                                                2m ' ''2h    > ''l      'c is negatively related
 to P11• holding P12 and
                                 1'lc2h"1c2m constant, negatively related to
                                                                     lc2.
 holding 1c2h"lc2m Constant, and positively related to lc2m"lclh holding
 1c2m +   l2h    constant.      is increasing in the ex post returns to college.
        The analysis of the effects of the
                                            fundamental variables A,
                                                                         r2h. r2,
 r1, and 8 is complicated because they influence all of the
                                                             probabilities. It is
 tedious to work through the
                             comparative statics analytically. It is easy to do
 so numerically, and I do so below.
        In the present case, however, the
                                                                 special assumptions made about
preferences have the implication that the
                                                                     internal rate of return to
                                                                                                         starting


           It should be keeping with the
 ante return to education, Propositions empirical emphasis in the paper on the cx
 of factors influence on the             3.a, 3.b and 3.c characterjse how a number
                              probability of various postsecondary education
outcomes conditional on starting
have a distribution in the         college. However, by considering      A, 6, to
                             population, one may use the model to analyse the
determinants of the probability of
math without Conditioning            obtaining a college degree in humanities, in
                            on starting college. The implications may be quite
different from a perfect foresight
                                     model. For example, with sequentional choice
under uncertainty, increases in
                                  r2 can actually increase the probability that a
high school graduate will end up wth a degree in engineering provided that
        +
          62) is not very large and that there is limited specialization in the
fIrst year of college. In this
the number of persons who         case, r2 will have a relatively large effect on
flow into the first         attend at 1eas one year of college. This increased
                     year of college may dominate the negative effect of r2h on
the Probability of
                    choosing engineering conditional on attending college one year
and being a type 2. (See
                          Appendix 2, equation A2.5) A full analysis of these
issues would require a separate paper.
                                                15

college   is monotonicaily related to the value of starting college. Consequently,
Proposition 1 implies that            is increasing in A, Ko• r2h, r2, r1, and 021(81 +
    and decreasing in 80.
   III. An Econometric Framework for Measuring the Ex Ante Return to Education

       In this section I begin by extending equation (10) for the internal rate
of return to consider a wider set of post secondary outcomes, including several
fields of specialization and advanced degrees.             I also provide a specification
for earnings associated with the various education outcomes that may be used to
compute the ax post payoffs to education that appear in (10).
       The expected present value of earnings conditional on attending school
level a' + 1   in field c   for a person who has completed s' years of schooling
with c' as the most recent field of specialization is


(11) PV(s' +   1, c"Is'.c',X,Z,R) —                      P(X,Z),1 Y(X,Z,R)
                                       s—s+2         c

                             +
                                     P(X.Z)5,+i, ,sI+i,cN Y(X,Z,R),1

where Y(X,Z,R)     is the expected present value of earning (conditional on X, Z
and the interest rate R) of obtaining schooling level s in field c,

P(X,Z),+i c"        is the probability that a person with characteristics X, Z will
end up with schooling level s in field c given that they currently are at
schooling level s'+l in field c". As illustrated in the two period            model, these
education   outcome probabilities reflect sequential decisions that are made after
each year of schooling based upon information about performance in school, grade
and course requirements associated with particular programs of study, the wages
associated with different educational outcomes, and preferences for particular
fields of study and work. However, to analyze the ex ante return to education,
one may work with the reduced form equations instead of the structural equations,
which is what I do below.
       Assuming that in postsecondary school there is no specialization until
after the first year, then the expected present value of earnings for attending
the first year of college for a person who has completed high school (s—0) and
has characteristics X,Z is

(12) PV(l,.I0,X,z,R) —                                      Y(X,Z,R)
                             s—i         c
                                             P(X,Z)

                                 +
                                      P(X,Z)1        Y0(X,Z,R)
                                         16


 where Y0(X,Z,R) Is the expected present value of earnings for persons who leave
 school after high school. The value of R that equates the right hand side of
 (12) to Y0(X,Z.R) is the ex ante internal rate of return p to the first year of
 college.

        To estimate p and examine its dependence on X and Z one must have
 estimates of the P(X Z)
                         l.sc functions and the Y(X,Z,R) Sc functions.
 Unrestricted probit models are used for the probability that the highest
 education level achieved by an individual who started college is less than two
 years, more than two years but no degree, a college degree in business, etc.
 Eighteen mutually exclusive outcomes are considered, as described in the data
 section below.

        To measure the returns associated with the various education outcomes,
 assume that the log wage of a person with post secondary education ievel s with
field c as the final field of specialization in school and with t years of labor
market experience is

 (13) in w —      + ZB2 + r(Z) + ast + *(t)

where ast + 4(t) is the experience profile of earnings and where r5(Z) is the
difference in the log wage the individual receives if she chooses to leave school
with a high school degree and the log wage she expects to receive if it turns out
that she chooses s years of schooling in field c. The value s—O corresponding to
a high school degree. Equation (13) assumes that early choices of post secondary
field do not affect the log wage conditional on s and the final field c. Note
that these choices still may affect ex ante returns because they may alter the
probability that one can attend school in year a in field c. Aptitude and
Achievement and specialization in high school may be captured by elements of the
Z vector.

       The wage effect of a particular education sc may depend upon personal
characteristics Z for two reasons. First, Z may directly influence the effect of
sc on productivity and, as a consequence, wages. People with strong math
aptitude might get an extra benefit from an engineering degree. Second, if
individuals know in advance that they will obtain additional information about
the market payoffs to various education outcomes as they go through school, then
variables that are related to the cx ante completion probabilities will be
related to the wage that the individuals expect to receive in the event that ex
post they choose s and c. Appendix 3 demonstrates that this is true even for
                                       17

variables do not directly alter the effect of a given education level on
productivity. 16
       Most of the empirical work assumes that Z is observed by the
econometrician. Consequently, the wage equation is inconsistent with wage
specifications discussed in Willis and Rosen (1979) and Willis (1986), in which
both observed and unobserved personal characteristics shift the percentage effect
of education on wage rates.'7 The Willis and Rosen analysts implies a
relationship between the unobservables affecting education choice (the P(X,Z)
functions) and the unobservables affecting the expected wage associated with a
particular education outcome. I relax the assumption of no unobserved
heterogeneity in expectations about ex post payoffs with a procedure that assumes
that an agent's information about ex post payoffs is reflected in measures of her
expectations about education. There is some evidence of selection bias, but it
has little effect on the results.'8
       The estimates of the probit models of the education probabilities may also
be subject to selection bias, since those who choose not to attend college may
have different postsecondary outcome probabilities (conditional on the
observables) than those who do. Some bias undoubtedly exists, but it is worth
noting that the observables that are used have considerable explanatory power.
As shown in Appendix Table A.4, the predicted dropout probabilities are much
larger for those who do not attend college than for those who do and are very
sensitive to the ability measures, family background, and high school curriculum.


     16 For example, people who know at the time that they start college that
they will enjoy the study and practice of engineering also know that they are
less likely to switch to another field of study or drop out of college if they
find out during senior year of college that they are bad at and will receive a
low market payoff to engineering. Consequently, the earnings individuals expect
(as of senior year of high school) to receive conditional on ultimately
completing of engineering may be negatively correlated with preferences for
engineering.

     17 These papers assume that educational attainment is based on a once-
and-for-all decision, with certainty about the probability of successfully
completing the program chosen.

     l8 Berger (1987) estimates wage equation for several majors using data
from the original NLS survey of young men with corrections for selectivity bias
based upon a reduced form multinomial logit model of major choice. He reports
little evidence of selection bias. However, there are severe difficulties in
identifying the effects of selection on wages using conventional approaches. I
do not view his results or those of the present paper as decisive on the issue of
whether selection bias is important.
                                                   18

 As noted below, I have also experiment with adding a vector of measures of
 college plans to the education outcome models as proxies for unobservables
 infuencing education choice. These add substantially to the explanatory of the
 education models but do not have significantly alter the estimated
                                                                    relationship
 between p and ability, family background, high school curriculum, and whether or
 not one started college.

        Let R denote the interest rate at which earnings are discounted and
 assume for the moment that 0—0. Then the present value of future
                                                                               wages 1sc l9
                                                    -   Rs
                                             r(Z
 (14) Y(X.Z.R) —
                     Y0(X,Z,R) exp

                                X B1s- ZB2
 (15) Y0(X,Z,R) —   Q exp

 where Q —     jexpt) rt    -
                                              20


One may compute p by substituting the estimates of the probit models of the
education probabilities and equation (15) for Y0(X,Z,R) and (14) for the various
values of a and c into (12). The solution will differ from the cx post return

exp(r1 (z) to starting college unless exp(r(Z) /s) —                          ) for all s
                                                                  exp(r(Z)1
     19• If the ex post payoff to education is stochastic conditional on the
information set Z and the fact that ex post the individual has found it optimal
to choose Z, then in principle this randomness should
                                                      be accounted for in going
from the log linear equation (13) to the present value of the wage level
 Suppose that the ex post payoff is r(Z) +         for the various values of Sc,
 where the ,   have
                    mean 0. Then the analysis goes through provided that the
 for each sc5ave identical distributions.
                                              Intuitively, the effect of randomness
 in the log of the wage on the
                                expected value of the wage level will be the same
 for all education outcomes (in
                                 percentage terms)
about the payoffs is the same for all outcomes.
                                                             if
                                                       the degree of uncertainty
      It should also be noted that adding
                                           a transitory error component to
equation (13) leads to similar complications. If the
                                                         distribution of the
transitory wage component is the independent of the
                                                       schooling outcome, then this
randomness changes the present value of earnings associated with the various
education outcomes by the same factor of proportionality. However, if the
transitory variation is related to the education level and/or if the experience
slope of earnings depends upon years of schooling and the variance of the
transitory component is related to experience, then
                                                      complications arise. In
principle, one could estimate the uncertainty and modify the internal rate of
return calculations, but I have not attempted to do so.

     20• Equation (14) assumes that T does not depend on a and c. Mincer (1974)
presents evidence that this is a reasonable approximation for a.
                                               19

 greater than 1 and all fields c. Below I compute estimates of p for various
 values of X and


                         IV.   Data   and Econometric Specification

 IV.1   The Sample
       The NLS72 is a Department of Education survey of individuals who
                                                                        were
high school seniors during the 1971-1972 academic year. The initial interview
vas conducted during the Spring of 1972, with followup surveys in 1973, 1974,
1976, and 1979. A subsample was resurveyed in 1986. A subsample of 10306 met
various sample selection criteria and had valid data on the variables used in the
education analysis.22 The equations for education outcomes are conditional         on
starting college, which reduces the sample to the 6660 individuals who have at
least some college.

        The cross section-time series of observations for each individual used in
the wage analysis was created using information on earnings divided by hours for
1977, 1978, and 1979, and information on the wage at the beginning and end of
each job held between 1980 and 1986 up to a maximum of the four most recent
jobs.23 An observation for 1977 is included if (1) the individual was not a full
time student in October 1976 nor October 1977, (2) hours worked in 1977      was
greater than 1,040.        (3) the 1977 real wage was between $.50 and $75 in 1967
dollars.      Observations for 1978 and 1979 were included if they met the
corresponding three criteria for 1978 and 1979 respectively. Data for begin and
end job dates (1980-86) were included if (1) the hours worked in the appropriate


     21• The present value formula is modified slightly If wage growth rates
depend upon the education level, which I consider In the empirical work.

     22 The NLS72 contains data on 22,652 people, 12,841 of whom were re-
surveyed in 1986. I restrict the sample first to the 16,683 individuals from the
schools that participated in the base year survey, then to the 15,680 for whom
high school test information is available, and then to the 12980 individuals who
were surveyed in each of the 1973, 1974, 1976 and 1979 followups. Information
from the 1986 follow-up was then added, and only those 7358 persons who were in
the earlier 12980 sample were included. The sample of 12,890 from the 1972-1979
surveys forms the basis for the analysis of education outcomes. Of these 10306
had valid data on the variables used in the analysis, which is about 61.8 percent
of students in the base year sample and 65 percent of students In the base year
for whom test data are available.

        23
          One potential problem with this sample design is that it Is weighted
toward persons who have worked for several different employers.
                                           20

 year was greater that 1040, and (2) If the real wage was between $.50 and $75 in
 1967 dollars. The wage sample contains 38,595 observations on 9239
 individuals.24 Descriptive statistics are provided in Table A.3.
 IV.2 Variable Definitions
         A few of the variables require discussion. The
                                                         high school curriculum
 measures consist of semester hours in industrial arts, commercial, fine
                                                                          arts, and
 the 5 main academic subject areas of science, math, social
                                                             studies, English, and
 foreign language.25 I also include dummy variables for whether the student was
 in the academic track or in the general track.
      The education outcomes measures include dummy variables for whether the
 highest level of education an individual had completed as of 1979 is

postsecondary vocational education and no college (V0C79), less than 2 years of
college (S0C01479) and 2 or more years of college but no
                                                          degree (SOCO1S79).26
Occasionally I use dummy variables for whether an individual has
                                                                  a college degree
but not advanced degree (COLL79) and whether the individual has an advanced
degree (ADVJ9). The fields of the college and advanced
                                                         degrees are aggregated
from the 4 digit codes reported in the 1979
                                            survey. The college majors consist
of

         1. Business (including economics and communications)
         2. Engineering and Technical
         3. The Physical Sciences
         4. Humanities (English, Foreign Languages, and Theology)
         5. Social Sciences, including History,
                                                 Psychology, Legal Studies,
            Consumer Services, and Area Studies,
         6. The Life Sciences and Health Fields
         7. Education, including Home Economics and Library Sciences
         8. Mathematics, Computer Science
         9. Fine Arts


     24 The number of
                      observations per person in the wage sample is 4.177 with a
standard deviation of 2.34 and a range from I to 11. Fifty-two percent of the
wage observations come from 1977, 1978, or 1979, 21 percent come from 1985 or
1986, and 27 percent come from 1980, 1981, 1982, 1983, or 1984.
     25 Tue
             measures of semester hours refer to courses taken between
1969 and the date the student will                                     July 1,
                                   graduate, and so refer to 10th, 11th, and 12th
grade for most students. The information was
                                              provided by the high schools. The
semester hour variables were computed by taking the sum of the semester courses
in each subject area, weighting each semester course by the number of hours per
week that it met. See Altonji (1988).
    26
          use education as of 1979 rather than education as of 1986 because not
all students are included in the 1986 followup and because the sampling
probabilities for 1986 depend upon educational outcomes.
                                        21

       lO.A Miscellaneous category consisting of 7.8 percent of the
          persons whose highest education level is a 4 year college degree.

       The graduate fields consist of Business, including legal studies and
communications, Social Sciences and Humanities, Technical Fields (including
Engineering, Mathematics, and Computer Science), the Life Sciences and Health,
Education (including Home Economics and Library Sciences) and Miscellaneous,
including fine arts, consumer services, and missing). One Must aggregate to keep
the analysis manageable and because of sample size considerations.27 The college
major indicators are coded as 0 if the individual has an advanced degree in any
field. High school is the omitted category in the wage equations.
     The aptitude and achievement measures consist of predicted SAT Math and
SAT_Verbal scores, high school grades and the student's own   assessment   (on an
inverse 1 to 5 scale) in the Spring of senior year of whether or not she is
college material (COLABIL).28
       The vector    in the education equations contains (1) dummy variables
indicating whether the individual is female, black and/or hispanic, (2) a set of
family background characteristics consisting of the levels, squares, and
crossproducts of father's years of education and mother's years of education, the
log of family income, and a set of variables that measure parental influence on
and aspirations for their children, (3) the levels and squares of the predicted
SAT_MATH and SAT_VERBAL scores, high school grades, and COL_ABIL, (4) the high
school curriculum measures. X also includes the level and square of hours per
week spent on homework and controls for the size of community and the region of
the country in which the individual lived in 1972.


     27 In computing p is I set s to 1 for S0C01479, 2.75 FOR S0C01579, 4 for
all college degrees and 6 for all advanced degrees.   I am ignoring variation in
expectations about how long it will take to get a degree.

     28 The NLSHS72 provides standardized scores from each of a battery of six
test that were administered as part of the base year survey. SAT Math and SAT
Verbal scores are available for about one third of the base year sample. I
constructed a composite measure of verbal and mathematics aptitude by regressing
SAT Math and SAT Verbal scores against levels and squares of the 6 tests, the
cubed values of the reading, mathematics, and the vocabulary tests, a cubic in
COL_ABIL, a cubic in high school grades, and dummy variables for race and gender
and taking the predicted values for all sample members.   I use the equations to
compute predicted SAT Math and SAT_Verbal scores for each sample member. The R2
for the Math SAT and the Verbal SAT are .711 and .760 respectively.   I also
experimented with using the base year reading, vocabulary and math tests directly
and obtained similar fits for the wage and education outcome equations.
                                             22

           The models are estimated on the subsample of
                                                      young men, the subsample of
  young women, and the combined sample (with a gender dummy variable
                                                                     included).
         Turning to the wage equations, the wage measure is the log of real hourly
 wage rate in period t.29 In the most of the specifications the variables
                                                                                    that
  affect the payoff to the various post
                                       secondary education are restricted to the
 aptitude and achievement measures. I include interactions
                                                             between SAT_MATH and
 SAT VERBAL and (S0C01479 + SOCO1S79), COLL79 and
                                                  ADV79, between SAT_MATH,
 SAT_MATH2, SAT_VERBAL, and SAT_VERBAL2 and a dummy variable
                                                              for whether the
 individual has a college or advanced degree in a technical field, and between
 SAT_MATH2 and SAT_VERBAL2 and (COLL79 + ADV79).
                                                   The variable COL_ABIL is
 interacted with [SOCO1479 + S0C01579J and with
                                                      [COLL79 + ADV79). The X and
 appear separately in the equation, along with experience,
                                                                experience squared, and
 a quadratic time trend.

        Some of the equations also contain the term a (EXP*s), which is the
 coefficient a times the product of experience
                                               (EXP) and years of schooling s.
 do not rely upon the sample to estimate a because the range of labor market
 experience of the sample is limited, particularly for
                                                           college graduates.
 Instead, I set a to three alternative values
                                             prior to estimation of the wage
equation and present results for each case. The first case is a—O. The second
case is a — .0011, which is the estimate obtained
                                                  using panel data for male heads
of household between the ages of 18 and 60 from 1968-1981 from the Panel
                                                                          Study of
Income Dynamics.3° The third value is .005, which is approximately the point
estimate one obtains when one estimates
                                        a freely in the sample. This value
reflects the explosion in the return to education in the 80's (Murphy and Welsh
(1988).     I take it to be an upper bound for what
                                                      the Class of 1972 contemplated
at the time they were making their decisions.

                                      V. Results
          I begin with a brief discussion of the
                                                   distribution by education outcome

        29 The
             use of the hourly wage rate rather than annual
crude standarization for differences across                 earnings provides a
                                            majors in typical hours. However, I
am not considering differences across
                                      jobs in nonpecuntary attributes. The
comparisons between men and women ignore
differences in labor force               complications associated with gender
                           participation and hours worked. In working with wage
rates rather than earnings I am also ignoring the return to education that comes
from a reduction in the
                        unemployment probability, as analyzed in Mincer (1988).
     3o The sample is described in Altonji and Shakotko (1987). The
available from the author.                                          equation is
                                          23

 and the rates of return associated with the difference outcomes. I then turn to
estimates of the cx ante return (p) to starting college for the pooled, men and
women samples. I then consider in more detail the contributions of gender
differences in (1) personal characteristics, (2) the wage equations, and (3) the
education outcome equations to the gender difference in the rate of return to
education. Next I discuss the effects of aptitude, high school curriculum, and
family background. Finally, I compare estimates of the return to starting
college for college going and non-college going samples.
V.1 Suzmnarv Statistics on Ex Post Returns and Education Outcomes
           Because of the large number of education outcomes and the large number
of interaction terms and nonlinearities in the wage equations, it is convenient
to begin with some basic information about the probabilities of the various
education outcomes conditional on starting college and the cx post returns.        I

estimated wage models with all interactions terms between Z and the education
outcomes excluded and report the estimates of the cx post effects of the various
education outcomes on the log wage (relative to high school) in columns 1, 3, and
5 of Table A.l. Separate estimates are reported for the pooled, male, and female
samples.
       The results show first that the effect of S0C01479 on the log wage is
.0369 for the sample as whole, implying a percentage wage increase of about 3.7
percent. The coefficient is actually negative for men (-    .0076).   In contrast,
the effect of S0C01479 on the log wage is .0789 for women. Similarly, the
percentage return to men for attending college for two or more years but not
obtaining a College degrees is 5.9 (5.9—exp(.0575) ,   while   the corresponding
value for women is 21.4 percent (21.4— exp(.19455). These differences at the low
education levels have a large effects on the estimated cx ante returns because
about 65 percent of both men and women do not complete college.
       The results in Table A.l also show that there are large differences in
the cx post effects of the various college and advanced degrees on the log wage.
For the pooled sample, engineering (.5105). physical sciences (.3367), math and
computer science (.4475) and the physical sciences (.3438) are the college
degrees with the largest cx post returns. At the other end of the earnings
spectrum are humanities (.1676), education (.1588) and fine arts (.1431). There
are broad similarities in the relative returns for men and for women but many of
the estimated returns for specific college or graduate fields are larger for
women than for men, particularly in the case of business, education, and fine
                                           24

 arts.

         When one restricts the coefficients to be the same across majors and
 suppresses the aptitude interaction terms, the return (relative to high school)
 of college and advanced degrees in technical and nontechnical fields may be
 summarized as follows:




             Effects of College and Advanced Degrees on the Log Wage
                           (standard errors in parentheses)

                             Pooled        Women              Men
 College. Nontechnical       .238           .298              .152
                             (.015)         (.019)            (.026)
 College. Technical          .441           .404              .394
                             (.023)         (.050)            (.038)
Advanced, Nontechnical       .377           .431              .284

Advanced, Technical
                             (.033)         (.043)            (.052)
                             .521           .824              .419
                             (.038)         (.050)            (.078)


The results show a large difference in the returns to college and especially to
advanced, technical degrees. The coefficient of .824 for women with an advanced
technical degree implies an increase of 128 percent over the earnings of high
school graduates. However, only 6 women complete advanced degrees in a technical
field. The coefficient on FEMALE      in
                                     the pooled regression is - .162, and so these
results indicate only that the percentage differential between men and women
narrows with education.

         The probabilities of the education outcomes differ
                                                              substantially between
men and women. The sample probabilities (not conditioned
                                                           on starting college)
are reported column 2, 4, and 6 of Table A.l for the pooled, male, and female
samples (respectively). Women are much less likely to major in
business/communications, engineering, and the physical sciences than men, and are
much more likely to major in education and somewhat more likely to major in the
humanities.31 These results refer to those who do not go on to graduate school,


     31 Studies of gender differences in choice of college major include
Polachek (1978) and Blakemore and Low (1981), England (1982) and Berryman (1983).
In this paper I simply examine the implications of differences in college
outcomes for the internal rate of return to
                                            starting college. In particular, I
am not assuming that education choices are made to maximize the present value of
future income.
                                        25

but the gender pattern is consistent with the gender distribution by 4 year
college degree of the combined samples of individuals whose highest degree is
either college or advanced. (Table A.2) 32
V.2 EstImates of the Ex Ante Return to Education
       Table 1 reports a variety of estimates of p. The column labels in the
first row of the table indicate whether the sample used to estimate and to
evaluate the education outcome probabilities and the wage and education outcome
equations consists of men and women (columns I and 2) men only (columns 3 and 4)
or women only (columns 5 and 6). The titles of each panel provide information
about the values of the X and Z variables used to evaluate p.
       In Panel l.A. p is evaluated at the mean of all variables computed over
the sample that includes both persons who started college and those who did not.
For the men and women combined, the ex ante return is 5.1 when a—O. (column 1).
In Appendix table A.4 I report the probability of various education outcomes and
the cx post payoffs, evaluated at the mean for the pooled sample. The low return
in part reflects the high dropout probability: The cx post return to attending
college for less than two years is 4.1 percent. Columns 2 and 3 present results
based on equations estimated on the sample of males and females (respectively)
and evaluated at the sample means for male and females (respectively). When m is
set to 0, the cx ante return to starting college evaluated at the sample mean for
men is 2.8 percent, while Table A.4 shows that the cx post return to attending
college for less than two years of college is actually negative (..61).31 The
negative coefficient gets a large weight in the estimate of p., because the cx
ante probability of leaving school with less than 2 years of college is .296
(Table A.4). The cx post and cx ante returns for female high school graduates are
closer ((8.5) versus (7.4)), and are much larger than the return for men.


     32    also examined the links between undergraduate and graduate field for
those who go on to graduate school. Education majors and life sciences/health
majors are very unlikely to switch fields at the graduate level. 19 of 25
business/communications majors who attend graduate school concentrate in
business, law, and communications. 11 of 15 engineers concentrate in a technical
area in graduate school. The rest go to business, law, or communications
programs. However, social science/services majors are not very concentrated at
the graduate level, and humanities majors are less concentrated than the other groups.

       31 The estimate of 2.8 refers to the base case in which the returns to
  education do not depend upon labor market experience. I report estimates
  4.1 and 7.3 under alternative assumptions about the size of the
  interactions.
                                         26

        The ex ante returns for both men and women are
                                                       substantially higher if
 one allows the ex post payoff to education to increase with labor market
 experience.32
Sources of the Gender Difference In the Internal Rate of Return
        Is the large gender difference in the rate of return due   to gender
differences in characteristics, gender differences in the education outcomes
equations, or gender differences In the market payoffs to education? In
                                                                         Appendix
Table A.5 I report the internal rate of return estimate for the 27 possible
permutations of (1) the choice of sample used to estimate the
                                                               wage equation
(pooled, men, and women), (2) the choice of sample used to estimate the education
outcome equations (pooled, men, and women with at least some college), and (3)
the sample used to compute the mean values of characteristics that are plugged in
the wage and education equations when computing the internal rate of return. The
results show that higher ex post payoffs for women from most of the college
majors and, in particular, to completing some college are responsible for most of
the difference. The higher payoffs raise the rate of return by about 5 points.
(Compare Table A.5, columns l.b-9b to columns l.c to 9c).
       Given the differences in the college major distribution and given that
these differences are not explained by gender differences in personal

characteristics, one might expect that differences in the education coefficients
tend to lower the rate of return for women.
                                             They do, by an amount that is
typically about .9 when a — 0. (Compare columns 4a-6a to 7a-9a, 4b-6b to 7b-9b,
and 4c-6c to 7c-9c.)

       Finally, differences in the personal characteristics of men and women do
not have a consistent effect on the difference in returns.


       32• One obtains somewhat different results if one computes the
  education probabilities as the mean of the probabilities evaluated over the
  sample distribution of X.   For the pooled sample, the estimated probability
 of College, LT 2 and College, 2+ are .382 and .282 respectively. For men
  the probabilities are .351 and .301. For women the probabilities are .407
 and .275. The probabilities of the college and advanced categories
 increase relative to those reported in Appendix Table A.4. When the mean
 education probabilities (as opposed to the probabilities computed at the
 sample means) are used along the wage equation evaluated at the sample
 means, the estimated internal rate of return for the case a—0 are 5.5 for
 the full sample, 3.1 for men, and 7.8 for women. In principle one can
 compute an internal rate of return for each of the 10340 persons in the
 sample and average the result, but I have not attempted to do so. One would
 use the micro data to evaluate the
                                     wage equation as well as the education
 equations.
                                         27

The Effects of Aptitude and Achievement Differences
       Panel 1.8 of Table 1 shows the difference in the internal rate of return
between individuals who are one standard deviation below and one standard
deviation above (respectively) the overall sample mean in SAT_MATH, SAT_VERBAL,
GRADES and -COL_ABIL (COL_ABIL is on an inverse scale). Using the means and the
model estimates for the combined sample, the estimates of p when a—O are 6.4 and
3.6 for the high and low ability cases. The value of p for the high and low
ability cases for men are 4.2 and 0.5. The corresponding values for women are
8.8 and 5.9. Thus, there is a large difference in the cx ante return to college
for the low and high ability cases.
       Does ability raise the return by inducing a favorable shift in the
education outcomes or by raising the ex post payoffs associated with the various
outcomes? For the sample of men with a—O, p is 3.8 and 2.2 for the high and low
aptitude cases when one varies the aptitude measures in the wage equation but
evaluates the education equations at the sample mean. The corresponding numbers
are 8.7 and 6.3 in the case of women. These results in combination with Table
1.8 suggest that for women the main effect of higher ability is to raise the

     payoffs   to education. For men higher ability increases the return to
college both by raising the cx post payoffs to education and by inducing a
favorable shift in the education outcomes.33 The college dropout probability is
.9097 for the low ability males and .5195 for the high ability males.

Family Background:
       Panel l.C compares p for those with family backgrounds that are favorable
to attendance at postsecondary school with those. The results suggest that a
favorable family background raises the return to starting college by a
substantial amount for young men. (1.4% when o—O). On the other hand, a
favorable background is actually associated with a slightly lower return in the
case of women. The probability of graduating from college (conditional upon



            With structural equations analogous to those discussed in Section
  II. one could distinguish among three channels through which ability affects
  p. First, ability alters the distribution of education outcomes holding
  expected ex post payoffs constant (e.g., it changes the odds of passing
  school requirements). Second, it changes the mix of education outcomes by
  altering the cx post payoffs. Third, it alters the cx post payoffs. The
  reduced form equations for the education outcomes do not hold constant the
  expected cx post payoffs. Consequently, the estimates of the affect of
  ability on the distribution of education outcomes lump together the first
  two channels.
                                        28

 starting) is .402 for an individual with the mean values for the pooled sample
 and a favorable background and Is .135 for those with an unfavorable background.
 (Table A.4). The figures for men and women are similar.    The effect of
 background on the graduation probability has a bigger effect on the ex ante
return for men than women because of the low return to some college for men.
High School Curriculyji

        One might expect high school curriculum to affect p for at least three
 reasons. First, large numbers of academic courses may increase the ability of
students to handle college courses. Second, the composition of courses may
affect the relative probabilities of completing particular degrees because of
effects on preferences and because knowledge in particular subjects may be a
prerequisite to further study. Third, the course variables and dummies for
participation in the academic and general tracks may be indicators of tastes for
college and family pressure to attend college. The aptitude and achievement
measure and family background measures may not fully control for these factors.
In addition, curriculum may alter the ex post payoff to various post secondary
outcomes, although the specification of the wage equation used does not allow for
this.34

       Panel l.D reports p for individuals who are in the high school track,
take one standard deviation more semester hours in science,
                                                            foreign language, and
mathematics, and one standard deviation fewer semester hours in industrial arts
and commercial than the sample means for these variables for the full sample.
Column 2 reports p for individuals are not in the academic track and who are a
standard deviation below the sample mean in science, foreign language, and
mathematics and a standard deviation above the sample mean in Industrial arts and
commercial courses.   Both columns use the means and the model estimates for the
combined sample. When o—0 the difference is .7. The difference for the sample
means and equation estimates for young men is 1.0. The corresponding difference
for women is only .1. Thus, high school curriculum has a modest effect for men
but only a small effect for women. The difference in the probability of
graduation between the academic and nonacademic cases is .326 for men and .353
in the case of women. (See Appendix Table A.4) The fact that academic curriculum


     36 One could use a wage model that allows high school curriculum to effect
the return to the various post secondary education outcomes. I have chosen not
to add additional interaction terms to the wage equation, in part because the
results of Altonji (1988) suggest that the main effects of high school curriculum
on wage rates are relatively small.
                                           29

has a larger effect on the return to starting college for men is due to the fact
that men who drop out of college receive a much lower payoff than women.
Differences in Ex Ante Returns for those Who Do and Those Who Do Not Start
College

       Panel i.E reports p evaluated at the sample means for the college going
and non_college going sample. The main result is that p is substantially higher
for those who actually did start college than those who did not. The ox ante
probability for high school seniors of obtaining a college or advanced degree is
much higher for those subsequently choose to start college than for those to do
not. The differential is proportionately larger for men, reflecting a huge
difference in the probability of ultimately dropping out of college between those
who do and do not choose to start college. (See Table A.4).
                   VI. Modifications to the Eipirica1 Fraework
       In this section I consider the effects of modifying the information set
used in forming expectations about the return to college.        I also deal with the
problem of selectivity bias in the estimates of the wage equation by using
education plans and actual years of education as indicators of unobserved
differences in the payoff to education.
VI.l The Information Set as of Senior Year of High School
       The results for men indicate an important empirical distinction between
the cx ante and cx post returns to education. These results may be misleading if
important variables have been excluded from the information set X, Z that
individuals are assumed to use in evaluating the probabilities of various
educational outcomes when deciding whether to start college. The final education
outcome may appear uncertain given the variables used, but may be known to the
individual at the time they start college.       As a check on this, I added measures
of plans (as of senior year) to attend or transfer to a four year college plans
and to obtain a 4 year or advanced degree the education outcome equations.
       The results are in Panel l.F of Table 1. For the pooled sample, p is
between .6 percent higher for those planning to attend college than for those who
did not plan to attend college. The differential for men is about 1 percent.
For women, the estimated return is actually a bit higher for those who were not
planning to attend college.    I suspect that the gender difference in the effect
of plans is due to the much larger return to some college for women.
VI.2. Adjustments for Unobserved Differences in the     Payoff   to Education
       The estimates of p   will be   biased if I do not include all the variables Z
                                            30

 thai determine expectations about the payoffs to various levels of education.
 Partition Z Into the subvectors 21 and Z2. Assume both Z1 and 22 are known to
 the agent at the time that the decision to attend college is made but that the
 econometrician does not observe 22. Since        influences the payoff to
 postsecondary education, almost any model of the demand for education implies
 that it will influence the decision to start college. In this case, the
 estimated differential between a high school and college graduate conditional  on
 21 will be biased as an estimate of the agent's expectation of the differential

 given 21 and 22.
        Assume that the expected contribution to lifetime utility of starting
 college depends upon X and on the vector of payoffs associated with the
 different educational outcomes conditional on the information set       and 22 and
 the fact a particular education outcome will be chosen cx post.
                                                                Z2 is
unobserved. However, assume that there exists a vector of measures EDe that
 indicate how much education the individual expects to attain. These
expectations depend on X, 21 and           I make the key assumption that these
indicators are an exact function of X,    and Z2. I also impose linearity.
although this could be relaxed. This leads to
(16) EDe        +
                     Z   1 + Z2   fl2

Although Z2 is unobserved, one may solve for
(17) 22 2 — EDe      -      +
                   [XP0   Z1 fi1)
       I approximate the elements of Z2 fi2 as the residuals of regressions of
the elements of EDe against X and Z1. In practice, the vector EDe consists of

dummy variables for the highest level of post secondary education the individual
expects to complete (vocational, some college, or college and advanced), a dummy
variable for whether the individual will attend a 4 year college, and a dummy
variable for whether the individual will start at a two year college and transfer
to a four year college or start at a 4 year college.
       It is not practical to allow the education payoffs to depend on this many
variables, and so I combine them by estimating the equation


(18) YRSACD79 — X C1 +
                           Z    G2 + tZ2   3 +

Finally, I allow the wages associated with stopping school after high school,
some college, college, or an advanced degree
                                             (respectively) all to depend upon
the index 1Z2 fl2J   G3
                                                 31

          There are two important limitations of the approach. First, if ihe
 vector EDe depends upon factors that are unrelated to the expectations about
      payoffs to education in addition to the X variables we control for, then the
 estimate 1Z2 G3 will be a noisy measure of the heterogeneity in the    education
 coefficients in the wage equation. For example, X may not control adequately for
 differences in tastes for education, and these tastes are presumably reflected in
 EDe. Or the elements of EDC may be noisy indicators of educational expectations.
 Second, it is unlikely that one may write r (Z1.Z2) as r
                                                                        (Z1,[Z2 fl2)C3), which
 I am assuming when I use of      interactions    between the educational outcomes and
                                                                                            1Z2
          in the wage equation.

        A second, closely related approach is to regress YRSACD79 on X,
                                                                         Z1, EDe,
 and, form YRSACD79. and add interactions between YRSACD79 and SOCO1479, S0C1579,
and (COLL79 + ADV79) to the wage equation. The basic idea is that many of the
variables that are related to expected educational attainment (given information
as of senior year) may also be related to the ex post payoff to education.
Results
          The estimates of the wage equation with
                                                1Z2 fl2JC3 included suggest that,
at least for the pooled sample, the variable has only a small effect on the
return to postsecondary education and incorporating the variable does not make
much difference for estimates of p.
       When I use the second approach to obtain coefficients (uncorrected OLS
standard errors) of - .0073 (.0068) for YRSACD79, .0097 (.0083) for

SOCO1479*yRSACD79, .0165 (.0084) for S0CO1579*yRSACD79, and .053 (.0096) for
(COLL79 + ADV79J*YRSACD79. The positive coefficients on YRSACD79 and the
interaction terms indicate that higher values of YRSACD79 are associated with
higher wage levels regardless of education, and with a higher ex post payoff to
education. In the case of the pooled sample with a—0 the estimate of p is
unchanged when one uses the augmented education and wage equations. I have also
re-estimated the differences in returns for the college and noncollege going
samples and by ability level, family background, curriculum, and college plans
using the expanded wage model.35 The results are basically similar to those
reported in the tables.




          In these calculations the values of the variables used to form
YRSACD79 reflect the differences in ability, family background, etc. that             are
under examination.
                                         32

                       VII. Directions for Future Research

       This paper presents a theoretical and empirical analysis of the demand for
and return to education when educational outcomes are uncertain. The simple
structural model implies an equation relating the rate of return to starting
college to the earnings associated with each of the possible outcomes of starting
college (including dropping out after a year, getting a college degree in math,
etc.) weighted by the probability of the specific outcome. The ex ante internal
rate of return to education depends on factors that affect the odds of completing
various college majors, such as preferences for schooling, aptitude and high
school achievement variables, as well as on the ex post payoffs to various
postsecondary education outcomes.   I evaluate the formula for the cx ante
internal rate of return using reduced form models for the probabilities of
various education outcomes and estimates of the cx post payoffs to them.     I

estimate the effect of parental background, high school curriculum, academic
ability, and gender on the internal rate of return to starting college. The main
results of the empirical analysis are summarized in the introduction and seem
quite promising.
       There is a long research agenda. On the theoretical side, one could
easily follow the suggestion in footnote 15 and use the model to analyze the
probability of starting college and the supply of college graduates in various
fields. It would be useful to relax a number of the special assumptions of the
model. It might also be useful to examine the screening/human capital debate
from the perspective of the sequential choice model.36
       On the empirical side, a number of refinements to the model and


      36• For example, Lang and Kropp (1988) base a test of human capital models
versus screening/sorting models on the idea that an increase in the school that,
to a first approximation, increases in the compulsory school leaving age should
not alter the distribution of education above the level affected by the increase.
They are correct in the case of conventional human capital models that assume
perfect foresight about education choices. In the model in the paper, however, a
law requiring all high school graduates to attend the first year of college would
result in an increase in the fraction of high school graduates who graduate from
college, because some of the reluctant college attendees would find out after the
first year that they are type 1 or type 2 individuals or have higher graduation
probabilities than expected given K0 and A. (In their conclusion Lang and Crop
note that "A compulsory schooling law might affect individuals it is does not
directly constrain if. . . forcing persons to go to school longer teaches them that
they are benefiting from higher level schooling.") One would have to expand the
model to incorporate explicit assumptions about how firms value knowledge and
ability before it could be used to address the issue of education as a screen.
                                         33

        On the empirical side, a number of refinements to the model and
 improvements in the empirical estimation should be implemented before
                                                                          strong
 conclusions can be drawn about the factors that influence the   cx ante return to
 starting college.   The absence of standard errors on the internal rate of return
 estimates should also be kept in mind in considering the results.37
                                                                       One might
 also wish to experiment with letting the cx post payoff to college depend upon
 specific courses taken and grades. In principle, one can do this using data
 from the Post Secondary Transcript Survey of NLS72. However, it would be
 necessary to add forecasting equations for grades and course counts to the
 education outcome model.   In view of the large shift in the cx post payoff to
 college in the 80's, more attention should be given to modelling
                                                                  expectations
 about the earnings associated with various education outcomes. The problem of
 sample selection bias in the estimates of the wage and education equations
 remains a potentially serious issue.
        Another natural extention would be to distinguish between the cx ante
 return to high quality and low quality colleges. Differences in dropout
probabilities may be more important than differences in cx post payoffs in
determining the cx ante return to attending a particular school.
       The most interesting and also the most difficult extension would be to
expand the structural model of education decisions in Section II into a model
that is rich enough to take to the data. One could then replace the reduced form
equations relating personal characteristics as of senior year to education
outcomes with a structural model of the sequence of education decisions
                                                                        leading
to a final education outcome. With transcript data on courses and grades and
with survey information on attitudes toward school, one might be able to devise
an empirical counterparts to the equations for knowledge and for  graduation
probabilities and the preference variables in the theoretical model.


      37. Estimating the standard errors is difficult because the estimate of p
 is a function of hundreds of parameters from the education
                                                            equations and the wage
equation as well as the values of X and Z that enter the wage and education
equations. One could estimate the variance matrix of the model parameters and
then use a simulation method to compute the standard error of p. However, given
the number of parameters involved, it would be very difficult to estimate the
variance matrix. Or one could apply bootstrap methods to the entire problem.
The bootstrap approach would involve drawing random samples from the sample used
in the study, estimating all of the model parameters, computing p for each of the
random samples, and computing the variance of the result. This approach is
beyond my computing resources given the large number of different specifications
I examine.
                        ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Research support from the National Center on Education and
Employment. Teachers College Columbia University, the Spencer
foundation and the Center for Urban Affairs and Policy Research
at Northwestern University are gratefully acknowledged. I am
indebted to Thomas Dunn and especially to Lew Segal and James
Spletzer for excellent research assistance. I am grateful to
Robert Willis and participants in a seminars at Columbia, NBER,
University College London, Northwestern, U.C.S.D., U.C.L.A., U.C.
Berkeley, U. of Washington, U. of British Columbia, University of
Western Ontario, and University of Chicago for helpful comments.
Some of the ideas in this paper were presented in preliminary
form in an unpublished paper entitled, uAccounting for
Uncertainty When Estimating the Rate of Return to Education
(September 1988). A May 1990 draft was prepared for a Columbia
University conference honoring Jacob Mincer. I am solely
responsible for the opinions expressed in the study for any
errors or omissions.
                                         34



                                       REFERENCES
 Altonji, Joseph C., "The Effects of Family Background and School Characteristics
      on Education and Labor Market Outcomes" (December 1988)

 ______________ "The Effects of High School Curriculum on Education and Labor
      Market Outcomes" (December 1988)

 Altonji, J. and R. Shakotko. "Do Wages Rise with Job Seniority?" Review of
      Economic Studies (July 1987)

 Bamberger, Gustavo, "Occupation Choice: The Role of Undergraduate Education",
      unpublished paper, Graduate School of Business University of Chicago
      (October 1986).

 Becker, Gary S., Human Capital; A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, NBER: New
      York (1975).

 Berger, Mark C., "Predicted Future Earnings and Choice of College Major",
      Industrial and Labor Relations REview", v4l No. 3, April 1988, 418-429.

Berryman, Sue, Who Wifl. Do Science? Ford Foundation, 1983.

Card, David, and Alan Krueger. "Does School Quality Matter? Returns to
     Education and the Characteristics of Public Schools in the United States."
     Working Paper No. 265, Industrial Relations Section, Princeton University,
     (April 1990).

Comay, Y., A. Melnik, and M.A. Pollachek, "The Option Value of Education and the
     Optimal Path for Investment in Human Capital", International Economic Review
     14 No. 2 (JUne 1973) : 421-435.

England, Paula, "The Failure of Human Capital Theory to Explain Occupational Sex
     Segregation", Journal of Human Resources 17 pp. 358-370.

Criliches, Z. "Estimating the Returns to Schooling: Some Econometric Problems."
     Econometrica, January 1977, pp. 1-22.

Hungerford, Thomas and Gary Solon, "Sheepskin Effects in the Return to
     Education", Review of Economics and Statistics, 69 No 1, (1987): 175-177.

Lang, Kevin and David Kropp, "Human Capital Versus Sorting: The Effects of
     Compulsory Attendance Laws",Ouarterly Journal of Economics, 101 No. 3
     (August 1986): 609-624.

Manskj, Charles F., "Schooling as Experimentation: A Reappraisal of the
     Postsecondary Dropout Phenomenon", Economics of Education Review, 8 No. 4,
     (1989): 305-312.

Mincer, Jacob, "Education and Unemployment", National Center on Education and
     Employment, Teachers College Columbia University, (1988).

Mincer, Jacob, Schoo1jn. Experience, and Earnin, NBER: New York (1974).
                                        35



Mincer, Jacob, "On-the-Job Training: Costs, Returns, and Some Implications",
     Journal of Political Economy (1962)

Hincer, Jacob, "Investment in Human Capital and Personal Income Distribution",
     Journal of Political Economy August 1958.

Miller, Robert, "Job Matching and Occupational Choice", Journal of Political
     Economy, 92 (December 1984): 1086-1120.

Murphy. Kevin and Finis Welch, "The Structure of Wages", unpublished paper,
     Unicon Corporation, (September 1988).

Paglin, Horton and Anthony H. Rufolo, "Heterogenous Human Capital, Occupational
     Choice, and Hale-Female Earnings Differences", Journal of Labor Economics 8
     No 1, Part 1, (January 1990): 123-144.

Polachek, Solomon, "Occupational Self Selection: A human capital approach to Sex
     Differences in Occupational Structure", Review of Economics and Statistics
     58 pp. 60-69.

Rosen, Sherwin (1977), "Human Capital: A Survey of Empirical Research." In R.
     Ehrenberg ed., Research in Labor Economics, Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

Shaw, Kathryn L., "Occupational Change, Employer Change, and the Transferability
     of Skills" Southern Economic Journal (1987): 702-719.

Sicherman, Nachum and Oded Calor: "A Theory of Career Mobility", Journal of
     Political Economy, 98 No. 1 (February 1990): 169-192.

Weisbrod, Burton A, "Education and Investment in Human Capital", Journal of
     Political Economy, Supplement, LXX (October 1962):106-123.

Willis, Robert J. and Sherwin Rosen, "Education and Self Selection", Journal of
     Political Economy, 87(2) (1979):S7-S36

Willis, Robert J., "Wage Determinants: A Survey and Reinterpretation of
     Human Capital Earnings Functions", in O.Ashenfelter and ft. Layard (editors)
     Handbook of Labor Economics (1987).
                                               36

 Appendix 1: Proof of Proposition I

          I first examine the properties of V2(g2, j) and then use the assumption

 that Fh and Fh are stochastically increasing in K0 and A to establish

 properties of E(V2(g2, j)1K0, A). Proposition 1 follows almost iunniediately.

 Lemma A1.1: V2(g2, 2) is nondecreasing in
                                                    2h'           strictly   increasing in
and nondecreasing in

Lemma A1.2: V2(g2, 1) is nondecreasing in 2h' g2, strictly increasing in

and nondecreasing in Y and Y
                         2h        2m
          Proof: Recall that 2—(g2. g2}. Both lemmas are obvious upon inspection

of equations (6) and (7), since the max function is nondecreasing in all

arguments and 2h and 2m are assumed greater than

Y1/(l +   R).
Lemma Al.3: EV2(K1,A,2
                              K0, A, c1)/Y0,
                                               c     in   or   h, is strictly increasing in K0

and A, 2h'O' Y2/YØ and Y1/Y0. It is strictly decreasing in R.

          Proof: The first argument of the Max(            ) function in on the left side of

(7) is strictly increasing in 2h and g2h (given T2h >
                                                                    Y1/(l + R))   and strictly

decreasing in R. The second argument is strictly increasing in
                                                                                    T2m' and Y1
and strictly decreasing in R. The third argument is strictly increasing in
                                                                                             Y1.
Consequently, the distribution of at least one of the three arguments is strictly

increasing in '12h' '12m' and      and strictly decreasing in R. Furthermore, the

distribution Fh of (g2.g2) is assumed to be stochastically increasing in
                                                                                             K0
and A, which implies that the distribution of the arguments that are strictly

increasing in       and/or g2 are stochastically increasing in K0 and A. These

facts and the fact that positive shifts in the distribution of one or more

elements of a set of random variables increases the expected value of the maximum

of the set establishes the results in the lemma.

  The same line of reasoning establishes
                                           3
Laa Al.4: EV2(K1,A,l I           A, c1)/Y0, c — m or h ii strictly increasing in

A,         and             ft ii strictly decreasing in R.

       Proposition 1 follows from Lemma       Al.3   and Al.4 once on.   note.   that   the
value of starting college Is the maximum of the value of starting college

in m or in h and recalls that


      V1(K0, A       a1)        0i   E(V2(g   J)1K0.A.m1)
and


      V1(K0, A .   6, h1) —L E(V2(g2, i)1K0.A,h1)
                                                1


           Appendix 2: The Post Secondary Education Outcome Probabilities


          All type 0 individuals drop out of college.               Type 1 individuals drop
 out of college if



 (A2.l)                 g2(1+r)    •   (1—g2) <      1
                          (1.R)3       (1.R)2       (1.R)

 or if g < (R/r), where (l.z-) -
                                         (l.r2)/(l+r1) ,c       —   h   or m.

         Type 2 individuals would choose to drop out rather than spend a second

 year as a humanities major if



               g < (R/r)

         Using an equation analogous to (A2.l) one concludes that type 2

individuals would prefer to drop out rather than major in math if

g< (R/r_). Consequently, they drop out of school if both

g < (R/r) and g, <       (R/r,).   Thus.




(A2.2)                                                   •
              p11•
                         • (l_Oo)(l_e)F.[4.Ixo.A}                              .
                                         r2h                               t2h_4_IKo.AJ
                                                                                 r
                                                             (l_ec)(e)Fi..[4..

where Fb is the marginal CDF of g and F is the joint CDF of g2h, g. and

  -
      2/(1O2).       I have suppressed the fact that both F and F are

conditional on the first period field c.

       It is obvious from inspection of (A2.2) that P is increasing in 8,.

Since F > F, P11 is also decreasing in 8. The other results in
                                               2

Proposition 3.a follow from the fact that P1 is increasing in the value of

F_ and F and the fact that the monotone likelihood ratio property implies

that these functions are decreasing in K and A.


         The probability P12 is the probability that a person is type 1 or type

2 has a sufficiently high graduation probability to attempt to complete

college but is unsuccessful in doing so. The equation is




                         —
                             (i—Os) (1—O) f (1—g2)dF(g1IK0.A)


                             +
                                          f f (1-g2)dF(g2.g,4,IK0,A)
                                 (1_oa)e{*/z   gr/r,
(A2.3)
                                    1
                             +
                                 f 1Jr_
                                    f (1-g2,)dF,.(gg2;,A)
                                         1

                             + (i-e)o f f (l-g2)dF(g2,g,Iç,A)
                                        l/r
       The first term is the probability that the person is type l has a

graduation probability above the critical value R/r, but then fails to meet

the requirements in the humanities. The next term is the probability that the

individual is type 2, attempts to graduate in m, and is unsucessful. The last

term is probability that the person is type 2, attempts to graduate in

humanities, and fails to do so. The ranges of integration reflect the fact

that type 2 individuals are best off in an expected value sense from choosing

a if



              g2> R/r, and g2> g2x/r.
                                            3

 They are best off choosing h if



                gzh> R/rh


 It   is obvious that P2 is decreasing in e0.          An increase in r unambiguously

 increases the term on the 3rd line of (A2.3). If r> z-, it is easy to show

 that the derivative with respect to r         of   the sum   of   the terms on the 2nd and

4th lines of (A2.3) is positive. (The increase in r                induces some students
to wove from humanities to math even though g > g2_.               This raises 12) This

proves that P12 is increasing in r if r >               r.     Using the same methods it

is easy to show that P2 is increasing in both r and r if r —                     r.   An
increase in R works in the opposite direction,          reducing the fraction of

students who attend college in the second year, P1,2.

         Without further assumptions about Fh       and F, the effects of increases

in K0, A, and 8    are   ambigous for reasons discussed in the text.

         I now turn to Proposition 3.3. The equation for                + P1 is I minus
the expressions for P11 and P2 in (A2.l) and (A2.2). For completeness, I

present the equations for 1c2h and P1      below:



                     Ic2h — (1—O)1—e   f gdF(g2jK0.A)
(A2.4)

                            ÷ (1-e0)ej     f    gadF_(g.g2JK0.A)
                                                    4

 The first term of (A2.4) is 9 times                                                 The

 second term is e2     times

                        ,   g> RJr)      .Prob(g<g2rr, g>R/r). The equation for

P1 is:


                                      1

                   - (1-OO)02 f       f gdF(g,g2_I;.A)
                                     R/r.
(A2.5)
                        +   (l-O)O   f       f g3dF(g2,g3_x0.A)
                                   1/th     5a&/.

             + P1      is decreasing in         because all type 0 persons drop out

after the first year. An increase in R reduces the fraction of students who

attend college in the second year. lowering both Pim and P1N.

         To prove that P1 + P1_ is increasing in A and K0 when r -              r,    note

that in this case one may combine (A2.4) and (A2.5) and rewrite them as




                   +   P1, =   U—e0) (i—9) f        g2hdPcg2;,A)

(A2.6)                         +




                               + ('-e.)e 1_F4,.4.I;.A1__
                                                r1,  / r3




The assumption that CDFs Fh and F have the monotone likelihood ratio

property in A and K0 implies almost immediately that the first term is

increasing in A and K0. The fact that max(O.g2 -             R/r,g2_ - R/r.)   is
                                       5

nondecreasing in g and g and strictly increasing over part of the       range
between 0 and 1 and the assumption about F implies that the second term is

strictly increasing in A and K0. The assumption about F implies that

1 -F(R/r,.R/z-IK0,A) is strictly increasing in K0 and A. Consequently, the

third term in (A2.6) is also strictly increasing in K0 and A.

      The positive effect of O on the Pm +    P1   when r -     r   follows from

the fact that the weight on (l-e) is (1-es) times the product of the


expectation of gm given g> r/r_ and the probability that    g> r/r. This
weight is strictly less than the weight on $, which is (1 - eo) times the


product of the expectation of max(g, g) given that max(g,g) > R/r and

Prob(max(g,g) > R/r).
                                           1

Appendix 3: The Expected Ex Post Return to College When Returns are Uncertain.

         In this appendix I show that variables that alter the cx ante

probability of completing college, such as ability or high school preparation,

will be related ox post to the earnings conditional on completing college even

if the variables are not related to the unconditional distribution of the

return to college.       I work with the model in Section 2 but impose the

simplifying assumption that there is only one field of study in college with

return R2. Let F(g2IK, A) be the cdf of the probability g2 of completing

graduation requirements conditional on K0 and A.      I assume that this CDF has

the monotone likelihood ratio property in K0 and A. Since there is only one

field of college I need only distinguish between type 0 and type 1

individuals. Type 0 individuals dislike college and will drop out of college

after the first year regardless of g and R2. Type 1 individuals have no

nonpecuniary preference between working and college.

         I drop the assumption that the returns to college are nonstochastic.

Let R2 denote the return to a college degree. I assume that R2 is equal to



(A3.1)         R2 —   r2(K0, A) +   #,


where # has a continuous distribution over the range (O,) and is independent

of K5, A, 0, g2, and whether the individual will complete graduation

requirements conditional on g2. At the end of the first year of college, the

individual learns .        For simplicity. I analyze the case in which the
                                             2

 nonstochastic portion r2(K0, A) of R2 is a constant which I set to 0.            I also
 set Y1 to Y0/(l +    R).    I discuss the case in which r2(K0,A) depends on I( and A

 at the end of the section.

         Let E(jK0. A, graduation) be the expectation of conditional on

 graduation from college, I(, and A. Under the assumptions made earlier, the

 following proposition holds.



 Proposition A3: E(IKO, A, graduation) is decreasing in I( and A.

         Note that by assumption K0 and A are independent of .           Furthermore,
both are determined prior to starting college and prior to the realization of

.   The proposition holds because K0 and A increase the probability of

completing graduation requirements. This lowers the critical value of

required to justify staying in college a second year of college and taking the

risk of failing to meet the requirements.

         To formally prove Proposition A3. note that the value function at the

end of the first period of college is



(A3.2)           V2(g2,$i)                       +
                                                     (1—g2)
                              l.R1c{[                         (1.R)}1}

for individuals who turn out to be type 1.           (The value function for type 0

individuals is irrelevant, since these individuals always drop out).


A type 1 individual prefers to remain in school if # > R/g2.

Given the assumption that with > R so that education is profitable if the

person knows she is type 1, will receive 4', and is certain to graduate

(g2 —   1),   then
                                             3


(A3.3)         E(g2, graduate) —           > Rig2)

which is strictly decreasing in g2. It remains to evaluate the expectation of

     conditional on I(, A. and college graduation, which is



(A3.4)         E(E( > R/g2)K0, A, graduate) —        E(K0, A,   graduate).



The above expectation is




(A3.5)         E($1K0A, graduate) -   fE(I+.R/g2)dF'cg3jK0.A)




where dF is the product of the probability density of college graduation

conditional on g2 (and type j — 1) and the density of g2 given K0 and A. dF

is



(A3.6)         dF'(g2jK0,A) -   Prob(#>R/g2)g2dF(g2K0,A)/fl(K0,A)


where Q(ç,A) -
                  f   Pzob($>   R/g)gdF(g3Iç,A).

Since from (A3.6)

dr(g2k,A')/dr(g2/K',4") —

the assumption that dF has the monotone likelihood ratio property implies that

dr has the monotone likelihood ratio property. Since E(I# > R/g2) is

decreasing in R/g2, it follows that E(#IKO, A, graduate) is decreasing in K0

and A, which completes the proof.
                                       4

       The proposition does not examine the effects of
                                                         nonpecuniary
preferences. In the above model variables that alter 80 and 8 do not alter

 the expectation of conditional on K0, A, and graduation.    80 and 01 may alter
the expectation of conditional only on graduation by altering the

distribution of K0 and A among those who choose to start college. If one

extends the model to include a third preference type who "likes"   (receives a

nonpecuniary benefit from attending) college, then one may show that the

expected value of    is negatively related to factors that increase the ex ante

probability that the individual will like college even after one conditions    on
K0 and A.

      If r2(K0, A) is a positive function of I( and A, then the proposition

remains true, since the increase in r2 lowers the critical value of     at which

the individual decides to drop out. If elements of K0 and A lower r2(K0, A),

then the overall effect of increases in these elements on E(IK,, A,

graduation) is ambiguous.
                                         Table 1
                        TUE INTERNAL RATE OF RETURN TO STARTING COLLEGE (p)

                        (1)       (2)           (3)       (4)      (5)      (6)
Saaple Used to Estimate Ken       Man            Men       Men     Women   Women
and to Evaluate the     and       and
Wage and Education
         a              Women     Women
Equations:
                                  L.A Means for All VarLab1es

FXP*s Slgpe (a)
    .000                 5.1                    2.8                 7.4
    .0011                6.2                    4.1                 8.4
    .005                 9.0                    7.3                10.8

                                         l.B Ability   LevelC
                        HIGH      LOW         HIGH        LOW      HIGH     LOW


EXP*s Slgpe (a)
   .000                  6.4       3.6           4.2       0.5      8.8       5.9
    .0011                7.4       4.9           5.4       2.1      9.5       7.0
    .005                 9.9       8.0           8.3       5.7     11.7       9.8

                                       1.C   Family Backgroundd
                        FAV       UNFAV          FAV       UNFAV    FAV    UNFAV


        g. '°           5.4       4.8            3.3        1.9     7.3     7.6
    .0011               6.4       5.9            4.5        3.3     8.3     8.5
    .005                9.2       8.7            7.6        6.6    10.7    10.8

                                  1. D High School Curriculume
                        AC        NONAC          AC        NONAC    AC        NONAC


   *sgpe                5.5       4.8           3.1        2.1      7.7        7.6
    .0011               6.6       5.9           4.4        3.5      8.6        8.5
    .005                9.3       8.7           7.5        6.8     11.0       10.8

                                        i.E   Started coiiege
                        Yes       NO             YES       NO       YES       NO

EXP*s Slgpe (a)         5.6       4.1           3.5        0.9      7.8        6.8
                        6.7       5.3           4.7        2.4      8.7        7.8
    .005                9.4       8.3           7.8        6.0     11.0       10.3
                                            l,F College

                             YES      NO         YES       NO        YES       NO
 EXP*g Slgpe (a)
     .000                    5.3      47         3.1       1.9       7.3       7.7
     .0011                   6.4      5.8        4.4       3.3       8.2       8.6
     .005                    9.2      8.6        1.5      6.6       10.7      10.9
     a.   The text for the specification of the wage model and the 18 probit models
 education   outcomes.                                                              for the
                        The internal rate of return is computed using the estimates of
                                                                                        these
 equations evaluated at the sample means of all variables unless otherwise noted in
 title  for each panel of the table.
                                                                                      the
     b. The Exp*s slope coefficient a is the coefficient on the product of years of
 academic education and experience. The wage equation was estimated with this parameter
 set to .000, .0011 and .005 respectively. The alternative estimates of the
 were used to evaluate the rate of return.                                    wage equation
     c. The wage and education equations are evaluated at the sample means of all variables
 except those related to ability, which are set to either high or low values. In the case
 of "High" ("Low") ability SAT VER3AL, SAT MATH, CRADES, and -COL_ABIL are set to the mean
 for the particular sample (pooled, men, or women) plus (minus) one standard deviation.
The standard deviations are taken from the full sample, so the difference in the values of
 the aptitude measures for the high and low aptitude cases is the same regardless of
whether the group analyzed is men and women, men, or women.
     d. The wage and education equations are evaluated at the sample means of all variables
except the family background variables which are set to either high or low values. In
the case of favorable background father's education, mother's education, and the log of
family income are set to the mean for the particular sample (pooled, men, or
                                                                               women) plus
(minus) one standard deviation. The dummies for whether the individual discussed
                                                                                    plans
with parents and whether he/she was influenced by parents were set to 1.    Dummy variables
for whether lack of parental interest interfered with higi school education and for
whether lack of money interfered with high school education were set to 0. The
definition of "unfavorable" is symmetric to the favorable case. The standard deviations
are taken from the full sample.
    e. The wage and education equations are evaluated at the sample means of all variables
except those related to high school curriculum. In the case of AC, semester hours of math,
science, and foreign language are the means for the particular sample (pooled, men, or
woemn) plus one standard deviation. Industrial arts and commercial were set to the
sample means minus one standard deviation. In the case of NONAC, the opposite
                                                                                adjustment
was made. The standard deviations of the curriculum variables are taken from the
particular sample (pooled, men and women).  I do so because the standard deviations of
industrial arts and commercial courses differ dramatically between men and women. In the
case of AC. the dummy variable for whether the individual was in an academic program was
set to one and the dummy for a general high school program was set to 0. (Vocational is
the reference group in all equations.) In the case of NONAC, the dummy for academic
program was set to 0 and the dummy for general high school program was set to the
conditional probability that an individual is in a general program given that he or she is
not In the academic program.
    1. The wage and education equations are evaluated using the sample means and women
alone of those who started college (Yes) and the sample means for those who did not start
college (No).
    g. The wage and education equations are evaluated at the sample means of all variables
except those related to college plans. The education equations were augmented to include
a series of measures of educational plans. Individuals are defined to have 4
                                                                               year college
plans ("Yes") if they Indicated they planned to complete college and if they indicated
that they planned to attend or to transfer to a 4 year college. They are defined not to
have 4 year college plans if they indicated that they did not plan to complete college
and did not plan to attend or to transfer to a 4 year college.
                                                Table A.l
                 Log Wag. Coefficients and Sample Probabilities for Various
                             Post Secondary Education Outcomes.

                            Hen and Women                                    Women


                          Wage
                                  '.4
                                        Prob.        Wage
                                                            q        h
                                                                 Frob.    Wage
                                                                                         6
                                                                                     Prob.
                          Coaf.                      Coef.                Coef.
Education OutCome             (1)         (2)           (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)

College, LT 2              0.0369        .286       .0.0076       .264    0.0789       .308
                           (0.0116)                  (0.0180)             (0.0142)
College. 2+                0.1292        .272        0.0575       .287    0.1945       .258
                           (0.0128)                  (0.0200)             (0.0174)
Cohere Derree
Business.                  0.3153        .067        0.2113       .077    0.4647       .039
 communicatIons            (0.0215)                  (0.0300)             (0.0337)
EngIneering                0.5105        .017        0.4436       .031    0.5061       .002
                           (0.0290)                  (0.0353)             (0.1012)
Physical sciences          0.3367        .009        0.2749       .014    0.2968       .004
                           (0.0680)                  (0.0842)             (0.0778)
Humanities                 0.1676        .023        0.0963       .018    0.2177       .027
                           (0.0312)                  (0.0556)             (0.0361)
Social sciences,           0.1939        .086        0.1292       .089    0.2342       .083
 law services              (0.0209)                  (0.0345)             (0.0252)
Life Sciences.             0.3133        .075        0.1548       .074    0.4282       .077
 health                    (0.0215)                  (0.0347)             (0.0254)
Education, home            0.1588        .070        0.0317       .038    0.2225       .101
 economics,                (0.0209)                  (0.0427)             (0.0224)
 library science
Math, computer             0.4475        .006        0.4204       .006    0.4550       .006
 science                   (0.0480)                   (0.0739)            (0.0648)
Fine Arts                  0.1431        .014        0.0256       .011    0.2281       .018
                           (0.0414)                   (0.0617)            (0.0471)
Miscellaneous,             0.2278        .031         0.2327      .029    0.3024        .033
 Field missing             (0.0281)                   (0.0454)            (0.0310)
Advanced
Math, physical             0.5369        .0047       0.4234       .0076   0.8470      .0018
 science,                  (0.0725)                   (0.0786)            (0.0515)
 engineering, computer
 science
Business law,              0.5138        .0077        0.4302      .0110   0.5982       .0044
 communications            (0.0541)                   (0.0611)            (0.1154)
Humanities, social         0.3697        .0068        0.2108      .0067   0.4267   .0068
                           (0.0550)                   (0.0515)            (0.0861)
Life sciences.             0.3916        .0071        0.2725      .0073   0.4960   .0068
 health                    (0.0711)                   (0.1137)            (0.0767)
Education, ho..            0.3436        .0117        0.2040      .0046   0.4368   .0186
 economics, library        (0.0556)                   (0.0977)            (0.0624)
 science
Arts, services,            0.3181        .0060        0.3194      .0073   0.2973   .0047
 field of degree            (0.0927)                  (0.1618)            (0.0829)
 missing

a) The other variables in the wage equation are described on page 26 and 27.
Interactions terms involving the education outcomes are included. The standard errors
In parenthesis allow for arbitrary forms of hetaroscedascictry and correlation among
residuals for a given individual or individuals from the same high school. The R2 for
columns 1. 3. and 5 are 0.1958. 0.1I7S and    0.2062 respectively.

b) The   sample   probabilities are conditional upon starting college.
                                      Table A.2
                          Distribution of College Majors
                               and Advanced Degrees

                            S of Males       S of Majors    S of Females       S of
Majors
College Major             With This         Who are        With This          Who are
                            Major            Male            Major            Female

                      Individuals with College or College and Advanced Degrees

Business
  coriununicat ions          22.84            71.19           9.24            28.81

Engineering                   7.96           93.60              .54            6.40

Physicial science             3.26            72.73            1.22           27.27

English. foreign
  language                   4.68            39.88            7.06            60.12

Sociology.
  psychology, law           21.74            50.47           21.34            49.53

Life sciences                17.38           48.04           18.90            51.96

Education                    9.06            26.07           25.82            73.93

Math, computer
  science                    1.83            54.00            1.56            46.00

Fine arts                    2.50            36.27            4.42            63.73

Missing                      9.06            49.26            9.38            50.74

    Total                            1479                              1464

Advanced Degree                        Individuals with Advanced Degrees

Math, physical science,
  engineering

Business, law,
  cOmmunjcat ions           24.66            70.59           10.28            29.41

hun*anjtjes social
  sciences                  15.06            48.89           15.76            51.11

Life sciences               16.44            51.06           15.76            48.96

Education                   10.28            19.23           63.16            80.77

Missing                     16.44            60.00           10.96            40.00

    Total advanced degree             146                              146
                                                                  T.bI. A.3
                                                       I,r1W STATISTI4• t AND
                                                                FULL SAMPLE                  440 LLSOE                  SalE (X)LLEGE
 VARIABLE      LABEL                                             MEAN         STANDARD MEAN           STANDARD MEN             STANDARD
                                                                               DEV.                    0EV.                     0EV.
  BLACK        BLACK.   AI.INDIAN                               0.09926      0.29902      0.11419     0.31809      0.11350     0.31729
 HISP         IICAN.FU1OR1Q3.LATUI              AMERICAN        0.03541      0.18483      0.04292     0.20272      0.04203     0.20073
 CSEX          SEX      fl_SITE:   HALE • 0. FD4ALE — 1         0.32658      0.49931      0.56136     0.49628                  0.49786
Yt1y Isckruiaid
 CFAED        FATNESS aXRA?I0II CaIPOSITE                     12.60061      2.30669
 OCED         143ThESS ED4EATIOII,     csiit                  12.32621      2.08474
                                                                                         11.50632

                                                                                        11.51238
                                                                                                      1.86514
                                                                                                      1.64909    12.14293
                                                                                                                               2.33533
                                                                                                                               1.95010
 LSOINC       LOG FMIILY II           IN 1972                   8.974         0.386       6.784     0.569       6.936        0.578
 DQ17.R4l     tESIEY WOBLD INTESFESE WITh ED                   0.28827      0.45298      0.36048     0.48020      0.31213      0.46348
 PIED         PDTI4ES IEXD 611D1 IN ELDI.SQ4OL                 0.40238      0.49040      0.40368     0.49070      0.44771      0.49738
 FLANDScD     PARENTS DISOUSSED FUTURE PLANS                   0.78662      0.40970      0.70638     0.45548                   0.42404
 PLAIIINFL    PARENTS INFUDICED FUTURE PLANS                   0.43867      0,49624      0.37259     0.48356      0.39358     0.48667
 IQ17TUIP     IJIINTERESTED PARENTS INTESTNRE W ED.            0.21395      0.41011      0.30902     0.46215                  0.43167
Bish 5oL Pir
 BQ7          TI1€/'.IK SPENT   ON                             4.41934      3.26270      3.63856     2.88145      4.01146
 HSACAD       US-FND1l IS ACADD4IC (1—YES.0—4403               0.45216      0.49773      0.16318     0.36958      0.38045     0.48562
 HSGDI        ME-PCONI IS OSNERAL (1—YES0—II0J                 0.31496      0.46452      0.41001     0.49190      0.31046     0.48305
 .LFCOX ScI. P(IHITY TO LLEGE                                  1.79352      0.75499      1.93462     0.76172      1.70633     0.74410
 FRFQTIRU     Sai. URS SCIENCE • FRED.                        18.72539     10.00141     14.83691     8.79246     17.48391
 FRFQT12 sai. w FONSION LA$OUAGES FRED                        10.84675     11.32240      5.21479     8.65498      9.61250    10.36436
 PRFQTHR3     SaI. lIES SOGIAL STUDIES. FRED.                 26.23072      7.67122     26.00046     7.74759     26.12846     7.52894
 FRFQTIU44    SVI.      EIGUSII      • FRED                   29.99487     6.60730      29,34478     6,47051     29.73800     6.57107
 PRFQTHRS SEN.          144TSa44T1cS. FRED                    10. 17939    9.99209      14.61655     9.30781     18.20686     9.49172
FRFQT2IE6    Sal. lIES INDUSTRIAL ARTS. FRED                   5.61403     11.90266      7.54189    14.16043      5.98975    12.40059
FRFQT1IE7    $834. lIES CaIUIL STUDIES.FRED                   14.05415     16.50500     19.20508    19.85767     15.06001
PRFQTIW.6    5831.      FINE ARTS. FRED                       8.68579      13.17194      7.24450    11.85174      9.35001    13.36491
Ajt. £cL1.vL Ns..ur.s
SATH_HAT PREDICTED SAT E: 444TH                              427.42329    100.86270    370.56558    75.29589    409.76157    86.85755
SATV_1IAT    PREDICTED SAT SE: VERBAL                        397.96923    97.42458     344.32919    74.17472    383.36516    83.23649
3Q28         DOES STUD. BELIEVE HE HAS OGLL. ANIL.            1.88734      0.96677      2.44744      1.09906     1.86442
DQS          ONADED Ill UTIEI SQ1L                           80.95753      7.58272     77.89812      7.07144     79.45181     6.04694
LocaU
S1L7O46I     STUDENT CaCS IRON SHALl. HQIETCMII               0.27760      0.44783      0.27820     0.44817      0.27798
I'WCITY      STUDDIT 5 PEal ItRl CITY                         0.11866      0.32341      0. 12000    0.32594      0.13137      0.33789
NEDSURB      STUDENT            PEal SUBURB OF lIED CITY      0,07869      0.26927      0.07099     0.25605      0.08197      0 27440
BIGCITY      STUDENT            FRI BIG CITY                  0.08319      0.27918      0.07292     0.26004      0.09406      0 29199
BIGSURB   STUDENT CaS FRl SUBURB OF BIG CITY                  0.08723      0.28210      0.05971     0.23698      0.09090      0.28755
HLGSCITY STUDENT CaS 114*34 NUDE CITY                         0.04773      0.21322      0.03714     0.18915      0.05465     0.22735
H1JIEDIJ4S   STUDENT S PROt SUBURB            OF NUDE CITY    0.06782      0.25145      0.030a2     0.17265      0.06305     0.24313
NOSD*TR      RION—WRTU-CD4Th,Aj.                              0.28394      0.45188      0.30599     0.46009      0.20849     0.45318
SWill        REGION—SOUTH                                     0.32623      0.46683      0.35293     0,47764      0.33158     0.47090
WEST         REGION'4JEST
                                                         TabI• A.3 Cont..Inu.d

                                                          COLLEGE GR ADVANCED


 VARIABLE LABEL                                                  ?M STANDARD
                                                                          DEVIATION
 BLACE       BLACK. AER. INDIAN                             0.06863      0.25287
 HIS?        PXICAJI. PUfl1TGRICO.LATIN NR1CA1I             0. 01664     0.12797
 cSZX        SEX TOSITE: MALE — O         FENALE — 1        0.48745      0.50007
?*1y 1.jrvd
 CTARD       FATHENS ThUC*TION. COIFOBITE                  13.6885'.     2.66764
 Q PCNENS EGUCATION. CalIOBITE                             13.29323      2.20082
 1.OGINC  LOG FAMILY IIICONE IN 1972                         9.212        0.533
 1Q17JON POIIEY ffi0SLD IKTFERE WITH EG                     0.1846'.     0.36823
           VENEN         *EN IN E.DI.SCIOCL                 0.36493      0.40149
 PLAIIOSCD   PARENTS DISCUSSED FUTURE PLANS                 0.86005      0. 32'. 95
 PLANINFL PARENTS INFUE)ICED FUTURE PLANS                   0.532'.'.    0.49903
 BQ1TPUI? UNINT!RESTV) PARENTS INTENFERE EwCnr—o            0.09106      0.2877'.
Risk   $o1 Prvgr
 807         TflC/WK SPENT ON ID1CRX                        5.56137      3.53350
 HSACAD      Ri-FSOGRM4 IS ACADDIIC (1—YES.0—NO1            0.79816      0.40143
 USCEN       Ri-PSOGRAM IS CENERAL (1—YES.0—BOl             0.17023      0.37590
COLLPC       EGIO3OL   PCIMITY   TO COLLEGE                 1.72349      0.72679
PRFQTUR1     SEN. IRS SCIENCE • P920.                      23.52333      9.60960
 PRFQTHR2 SEN. I FGREIaI LANCRIAGES. P920                  17.38599     11.17244
P#FQT13 SD.      SOCIAL STUDIES. P9EV.                    28. 42870       .62580
 1\juu4 SEN. I ENSLISH • P9EV                             30.90932       6.59548
PRPQTRES     SEN. IRS MATUD4ATICS• P93)                   24.49334       8.47319
FRYQTIOL6 SD.           INDUSTRIAL ARTS • FRED             2,95682       7. 56'.   18
PRFQTUR7     SEN. ._    CQtXAL STUDIES,FRED                 8. 32675    10.63317
PRI'QTIIII   EDO.       FINE ARTS, FRED                     9.89006     14.34163
Alatitud. d Achi.vL Ms.aur..
SAN_HAT PREDICTED SAT SCGRE: MATH                        502,65626      93.36001
SATV    MAT PREDICTED SAT SE: VERBAL                     467.50043      92.06562
103          GRADES IN BII SaloOl.                        65.61153      6.04901
1326         DOES SliD. BELIEVE HE HAS COIL. ABIL.          1.36119     0.56564
Loc.t.1
StTI STUDENT COTS IRON SMALL HCIIETONN                     0.26916      0.4334'.
PCITY        STUDENT CO'S IRON 1420111 CITY                0.10771      0.31007
NEDSURE      STUDENT COS IRON SUBURB I CITY                0.07849      0.26898
BICCITY           COTS tHi BIG CITY
             STUDENT                                       0.06660      0.26433
IIGSURB      STUDENT COS FROI SUBURB          BIG CITY     0.11346      0.3172'.
HUGEGITY STUDENT aBfS FRQI HUGE CITY                       0.05020      0.21857
HUDESURI STUDENT COTS IRON SUBIMS OF HUGE CITY             0.11213      0.31558
NrUITR       REGIcI(—4IGRT1I-CEiOTR#L                      0.27760      0.44769
SOiTH        REGION—SOUTh                                  0.30071      0.45664
WEST         REGION—WEST                                   0. 14040     0.35564
                                      TaLL. A.4 lb.         Pr.3tlILt,. owd La9 Wow_.. Gl. tot Lduc.LI.. Outcow..
                                       (Coii     l.tt.r. corr..pood to                                     0, 1 .nd F ot


                           .
                                                                                    p...la A.      5 C,                    TaLL. 1)

                            A. Ma...
                          U ANTE
                                                 I.    Nt&i Aflhty           I.    Low A1tiLy       C. F... backgrooaid C. Untaw. Iack1ro
                                      LOAGE U        L0E U
                                                     ANTE               ANTE L0I*Og U
  CATROOST                             GAIN       l GAIN                     PROS          GAIN
                                                                                                      MITE LW.IAGL U ANTE LOGE
                                                                                                     PROS        GAIN       9906       GAIN
  LL901. I.? 2              .3323      .0409      .2433        .0933         .3410         .0104     .2301     .0409       .5217      .0409
  LLEGC. 2s                 .3520      .1301      .3302        .0531         .3531         .1012
  LLROE TI                  .0020                                                                    .3665     .1301       .3542      .1307
                                       .3221      .0029        .4924         .0003         .6232
             T
             RONTU          .2390      .2242      .4*30        .2710         .1044         .1603
                                                                                                     .0020
                                                                                                     .3000
                                                                                                               .3241
                                                                                                               .3263
                                                                                                                           .00*0
                                                                                                                           .1176
                                                                                                                                      .3123

  1
  ADVANCE
  ADVANCE ROSIT

  LLEGE
       00LLLGE
                            .0000
                            .0050
                            .7331
                            .3559
                                       .6207
                                       .3428
                                       .0074
                                       .2265
                                                  .0000
                                                  .0097
                                                 .5733
                                                 .4160
                                                               .5501
                                                               .3567
                                                               .1130
                                                               .2723
                                                                             .0000 .74
                                                                             .0003
                                                                             .1940
                                                                             .1048
                                                                                        .4300
                                                                                        .0539
                                                                                        .1690
                                                                                                     .0000
                                                                                                     .0015
                                                                                                     .5006
                                                                                                     .3920
                                                                                                               .6207
                                                                                                               .3754
                                                                                                               .0062
                                                                                                               .2307
                                                                                                                           .0000
                                                                                                                           .0054
                                                                                                                           .0750
                                                                                                                           .1106
                                                                                                                                      .2*23
                                                                                                                                      .6207
                                                                                                                                      .353s
                                                                                                                                      .0172
                                                                                                                                      .2149
                            .0059      .3620     .0001         .3547         .0003      .4300        .0003     .3754       .0054     .3335
                            0, M.d Cut.         0.    Nan.c   Cur.     2. Start coil.6.            C.
                        U ANTE LE U ANT! 14AGE U ANTE 53.40GC           Coll.u. Plow. F. NO-Coil P1...  No Coil.6. F,
 CATT                     9 GAIl      PROS  GAIN S GAIN U6Ut?! L01AGL U ANTE L4AGE U ANT! LGE
                                                              GAIN                                                       PROS       GAlls     5 ETIN
 .L!GL. LT         2        .1975     .0400      .5272        .0409         .2434      .0476         .5421     .0205     .2334
 OSLLEGE, 2'                .3474     .1307      .3600        .1301         .3416      .1314
                                                                                                                                    .0409      .5680    .0409
 00L1.F.L T(                                                                                        .3570      .1103     .3*90      .1307      .3735
                            .0114     .4661      .0003        .5270                                                                                     .0307
 LL..EGE NOIIT!CN           .4217
                                                                            .0046      .4910        .0003      .573*     .0034      .5242      .0004    .3270
                                      .2276      .0910        .2200         .3739      .2374        .0993
 ADVANCE TECh              .0000      .1267      .0000        .6261
                                                                                                               .5996      '334      .2210      .0510    .227k
            NOUTs
                                                                            .0000      .   596.8    .0000      .7107     .0000      .6261      .0000    .6207
 ADVANCE                   .0155      .3938      .0015
 1C LLE                    .5432      .0901      .9072
                                                              .3652
                                                              .0105
                                                                            .0563
                                                                            .6050
                                                                                       .3666
                                                                                       .1013
                                                                                                    .0004
                                                                                                    .0000
                                                                                                               .3970     .0100
                                                                                                                         .5532
                                                                                                                                    .3676      .0004    .4334
                           .4390                              .2299
                                                                                                              .0642                 .0926      .9422    .0165
                                      .2338      .0913                      .3765      .2403        .0996     .2007      .4366      .2233      .0574
 ADVANCED                  .0151      .3961      .0013        .3652         .0163                                                                       .2206
                                                                                       .3686        .0004     .3010     .0*00       .3676      .0004    .4334

                           A. N....            0. ILb Ability          S.    Low    AbIlity C. F.,. 5.ckruuiid C. lOot.,. 5ockroi.id
                        U ANTE W1AGE           U AltEC LCC U ANTE LWMGC U ANTE LOAGE U MITE LWG4
C*Xy                      PROS       CAIN       S GAIN                       PROS      GAIN          PROS      GAIN      PROS GAIN
             I.E 2         .2038 - .6001        .1061         .0*75         .4930      .0297        .1524     .0041     .4887 - .0061
OSLLROC. 2,                .4117     .0563      .3313         .0601         .4130      .0320        .3601     .0365     .3907      .0565
                           .0126     .4732      .0140         .4640         .0024


f
00U.ROE ROlIt                                                                          .5376        .0190      .4739    .0051      .460*
                           .2770     .1403      .4642         .1902         .0016     .0605         .4045
ADVANCE TTEI               .0000                                                                               .1544    .1*41      .1310
                                     .4844      .0000         .4494         .0000     .5035         .0000      .4643
ADVANCE POVT               .0023     .27*2                                                                              .0000      .4543
                                                .0023         .3217         .0002     .0266         .0039     .2261     .0002
      .LROE                .7073     .0303                                                                                         .3170
                                                .3*55         .0515         .0097 -.0013            .5105     .0304     .8794
00LLEGE                    .2002     .1625      .4712         .1062
                                                                                                                                   .0217
                                                                            .0902     .1013         .4236     .1666     .1204      .1533
ADVM                       .0023     .2752      .0023         .3277         .0002     .0266         .0050     .2261     .0002      .3179
                         0. M.d. Cur. 0. Nonocad. Cur. E. Stool. Coil.1. C. No Coil,1. F. Colls. Plows F. NO-Coil Plan.
CATROOSY                S
                       U ANTE L04AGE U ANTE L4AGE U AlIT! LOGIAGE
                                    GAIN        PROS        GAIN S
                                                                          U MITE LGMGE U AIITE LCGL U
                                                                                      GAIN         PROS      GAIN       PROS       GAIN S GAIN
                                                                                                                                              AlIT! L04AGt

LLEGE, LT      2          .1743 -.0061          .4520 —.0061                           .00*4
LLL, 2'                   .3757      .0561      .4365   .0565
                                                                        .1942
                                                                        .3123          .0640
                                                                                                   .5163
                                                                                                   .4000
                                                                                                             .0213
                                                                                                             .0410
                                                                                                                        .2210 -.0061
                                                                                                                        .3464      .0563
                                                                                                                                              .4903 -.0065
                                                                                                                                              .4201
..LEGE TROS               .0294      .4410      .0040 .4746             .0193                                                                          .0363
00LL lTN                  .4005      .1360      .1041 .1603             .4040
                                                                                       .4390
                                                                                      .1591
                                                                                                   .0026
                                                                                                   .0911
                                                                                                             .5156
                                                                                                             .1153
                                                                                                                        .0160
                                                                                                                        .4092
                                                                                                                                   .4737
                                                                                                                                   .1445
                                                                                                                                              .0042    .4746
ADVANCE T                 .0002      .404)      .0000 .4643                                                                                   .0054    .1339
                                                                        .0000         .4690        .0000     .3402
ADVANCE     P0llT         .0060       .2120     .0001 .3269             .0093         .2369        .0000     .3111
                                                                                                                        .0000
                                                                                                                        .0038
                                                                                                                                   .4543      .0000     .4043
S OSLLNCC                 .3530      .0367      .0064                                                                              .2556      .0000     .4340
                                                       .0240            .5665         .0425        .6163      .0057     .3682                 .9105
                          .4379      .1565      .1109 .*9j              .4242         .1720        .0037      .1276     .4260
                                                                                                                                   .0320
                                                                                                                                   .1390      .0605
                                                                                                                                                        .0227
                                                                                                                                                         *707
ADVAJ.CC,                 .0001      .2165      .0007       .3260       .0093         .2370        .0000     .3111      .0036      .2534      .0000    .4340
                                                               To1,lr iA'((uli.it.c(
                                                                        flLLX
                       A. Hssoa S. 511h Ability S. La.. Ability C. Fey. lackircund C. Untav. $.ckground
                    LX A LOGIAGE LX ANTE LOGZ LX *1111 WE LX *1111 1.W.IAGL LX MITE LW.MGE
CATWY                l'EGI       GAIN        FS GAIN             POOl     GAIN     PEGS    GAIN I GAIN
                     .4060       .c.si       .3004    .1152      .5667    .0555    .217)   .0155      .5618    .0555
COLLEGE. LI 2
                                 . 1956      .3374               .2977    .1612    .3410       1966   .3191    .1916
.LCGE. 2+                .3552                        .2200
                                                                                   .0000   .3711      .0000    .3111
CCU.EGE TICK             .0000   .379)       .0000    .5003      .0000    .2111
                         .2366   .27*7       .3550     .33)1     .1155    .2363    .3729   .210'.     .113'.   .2564
COLLEGE EGNTWK
ADVANCE TI               .0000   .           .0000    .          .0000    .        .0000   .          .0000
ADVANCE PONTECII         .0013   .4001       .0013    .4404      .000)    .5438    .0030   .4079      .0000    .4913
                         .7522   .1311       .6377    .1755      .9644    .003'.   .6241   .1485      .1157    .1264
__— COLLEGE                                                                                           .1134    .2604
COLLEGE                  .2365   .2797       .3150    .3311      .1155    .2363    .3729   .2004
                         .0013   .4907       .0073    .4404      .0001    .5436    .0030    .4019     .0009    .4113
ADVANCED



                     0. Aced. Cur. 0. Non-Aced Cur. I. Start Colisie E. No Callus. F. Colleis Plan. F. No Coil Plan.
                    LX   ANTE LOE  LX ANTE LO.IAGE LX AlIT! I.O.JAGI LX ANTE LOGIAGE LX MITE LIAGL LX AlIT! L4AGE
                                             GAIN    PEGS     GAIN       POOl   GAIN   P909   GAIN    PEGS   GAIN
CATEGOIT             lEGS    GAIN     PEGS

COLLEGE. LI 2            .2153   .0151        .5183   .0151      .2022    .0047    .5134   .07)2      .2446     CIII   .6174   .0958
                         .3051   .1*06        .3322    .1061     .3)01    .2011    .3250   .1830      .2094    .1966   .336)   .1986
COLLEGE, 2•
                         .0000   .3161        .0000    .3751     .0000    .414)    .0000   .3231      .0000    .375)   .0000   .3781
COLLEGE lEON

ADVANCE    T
COLLEGE NOItTECII

ADVANCE IIOKTWN
                         .3900
                         .0000
                         .0101
                                 .2966
                                 .

                                 .4923
                                              .0902
                                              .0000
                                              .0003
                                                       .2749
                                                       .
                                                       .4915
                                                                 .3540
                                                                 .0000
                                                                 .003)
                                                                          .2071
                                                                          .

                                                                          .47)0
                                                                                   .1013
                                                                                   .0000
                                                                                   .0003
                                                                                   .1914
                                                                                           .2521
                                                                                           .

                                                                                           .5171
                                                                                           .1120
                                                                                                      .4520
                                                                                                      .0000
                                                                                                      .003)
                                                                                                      .5440
                                                                                                               .2776
                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                               .4900
                                                                                                               .1479
                                                                                                                       .0464
                                                                                                                       .0000
                                                                                                                       .0000
                                                                                                                       .0531
                                                                                                                                2134

                                                                                                                               .4957
                                                                                                                               .1256
      COLLEGE            .5212   .1520        .0106    .1270     .8429    .1562
                         .3010   .2964        .0002    .2740     .3540    .207)    .1013   .2527      .4329    .2176   .0454   .2034
COLLEGE                                                                                                                        .4917
                                                       .40)5     .0031    .47)0    .0003   .5177      .0031    .4009   .0000
ADVANCED                 .0101   .4923        .0003

a)   lb... sot. prcbabiUti.s era                      Lb. various .ducation outcau.s. lb.
                                          Lb. prohebilities •f                                           coItt.
                                                                                                       catasori.. COLLEGE
                                                          are d.fin.d in Lb. L.xt.. ALL 10 colL.ia degree categoriC, and .1)
ITICS. COLLEGE T. ADVANCE T, and                 ADVANCED N09TEC1I
                                                                                                                     is Lb.
S .dvinc.d c.t.Iori.. a,. ccln.d In COLLEGE sod ADVANCED. lb. los ens. .Io for a particular education category
w.ibtsd sv.reg.. of the los weg. dlff.rantiaL. (r.Lat$v. to a high echool   •r.&.at.) for lb. earl.... dsrse. 1. Lb. cat..ry
ualn lb. .e ant. prclabillt.IaI cc wiighte. Tb. values of Lb. individusl char.ct.ristics u..d is .v.Luata Lb. .duCatlOn
               and tog wag. dltf.r.ntist. at. d.scrib.d in Lb. footnote. to TibIa 1. 5.. Table 1. In. a for the A cols.
to. c tar Lb. I colunta. to. d for Lb. C cut.—.., footnote . for Lb. 0 c.i.s. En. I for the L coL.-a. end to. $ for the F
prababllittes

cal.-...
                                                           Table A.5
                        GENDER DIFFERENCES EN TUE INTERNAL KATE OF RETURN TO STARTING COLLECE (p)

                             Ia   2a   3. 4a Sa       6a    7a   Ra   9a   lb   2b   3b 4b    Sb 6h
 Wage Equation     SaapI. HF      HF   HP   HF   HF   HF   HF HF HF K           N    K    H   H     H

 Education Equations        HF    HF HF     K    K    N    F     F    F    HF   HF HF K       N     H
 Sa.ple (Only
 Persona who
 Start.d College)
 Characteristics Used HF          H    F    HF K      F    HF K
 to Evaluate Education
                                                                      F    HF   N    F    HF K      F
 and Wag. Equations:

CP*     Slope                51 5 5.2 5.6 5.3 5.9 4.8 4.5 5.0 2.4 2.6 2.3 3.0 2.8 3 2
                   —.0011 6.2 6.3 6.3 6.? 6.4 6.9 5.9 5.7 6.2 3.1 4.0 3.6 4.3 4.1 4.5
                   —.005 9.0 9.1 9.1 9.4 9.2 9.6 8.8 8.6 9.0 7.0 7.2 6.9 7.4 7.3 7.6
                            7b    8b 9b     Ic   2c   3c   4c    Sc   6c   lc   8c   9c

Wage   Equation Sap1e K           H    K    F    F    F    F     F    F    F    F    F

Education Equations F             F    F    HF HF HF K           N    K    F    F    F
S1e    (Only
Persons who
Started      College)

Characteristics Used HF K              F    HF   H    F    HF    H    F    HF   H    F
to Evaluate Eduation
and Wage Equations:


EXP*a Slope _000b 1.9 1.7 2.1 8.1 8.6 7.6 8.6 8.8 8.4 7.7 8.1. 7.4
            —.0011 3.3 3.1 3.4 8.9 9.4 8.5 9.4 9.6 9.2 8.6 8.9 8.4
                  —.005      6.6 6.5 6.8 11.2 11.6 10.9 11.6 11,7 11.5 11.0 11.2 10.8

a) HF   Pooled aa3ple       of
                         men and women. K: Sample of men.    F: Sample of Women. The
education outcomes probabilities used in evaluating the internal rate to education are
evaluated at the mean of the explanatory variables for the indicated
                                                                      sample. Results
using the mean of the probabilities evaluated over the distribution of the explanatory
variables are discuased in the text. The wage equations are evaluated at the sample
means. See the text for a description of the education and wage equations.

b. The EXps slope is the coefficient a on the product of years of academic education and
expertenc.. The wage equation was estimated with this parameter set to .000. .0011. and
.005 respectively.
                    The alternative estimates of the wage equation were used to evaluate
the   rat,   of return.
