                    NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




          CONVERGENCE OF INTERNATIONAL OUTPUT MOVEMENTS




                        Andrew B. Bernard

                        Steven N. Durlauf




                     Working Paper No. 3717




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            May 1991




The authors thank Suzanne Cooper and Paul Romer for many helpful
discussions. The authors also thank participants at the NBER
Summer Workshop on Common Elements in Trends and Fluctuations for
helpful comments and the Center for Economic Policy Research for
support. Bernard gratefully acknowledges dissertation support
from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. All errors are ours. This
paper is part of NBER's research programs in Growth and Economic
Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper 37l'7
                                               May 1991

               CONVERGENCE OF
                                INTERNATIONAL OUTPUT
                                                       MOVEMENTS
                                   ABSThAT
        This   paper explores the
                                    convergence of real
     output in advanced                                  per capita
                         industrialized economies,
                                                     we start by
    observing that in a
                          stochastic environment,
    capita GD? requires                            convergence in per
                          that permanent shocks
    associated with                              to one economy be
                     permanent shocks to other
   is a natural                                  economies. Convergence
                 outcome. of models where
                                           exogenous technical
   migrates across countries                                    change
                               with similar
                                             microeconomic
   specifications. Conversely, in a world where
  permanent output movements                        some component of
                                is due to technical
  other components                                   change whereas
                     are due to domestic
                                          factors, national
  nay diverge over time.                                     economies
                            we formalize a
                                            general definition of
  convergence using the notions
                                  of unit roots and
 developed in the time                               cointegration
                          series literature,
                                               we construct
 and multivariate                                           bivariate
                    tests of convergence
                                          across advanced
 industrialized economies,
                              our evidence indicates
reject the no                                          that one cannot
                convergence null. Further,
                                              the estimated time
series representation
                         of cross-country
                                           output deviations
substantial persistence.                                      exhibits
                             These results
                                            suggest that previous
mpirical work on
                    convergence has neglected
iull hypothesis.                                some aspects of the

ndrew B. Bernard
epartment of Economics                    Steven N. Durlauf
tanford University                       Department of Economics
tanford, CA 94305
                                         Stanford University
                                         Stanford, CA 94305
                                               and
                                         NBER
      1. Iutroductio11

           One of the most sinking features
                                                  of traditionaj models of
                                                                         economic growth is the im-
     plication these modeb have for
                                          cross-country convergence. In standard formulations
     infinite horizon opt imaJ growth
                                                                                                     of the
                                      problem, various turnpike theorems
                                                                            suggest that steady state
     per capita output is independent of initial
                                                  conditions. Further, differences in microeconomic
    paramete,, will generate stationary differences
                                                      in per capita output and will not imply differ-
    ent growth rates, when the forms
                                       of utility functions vary.'
                                                                   Consequejitly when one observes
    differejices in per capita output growth across countries, one
                                                                   must either assume that these
    countries have dramaticaijy different
                                            microeconon.jc characteristies such as different pro-
    duction functions or discount
                                  rates, or regard these discrepancies as transitory. -
         Launched
                   primarily by the theoretical work of
                                                        Romer [1986) and Lucas (1988J, much
   attention has focuseri on the predictions
                                              of dynamic equihibriu models
  havior when various Arrow-Deb                                                for long term be-
                                       assumptions are relaxed. Lucas and Romer
  that divergence in long term                                                        have shown
                                 growth can be generated by social
                                                                      increasing returns to scale
  associated with both physical and human
                                              capital. When there exist various
  tive feedbacks from capital                                                      types of posi-
                              formation to production which
                                                             are not internaH,] by indivitluaj
 agents, multiple steady states may result.
                                             These steady states are indexed by the initial con-
 ditions of an economy;
                          consequently, these models predict that
 not hold. More generally,                                          convergence will generally
                            economies characterise,j by
                                                        strong complementarities will possess
 multiple steady states. For
                                 example, Murphy, Shleifer and Vishny
                                                                            12989) show how incseas.
 ing returns to scale can induce
                                     a multiplicity of steady states because
      For the standard time                                                       of aggregate demand
                               separable growth model, if rates of time
                                                                           preference vary across coun-
 tries, consumption and CNP (or the
                                           more impatient country become
 Hence crosscoun try variation                                                ssYmputkally negligible.
                                   across this dimension will hot lead
                                                                         to interesting forms of diver-
 gence. However, Jones and Manuelli
                                          119901 show that if the marginal
                                                                              product of capital Jitters
sufficiently across countries, then
                                     divergence can occur in a competitive
emphasize bow croascoun                                                       equilibrej model. They
                            try differences in macrneconomjc
                                                               policies, such as tax rates, can lead to
divergence (or countries
                         with similar preference and
                                                       production specilications
                                   obtains similar results based solely on imperfect compel1-
cornpIementarkt Ileller (19861
                                    concentrated on onstrating how static economies may
tion. This literature has typically
                                               (1990 lisa shown that multiplicity can be ex-
exhihit multiple equilibria. However, Ileller                                        stochastic
                                              Further Durlauf 11991a,hl shows how
tended to inlinite horizon growth problems.
                                          lead to long run divergence in the sample paths 01
formflkllatmons of complemnermtarit can

per capita output for different economies.
                                                        has developed in parallel to the new
        An empirical literature exploring convergence
                                         these contributions is the work of Haumol (19861, Be-
 growth theory. Prominent among
                                            and Wolff (19891. Most of this research has argued
 Long (19881 and Baumol, Blackman,
                                                                                            Banmol
                                          with the convergence hypothesis. In particular.
 that the historical data is consistent
                                                                                       between the
                                             horizons, there is a negative correlation
 and his coauthors argue that over long
                                                                                  correlation means
 initial per capita income of a country sad its subsequent growth rate. This
                                      countries tend to catch up. Barro (19001 has also examinS
  that on average, relatively poor
                                                                        countries from the Heston
  convergence from this perspective using a large cross-section of
                                       find convergence in the raw correlations but when proxie
  Summers data set. 1-Ic does not
                                          included the countries do appear to be converging.
   for human capital development are
                                                    a new definition and set of tests of the convel
          The purpose of this paper is to propose
                                                                    empirical work in that we
                             research differs from much previous
   gence hypothesis. Our
                                                  stochastic framework. Technical innovation ar
    the notion of convergence in an explicitly
                                                       which lead to random yet permanent mov
    capital accumulation are continuing processes
                                          countries. Convergence in the face of stochastic technic
    enents in per capita output across
                                                        movements in one country's per capita om
     innovations essentially asks whether permanent
                                           movements in other countries' outputs. Recent ailvani
     put are associated with permanent
                                        the theory of cointegratiosi, provide a natural language
     in time series analysis, notably
                                                                               The role of cointeg
      testing 0s-cosmntry relationships in permanent output movements.
                                                 was first explored hy Campbell and Mankiw (l9
      lion in addressing long run convergence                                   methodologies as 1
                                beth through new data analysis and testing
      we extend their analysis
                                    information on the structure of growth across countries.
       as by developing additional
                                                    2
         Our analysis, which examines armual
                                                    log real output per capita For 15 OECD economies
    from 1900 to 1987, leads to two bMic
                                              conclusions about international
                                                                                output fluctuations.
    First, we find very little evidence of
                                             convergence across the economies. Per capita
   deviations do not appear to                                                                output
                                 systematically disappear over time. Second, we find that there
    is strong evidence of common elements
                                            to long run economic fluctuations across countries,
   As a result, economic growth cannot be
                                           reduced exclusively to idiosyncratic,
                                                                                 country.specific
   factors, A relatively small set of common factors interact with individual
                                                                              economic charac-
   teristics to determine growth rates,

        Our work is most closely related in
                                               spirit to a recent paper by Quah
                                                                                  [1990) who also
   finds evidence against
                          convergence, Quah examines whether there is stochastic
                                                                                      convergence
  across (almost all) the capitalist economies listed
                                                      in the Sunssners.Heston [1988)
                                                                                     international
  output data set. Our analysis differs from that
                                                         work in three respects, First,
                                                                                          we employ
  a different econometric framewnrk whicis leads
                                                         to alternative tests. Second, we restrict
  ourselves to analysis of advanced islduatriajized
                                                       economies, it seems unreasonable to
                                                                                     expect
  to observe convergence between sub-Saharan
                                               and OECD economies nn the basis of post-
  1950 data. Our rejection of
                               convergence therefore is both more surprising and
                                                                                 more easily
 interpreted in terms of different growth
                                          models. Third, we examine data sets which extend
 across the current century. A shorter data
                                             set runs the risk of missing long
                                                                                     run types of
 convergence,

     Studies similar to ours have been
                                     conducted by Campbell and Mankiw
                                                                      [t989j and Cogley
 119901 who have explored patterns of
                                         persistence in international output.
                                                                              Using quarterly
post-1957 data, Campbell and Mankiw demonstrate
                                                           that 7 OECD econornks exhibit both
persistence and divergence in output.
                                         Cogley, examining 9 OECD economies
                                                                                  using a similar
data set to the one here, concludes
                                      that persistence is substantial for
at the sametime he argues that common factors                               many countries; yet
                                                     generating persistence imply that "long
run dynamics prevent output levels from
                                              diverging by too much," Results from another
paper1 (Bernard and Durlauf [199th1),
                                         complement those of both Campbell and Mankiw
and Cogley by strongly
                         supporting the persistence hypothesis using a new set of measures

                                                3
                                                                th&. of Campbell and hlankiw in
and test statistics. On the other hand this work supports
concluding that there is lit lIe evidence of convergence.
                                                                               methodology, a de-
      This paper consists of a brief theoretical introduction to the testing
                                                         section which considers the convergence
scription of the statistics used, and a main empirical
                                                           Additionally there is a description of
hypothesis in both hivariate and multivariate settings.
                                                         sample preceding the empirical results.
the data [or the fifteen industrialized countries in our
                                                                  the notion of convergence for
The evidence from the cross-country analysis argues against
                                                          be groups of countries with common
the whole sample. Alternatively there do appear to
stochastic elements as one would expect for some of the proximate, similarly structured

 economies of Europe.


 2.   convergence in stochastic environments
                                                                   from employing stochastic def-
       The organiaing principles of our empirical work come
                                                        and convergence. These definitions rely
 initions for both long term economic fluctuations
                                                    in time series. This literature, whose basic
 on the notions of unit roots and cointegration
  ideas are well exposited in Engle and Cranger 119871,
                                                            formalizes the concepts of trends in

  individual series and of relationships in trends across time series.

        By a stochastic trend, or unit root, we mean that part of the time series which is
                                                         is not predictable from the indefinite past
  expected to persist into the indefinite future, yet


  Definition 2.1. Stochastit trend


        I'n,*
                contains a siocha.utic trend if it is nonstsstionarii in levels esen after removing

         linear trend, whereas the process is stationary in first differences. The first difference
         have the moving average representation

                                          = js + o(L)e,r = p +Ea&ei,c_s                         (2.1



         where e is white noise distribssted     (D,a,).
                                                     4
        The part of each innovation that persists into the indefinite future
          I e,,)      (5              $
                                                                             is represented as
                          aa) ej O The interactions of stochastic trends across
   can be formalized into general definitions of
                                                                                     countries
                                                       convergence and common trends.

  Definition 2.2. Common stochastic elements in per capita output


                                                   i
       If tag per capita outputs in countries andj satisfy Definition
                                                                      2.1, then tong run growth
       in Y, and Y is determinegi by a common
                                                    factor if     and g are cointegrate,j, i.e.
       there exists a Constant y such that



                                            —   p+     y} + Vjj,                                (2.2)

      where
                   is distributed (O,a) and is stationary in levels.

 Definition 2.3. Stochastic convesence in
                                          per capita output

      Log per capita output in country i converges to Log per capita output in country j
                                                                                         if
      Y,g and }, have stochastic trends as in Definition 2.1 and if



                                                   }'j.1 + 6,.                                (2.3)

     where öj is distributed (0, o) and is stationery in levels.


     lEa pair of output series satisfies Definition 2.2, but not Definition
                                                                          2.3, then they will be
cointegrated but the expected long run output levels for the pair will not be equal. However,
it will remain true that shocks to
                                     country i will be related in part to those in country j.

     The third definition gives us important testable implications for the convergence ques-
tion, If it is true that countries with differing
                                                        'initial' incomes are converging to similar
                                                   5
                                                   in such a group will satisfy Definition 2.3.2
growth ratro and levels of output then any pair
                                                  the stochastic components of the two series,
The definition says that the difference between
                                                                             to exclude a non-zero
    —        will be a zero eaii stationary process. It is important
                                        will look at first differences of the deviations between
mean because most Lesis we employ
the series and varying means will help us test the convergence null.
                                                      different than thai employed by Baumol,
       Our definition of convergence is substantially
                                              11991a.I for a comparison of the alternative def-
 DeLong eh al. (See Bernard and Durlauf
                                                          performing a cross-section regression
 initions.) These authors have tested persistence by
                                                                            correlation between
 which  examines whether over a given time period there is a negative
                                                 its subsequent growth rate. This definition
 the initial per capita income of a country and
                                                         to one another, but does not address
 captures the qualitative notion of nations catching up
                                                            lithe world economy experiences a
 the question of whether the economies actually converge,
                                        would be surprising if this change did not migrate freer
 single episode of technical change, it
                                                   the negative correlation we have described
 richer to poorer countries, which would generate
                                                           that income disparities eventually vanish
 Our definition of convergence, however, requires
  Persistence of income disparities is sufficient to reject the turnpike arguments of optima
  growth models and lead economists to concentrate on idiosyncratic microeconomic Factor
                                               to construct a model which generates both
  as a source of growth. It is straightforward
                                            and growth and persistent deviations according
  negative correlation in per capita income

  our definition.
                                                       framework, by relying on time series analys
         It is important to observe that our testing
                                                               degree of stationarity in the data thi
   of national output movements, presupposes a greater
   is required for cross-section tests. in particular, we
                                                             require that the joint autocorrelati
                                                    series is time invariant. Our tests assume th
    [unction of the first differences of the output
                                                            washed out when the sample momer
    the initial conditions for the various time series are
                                                       assume that the sample moments well appr
   are computed. In other words, our procedures
         By 'initial', we mean a date helore which all the countries have gained access to simi

   technologies.
                                                       6
   iniate the asymptotic population moments of the data. This approximation doe, not hold
   when the data consist exclusively of trsisition
                                                   dynamics from some initial conditions. Cross-
   section tests impose no such stationarity, In fact,
                                                       they are appropriate when one is analyzing
   how a set of economics evolve from a single
                                                 event which induces different initial conditions.
   For example1 if one were interested in asking whether
                                                          the industrial revolution migrated from
  country to country then a comparison of initial conditions to
                                                                  subsequent growth rates makes
  sense. Our methodology is appropriate when one regards technical change as an ongoing
  process where distinct permanent shocke originate at different points in time. A general
  discussion of the relationships between various tests of convergence is contained in Bernard
  and Durlauf[l991a1


 3. Output relationships across countries

 3.1 Econometric methodology

      We now turn to the cross-country analysis to look
                                                            for cointegration and convergence.
 First we discuss the various statistical
                                       techniques employed along with their associated
 caveats, Then we describe the annual data series. Next
                                                        we present the empirical results
 on common stochastic elements to growth for
                                                 pairs of countries, followed by a ps.irwise look
 at convergence, as both were defined in section
                                                     2. Finally we use recent techniques de-
 veloped by Phillips and Ouliaris (l988J for a
                                                 multi-country look at both cointegration and
convergence.

     For bivariate output relationships, we can test for the presence of common trends
through the use of cointegration techniques. In
                                                  a companion paper (Bernard and Durlauf
[1990bj}, we find all 15 countries in our sample exhibit
                                                          substantial persistence in the uni-
variate output rePresentations. The
                                      presence of persistence, or unit roots, in the univariate
data naturally suggesti the use of
                                    cointegration techniques for analyzing the bivariate sad
multivariate relationships. In particular we employ a methodology described by Engle and
Ct-anger [l987j which is based on the estimated residuals
                                                             of cointegrating regressions. To
test for coTlunon stochastic elements in a pair of countries we estimate the equation



                                     = C13   + 7i1J +                                    (3,1)


    The estimated residuals,      ,, from this equation are then employed to compute aug-
mented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) statistics for #jj
                                              from a second equation



                                = —Oijij,t—i + B(L)Ao,,.-i + Cij,,.                       (3.2)


Since we do not know the actual autoregressive structure, we choose the minimum of the
t-statistics over a range of lag lengths.3 Recommended by Engle and (3ranger (1957]. this
 statistic allows for non-white noise processes for the stationary series produced by the coin-
 tegraLing vector. As is well known, the main drawback of this test is its relatively low power
 against many alternatives. Accordingly, rejections will be taken sa a strong signal that 'he
 series are cointegrated.
      For pairwise convergence, we employ two types of tests to look for unit roots, and thus
 persistence, in the difference between the output series,



                                      DY.1,, = Y,5   —
                                                         Y3.,.                             (3.3)


                                                                      test for the presence of s
  First we employ an AugmentedPickeY-F!ller(ADF) statistic to
  unit root in DY3,,. Again we choose the minimum of the i-statistics over a range of la
  lengths. In addition we ese, as a descriptive device, the sum of the coefficients of the seconl
  order autoregression of DY11,,. A sum near one indicates a large degree of persistence in tin

  cross-country differences.

       Choosing the minimum of the MW over a range of lag lengths inaxinsires the possibility a
  finding common stochastic elements in the output pairs.

                                                 S
        Second, we employ a series of spectral-based tests for
                                                                   the first differences of D14. A
   natural way to test for persistence in output deviations
                                                            is through the Zero frequency of the
  spectral density of            When a time series is difference stationary, the
                                                                                  zero frequency
  measures the variance of innovations to the stochastic trend; when fADy,,(O)
                                                                                      = 0, then
  there is no persistent component to output deviations.
                                                           However, as documenteui by Cochrane
  11988) and   Durlauf [løYOb), the standard errors of the zero frequency estimates are typically
  large. Any rejection of faDy,,(Q) =       can be taken as a relatively strong rejection of
                                                1

  persistence in output deviations and thus of divergence, We estimate the zero frequency
  of the periodogram under Daniell windows of width
  alternative spectral bssed strategy to assess the
                                                         f   and   .   Additionally we employ an
                                                    persistence of output deviations. We first
  test the spectral properties of output deviations relative
                                                             to the hypothesis that they are a
  random walk with drift. Then we look for
                                             departures from the pure random walk hypothesis
  to determine whether these deviations are suggestive of mean reversion.

      The simple random walk model,



                                           = DY.1,1_1 + '?'jt
                                                                                           (3.4)

 where {q,31) is a martingale difference
                                             sequence1 is a useful baseline for measuring the
persistence of fluctuations. In this case, shocks
                                                  are entirely persistent as a contemporanenus
output movement is fully incorporated into long term forecasts.



                                 lim E(DY1+ I flIt) = flit,
                                 koo                                                      (3.5)

     We may test this null with statistics based upon the properties of the
                                                                               spectral density
of first differences of the output deviations
                                             series, favy11(c4. Since the first difference of a
random walk with drift is a martingale
                                        difference sequence with possibly positive mean, it is
possible to capture all second moment implications of the
                                                           null hypothesis in the requirement
that the spectral density be shaped as a rectangle.

                                                    9
                    ffly3(W) =     !.                          Jcy(0)                   (3.6


where          (k) is the autocovariance function.

    An equivalent way of formulating the null is in tern's of the normalized spectral distri

bution function, defined for A E D as


                                             25'faDyi1(w)dW                                -
                                                                                        (3.s


     Under the null hypothesis,



                                        H5 FaDy,(A)                                      (3.8

i.e. the spectral distribution function is shaped as a diagonal line. By the Cramdr Represer
tation Theorem, the spectral density at w equals the contribution of cycles of period 2r/i

to the total variance of aD?11,,. Thus a white noise representation of this process mar
that cycles of all lengths between 2 and o contribute equally to the total variance of t

 time series. Observe that if DY3,, exhibits mean reversion, this will be manifested in a lao
 of spectral power in the lower frequencies relative to white noise.

        The normalized spectral distribution function has the advantage that a general asym
 totic tbeory exists to formalize tests of the random walk model (Durlauf (1990a1). TI
 tests that follow from this asymptotic theory are based on the difference between the semv
 normalized spectral distribution function and the diagonal shape which holds under the mi

 tingale difference null. Letting IADy,,r(u?) denote the periodogram estimate of the specti
 density of AD?13., over the sample of size T, these deviations can be modelled as a randa

 Function whose domain is (0,1],



                             f (Jr0.l.W — 21r/ &L'            E [0,11.
                            Jo    \aaDy0(0)
                                                10
          We present two theorems on the behavior of these deviations and their associated test
   statistics. The proofs of Theorems 3.1 and 3.2 are in
                                                              Durlauf [1990a1,4

   Theorem 3.1 DistributIon of the normalized spectral distribution
                                                                    function.
         If DY1, a mari*ngale dffenace sequence, then



                                         uaov(O) 2w
  where    U(t) is the Brownies bridge on t E 10,11.

 Theorem 3.2 Spectral distribution function tests.

         Under H0,




 (a)        ADT = 1j-)dt                                A the Anderson-Darling statistic.
                                       A'
 (6)

 (c)
           CVMT j Ur(tfdt
           For fixed t, (.17(t)
                                        j   U(1)2dt A the Cramer-von Mises statistic.

                                   N(0,1(1 —t))


           ADr and CVMT diverge if ADY,, is any other MA
                                                                     process.
           Ur(t) diverges if Faoy1(A)       ,   t=

       Theorem 3.2 embodies two perspectives in
                                                     assessing the behavior of output deviations
relative to a random walk null. The ADT and
                                                  CVM statistics represent general tests
for spectral shape. These tests are appropriate when a researcher possesses little prior
information on the location of the alternative hypothesis
                                                          to the pure random walk nuU.
       The theorems .rc valid assuming some technical
                                                        conditions which we omit. These conditions
permit a wide degree of heteroelcedsaticity in the process.

                                                11
When an alternative is well specified, or a researcher possesses a non-diffuse prior over a
range of alternatives, then the individual U7(t)   statistics may he more appropriate. For

example, if the relevant alternative is long run mean reversion, then the
                                                                             Ur(t) statistic for

 = f would be an appropriate statistic to employ, as it identifies the variance contributions
                                                                                  conclude that
For [0, ], i.e. cycles of 16 years or longer. Bernard and Durlauf [1991c]
this test has reasonable power against a range of mean reverting alternatives.      Further, by

examining the spectral distribution function through the Ur(t) statistics, we can completely
characterize the second moment properties of the different series.

     Finally we turn to multivariate tests for common stochastic components. Unfortunately,
there is no natural analogue to the spectral distribution function tests we employ in our
bivariate analysis. Hence we rely on analysis of the zero frequency of the spectral density
 matrix, recalling that the zero frequency in this case measures the variance-covariance matrix
 of innovations to the various stochastic trends.

     For multivariate series, as in the univariate ease, common trends and convergence will
 impose distinct restrictions on the zero frequency of the spectral density matrix. Common
 trends require that the persistent parts of different time series be proportional; convergence

 requires that the persistent parts be equal. Let Y, denote the n x 1 vector of output levels
 a2 the first differences of that series, DZ the (n —1) x 1 vector of output deviations such

 that DY1, = — Y,,,, and sD2 the first differences of the deviations. Proportionality ol
 the persistent parts, in a snultivariate framework, means that the persistent parts of differesil

 series are linearly dependent, which is formalized as


 Theorem 3.3 Common factors and spectral density matrix of output differ
  ences.

                                                                                         is not
       If the number of disffnct sloe/ssstit treats in 1' is less then is, thea fav(O)
  full rank.
       p1. Engle and Cranger (1987].
                                                 12
        On the other hand, if several output series have the
                                                                same peNis tent parts, the output
   deviations from a benchmark country must all have
                                                           zero-valued persistent components.

   Theorem 3.4 Complete convergence and spectral
                                                                density matrix of output de-
   viaLions.


       If all n countries etc converging in per capita output, then fg(O)j = 0
                                                                                           Vi, or
  equivalently, the rank of f.csof(0) ss0.

       pj The first implication is immedia from the
                                                    stetionerity of ADY,11 Vi,j. The
  second implication follow, from the application
                                                   of the Ceuchy.Schwarg inequality for the
  zero frequency of .A.DY11,, which implies that 0 =
                                                     faoYJ(O)fsDy1,(O) fLiyqaDya,(O).
  Q.E.D.

      Spectral tests devised by Phillips and Ouliaris [1988J and
                                                                   recently used by Cogley 119901
 permit us to detennjne the number of common trends for the 15
                                                                     output series and then test
 for complete convergence. These tests exploit the fact
                                                            that the spectral density matrix at
 the zero frequency measures the variance-coveriance matrix of the permanent components
 of output fluctuations in each country, These 15
                                                  components can be expressed as linear
 combinations of orthogonal random variables. The eigenvalues of the zero frequency matrix
 represent the variances of a partkulsr choice of orthogonal variables,
                                                                      When one or more of
these eigenvaiues equals zero, the 15 permanent innovations are driven by a smaller number
of common factors,

     The tests themselves make use of the fact the the
                                                         spectral density matrix of first dif-
feresices at the zero frequency will be of rank q      n where q is the number of linearly
independent stochastic trends in the data and si is the number of series in the sample. This
reduction in rank is captured in the eigenvalues of the
                                                        zero frequency of the spectral density
matrix. If the zero frequency matrix is less than full rank, q C
                                                                 ii, as in Theorem 3.3, then
the number of positive eigenvalues will also be q c n. If
                                                            the matrix has zero rank, as in
Theorem 3.4, then there will he no positive eigenvalues,
                                                           The particular Phillips-Ouliar test
                                             13
we employ is a bounds test that examines the smallest           us    n — q eigenvalucs to determine
if they are close to zero.5


4.    Data
       The data used in both the empirics.l exercises are annual log real GD? per capita in
1930 international dollars for current boundaries. The series run from 1900-1987 for 15
industrialized countries with the GD? data drawn from Maddison [19891 and the population
data from Maddison [l9821. Recent years are updated from IFS yearbooksY Figures 1 and
2 present graphs of the fifteen series over the whole sample in levels and logs respectively and
 Table 1 gives the means and standard deviations of the growth rates. The picture in levels
 shows dramatic income growth over the period but no absolute narrowing of the overall
 spread- In logs, however, the narrowing is eubstantial. From this visual perspective, the
 convergence hypothesis looks to be an appropriate starting point, in particular, the trends
 in the various series appear to keep the series within a fixed range. However, Figures 3
 and 4 show the fourteen series as deviations from log 113 output, i.e.  — Yus,g. Output

 differentials narrow across the whole sample, but there does not appear to be any tendency
 to converge to the US level.

         Other work on convergence, particularly Baumol [1986] and DeLong [1988), has used
             series from Maddison [19821 for a similar group of countries. Cogley [19901 used
 longei time
 this data for a smaller set of countries- ilowever, significant revisions of the data for the
 pre-World War I period have occurred since their original publication.e In light of this we
                                 of the Phillips-Ouliaris test statistic and the critical values chosen ass
         Complete descriptions

  in Appendix A.
      The countries are: Australia (AL), Austria (AS), Belgium (BE), Canada (CA), Denmati
     (DE), Finland (Fl), France (FR), Germany (GE), Italy (IT), Japan (JA), the Netherlands (NE)
     Norway (NO), Sweden (SW), the United Kingdom (111<), and the United States (US).
         Population data for 1980.1987.
         GDP data br Canada, Finland, France, Netherlands, and Sweden have all had major change

     since Maddison's original book.

                                                      14
   choose to use only the revisesi CUP
                                             data availahk in Maddison's 1939
                                                                                  work. This lies the
   disadvantage of truncating the length p1 the
                                                       series by 29 years and possibly
                                                                                          missing very
   long run convergence However, the data
                                                    are of suhstantisjiy higher quality than previous
   studies as they correspond more closely
                                           to current definitions of CUP,   given the extra effort
  in calculating the early
                             years, and allow the inclusion of more countries
  series.
                                                                                  with uninterrupted


       Several difficulties remain with
                                            our particular data set. First, as
                                                                                 DeLong (1938] has
  argued, the sample includes only countries that
                                                       have successfully industrialized and therefore
  is weighteej towards accepting the
                                       convergence hypothesis. On the other hand,
                                                                                      any failure
  to find convergence will therefore be
                                           more persuasive given this hiss. Our statistirj tests
 will take no convergence as the
                                     null; consequently, DeLong's critique will imply that the
 size of our tests is larger than the
                                      nominal 5% without any implication
                                                                            for the test,' power
 properties,

     More important, however, there are still problems of data quality due
                                                                               to changes in
 definition, of border,, Cersnasiy
                                  presents a special problem for tests of
                                                                          convergence. While
  some may argue that Germany is a prime
                                           example of convergence in action disc to its rapid
 growth in the postWWIz period, the
                                      numerous boundary changes and population
                                                                                   gains and
 losses for Germany over the entire
                                    century make inference difficult. We choose to include
 Germany for completeness, hut we will
                                       not stress any conclusions which
inclusion.                                                              hinge on Germany's


    The population data as published
                                     in Maddison (1982] are not adjusted to conform to
:urrent houndaries as is the CUP data.
                                       Failure to account for boundary
                                                                                 changes can lead
.0 large one time income per capita
                                       movement, as population is gained or lost. For
                                                                                       example,
 DP per capita in the UK jumps in
                                        1920 without a correction for the loss of the population
(Ireland in that year. To avoid these
                                         discrete jumps we adjust the population to reflect
sodern borders.9 (It should be
                                 noted that Cogley 119901 and other, do
                                                                        not appear to have

   This type of gain or loss affects
                                       Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Frasice, Italy, Japan, and the

                                               15
made these corrections although it is not clear how much, they affect the results.)

    The GDP data set also has a few potential dtfficulties. The year to year movements
                                                 WWI for Austria are constructed from
during the two world wars for Belgium and during
                                                    that we will be less likely to reject
CUP estimates of neighboring countries. This means
                                                      or Austria-Germany. Again since
cointegration for Belgium-France Belgium.Netherlands
                                           increase the possibility of mistaken rejections,
our null is no convergence, these linkages
which only affects the size of the tests.


 5. Empirical results on cointegration and convergence

 5.1 flivariate teats
                                                     in our sample are converging is to see i
      The first step in determining if the countries
                                             defined in Section 2. To do this we use the ADI
 they have common stochastic elements as
                                                      presented in Tahle 2. 39 out of 105 pair
 cointegration tests described above. The results are
  reject the null hypothesis of no cointegration at the 5% level.
                                                     that there are common elements in outpr
      These results give some support to the idea
  growth across countries. However, more
                                            than one half of the pairs cannot reject the null

  no cointegration and thus it is unlikely that the entire sample is driven by a single comznc
                                                      statistics shows that a small subset of tl
  trend. A closer examination of the significant
  countries account for almost a third of the rejections for both lag lengths. These countries as
                                              and the Netherlands.5° This is not a surprisil
   Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Italy,
                                      stochastic elements since every member except Denms
   group of countries to share common
   has at least one common border with another country in the block. For Belgium and
   Netherlands, it would be astounding if we did not see convergence since these two countr
                                                              lost by country X in year 7'1, we ad]'
   UK at least once. If territory, and thus population, are
   earlier years by extrapolating backward from T1 using the year-to-year population changes

   country X.
     IS These   six countries plus Germany reject in 18 pairs or almost half the total.

                                                    16
     have highly intertwined economies
                                            are members of Benelux and
                                                                       have a Common Culture.
    We will make use of this
                                group of couitries in the
                                                            multivariate analysis to help identify the
    sources of cointegration for larger samples,

         Proximity can help explain other
                                          cointegrated pain such as LJS-Cana4a,
                                                                                 and Finland
    with Denmark, Norway and Sweden, while former colonial ties
   U.K. Ceography                                                  may  account for Australia.
                     alone cannot explain all the results. Pairs such as Belgium-Japan
                                                                                          and
   France-Japan remain troublesome
                                       However, cointegration does not
                                                                       necessarily imply con-
   vergence to similar output levels,

        To better understand the results from the ADF cointegration
                                                                         tests, we look at the dis-
   tribution of the estimated cointegration
                                              coefiicegs as preseneJ in Figure 5. The coefficients
  are all near one, although most are
                                         statistically significantly different from one. One inter-
  pretation of the clustering near unity
                                           combined with the lack of
                                                                          cointegration form] in the
 ADF statistics might be that while
                                        common shocks may impact econonijes
                                                                                     similarly, there
 remain countnJ-spiflc elemenits in
                                         long run growth that induce
                                                                            divergence across many
 pairs of countries. For example, if
                                       Y1 tc1, 4- tc3, and Vj1 =             + ic3 are two income
 processes where
                             and e31 are independent random
                                                                    walks, then the OLS estimate
 of fi in Y,,1 = PI'J + e,j will center around 1.

      The bivariate cointegration tests
                                        are therefore suggestive of both common and idiosyn-
cratic components to output fluctuatiops.
                                             Recall from Definitions 2.2 and 2.3 that common
trends are necessary but not sufficient
                                        for convergence, Consequentjy,
                                                                          the evidence of corn-
mon hivariate trends in the data
                                   may be consistent with divergence in
                                                                            per capita output.
For example, different
                       economies may process similar production
                                                                     sets differently, We now
examine the behavior of output
                               deviations across the 15 countries.
    The first of our
                       convergence tests parallels the cointegration
                                                                   tests in that it explores the
presence of unit roots in the output deviation
)f tIre
                                                 series DY.1. Table 3 presents the minima
                                 statistics for DY11 for lag lengths, k      1      5. This test
ejects if the data are inconsistent with
                                         a unit root in the cross-country
                                                                             output differences.

                                               17
                                          countries exhibits convergence as defined in Equation
Thus a rejection means that a pair of
                                          the cointegratiotl tests is immediately apparent. Only
2.3. The difference in the results from
                                                  null hypothesis aL the five per cent level o
6 pails of countries rejec& the no convergence
                                                countries.
which five are in the group of six European
                                                     against some mean reverting alternative
     Since the ADF tests may possess low power
                                                 estimates of the time series structure of th
in such small samples, we now turn to point
                                             estimates provide some indication as to wheth
differences between pairs of output. These
                                   due to estimated autoregressive roots near unity
                                                                                    or to lsq
our rejection! of convergence sic
                                               intervals on those roots. Table 4 contains ti
 standard errors leading to large confidence
                                           coefficients of DY1,,. Numbers near 1.0 indicate
 sums of the second order autoregression
                                  the output differentials. Only 7 of the 105 pairs produce
 large amount of persistence in
                                    numbers are greater than or equal to 0.97. Among the es
 sum less than 0.90 and 59 of the
  combins.tions that appear to he stationary using 0.9 as a cutoff are Australia-tiE, Austri
                                     Finland-Germany. Except for the last pair all are citl
  Italy, Denmark-Nethe snds and
                                                colonial relations. While the point estimates
  geographically contiguous or tied by former
                                            the large majority of the country pairs give evider
  slightly more suggestive of 5tationarity,
  of substantial persistence in output disparities.
                                                      we turn to the estimators based on sped
       Lastly in testing for bivariate convergence,
                                                    estimate the zero frequency of output de
   density and distribution functions. First we
                    As mentioned earlier windowed zero frequency estimates have large variar
   tions, Yj — Y.
                                                          on the degree of persistence in the
   and thus are unlikely to provide definitive answers
                                         of the zero frequency will be taken as an indical
   put deviations series. Low estimates
                                          for pure random walks in Y. — Y with the AD
   of pairwise convergence. We then test
                                                estimates of the spectral distrihution Fund
   CVM statistics and then examine the point
                                                   statistics is that the differences of deviat
   fternembering the null hypothesis of the Fly0)
   in output, DY5,1, is a random walk, we  will look For rejections that indicate an alternati
                                     is equivalent to convergence. Since the spectral distribs
   long run mean reversion, which
     1 Allowing for a constant difference in logs did not change the results markedly.

                                                    18
    function 5Ummariz all second moment information
                                                           in the each data series,   the mean rever-
    sion alternative will be preferred if tlere is a lack
                                                          of power in the low frequencies. Again,
    rejections of the pure random walk null
                                               may not indicate mean reversion and hence
                                                                                             con-
    vergence when there exists excess power in the low frequencies
                                                                     of the spectrum of
   Civen our alternative of long run mean reversion, we will
                                                               concentrateon the frequency bands
   [01 fJ and [U, y.


       The windowed zero frequency estimates
                                                   are shown in Table 5. Ten country pairs
                                                                                               reject
  of the hypothesis that the zero frequency
  Seven of the ten pairs are in the
                                              of output deviatio, equals one for the     j
                                   group of European countries listed above. If we look for
                                                                                             window.

  low point estimates, those below
                                   0.25, we find that 14 of 17 pairs come from
                                                                                 the group
  of six European countries. On the other
                                                 end, there are 20 estimates greater than one.
  This suggests that some pairs
                               may be colnerging while some are diverging. The standard
  deviation of the    window estimates is so large that
                                                            even a point estimate 4 hero doei
  not reject the hypothesis that the zero
                                            frequency equals one. The general magnitude of the
 estimates remains unchanged.

      Table 6 shows a number of rejections
                                                for the random walk null hypothesis by the Al)
 and CVM statistics. 39 of the 105 pairs reject at the 5% level for both
                                                                              statistics arid an
 additional 11 reject for one test. On the other
                                                    hand, 52% of the combinations fail to
 the random walk null for either                                                           reject
                                    statistic, which argues against convergence for the whole
sample. We must again look more closely at the
                                               spectral distribution estimates i.e determine
the nature of these rejections.

     The spectral distribution point estimates
                                               and the UT(t) statistics for [0, fJ in Table 7,
above the diagonal, gives some evidence for the alternative of mean
                                                                      reversion. As Table 7
indicates, only two of the 105 pairs reject the
                                                   random walk null at the 5% level because
of too little power in these
                            frequencies; however, a total 66 pairs have deficient power to
some extent, i.e the point estimate is below
                                             0.125. Leaving aside Germany and the six
European countries which have already shown
                                             a high degree of cointegration the number of


                                              19
combinations that display too little power drops to 37 oF a possible 76. The point estimates
                                                           deficiencies in spectral power. In
of f() for these 37 indicate some evidence of substantial
                                             of the power of the white noise null in the [0, j
particular, 15 pairs possess less than
interval and 5 pairs have less than half of the power
                                                         under that null.

                                                          this frequency range, many pairs have
      The evidence here is certainly ambiguous. Over
                                                 is consistent with a random walk. In particular,
less persistence in the output differential than
                                                     cointegrated also appear to be converging.
 the six European countries which are pairwise
                                                         univariate output series is also deficient
 dditionalIy, other pairs including Germany. whose
                                                           there are 17 pain of countries whose
 from [0,1], show signs of mean reversion. However,
                                              the 101 11 range than do either of the output series
 output differential displays more power in
                                                                    for these comhinations.
 by themselves. This is powerful evidence against convergence

                                                    Table 7, we find many more rejections of the
      Turning to the results for (0, 2f], also in
 random walk null at the 5% level, most of them due to excess power. Three more pairs
                                                  Germany-Italy and Denmsrki4orwaY
 do show up negative and significant, Germany4apalsi
                                                      much power. In particular the U.S. rejeet
  but now 28 combinations reject because of too
                                                  U.S. is considered to be the 'leading' count
  in S instances. This is interesting because the
                                              countries should be converging or catching up t
  in the post-war years and thus the other
                                                13.5.-Canadian statistic even shows up with thi
   the U.S per capita output levels. Only the
                                              but this is to be expected, given the high degre
  negative sign required For convergence,
                                                      also rejects with 7 countries as would mak
  of interaction between the economies. Canada

  sense if U.S. and Canadian output levels are converging.

     There still is some evidence of too little power for 30 of 105 pairs. However, cxcludin
                                             other combinations are deficient. These resull
  Germany and the European six, only 10
                                                        for all 15 countries, there are snbse1
  confirm that while convergence again appears unlikely
  of countries For which the convergence hypothesis cannot he rejected.'2

                                                                            robust to changes in ti
    12 The overall pairwise results on cointegration and convergence are

   testing methodology, see Bernard (1991j

                                                    20
  5.2. Multivariate tests

       Finally we consider tests for cointegration and convergence with more than two time
  series. This section gives us a sense of the extent of common stochastic
                                                                         components for blocks
  of countries. If idiosyncratic elements dominate for every country then we would expect to
  find n distinct roots for vs countries. If countries converge then we would expect to find
                                                                                                   1
 distinct root. If the number of significant roots lies between these
                                                                    extremes, this indicates
 the presence of common elements in international output. As an alternative measure of the
 number of common trends, we look at the cumulative percentage of the sum of the roots. If
 the first p C vs largest roots contribute 95% or more of the sum, then we conclude that there

 are p important common stochastic trends for the block.13

     To use these various measures, we must arrange the countries into groups. We first
 consider all 15 countries together. We initially test for cointegration by performing the
 Phillips'Ouliaris bounds tests on the first difference of output, th. Next, we repeat the
 exercise For those six European countries which displayed
                                                            a high degree of cointegration in
the psirwise results. Finally, to determine if the removal of those six conntries affects the
results from the original 15, we run the tests•on the remaining nine.

      Second we examine the behavior of output deviations. In order to identify convergence
for the 15 country group, we test using IAID9,, having subtracted off the US output, as in
Theorem 3.4. We separately test for convergence in the 6 European economies exhibiting
substantial cointegration by examining output deviations from France and in the 9 remaining
countries by examining output deviations from the US.

      In Table 8, we present the ?hillipe'Ouliaris bounds tests
                                                                    for cointegration and the
cumulative sums of the eigenvalues for the
                                            groups mentioned above.14 There are two distinct
tests for each group. First if the upper bound is less than the critical value for a given p, we
can reject the null hypothesis that there are p or more distinct roots, If the lower bound is

 13
    Cogley f1990J uses a similar measure,
 14 <, the size of the DanisH window was chosen to he T°'6,
                                                            or 27 for our sample.

                                              21
greater than the same critical value then we accept the hypothesis that there are aL least
distinct roots.

     Table 9 contains the results of the convergence teats and presents the upper and lowe
bounds on the largest eigenvalue of output deviations as well as cumulated sums of eigeii
values for the different groups of countries. Here, if the lower bound on the largest root
greater than the critical level we can accept the no convergence null.

     For the fifteen country sample and critical value C1 (= ?)15, we reject the null h1
potheais that there are 7 or more distinct roots and we accept the null that there at least
distinct roots. With the alternative critical value of 5% of the sum of the eigenvaluea, C
we again reject for 7 or more distinct roots but now accept for at least 5. This leads us t

posit that there is a large common stochastic component over the sample. The six large
roots account for 96.7% of the total, coinciding with the results from the test statistics. 0
the other band, the largest root accounts for barely oO% and the largest two roots for abo
75% of total variance, which argues against the existence of just a single common factor,
 is required for convergence. The direct convergence test in Table 9 accepts the no cons's
 gence null for both critical levels as the largest eigenvalue is statistically different from zer
 Observe that over 95% of the output deviation variance is attributable to the first 4 factor
 Overall the output deviations exhibit somewhat greater concentration of variance in few
 roots than do tbe output levels. For example, the largest factor contributes 52% of the tot
 variance to levels whereas the largest factor in the deviations contributes 74%. This sugges
 that there are some common elements which are cancelled out in the deviations.

      Turning to the results for the six European countries which were largely cointegrat
 in the pairwise exercise, we reject the null that there are are 4 or more distinct roots wi
 both the C1 and C2 critical values and accept the null that there are at least 3, again wi
 both values. 97.8% of the sum comes from the three largest eigenvalues. Even in this sami
 we do not find evidence for complete convergence as, the largest eigenvalue is statistica


      See Appendix A.

                                                  22
  significant. Interestingly, a comparison of the cumulated eigenvalue contributions in Tables
  8 and 9 reveals that the variance contributions of the first few (actors are
                                                                               comparable for
  the levels and deviations, suggesting that France does not contain a common Factor for the
  remaining economies in the subsample.

        We also consider the behavior of the sample after removing these six European countries
 from the larger set. The nine remaining countries display a large number of distinct roots.
 We reject the null that there are 7 or more distinct roots, but we can accept the null that
 there are at least 5 for both critical values. The largest five sum to 95.7% of the total. It
 appears that removing the six countries has dropped Lhe number of distinct roots from the
 t5 country case by at most one. We still do not have completely idiosyncratic components
 dominating the sample. The convergence test for this subsample once again accepts the no
 convergence hypothesis.

      These results do not support either of the extreme hypotheses that countries converge
 or that they are entirely dominated by idiosyncratic elements. There is substantial evidence
 for consmon atochastic components, particularly in the European sub-sample.15


6. Conclusions

       This paper attempts to answer empirically the question of whether there is convergence
in output per capita across countries. This question is important to a large body of recent
macroeconomic theory as new models of economic growth, in contrast to traditional formu-
lations generating turnpike results, have shown how long run divergence can occur across
economies.

       We first construct a stochastic definition of convergence based on the theory of integrated
time series. Time series for per capita output of different countries can fail to converge
only if the persistent parts of the time series are distinct. Consequently, we are able to
  16
       Using a different multivariate methodology, Bernard [199l} finds similar results for these

samples.

                                                23
identify the common elements of long term growth across economies by esandning whether
deviations in aggregate output series contain unit roots; in addition, we can determine
whether aggregate output in different economies is determined by common factors through
cointegration analysis.

    Our analysis of the relationship among long term output movements across counLries
reveals little evidence of convergence. Both time and frequency domain approaches indicate
that there is substantial persistence in per capita output deviations. Virtually all 01 our
hypothesis tests accept the null hypothesis of no convergence for both bivariate and multi-
variate data samples. Our rejection of convergence holds despite the argument by DeLong
floss] that concentration on OECD economies will hiss empirical work towards accepting
convergence. On the other hand, we find evidence that there is substantial cointegration
across OECD economies. Further, we find that the number of integrated processes driving
the 15 countries' output series appears to be on the order of 4-6. Our results therefore im-
ply that there is dearly some set of common factors which jointly determines international
output growth.

     Overall, our condusions on the absence of convergence are consistent with either the
class of macroeconomic growth models which emphasizes the potential for multiple steady
state equilibria due to complementarities or those Arrow-Debreu models where microeco-
nomic differences can cause divergence. This ambiguity is natural given the atheoretical
nature of the data snatysis. An important next step in empirical work on convergence is the
estimation of different stochastic growth models to determine the mapping of our reduced
form results into structural inferences. In turn, atructural estimation will permit the evalu-
ation of whether divergence in aggregate economies is indicative of essential deviations from

the competitive equilibrium paradigm.




                                              24
Appendix A. The Phullips-Ouliaris Bounds
                                       Test

Iii order to test For cointegration and the number of common stochastic trends, we estimate
the zero frequency of




                                                                                           (.41)

where XI", a scalar, is the average growth rate of output across countries. The smoothed
estimate of the spectral density matrix at the zero Frequency, f—---$O) using the real parts
of the periodogram estimates, is given by



               !—z-t(tl)   = ii                       +
                                                          Re ('t2.A2 ())}                  (A2)

with k the n:inther of ordinates used in the rectangular (t)aniell) filter. The tc!ulting esti-
mated spectral dcnsity matrix is then decomposed into its ordered eigenvalues, A1 A2
      A,,. The ratio of the sum of the smallest m eigenvalues to the sum of all the eigenvalues
is calculated and its upper and lower hounds determined.




                                                 wherep=n—m+i                              (A3)
                                           to
                          itp,c, = it, +   pj-                                             (A4)
                                = A, — zo                                                  (AS)

where z,, is the a-percent critical value of the standard normal distribution and


                                2                              2             +

                                (
                        \i1 / j=m+1         A+( A (fA
                                    / \i=n'+I / \—1                                  -
                                                                                 .        (AG)

                                                (tAi)2
                                                 25
    If the upper bound, A,ci. is less than the critical value we reject the null hypothesis that

there arepor more distinct roots, lithe lower bound, ApL, is greater than the critical value
then we accept the null hypothesis that there are at least p distinct root& As emphasized
by Phillips and Ouliaris, there is no preassigned critical value selected for these statistics,
However, the tests are designed so that if there are zero eigenvalues, the power of the test
will go to one asymptotically. If the matrix is of full rank but some of the roots are small,
there is a relatively high probability of mistakenly rejecting the null.

     We define some critical values for the two null hypotheses. For the purpose of identifying
whether the series are cointegrated, we examine the bounds of A relative to two critical
values, C1 = 0J0 and C2 = 0.05. These critical values assess the average of the rn
smallest eigenvalues in comparison to the average of all the eigenvalues. Consequently we
compare the average variance of the smallest in factors to the average variance of all n
factors. Using the upper bound statistic and the critical value, C1, we reject the null of
n — m + 1(q + 1) or more distinct roots if the sum of the smallest ns eigenvalues is less than
LOrn% of the sum of all the eigenvalues. Interpreted differently we reject if the upper bound

is less than m x 10% of the average root. Employing the same critical value and the lower
bound statistic, we accept the null of at least q + 1 distinct roots if the sum of the smallest
rn eigenvalucs is greater than m x 10% of the average root. One employs C2 in an analogous

fashion.

     The null hypothesis of no convergence requires that all eigenvalues for the matrix
Its D$0) equal zero. This means that we need to test for p = 1. En order to do this,
we consider the largest eigenvalue for fAD1(0), denoted as                 Asymptotic upper and
lower 100(1 — cs)% confidence intervals for this eigenvalue are



     The results for this non-normalized eigenvalue are reported in Table 9. Additionally we
confirmed the results using the spectral density matrix at the zero frequency normalized by the
variance-covariance matrix for the first differences, a normalization suggested by Phillips and
Ouliaris for series denominated in different units.

                                                 26
                                                                                         (A?)

                                                                                         (As)

respectively. We then follow the same rule as before: reject the null of no convergence if the
upper bound is less than C1 (or C3), accept the null of no convergence if the lower hound is
greater than C1 (or C2).




                                             27
Bibliography

     Barn, It. [1990]. "Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries." Quarterly Journal
of Economic3, forthcoming.
    Baumot, W, [1986]. "Productivity Growth, Convergence, and Welfare: What the Long-
Run Data Show.' American Economic Review, 76, 1072-1085.
   flaumol, W., Blackman, S. and Wolff, E. [19891. Productivity Growth: The Long View.
Cambridge MIT Press.
    Bernard, A. B. [1990]. "Testing for Random Walks in Exchange Rates.' Working Paper,
Stanford University.
              11991]. "Empirical Implications of The Convergence Hypothesis.' Working
Paper, Stanford University.
   Bernard, A. B. and S. N. Dtsrlauf. [1991a]. "Interpreting Tests of the Convergence
Hypothesis." Working Paper in progress, Stanford University.
              [1991b]. "Persistence in International Output Movements." Working Paper in
progress. Stauloid University.
              [1991€]. "Power Properties of Martingale Tests." Working Paper in progress,
Stanford University.
    Campbell, J t and N. C. Maiskiw, [1987]. "Are Output Fluctuations Transitory."
Quarterly Journal of Economics, CII, 857-880.
             [19891. "International Evidence on the Persistence of Economic Fluctuations.'
Journal of Monetary Economics, 23, 319-333.
    Cochrane, .1. [1988]. "How Big is the Random Walk in GNP?" Journal of Political
Economy, 96, 893-920.
    Cogley, T. [1990]. "International Evidenceon The Size of the Random Walk in Output.'
Journal of Political Economy, 98, 501-518.
   DeLong, J. B. [1988). "Productivity Growth, Convergence, and Welfare: Comment."
American Economic Review, 78, 1138-1154.
    Durlauf, S. N. [19891. "Output Persistence Economic Structure and the Choice of
Stabilization Policy.' Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 69-116.
              [1990a]. "Spectral Based Tests of the Martingale Hypothesis.' Journal of
Econometrics, forthcoming.
              [199Db]. "Time Series Properties of Aggregate Output Fluctuations." Working
Paper, Stanford University.

                                            28
               (1991aJ. aNonergodic Economic Growth." Working Paper, Stanford University.
                199th]. "Path Dependence in Aggregate Output." Working Paper, Stanford
 University,
     Engle, It F. and C. W. J. Changer. [1987J. "Cointegration and Error-Correction:
 Representation, Estimation, and Testing." Eronometrica, 55, 2.51-276.
     Hehler, W. P. [1986]. "Coordination Failure Under Complete Markets with Applications
to Effective Demand." in Essays in Honor of Kenneth J. Arrow, Volume 11, W. P. Heller,
R. M. Starr and D. A. Starrett, eds.
            (1990f. "Perfect Foresight Coordination Failure with Savings and Investment."
Working Paper, UC San Diego.
     Jones, L. and R. Manuelli. 119901. "A Convex Model of Equilibrium Growth." Journal
of Political Economy, 98, 5, 1008-38.
     King, R., C. Plosser, J. Stock and M. Watson. [1987J. "Stochastic Trends and Economic
Fluctuations." Working Paper, University of Rochester.
      Lucas. R. E. [1988j. "On the Mechanics of Economic Development." Journal of Menc-
tarij Economics, 22, 3-42.
    Maddison,A. 119821. Phases of Capitalist Development Oxford, Oxford University
Press.
               [1989]. The World Economy in the tOlls Century. Paris, Development Centre
of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
    Murphy, K., A. Shleifer and II Vishny. [1989]. "Industrialization and the Big Push."
Journal of Political Economy, 97, 1003- 1026.
   Phillips, P.C.B. and S. Ouhiaris. 119881. "Testing for Cointegration Using Principal
Components Methods," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 12, 205-30.
    Quah, D. 11990]. "International Patterns of Growth: Persistence in Cross-Country
Disparities." Working Paper, MIT.
    Romer, P. 119861. "Increasing Returns and Long Run Growth." Journal of Political
Economy, 94, 1002-1037.
    Summers, fl, and A. boston. 11988]. "A New Set of International Comparisons of Real
Product and Price Levels Estimates for 130 Countries, 1950-1985." Review of Income and
Wealth, 34, 1-25.




                                           29
                  Figure 1: GDP Per Capita -   15   Countries 1900-1987

    14000




i12000
9
8
0




£8000


6000

4000
$   2000



       0
           1900    1910   1920   1930   1940   i950     1960   1970   1980
                             Figure 2: Log GDP per Capita -     15   Countries
                                             1900.1987
         to

         9.5


          9


         8.5

Log
GDP
Per
Capita
         1.5


          7


         6.5


          6
               1900   1910   1920    1930     1940       1950        1960    1970   1980
                                                 Year
                     flguft 3: Difference from US Log GDP Per Capita
                               7 European Countries 1900-1987
                       (Alni.. B4luin. OeM. Er.,a. Onulay. Italy. Nedcbndi)
  0


-0.5


 —1




•1.5


 -2


-2.5
       1900   1910   1920      1930        1940       1950        1960        1970   1960
                     Figure 4: Difference from US Log GDP Pa Capita
                     Non-European, Scandinavia and the UK 1900-1987
                     (Asualiscsad.,FmI.S.I.pci Non".y, Swe&a, ticks klngdac)




-0.5




-'.5




•2.5
       1900   1910   1920       1930        1940       1950        1960        1970   1980
                                                Vur
         Figutt 5: Histogram of Estimated CoDitegrating Coefficients


9

S


7

6

5

4



                             n
:Fn      .               ____
0.86   0.88        0.9          0.92       0.94           0.96   0.98

                         Value of Estimated Coefficient
Table 1: Means and Standard Deviations of Output Growth Rates
                    15 Countries. 1900-1987

                          Counqy         frkan*
                          AL             0.0136
                                         (0.033)
                          AS             0.0192
                                         (0.114)
                          BE             0.0162
                                         (0.051)
                          CA             0.0224
                                         (0.054)
                          IDE            0.0199
                                         (0.044)
                          Fl             0.0257
                                         (0.050)
                          FR             0.0204
                                         (0.080)
                          GE             0.0270
                                         (0.105)
                          IT            0.0217
                                        (0.065)
                          IA            0.0307
                                         (0.091)
                          NE            0.0167
                                        (0.084)
                          NO            0.0259
                                         (0.043)
                          SW            0.0222
                                        (0.034)
                          UK            0.0137
                                        (0.038)
                          US            0.0176
                                        (0.062)

         * SiandaS deviations in pasentheses
                                                              Table 2

                      PAIRWISE COINTE(3RATIOP4 TESTS ON LOG PER CAPITA OUTPUT4
                                         IS Countries- 1900-1987




         AL     AS       lIE CA DE                   Fl       FR GE              IT          JA NE NO SW UK
 AL
 *5 -3A6
 lIE -2.7; -7.30'
 CA -3.03 -2.57 -1.67
 OK -2.76 -3.09 -2.41 -2.33
 Fl -2.17 -3.20' -1.52 -2.37 .4.40'
 FR -2.69 -6.13' -533' -1.76 -225 -2.00
 GE -3.42' -333' -3.87' -333' -6.39' -739'                   -5.01'
IT -2.55 -426' -538' -1.46 -2.92 -2.39 -49' -4.36'
.3* -1.87 -2.45 .4j3 -1.29 -2.24 -1.82 -3.52' -2.73 -321'
NE -3.05 -6fl -6.70' -2.48 -452' -2.87 -il.09' -5.25' -sa3' -4.32'
NO -1.86 -3.13 -1.28 -1.83 -531' -4.18' -L86 -531' -2.59 -234 -2.84
SW -2.17 -2.90 -1.48 -2.31 -2.49 -430' -1.51 -7.02' -129 -1.61 .2.53 -2.14
UK -332' -333' -2.79 -234 -3.70' -3.6cr -168 -4.89' -233 -1.58 -5.16 -3.01 -3.42'
US -2.32 -2.53 -1.58 -437' -246 -2.60 -IS! -229 -1.97 -1.88 -2.67 -1.60 -3.19' -2.57




'Denoies signiricant at 5%
+ Slaisica ibove die diagonal ito Augnieaied- Dickey-Fuhla iI Iig Sow the diagonal           - AEF it/S lags. QiUcal valaca ito
  Itt (met Engk-Granga (1987].


 Tltcequadoos csdmaxed were:                 Yu .aqj 2j + jj.i                       (3.1)

                                           44 0ijIj-1            +                    + CiLt      (3.2)
                                                         Table 3

                     PAIRWISE CONVERGENCE TESTS ON LOG PER CAPFrA                        Ourptrr
                                                iSCounnies- 1900-1987




       AL       AS      tIE     CA DR FT                FR GE iT                JA      NE NO SW UK
AL
AS     -on
lIE    -0.72 -2.38
CA     -1.17 -116 -1.04
1w     0k1 .1.49 -1.75          -1.57
Ft  1.05 -119 1.26              .0.02 0.39
FR -035 -l.0 -1.02              -0.82 -1.19 -0A6
GE 0.26 -OIl -0.49             -0,41  -0.78 -4.62      -2.01
tT      0.13 -4.31    -1.22     -0.49   -035 -1.28     -3.3?    .229
       0.71 0.48       0.25     0.09    0.23 -0.61     -0.16    .1.10   0.07     -
NE     -1.58 -2.07 -321r       -1.99 4.1 0.06 -0.74             -0.96   -0.92   0.10
NO     0.58 .2.52      0.19    -0.08 .0.39 -1.14 -1.71          -212    -2.29   .0,48   .0.57
SW     0.71 -1.32 -0.31        -0.57 -0.60 0.04 -1.10           -t39    -1.15   -0.09   -lii    -1.08
till   -226 -0.35 .1.00        -1.05 -0.90 0.70 -0.48           0,11    0.15     0.61   •tSS    038 0.35
Us     -1.18 -0.60 -0.55       -0.07 -038 0.18 -0.31            0.14    -0.12    0.43   -0.94   0.34      0.17   -028




• DcnauignhI1cintE5%
+sutIutla we mirt(AD9 when k is the nut & lags In 0(L) aid saiges [rein Ito 5. CiitioI spines ire taken
  [nan EngleOangc4I9B7i



 The equation estimated was:
                                        ADYIJI -ojjDYijtj +
                                              —
                                                                        ''lj,I4 +
                                                Table 4
                             SUMS OF ARQ) COEFFICLENTS OF
                   CROSS-COUWTRY DIFFERENCES IN LOG OUTPUT PER CAPITA
                                  I5Cowilzies- 1900-1987




     AL     AS     lIE CA DE            Ft     FR     GE     IT     JA     NE NO SW UK US
AL
AS 0.98     —-
DC   0.91   0.91   —.
CA 0.95     0.98   0.91   —-
DE  0.95    0.95   0.94   0.93 —
Fl  0.98    0.90   0.98   0.99 0.99 —
FR 0.97     031    0.94   0.96 0.95 0.96 —
GE 0.98     0,95   0.96   0.98   0.97   0.81   0S2    —*
IT 0.98     076 0.92      0.98   0.96   0.93   0.82   0.93 —
.IA 0.99    0.98   0.98   0.99   0.99   0.97   0.97   0.97 0.99 —
NE 0.92     0.94   0.81   0.92   0.76   0.97   0.96   0.95 0.96 0.98 —
NO 0.98     0.91   0.91   0.97   0.97   0.98   0.93   0.93 0.95 0.98 0.96 —
SW 0.98     0.94   0.98   0.97   0.97   0.99   0.94   0.95   0.76   0.fl   0.94   0.96   —.
UK 0.84     0.97   0.96   0.97   0.93   0.98   0.96   0.97   0.98   0.98   0.90   0.98   0.98   —.
US 0.99     0.99   0.99   0.98   0.98   0.99   0.98   0.99   0.99   0.99   0.97   0.98   0.99   0.99 —


The equailoncsd.matedwas:
                                 DY1e PI,ijDYIJ.II+JJDYjj.2+;.f
                                                          TableS

                    ZERO FREQUENCY SPECTRAL DENSITY ES1Th'AThS4
           CHANGES IN CROSS-COUNTRY DIFFERENCES IN LOG OUTPUT PER CAPITA
                                               ISCowuries- l9OO-I987




    AL AS           lIE      CA      DR        F!      FR      GE        IT      .54      NE       NO     SW      UK     US
AL. — 034          031      0.81     0.46     1.24    0.58     0.54     0.94     2.08    0.49      0.95   1,18   0.10    0.40
AS 0.63      —     0.08'    030      0.23     0.30    O.0&     0.21    0.15'     1.18    0.11'     0.28   0.34    0.3*   0÷89
lIE 1.08   0.30       ..    0.92     0.37     1.76    038      0.34     0.24     0.71    0.18      1.46   1.77   0.44    049
CA 0.72    0.80     1.17      ..     0.56     011     032      0.43     0.95     1.63    0.69      033    036     1.14   0.38
lIE 0.94   0.48    0÷87      1.01      ..     0.79     039     0.23     033      1.07    0.23      0.54   1.17   0.41    0.42
Fl 1.27    0.36     1.24    0.03     039        ..     0.85   0.15'     0.65     1.00    0.75      0.29   032    0,79    0.69
FR 1.22    038     039       130     0.65     1.02       —     0.15'   0.08'     0.38    0.13'     0.93   1.01   061     0.57
GE 0.65    0.17    042      0,76     037      0.2.6    033       •.     0.21     0.70    0.20      0.22   OW     0.19    031
IT 1.26    0.49    0.62      1.73    038      04.9     0.72    0.25       ..     1.01    0.20      047    1,01    1.29   0.13
34 IS?     1.84     1.23     1.70    1.42     1.27     1.19    0.58     0.99       —     0.51      0.86   1.43    1.88    135
NE 0.95    035      0.26     1,08    0.39     0.75     0.21    0.28     0.70     1.11      ..      0.87   0.84   0.50    0.47
hO 1.36    0.83     1.41     137     034      0.6.5    0.96    033      032      1.01    035         .-   1.11   0.93    0÷85
SW 1.23 033         1.53    0.99     0.92     03.1     137     037      1.14     1.47     1.02     14.8    -.    0.83    0.50
UK 0.71 038                          0.77     0.93     1.09    031      0.07     1.22    0.84      1.02   1.17      —    0.30
US 0.78    0.85
                    0.97
                    132
                             2.11
                            0.61     132      1.30     lit     0.97     1.46     1.72     1.01     Iii    1.27    1.58     —




 oencln aignifint1ydifferau r niw it 5%
SticaiJmvc the diigawI amino Imquestty titimno of T - Tj wüli a Donicil window of 'Q16
 SwMtica below tliediagattal ate urn Frequency eutlniscs ol TI - Vj with s Dart'S] window of tIE
                                                                Table 6

                                     RANDOM WALK TESTSt
                CHANGES IN CROSS-CO(JNThY DIFFERENCES IN LOG OUTPUT PER CAPITA
                                                      I5Cotrntnes-     1900-1987




AL —
      Al.      AS BE CA                     DE       Fl     FR GE           IT     JA   NE NO SW   UK     US


AS 0.03 —
      (0.49) —
lIE    0.60' 0.08 —
      (3.36') (09$) —
CA 0.48' 0.02             3.29' —
      (3,40') (0.24)     (8.19') —
DE 0.33         0.33      0.43       0.84' —
      (1.86) (2.35) (2.79') (537') —
Fl     0.32     0.05      0.013      0.87' 0.24 —
      (1.72) (0.70) u.60) (5.37') (1.46) —
FR 0.69' 0.19             0.26       1.19' Oil' 0.73' —
      (4.19') (1.44) (1.55)          (7.72') (2.61') (4.121 —
CC 0.16          3.89'    0.13       0.08    0.10    0.23   0.23 —
      (135) (21.23') (1.24)          (0.59) (1.07)   (2.24) (1.94) —
IT     0.60' 0.14     036' 0.95' 1.02' 0.76' 0.45 0.29 —
      (169') (1.13) (3.19') (6.24') (5.80*) (4.40') (2.65') (2.741 —
iA  0.04     0.26   030 0.15 0.87' OAt 0.56' 3.74' 0.05 —
    (1141) ('120) (L90) (135) (5.56') (230') (231') (9.46') (037) —
NE 0.56' 0.09 0.42 0.62' 0.39 0.67' 036 0.33 0.06 0.29 —
    (2.20') (0.98) (2.87') (3.85') (2.46) (3.63') (2.68') (2.88') (0.69) (1.78) -
NO 0.46' 0.03 0.10 134' 0.33 0.16 0.07 0.19 0.07 0.02 0.14 —
    (2.71') (0.53) (0.62) (9.82') (3.14') (1.29) (0.45) (136) (1165) (0.23) (0.96) —
SW 0.64' 0.08 0.20 0.93' 0.34 0.07 0.59' 0.16 0.95' 0.33 0.34 0.08 —
    (3.37') (0.67) (1.13) (5.56') (3167) (0.70) (3.69') (136) (5.29') (2.13) (3.89) (032) —
UK 032 0.02 0.58' 0.26 0.15 036' 0.11' 0.11 0.20 0.05 0.45 0.42 0.45 —
    (2.43) (0.34) (3.64') (2.06) (1.16) (3.45') (4.41') (1.11) (1.08) (032) (2.66') (2.72') (226') —
(iS 0.46' 0.03      1.41' 0.15       025' 0.71' 134' 0.05 1.11' 0.11 0.91' 1.32' 0.93' 0.23 —
    (2.78') (0.27) (8.16') (1.07) (536') (4.41') (8.') (0.35) (6.62') (0.97) (5.31') (8.45') (543') (1.76) —


tCnmerven-Mis sia'Sa w/o paitnthcses. Anderso•Thx1ing LMisIicl i4ataithcaea.
'I3enoqes significant at 5% level.
                                                                Table 7

                         SPECTRAL DISTRIDLJTION FUNC11ON ESTIMATES4
               CHANGES IN CROSS-COUNTRY DIPFERENCES IN LOG OUTPUT PER CAPITA
                                     15 Countries - 1900-1987



      AL       AS        60 CA DE                      Fl     FR      CE      IT      JA     NE     NO     SW     UK      US
AL —     0.08            0.13     0.07        0Il     0.10    0,15    0.06   0.15    0.17    012    013    0.11   0119   0.09
AS 0.26 —                0.04     0.10        0.07    0.04    0.05    0.02' 0.01     0.21    0.05   0.06   0.01   0.08   0.11
lIE 0.36 0.24          —          0.14        0.06    0.09    0.07    0.05   0.01    0.13    0113   0_li   0.17   0.12   0.16
CA    0.48'    0.29      0.46' —              0.13    0.11    0.17    0.10   0.22'   0.21    0.14   0.16   0.13   0.23' 0.07
00    0.28     0.34     0.13      0.40'               0.07    0.06    0.05   0.07    0.17    0.05   0.05   0.12   0.09   0.17
Fl    0.28     0.27     0.20      0.40'       0.19    —       0.12    0.03   tO!     0,16    0.06   0.09   0.06   0.08   0iS
FR    042'     0.25     0.25      0.49'       0.32    037 —           0114   0.09    0,14    o.or   0_li   0,17   0.13   0.16
GE    0.17     00?      0.18      0.21        0.18    0.16    0.16    —      0.03    0.01    0.03   0.06   0.05   0.05   0+11
IT    837      012      0.26      0,43'       0.33    0.32    0.35    0.09' —        Oil     0.08   0.06   0.14   OIl    0.18
3* Oil 037              0.37      0.37        0.45'   0+41'   0.42'   0,11' 0.26     —       0.12   0.13   0.18   0.12   0,36
NE 038' 012             0.15      0.39        0.21    0.30    0.08    0,12   0.32    0.37   •.-     0.08   0.12   0.10   (U
NO    034      0.23     012 0.46 0.09'                017     0.31    0,16   0.24    0,31      —
                                                                                             0.21    Oil          0.08   0.18
S%V   0.32     027      0.26   0.40' 0.22 020 0.42'                   0,16   0.36    039'      0.31 —
                                                                                             0.31                 0.11   0.15
tIE   0.36     0.26     0.42' 0.36 0.34 0,37 0.43'                    0.17   0.30    014 0 38' 0.56' ojr                 0.19
1,5   0.32     0.31     0.47' 0.23 0.4? 041' 0.49'                    0.25   0+40'   0.34    0.40' 0,45' 0.42'




Fig*ats thova tIm diagonal e qni dSxibuxlons for (0 aM
 flgwa below the diagonal me iporoal diw(btjdons toe (0. 2e/67
• Donates      tealistic sigzilricsfl as 5%
          Table X: Phillips-Ouliaris Bounds Tests for Co integration


                                               Bounds Tests
    AU Counthes                            o European Countries                  Remaining 9 Countries
F Learn           i.Luaz                   F         Lasx ijast                  2          Loser        SlopeS
15       0.000!    0.0002                  6         0.0019     0.0043           9            0.0019     0.0041
14       0.0003    0.0005                  5         0.0048     0.0093           8            0.0035     0.010!
13       0.0006    0.0011                  4         0.0149    0.0289"'          3            0.0121     O.0209'
12       0.0015    0.0026                  3         0.0582"' 0.1124             6            0.0312     0.0541
II       0.0030    0.0052                  2         0.2271   0.3970             5            0.0647"'   0.1079
10       0,0053    0.0088                                                        4            0.1039     0.1661
9        0.0003    0.0136                                                        3            0.2011     0.3142
8        0.0140    0.02.29                                                       2            0.4084     0.5193
7        0.0250    0.04I+
6        0.0418    0.0681
S        0.065I 0,1042
4        0.1068 0.1694
3        0.1881    0.2932
2        03868     0.5672



If the upper bound is below the attics! value. reject null of P or toots distinct roots,
If the lower bound is above the ctiticsl value accc null of as least P distinct toots.


* Significant at 0.10mM wltcsc it Is die ntoobcr of cournoiet and m it the einober of toots   -0.
+ Significant at 5% of the turn of the toots.



                   Cumulative Prsentagefrom p Largest Eigenvaiues

                      All Countries             6 European Countries            Rcmaining 9 Countries
                                ntI                 F     Curnulasad %           F Cnulassj%
                        1        0.5230              I        0.6880             1         0.5012
                        2        0.7594              2        0.9147             2         0.7420
                        3        0.8619              3        0.9781             3         0.8650
                        4        0.9153             4         0.9929             4         0.9137
                        5        0.9450              5        0.9969             5         0.9574
                        6        0.9669              6        1.0000             6         0.9135
                        7        0.9818                                          7         0.9922
                        8        0.9890                                          8         0.9970
                        9        0.9929                                          9         1.0000
                        10       0.9959
                        ii
                        12
                                 0.9980
                                  0.9991
                        13        0.9996
                        14        0.9999
      Smallest          IS        1.0000
                     Table 9: Phillips-Ouliaris Bounds Tests for Convergenec



                                                         Bounds Tests**
      All Counties                           6 European Counties               Remaining 9 Counties
t Ian Slassi                                 F           Lansi   Jlwnr         F         Ianr J1ac
      1.6028' 10877                          I           0.6837+ 1.3171        I         0462r- 0.8901



If the nmr bound S below the critical 'slit rot the largest root, reject troll ni no 000'ergace.
if the lower bound S above the aiticsi 'sloe for the l.rge.t mat. se null of no coevargarce.

• Signir.itunr icr critical 'sloe of 0.10.
* Significant (or critical value of 005.

    These statistic .rc eakolaced en the P.r-tar   oi tint differejce of ODPi - CDPL
    For all cornier, the us Is teboncreti off.
    Arc the o European connotes. France S subncied oft
    For the remaIning 9 counnies, the US is sobfractcd off.




                   Cumulative Percentare froniptargest Ei2envalues

                      All Countries              6 European Countries        Remaining 9 Counties
                       f     Cueriàied %             f Cusrulst'rd %          f Cornulared %
    Lwgrs               I        03403               1        0.6785           1       0.6876
                        2        0.8826              2        0.8846          2        0.8626
                        3        0.9247              3        0.9780          3        0.9162
                       4         0.9552              4        0,9951          4        03591
                       5         0.9734              5        1.0000          5        0.9781
                       6         0.9841                                       6        0.9913
                       7         0.9911                                       7        03969
                       8         0.9941                                       8        1.0000
                       9         0.9965
                        10       0.9980
                        11       0.9992
                        12       0.9991
                        13       09999
    SmaIleal            14       1.0000
