                                                                I




                    NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




              HETEROGENEITY AND OUTPUT FLUCTUATIONS
                  IN A DYNAMIC MENU-COST ECONOMY




                      Ricardo J. Caballero

                      Eduardo M.R.A. Engel




                     Working Paper No. 3729




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            June 1991




This paper is part of NBER's research program in Economic
Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                      NBER Working Paper #3729
                                                      June 1991



                      HETEROGENEITY AND OUTPUT FLUCTUATIONS
                          IN A DYNANIC MENU—COST ECONOMY


                                     ABSTRACI'


         When firms     face menu costs,    the   relation    between     their

output     and money is highly      nonlinear.       At the   aggregate      level,

however,     this     needs not be so.     In this paper we study the

dynamic behavior of a general equilibrium menu-cost economy where
firms are heterogeneous in the shocks they perceive, and the

demands and adjustment Costs they face.                 In this context we            (U
generalize the        Caplin and Spulber [1987] steady state monetary

neutrality result; (ii) show that uniqueness of equilibria
depends not only on the degree of strategic complementarities but
also on the degree of dispersion of firms' positions in their

price-cycle; (iii) characterize the path of output outside the

steady state and show that as strategic complementarities become
more important, expansions become longer and smoother than

contractions; and (iv) show that the potential effectiveness of

monetary policy is an increasing function of the distance of the

economy from its steady state, but that an uninformed policy
maker will have no effect on output on average.



Ricardo J. Caballero                                  Eduardo M.R.A. Engel
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
Columbia University                                   M.I.T.
New York, NY 10027                                    Cambridge, MA 02139
     and
NBER
                                  1      INTRODUCTION

    An important part of the debate on the response of prices to monetary shocks has
 centered on the dynamic discrepancy between economies with and without price rigidities,
 on the magnitude and persistence of these discrepancies, and on whether the monetary

 authority should attempt to exploit rigidities or not.
     These issues have been typically addressed in a framework in which individual prices
 (or wages) adjust according to some fixed time-schedule,resulting in a sluggish aggregate
 price leveL Caplin and Spulber     [19871   (henceforth CS) show   that such an assumption
 is not as innocuous as may seem    —
                                        when the fixed time-schedule approach is abandoned
in favor of having individual prices adjnst according to a rule limiting the size of the
departure from a target real price (a state dependent rule), results on monetary policy
effectiveness may change dramatically. They provide an example where individual prices are
controlled infrequently according to simple state dependent rules, but where the aggregate
price level is fully flexible respect to certain types of monetary shocks (both anticipated
and unanticipated).
   CS's economy, whiledynamic, starts off and remalns at its steady state; the assumptions
they make ensure that —except for a location parameter determined by the current level
of the money stock— the distribution of prices is self-replicating. Many new issues arise
when the shape of this distribution is allowed to change over time. For example, does the
economy have any natural forces pushing it towards the CS limit? What is the path of

output while outside the steady state? Is there a unique equilibrium path? Which is the
role played by strategic interactions in shaping the dynamic path   of output? Is there a role
for monetary policy?
  This paper provides a framework within which someof these questions can be answered.
We consider the simple microeconomicstate dependent rule used by CS; the fixed (S, s)
rule, which can be justified by the presenceof fixed costs of adjusting prices ("menu costs").
This pricing rule is optimal in certain sections of the paper; in others it corresponds to an
approximation of the first best rule. Under the maintained assumption of fixed (S,s) pricing
rules, we describe the endogenousevolution of the distribution of prices, and the way this
affects both output fluctuations and the response of output to monetary shocks.

   The basic macroeconomicframework —which corresponds to an extension of Blanchard
and Kiyotaki [1987] to a dynamic setting— is presented in Section 2, Section 3 extends the
 CS neutrality result to the case where firms differ in the shocks they           are subject to, the
 adjustment costs they perceive,and the demand elasticities they face.
    In Section    4 we show that whether uniqueness can he guaranteed or not depends not
only on the degree of strategic complementarity,as is the case when only symmetric equi-
libria are considered (e.g. Cooper and John [1988]), but also on the degree of dispersion of
firms' price deviations; the more dispersed these are, the stronger the degree of strategic
complementarities necessary to yield multiplicity.
    Section 5 characterizes the path of output when the economy is outside its steady
state. We show that, in the presence of positive core inflation, strategic complementarities
introduce realistic asymmetriesinto the business cycle generated by the model; the stronger
these complementarities,the longer and smoother expansions are relative to contractions.
    Section 6 shows   that monetary policy that uses information on the level of output and
firms' prices has effects on output outside the steady state. Yet monetary policy remains
neutral on averoge; the average effect of monetary policy when no information about the
location of the distribution of firms' price deviationsis available is equal to zero. Section 7
presents concludingremarks; it is followed by several appendices.


                        2      MACROECONOMIC FRAMEWORK

    lefankiw [1985] shows the potential first order effectsof monetary policy when small (sec-
ond order) non-convex costs of adjusting prices are present and competition is imperfect.1
Recent static general equilibrium models have furthered our understanding of the macroe-
conomic role of such costs (e.g. Blanchard and Kiyotaki [1987], Rotemberg [1987]). These

modelshave several elements in common: (a) an aggregateoutput equation relating output
to real balances (aggregate demand) at a given instant in time, Y(t) = G (M(t)/Q(t)), with
Y, M and Q denoting aggregate output, money stock and aggregate price level, respectively,
and G' > 0; (b) a frictionless pricing equation for each firm q7(t) = H (Q(t), M(t)/Q(t)),
with q? denoting the i-th firm's optimal (private) frictionlessprice, and H1 > 0, H2 > 0;
(c) a menu cost of changing prices so that the actual price charged by firm i, qj, may differ
from its optimal frictionlessprice within some range; (d) a symmetric aggregate price index;

(e) the assumption that prices are at their frictionless optimal level before the monetary
shock; (f) the assumption that equilibria are symmetric and (g) the assumption that cost

  'Akerlof and Yellee (l9s5 give a similarinsight in terms of near rationality.


                                                    2
 and demand structures are the same across firms.
    If prices can be changed   costlessly, then    q() =       = Q(t), and money is neutral.
 Au increase in the money stock is offset one for one by an    equivalent increase in the price
level. However, in the presence of menu costs there is a range in which actual prices do not
increase with the money stock, although frictionlessprices do. As a result, the aggregate
price level does not match the increase in the money stock. This raises real balances and,
through aggregate demand, output.
   Caplin and Spulber [1987] extend the previous model to a dynamic setting. They use
results on optimal dynamic pricing rules in the presence of fixed costs of price adjustments
(Barro [1972], Sheshinski and Weiss [1977] and [1983]) to give more structure to assump-
tion (c). Under certain conditions on the process describing the path of money, including
monotonicity, the presence of menu costs leads firms to follow one sided, fixed, (S, s) pric-
ing rules. The price charged by a firm remains fixed until enough inflation (possibly not
realized) accumulates so that its price is a given fraction s below its frictionless optimal
value. Once this trigger level is reached, firms reset their price to a fraction S above their
frictionless optimal price. Formally, denoting log qj and log q' by p, and p7, respectively,   the
above pricing nile implies that p(t)—p7(t)belongs to (s,S] for all i and t. A continuum of
firms is considered: i E [0, 1], and the difference between the logs of the i-tb firm's actual
and frictionlessoptimal price is denoted by z,(t), which therefore belongs to (s, 5]. In order
to remove constants that are irrelevant in our analysis, we assume that .s = —S.
    CS also dispose of assumption (e). The reason for doing this is that in a menu cost

economy where monetary shocks occur more than once firms are not           at the point where
z,(t) =  before every shock. Violation of condition (e) is important since the effects of
          0

monetary policy become ambiguous. For example, if all firms are bunched close to their
trigger point s, a (positive) monetary shock is likely to lower real balances and output
instead of raising them.
    If the money stock increases continuously, the logarithm of a firm's nominal price in-
creases by a quantity equal to the width of the corresponding (5,s) band every time a firm
adjusts its price; this amount is denoted by A. Substituting the expression for q7 shown in
(b) in the definition of z(t), yields z(i) as a periodic function —with period A— of: (i)
the initial conditions faced by the i-th firm, z(0), (ii) the logarithm of the aggregate price




                                               3
level, P(i), and (iii) the logarithm of the aggregate money stock, m(t):


(1)                    z0) = S — F (z(O), P0), m(t) — p0)) (mod A),

where x (mod A) denotes the remainder of dividing x by       A.

    Suppose initially F(z(U),P(t),m(t) P(t)) (mod A) = 0. That is, the i-th firm just
                                            —


changed its price and therefore is at the target level S. If now m(i) rises, ceteris paribus,
real balances rise. This puts upward pressure on the firm's frictionless optimal price and
lowers z1(fl. This continues happening as the money stock rises bringing F(., ., .) closer
to A, thus z(t) closer to the trigger level a. Once z;(t) reaches a, the price is immediately
reset to 5, starting a new cycle.
   The effects of changes in P(t), also ceteris paribus, are less clear since substitution and
real balances effects play opposing roles on the determination of the frictionless optimal
price. An increase in P(L) raises p(t) through the substitution effect but lowers it through
the real balances effect. This tradeoff is a well known source of multiple equilibria (e.g.
Ball and Romer [1987]) and affects the dynamic response of output to monetary shocks in
important ways; these issues are discussed in Sections 4 and 5.
    CS showed that money is neutral when the above assumptions are combined with an
initial distribution of (the logarithm of) prices that is uniform on (a, 5]. Here we drop the
symmetry assumptions made in CS and the models mentioned above. This allows us to
address interesting non-steady state issues and study the generality of CS's steady state
neutrality result. This is done in four ways: (a) ther can be an arbitrary distribution of
firms' initialpositions within their pricing cycle; (b) thereare firm-specific cost and demand
shocks (idiosyncratic shocks), (c) the cost ofchanging prices may differ across firms, and (d)
there may be differences in demand elasticities across firms. Extension (b) corresponds to
modifying the optimal pricing equation so that q(t) = H(Q(t),M(t)/Q(t),Wi(t)), where
WQ) represents shocks affecting only firm i (and wQ) its logarithm), with (just for con-
vention) H3> 0. Equation (1) then becomes:


(2)               z1Q) = S   —   F (z(0), P(t), m(t) — P(i), w1(t)) (mod A1),

with   s and S denoting firm specific trigger and target points and    their difference (i.e.
                                                                       A1

A1 = S      3d). Thus positive idiosyncratic shocks lower z1(t) (whenever the trigger level
          —


s  is not reached) by raiaing the i-tb firm's optimal frictionless price. An extension of

                                                4
 Blanchard and Kiyotaki's [1987j (henceforth BK) model, presented in the appendix, yields
 the following functional form for z,(t):


 (3)            z1(t)   = S — (S + m() + w(i) + k
                                                            j   z(t)du — p(O)) (mod j).
If m(i) and w(t) are interpreted as deviations from their values at time t = 0, and z(t)
z(t) — z(0), then equation (3) is equivalent to:

(4)           z(t) = s — (s + m(t) + w(i) + kj 1z,(i)du — zi(0)) (mod Ai).

The term    kfzdu in (3) reflects the fact that firms look at the aggregate price level (i.e.
real balances and substitution effects do not necessarilycancel) when setting their prices.
Consider the case where k is positive and the money stock is fixed. If firms' prices are
(on average) above their frictionlessoptimum, the i-th firm has more pressure (on average)
to raise its price. Conversely, if on average other firms' prices are below their frictionless
optimal price then the i-th firm has less pressure to change its price. This corresponds to
the concept of strategic cornp1ementariy. If k is negative, there is strategic substitutability
between firms.
    The model underlying equation (3) can be extended to incorporate heterogeneityin the
relation between firms' (or sectors') behavior and the business cycle. We introduce this
realistic feature by letting the income elasticities of the demands faced by firms differ.2
This leads to an expression analogous to (3) with k + 1 — /3 in the place of k, where I3 is
the income elasticity of the demand faced by firm i and f /3 di = 1. Firms with large values
of /3, have more incentives to raise their prices when output is above average than firms
with small values of /3,.

                                                                      f
    Defining the (logarithm of the) price level by P(t) = p,(t) di, using the definition of
z,(t) and the fact that in this model y(t) logY(t) = m(t) — P(t), it follows that output
is a linear function of the average deviation of prices from their frictionless optima:


(5)                                   y(t) = —(1 + k)j z,(t) di.

Output falls (rises) when the average price deviation (from the frictionless optima) rises
(falls). Any effect of money on output comes through its effect on this average.

  2Allowing for heterogeneityin price elasticities is   a tivia1 extension of the casewe consider.

                                                        5
             3      PRINCIPLE OF UNIFORMITY AND NEUTRALITY

In this section we show that the principle underlyingCaplin and Spulber's neutrality result
remains valid in the presence of various sources of heterogeneity among firms. Underlying
this result is the fact that once the distribution of firms within their pricing cycle is uniform,
it remains uniform as long      as the sources affecting firms' prices are independent from their

price deviations.
     In order to make the above statements precise, we begin by defining the cross-section
 distribution of firms' price deviations at time t, Fg(z). Other cross-section distributions are
 defined analogously. The quantity Fg(z) is equal to the fraction offirms with price deviations
less than or equal to z.3 It describes the distribution of firms' percentage deviations that
 actually attains at time t, and is totally unrelated to the observer's state of knowledge. We
refer to it as the "distribution of price deviations," for short.
     Next we derive the steady state distribution in the simplest case, where firms have
the same (S, a) bands and demand elasticity parameters, and no strategic interactions are
present. Let zt and Wg denote random variableswhose (joint) distribution function coincides
with the (joint) cross-sectiondistributions of the zt(t)'s and w(t)'s, respectively. Thus, for
example, z0 denotes the initial distribution of price deviations. Equation (4) then leads to:


(6)                             = S—(S+m(t)+wg —ro) (mod A).

If no idiosyncratic shocks are present (wi 0 for all I) and              o
                                                                       is uniformly distributed
on the interval (a, 8], then the distribution of price deviations, zj, is also uniform. The
level of trs(t) determines the relative position of firms within their cycle and the number of
times they have changed their prices, but it does not affect the shape of the distribution
of price deviations. CS showed that real balances and hence output cannot be affected by
monetary policy in this framework. A continuous increase of the money stock by Am leads
a fraction Am/A of firms to increase their prices by A. Thus the product of the fraction
of firms changing their prices and the size of these changes —the change in the aggregate
price index— is Am, leaving real balances (hence activity) unchanged.
    Idiosyncratic shocks have no impact on the relation between money and output once the
economy is   at its steady state. Monetary neutrality follows from the fact that if the initial

   3This distributioá function is rigorously defined when the number of firms is finite. Considering a
continuum of firmsshould be interpreted as a notationallyconvenient way of dealing with a large but finite
number of firms.

                                                    6
 distribution of price deviationsis uniform on (s, 5], then the distribution of prices at time     ,
 zt, is also uniform on (s, S]. Thisholds regardlessofthe distribution generating idiosyncratic
shocks, as long as its increments are independent from current prices. Intuitively, if prices
start off at their steady state and there is nothing systematic in the way idiosyncratic
shocks occur, then all these shocks effectively do is change the relative order of firms within
the (5,3) interval, without affecting the Irection of firms with price deviations within any
particular interval.
    Next we allow the width of the (5, s) bands to differ across firms. Now some firms
have high costs of adjusting their price and therefore allow their price deviation to vary

considerably while others have small adjustment costs and change their prices more often.
The steady state distribution of price deviations (the z1(t)'s) is no longer uniform. The
variable that is uniformlydistributed is the fraction every firm has covered of its own pricing
cycle at a given instant in time. Formally, let c,(i) (S. — z.(t))/), denote the fraction of
its current cycle covered by the i-th firm at time i, and c denote the corresponding cross-
section distribution. This variable takes values between zero and one. From equation (6)
it follows that


(7)                                Cg   =
                                            (   + m(t)+
                                                             tI)) (mod       1).

where A denotes a random variable with the same cross-section distribution as the As's. If
the initial position of firms within their cycle (c.(O) = (S — z,(O))/A.)is uniform, then it
remains uniform under rather weak conditions. All that is needed is that the (joint) cross-
section distribution of bandwidths and increments of idiosyncratic shocks be independent
from firms' current positions within their pricing cycle, i.e. that (dim, A) be independent
from Ct. The proof is similar to the onewe sketched above. Neutrality of money is derived

by noting that equations (5) and (7) imply that


(8)                              y(t) =     (1 + k)   (j A(t)di         —
                                                                             s)
with   S = f Sdi. The integral (expectation) on the right hand side of (8) is calculated by
first conditioning on the value of A,, then applying the result for the case of equal (5,3)
rules4 and finally adding up over all possible values of A,. This shows that in the steady

state y(i)   =   f ),di   —   S=   0.   Thus y(t)   is   unaffected by money changes. Firms increase

  4The assumption that c      in independent from   (dw,,A) 5   used   at   t1u8   step.

                                                         7
their prices by amounts proportional to their bandwidths, yet this is offset by the fact that
the proportion of firms changing their prices within each group (defined as firms with the
same A's) is inversely proportional to the width 1.f firms' inaction bands.
    Adding strategic interactions and heterogeneityin elasticities does not affect the steady
state nature of the uniform distribution of Ct, since these only play a role outside the steady
state, when output fluctuates (see equation (3) and Section 5). The main result of this
section is summarized in the following proposition.

PRoPosITIoN 1 (Principle             of Uniformity):    Assume the cross-section distribution   of
firms' initialpositions within their (pricing) cycle,c0, is (a) uniform on [0,1) and (b) in-
dependent of the (joint) cross-section distributions of idiosyncrutic shocks (that take place
at time t > 0) and bandwidths. Then (a) the cross-section distribution offirms' positions
within their cycle at time      t,                        and (b) monetary policy (that in-
                                      also is uniform on [0, 1)

creases continuously and mono tonically, and does not affect firms' pricing rules) is neutnil.

PRooF Any solution to the simultaneous set of equations defined by (3) at time t defines
a cross-section distribution of firms positions within their pricing cycle of the form (see
Section 4):
(9)                    Ct   =
                                (    + m(t) + wt +(k+
                                                         1—
                                                              fi)r) (mod 1),
where fi denotes a random variable with the same distribution as the cross-section distri-
bution of the /3's, and   r is a constant (that depends on fi, t, k, A and m(t)) equal to zero
in steady state.
   Equation (9) shows that the cross-section distribution of firms within their pricing
cycle at time t is the sum, mod 1, of a distribution uniform on [0, 1) and a distribution
independent from the latter. That the resulting distribution again is uniform on [0,1)
under these assumptions follows from standardFourier analysis and is shown in Lemma B 1
in Appendix B. The conditioningargument given in the text can then be used to show that
output remains constant over time.         I
    Thus, CS's steady state result can be extended to the case where idiosyncratic shocks,
different (S, s) rules and different demand elasticities are present. The aggregate behavior
of the correspondingeconomy —includingmonetary neutrality— is indistinguishable from
that of an economy with equal (5, s) bands and demand elasticities across firms, and without
idiosyncratic shocks. Yet at the microeconomiclevel there is an additional element of

                                                   8
 realism in the model presented above. The relative
                                                      position of two firms within their cycle
 may change   over time due to idiosyncratic shocks or aggregate shocks            The latter
                                                                           (Or both).
 only occurs if the firms' (S, s) bands have different widths since it is only in this case that
 aggregate shocks displace firms by different fractions of their cycles. Also the empirical
 distribution of prices need not be uniform since Pt = Zj +           p,
                                                                   and the distribution of            p
 is likelyto be dominated by the distribution of idiosyncratic shocks. Furthermore, if the
 (S, 3) bands are different across firms, Zt is not uniform.5


        4     EXISTENCE, UNIQUENESS AND MULTIPLE EQUILIBRIA

 When income and substitution effects cancel (k  = 0), equation(3) defines the (unique)
equilibrium of the (S, s) economy. This section highlights some of the issues involved in
determining existence and uniqueness of an equilibrium when this is not the case. Firms'
deviations from their frictionless prices, the z()'s, then appear on both sides of
                                                                                   (3) and it is
not obviousthat this system of equations has a solution. We first showthat an
                                                                                   equilibrium
exists under very weak assumptions (Section 4.1). This is followed by the derivation of
conditions that ensure uniqueness (Section 4.2). These conditions require that either the
degree of strategic complementarity across firms be small or that the economy be close to
its steady state. The section concludes with some speculations on what
                                                                        happens when the
possibility of more than one equilibriumarises. The results we obtain should be viewed as a
first step towards understanding equilibria in dynamic menu costs economies with
                                                                                             strategic
interactions, since the fixed (5, s) rules assumption is (more) likely to be suboptimal in this
case.
   In order to highlight the interrelation between the degree of strategic coinpiementarity
and the existence and uniqueness of equilibria, we assume bandwidths and demand elas-
ticities are the same across firms. This section's results can be extended to the
                                                                                  general
macroeconomicframework consideredin Section 2, as was done in a
                                                                    working paper version
   This does not include the stochastic bands case considered in Benabou (1989]. However the principles
underlying the proofs in this paper are likely to extend to his setting.




                                                  9
 of this paper (Caballero and Engel [1989b]).

 4.1   Existence and uniqueness
 Consider again the economy described in Section 2 and summarized by the equation


(10)            z(t) = S — (S + rn(t) + w1(t) + kf                 z5du   —
                                                                              p1(Ofl(mod A).


A collection {p(t); i E [0, 1J} is said to define           a general equilibrium at time t, if the cor-
responding z1(t)'s —which are uniquely determined since the frictionlesseconomy always
has a unique equilibrium (see Appendix A)— solve the system of simultaneous equations
defined by (10). Thus determinig whether an equilibrium exists at time t is equivalent to
determining whether there exists a collection {z(t); i [0, 1J} that solves (10).
    If {z(t); I [0, 1j} defines a solution of (10), then there exists a real number r(t) (equal
   f
to z(t) di) such that

(11)              z(t) =      S — (S + ns(t) +     u(t) + kr(t) — p(0))(mod A).

Hence any two solutions of (10) differ only in the value of r(t) in (11). Thus if we compare
the cross-section densities of firms' positions within their price cycle associated with two
different equilibria,any one of them is a mod-i rotation of the other.e
    Comparing equations (10) and (11) shows that proving existence of a solution at time t
is equivalent to finding a number r —that typically depends on the instant of time t being
considered—such that
(12)                                       r   =
                                                   j    z5(t)du,

where the r1(t)'s are given by (11), as a function of r. Let Y denote a random variable
with a distribution equal to the cross-section distribution of the (S + m(t) + w(t) — p(0))'s.
From (11) it follows that solving (12) is equivalent to solving the following (fixed point)
equation:


(13)                               5— r    = E(Z + kr)(modA).

The left and right band sides of (13) are denoted by L(r) and Gt(r), respectively. The
function G(r) is. periodic (with period A/[k[). We denote its maximum and minimum

  6The random variable Y is   a mod-I rotation of X if Y (X + a)(rnod I) for some constant a.

                                                       10
      values by   G5 and G,,.j,, respectively.
                                            Equation (13) then shows that we may restrict our
      attention to values of r in jS — Gm,S —           Both functions take values between in
      and M on this set. We therefore have that the existence of an equilibrium is equivalent to
     having a curve restricted to a square (with side oflength Gmac —            G)
                                                                              intersect the second
     diagonals  of that square. A sufficient condition for existence of an equilibrium is therefore
     that Gi(r) be continuous (in r). This is the case, for example, if the initial distribution
     of prices and the distribution of idiosyncratic shocks are independent and any one of them
     has a density.7 This provides a simple characterization of any equilibrium of an economy
     described by a system of equations like (10).
           A calculationfrom first principles shows that under the symmetricequilibria assumption
     (which implies that Y is concentrated at one point and therefore does not have a density)
     the functions L(r) and G(r) do not necessarily cross. There often does not exist a solution
     for (10) when this is the case. At the opposite extreme, when the economy is at its steady
     state and Yj(mod.\) is therefore uniform, the constant r solving the fixed point equation is
     unique and equal to zero, since output does not fluctuate (G,, =                   = 0). This suggests
     that uniquenessdependson how near the cross-section distribution of firms' positions within
    their cycle is from the steady state.
        Having established that an equilibrium exists (at time t) if Gj(r) is continuous, addi-
    tional conditions ensuring uniquenessare now considered. If two values of r solve (13), then
    necessarilythe slope of Gi(r) (as a functionofr) has to be equal the slope ofthe diagonal at
    some intermediate point (this is just a statement of the Mean Value Theorem). Hence G(r)
    is equal to —1 for some r. As G1(r) is periodic, its derivativeis equal to zero at some point.
    Therefore there exists a unique equilibrium when G'(r) is continuous and G'r(r) > —1 for
    all r. This is equivalent to having k(1 — h1(1        kr)) > —1 for all r in [Gm,Gm.,], where
                                                            —


    hg(z) denotes the density of Y1.8       Since the range of admissible values for k is (—1,+m),9
    it follows that there exists a unique solution whenever there is strategic substitutability
    (or no strategic interaction at all). The possibility of more than one equilibrium arises
p
    only when there exists strategic complementarity between firms' pricing decisions.                   The
       TThe prooffollows from the fact that if the distributionof Y has a density
                                                                                  (withrespect to Lebesgue mea-
    sure) then the continuous mapping theorem (see Billingsley [1986, p.344]) implies that G,(r) is continuous.
    The conditions mentioned above ensure that V has a density.
       5G(r) follows from Lemma 84 in Appendix B.
       9The extension of Blanchard and Kiyotaki's model presented in the appendixrequires short run decreasing
    returns to scale in otder to have a bounded equilibrium. This restriction determines that k > —l (see the
    appendix).


                                                       11
 condition ensuring uniqueness derived above holds when sup, h(z) —        < 1/k, whichi
 (as shown in the appendix) is equivalent to dR(zt, U) < 1/k, where dR(zt, U) denotes the
 largest relative error made in approximating the distribution of price deviations by its
 steady state distribution.'0" The larger the degree of strategic complementarity,the closer
 the distribution of price deviations must be to its steady state to ensure uniqueness.
    The results on existence and uniqueness of equilibria are summarized in the following
 proposition.


 PRoPosITIoN 2 (Existence, Uniqueness and Continuity                       of Equilibria)
       Let   Z denote a      random variable with the same distribution as the cross-sectiondistri-
 bution of the (w(t) — p(O))'s.
 Existence: Assume that Z has a density (with respect to Lebesgue measure). Then the set
 of simultaneous equations defined by (10) has a solution (at time t). Further, all solutions
 are such that the cross-sectiondistribution offirms' positions within their pricing cycle is
 of the form:
 (14)                            c = /I\co + m(t) + tDj + kr(i)\) (mod 1),
for some real number r(t).
Uniqueness:        Assume       H(a) = E(Zc + a)(mod     )   is continuously differentiable.12 Let        c
denote a random variable that has the same distribution as the cross-section distribution
of firms' positions within their price-cycle associated with a particular equilibrium at time
t. Then a sufficient condition for uniqueness is that either k 0 or dR(cj, U) < 1/k,
where    d(ct, U) denotes the largest relative error made when approximating the probability
of events under c1 by the probability assigned to that event by the steady state distribution.
    Further, (the unique value of) output at time t is the only solution of the following fixed
point problem:


(15)           y(t) =        {(    + m(t)+ tOt   —(1— )(y(t) —
                                                                    (O))) (mod 1)— s},
  '°Thiscoincides with the social increasingreturns condition highlighted in conventional multiple equilibria
models (see Hammour [1989]).
  "Note that, since the cross-section densities correspondingto different equilibria are rotations of one
another, d5(z,,U) is constant across solutions, hence checking that d5(z,,U) > 1/k for one solution is
enough to ensure uniqueness.
                        br
  "This is the case, example, if the density of Y in (13) is continuously differentiable and its first and
s&ond derivativesare integrable(see Caballero and Engel [1989a]).



                                                    12
 where=1/(1+k).
 Continuity: If the conditions ensuring existence hold for 0 t T,'3 there exists (at
 least) a set {r(t) : 0 t T} defining a sequence of equilibria (see (14)) such that the
 distribution of price deviations and output are continuous over this time period. Further, if
 m(t) is differentiable and the conditions ensuring uniqueness also hold, then the (unique)
 output path is also differentiable.

PROOF: Noting the equivalence between equations (3) and (4), all the statements on

existence and uniquenessfollow from the previous discussion. The continuity results follow
from (15) and the fact that the assumptions made above ensure that G(r) is differentiable
(see Caballero and Engel 11989aD.         •
    The conditions ensuring uniqueness imply that the right hand side of equation (15), as
a function of y, defines a continuously differentiable contraction mapping. This has two
interesting implications. First, since it is a contraction, standard fixed point calculations
can be used to calculate in an efficient way the value ofoutput at a given instant of time —
this is applied in the following section. Second, since it is continuously differentiable, the
unique value of r(t) defining a solution at time t (see (14)) —and therefore the distribution
of firm's price deviations— evolves smoothly over time. The dynamic behavior of the
economy therefore is consistent with  the fixed pricing rules assumption, in the sense that
firms adjust their prices smoothly. Sincethe path of money (and therefore the distribution
of price deviations) have no jumps, these cannot be a positive fraction of firms adjusting
their price in an infinitesimal time period.


4.2     Multiple Equilibria

   This section shows that more than one equilibrium may attain when k > 0 and the
economy is sufficiently far away from the steady state. The argument given in Section 4.1
shows that in this case the number of solutions of equation (10) is equal to the number
of times the periodic function G(r), with period X/k, crosses the diagonal bisecting the
square determined by    S—             and S   —        on the x-axis, and   and      on the
y-axis; where        and   G,.   denote largest and smallest values G(r) can take. It follows

 '3Recall that m(1)ia assumed to be continuous throughout this paper.




                                                   13
                     Figure 1: Example with more than one equilibrium
                                  L(r): (—) Gt(r): (- - -)


that the number of equilibria at time t, lie, satisfies:


(16)                             Nj
Figure 1 shows L(r) and G(r) (for t       = 0) in a particular example, where there are no
idiosyncratic shocks and the cross-section distribution of firms within their price cycle is
                   A = 0.2, k = 6, and m(0) = 0. For this example
uniform on   [, ],                                                              = 0.15 and
       = 0.05, and the number of equilibria is 5.
   It is shown  in Appendix B that     G,,—       is equal to Adj(c, U), where d,(cg, U)

denotes a   measure of the distance from the equilibrium distribution of firms' positions




                                               14
  within their price cycle to the steady state.14 Equation (16) then leads to:


  (17)                                       N      2kdi(ct,U) —      1.


         In Section   6     we show   that di(ct, U) can   also be interpreted   as a   measure   of the   effec-
  tiveness   of monetary       policy. The close relation between the distance from the steady state
  and the effectiveness of monetary policy           is one   of the themes explored in that section.
             the number of solutions of (10) is not significantlylarger than the lower bound
         Usually
 provided by (17). Equation (17) shows that, other things equal, the number of solutions
 for (10) grows at a rate approximatelylinear in (a) the degree of strategic complementarity,
 k; (b) the degree of monetary effectiveness and —equivalently to (b)— (c) the distance of
 the distribution of price deviations from its steady state.
     The fact that equation (10) may have more than one solution does not necessarilyim-
 ply that dynamic multiple equilibria are possible. The solutions of (10) give all possible
 distributions of price deviationsan economy may have when the previous path of this distri-
 bution is disregarded. Yet the presenceof menu-costsrules out jumps from one equilibrium
 to another. The economy's path prior to the time instant t may uniquely determine the
 equilibrium it attains at time i. Multiple equilibria that persist over time must take into
 account this dynamic consistency condition. This implies that a continuum of equilibria
 must exist at some instant in time. A general statement on this topic is an open research
 question.


 5        OUTPUT FLUCTUATIONS AND STRATEGIC COMPLEMENTARITY

     In thissection we study the economy's aggregate out-of-steady-state behavior. We
concentrate on the asymmetries introduced by strategic complementarity, and the desyn-
chronizing features of idiosyncratic shocks. Even though many of the results extend to
the more general setting described in Section 2,15 for expository reasons we assume band-
widths and demand elasticitiesare equal across firms. We first consider the effect of strategic
complementarity in isolation and assume there are no idiosyncratic shocks (Section 5.1).

  '4Moreprecisely, d,(ce, U) is equal to the largest absoluteerror made when approximatingthe probability
that z, belongs to any given interval (mod 1) by the probability the steady state distributionassigns to that
event.                  -

  '5See Caballero     and Engel [lQs9bl.



                                                      15
 Idiosyncratic shocks are incorporated in Section 5.2.

 5.1     Strategic Complementarity and Fluct nations
 We begin with a simple but illustrative example that motivates the issues we formalize later.
 The economy is initially at the steady state described by Proposition 1, when an increase
 io the rate of core money growth doubles firms' bandwidths.'6 Bands are symmetric before
 and after the structural change. The cross-section distribution of firms within their pricing
 cycle, which was uniform on [0, 1) before the change, is uniform on                      [, )
                                                                                  after hands
 widen.17 Both before and after the change in core money growth, the money stock increases

 monotonically and continuously.
    We first consider the case where there are no strategic interactions: firms' frictionless
optimal prices increase one-for-one with increases in the money stock because substitution
and income effects cancel. Firms' pricing decisions do not depend on the price level per
se, but only on the money stock. Since there is a gap between the distribution of firms'

positions within their pricing cycle and their trigger level, there is a period of time during
which no firm reaches its trigger point and nominal prices remain unchanged. This period
lasts until the (log of the) money stock grows by A/4. Real balances, and therefore output,
increase at the same rate as the muney stock during this period. By the time the first
firm reaches its trigger level —this firm was about to increase its price when the structural
change took place— firms begin changing their prices at a rate that is twice the steady
state rate, and therefore output decreases at the same speed at which the money stock
is growing. By the time the last firm completes its pricing cycle, the situation reverts
again and output increases at the rate at which the money stock grows. In the absence of
idiosyncratic shocks this cyclic behavior continues forever. The "curve" corresponding to
k   = 0 in Figure 2                                        of money growth is constant.
                      shows how output fluctuates when the rate
If money grows at a stochastic rate, output increases at the same rate that the money
stock until m(t) .A/4. Output then decreases —at the same rate that the money stock
is growing—until m(t) = SA/4, and so on. The frequency with which firms adjust prices

   "This sxtreme example has the nice property: 1(O) — lc(O) = 0 (see below), which allows us to isolate
more clearly the effects arising from strategic complementarities from those arising from the shape of the
cross sectional distribution.
   'TThis ignores the effect of the expected rate of inflation on the dsmand for real balances. Once this effect
is incorporated,the cross-section distribution of the c;'s continues being uniform on an interval of length
1/2 (as long as this effect is not larger than .1)4), hut this interval is not centered around 1/2. Except for
a shift in the time ails, the analysis that follows remains valid.


                                                      16
 —equal to m'(t)/A in the deterministic case— is not constant anymore, but on average it
 is equal to ThJA, where tdenotes the (new) average rate of money growth.




                                                  2.5
                                               Tine

                Figure 2: Output fluctuations with no idiosyncratic shocks



   Next we consider the case with strategic interactions, to ensure a unique equilibrium
we assume k < 1. Firms' frictionless prices grow at a rate equal to a convex combination of
the rates at which money and the price level are growing. A firm's frictionlessprice is less
sensitive to increases in the money stock for larger values of the strategic complementarity
parameter k. By the same token, the speed with which a firm moves in its pricing cycle
becomes more sensitive to the changes in price level as k becomes larger. Following the
wideningof bands, thereis a period during which no firm adjusts its price, just as in the case
with k = 0. Since the price level remains constant, during this period, firms' frictionless
prices grow slower than in the case without interactions. Yet the corresponding increase in
real balances is amplified —by the presence of strategic interactions— into an increase in
output that exactly offsets this effect, and output grows at the same speed as in the case

                                             17
k = 0 for a longer period of time. By the time firms begin to adjust their prices, output
falls sharply. The price level begins to increase (at a speed twice as large as the growth rate

of money) and therefore firm's frictionless prices increase faster than they would if firms
only considered changes in the money stock. Since the cross-section distribution of price
deviations moves faster during the downturn, this period is shorter than it would be with
k   = 0. When all firms have completed their first pricing cycle, output begins to increase
and tbe cycle starts again.
    Figure 2 shows output fluctuations when money grows at a constant rate, for various
degrees of strategic complementarity.55 Two regularities emerge from this figure and the
preceding discussion. First, output increases (decreases) when the rate at which firms are
changing their prices is smaller (larger) than the corresponding steady state rate. Second,
other things equal, output grows for a longer period of time —and declines for a shorter
period of time— the larger the degree of strategic complementarity. These insights hold
—in the absence of idiosyncratic shocks— for any distribution of firms within their cycle.
Later in this section we show that:


(18)                             y'(t)   =

where   f(1j denotes the cross-section       density of firms' positions within their pricing cycle
at time t and = 1/(1 + Ic). Since the denominator is positive (this is required to ensure
uniqueness), the numerator determines the sign of y'(t) and the strategic complementarity
parameter,   Ic, the magnitude of this rate of change.

   The asymmetry described above implies that, other things equal, the average length of
expansionsis larger the larger the value of Ic. This is valid more generally than this example
may suggest. Given an initial cross-section distribution of firms within their pricing cycle,
c0, and a degreeof strategic complementarity Ic, let IE(k) denote the fraction of time output
is growing and lc(k)                The difference between IE(k) and lc(k) measures the
                           1 — IE(k).
        of
degree asymmetry      in the lengths of expansions and contractions. Assume there are no              s
idiosyncratic shocks and the money stock grows at a constant rate — the expressionthat
follows holds (approximately) in expectation when the stochastic process generating the

 '8Bandwidths are equal to 0.2 and m(t) = 0.01t in this figure.




                                                   18
 money stock grows at a rate      that is independent from the current level of output. Then:

 (19)                       IE(k) — 1(k) = IE(O) — lc(O) + kdv(ct,U),

 where dv(c, U) denotes a measure of distance —known as the variation distance—between
 ct and the steady state uniform distribution U.'9 This result is proved in Lemma BIG in
Appendix B. It shows that the asymmetry in fluctuations grows (linearly) both with the
economy's distance from the steady state and the degree of strategic complementarity.2°
   When the economy is expanding, most firms are at the beginningof their pricing cycle
and, other things equal, the larger the degree of strategic complementarity,the larger the
incentive firms have not to adjust their prices. Hence expansions are reinforced by the
presence of complementarities among firms, and their duration grows with k. Similarly,
contractions are associated with periods where firms change their prices at a rate faster
than average. When prices are strategic complements,the larger the number of firms that
change their price, the larger the incentivesother firms have to do the same. It follows that
contractions are shorter the larger the degree of strategic complementarity.
   The magnitude of the effects described above is proportional to the difference between
the rate at which firms are adjusting their prices and the correspondingsteady state rate,
and this is proportional to the distance of the distribution of price deviations from the
steady state. This explains why the asymmetry between the lengths of expansions and
contractions increases with the distance from the steady state.


5.2     IdiosyncraticShocksand Fluctuations
When the economy is forced awayfrom the steady state described in Proposition 1, idiosyn-
cratic shocks (whose increments do not depend on firms' current prices) bring the distribu-
tion of price deviations doser to its steady state and therefore dampen output fluctuations.
The discussion of this mechanism is given in Caballero and Engel [1991); and extended
here to incorporate the presence of strategic interactions. If shocks are nonstationa.ry, and
no structural change takes place, the cross-section distribution of firms' positions within

  '5Tlie variation distance between c, and U is equal to supA Pr{c, E A) — Pr{U A}I, where the
supremum is taken over all Borel sets A. Note that, since there are no idiosyncratic shocks, dv(c,, U)
remainsconstant over time.
  This qualitative nature of this result may be expectedto extend to the casewhece adjustment rules are
two-sided, as long as core-iiiflation is positive.




                                                  19
      their pricing cycle converges to the uniform distribution.2' As time passes, the economy
      resemblesmore and more the steady state description given in Proposition 1.




B,
8




                                                          2.5

                                                        Time

                          Figure 3: Output fluctuations and idiosyncratic shocks



         Let us consider again the example where an increase in core money growth leads to a

     doubling of firms' bandwidths. We assume idiosyncratic shocks are normally distributed
     with zero mean and variance growing linearly with time.22 Figure 3 shows how output
     fluctuates on its way to the steady-state in the presence of idiosyncratic shocks for three
     different values of the variance, where time is measured in years.23 It is apparent form                      a
     this figure that fluctuations dampen out faster the larger the (instantaneous) variance of
     firm specific shocks. Since shocks are non stationary, their desynchronizingeffect increases

        2'Given the form of the distribotion of price deviations derived io Section 4, the corresponding proofs
     follow directly from Caballero and Engel [1991].
       "Strictly speaking, we should use a truncated normal (in auy interval of length dt) with truncation point
     at —dm(i). This is bf second order importance when rn'(i) >> a2. This approximation is also used iu
     Proposition3 below.
       "These figures assume k = 0.40, A = 0.20 and m(i) = 0.lt.

                                                        20
    without hound, hence output converges to its steady state level and the distribution of
    firms within their cycle approaches the steady state distribution. The larger tlse variance
    of idiosyncratic shocks, the faster the economy approaches its steady state distribution.

        Figure 4 shows the path of output for three different degrees of strategic complemen-
    tarity — and the same variance of idiosyncratic shocks. Figure 4 can be interpreted as the
    figure that results from adding idiosyncratic shocks (with instantaneous standard deviation
    equal to 0.05) to every one of the output paths considered in Figure 2. It is apparent that
    the asymmetry between the lengtbs of expansionsand contractions persists in the presence
    of idiosyncratic shocks — during the time period where the economy is sufficiently far away
    from its steady state. This is consistent with equation (19). In the following proposition
    we extend equation (18) to the case where idiosyncratic shocks are also present.




I


                                                 2.5

                                                Tht

       Figure 4: Output fluctuations,idiosyncratic shocks and strategic complernentarity



PROPOSITION3 Suppose the cross-sectiondistribution of idiosyncrutic shocks —the w1(t) '5
its   equation (3)— is normal with zero mean and variance 2a2t, with        = 1/(1 + k), and

                                               21
let fg(c) denote the density of c1.24
    Then:
                                      (1 — ft(1))m'(t) — x2fI(1_)
(20)                         ti'(t) =

                denotes the derivative (with respect to c)    of fg(c),   and x2 =
where   f'(c)
Paoor: See Lemma B9 in Appendix B.               I
    Equation (20) corresponds to (18) with an additionsi term in the numerator. This
additional term takes into account the fact that now firms are moving within their pricing
cycle not only because of increases in the money stock, but also because of firm specific
shocks. As the economy approaches its steady state, both (1               —
                                                                              ft(1))   and   f'(1) are
tending to their steady state values (zero). Since the monotonicityassumption implies that
the aggregate drift must be larger than the standard deviation of instantaneous shocks, the
first term in the numerator of (20) dominates over the second term, and the discussionfrom
Section 5.1 extends to the case with idiosyncratic shocks.

    Summing up, when an (S, s) economy with idiosyncratic shocks is forced away from
the steady state described in Proposition 1, output oscillates on its way back to the steady
state. Expansions are flatter and contractions are more pronounced (but shorter lived), the
largerthe degree of complementaritybetween firms' pricing decisions and the further away
the economyis from its steady state.


                              6     AVERAGE NEUTRALITY

   The previous section showed that monetary policy is generally not neutral when the
economy is outside its steady state. Yet knowledge of the level of output (i.e. of —(1 +
k)f zdi) over some period of time (so as to know its derivative) is necessary to take
advantage of non-neutrality. In this section it is shown that money is neutral on averoge
when there is no information on the location of the distribution of price deviations. This
serves as a threshold since any amount of informationbreaks the average neutrality result.25
We also show that the potential magnitudeof the effect of monetary policy grows with the
distance of the economy from its steady state. This ties in the various notions of distance

  241t follows from the mode! derived in Appendix A that w, = mv,, where the v, correspond to a linear
combinationof the (logsofthe) actual shocks; see Section 2 and AppendixA. The assumption made shore
is therefore equivalent to V having variance a21.
   "This paper does not deal with agents' responses to systematic exploitationof information. See Caballero
and Engel [1989al for a preliminarydiscussion of monetary policy in the context of (S a) economies.

                                                     22
  that appeared in the preceding sections. For simplicity we assume that bandwidths and
  demand elasticities are the same across firms,se and that the cross-section distribution of
  idiosyncratic shocks is normal (with a variance that increases with time).
      The elasticity of output with respect to (continuous) money changes              is   introduced in
  order   to make precise the concept of money  neutrality. It also is useful when defining
  various measures of the potential magnitude of monetary policy effects. Its value at time t
 is equal to:

                                   Y    —   M dY M     —       dy(rn(t),t)
                                                                  din
 where y(rn, t) denotes output as a function of the current money stock, in, and the distribu-
 tion of idiosyncratic shocks accumulated until time t. This index is
                                                                        shortsighted because it
 only reflects the effect of money on the current level of activity.27 It also assumes that the
 increase in the money stock does not affect the average growth rate of money, hence firms'
 inaction range. It measures the effect of output of a infinitesimal, continuous increase in
 the money stock.
                                             I
    From equation (5) it follows that is equal to minus (1 + k) times the derivative of
 fz1di with respect to the (logarithm of the) money stock at that instant in time. Hence,
if on average prices have been changed recently, an increase in the money stock ralses real
                                                       I
balances and total output (i.e. lowers fJ z1di): > 0. Conversely, an increase in the money
stock is likely to reduce output if on average prices have not been changed for a long time:
Ii <0.
     Defining neutrality                          I
                         at time t as having equal to zero is too general a definition. An
infinitesimal increase in the money stock has no effect on activity every time output reaches

                                                                             I
a locally extreme (maximum or minimum) value and therefore is equal to zero at these
instants in time.as Yet the index of (instantaneous, myopic) monetary effectiveness,        is     I,
different from zero an instant of time later. One measure for the distance of the economy
                                                           I
from its steady state at time t is the largest value could take over all possible realizations
of the (continuous and increasing) output path in(s);a t. Let therefore:


                               Mi(t) = supm(.)>m(g,a>tIi(rn(s),s).

  "The case with different bandwidths    was considered is a previous version of this paper.
  2tGeneratinga boom today comes at the cost of a recession, usuallymilder than the boom, in the future.
Intertempoeal tradeoffs issueslike this one are addressed in Caballero and Engel [1955a].
  "When the path of output is continuous.



                                                  23
It is shown in Lemma Bil in Appendix B   that Ms(L) is equal to (1 + k) times the largest
relative error made when approximating the cross-section distribution of firms within their
pricing cycle, Ct, by its steady state distribution. The condition ensuring uniquenessderived
in Section 4 may now he interpreted in the following way. Once the (instantaneous) effect
of monetary policy,   as measured by M5(t), is smaller than (1 + k)/k, there exists   a unique
equilibrium.
   Next we study to what extent an uninformed pollcy maker can take advantage of the
non-neutrality of money when the economy is away from its steady state. Assume that
the order in which firms change their prices is known, yet the exact position of any firm
within its pricing cycle is not known. This is equivalent to knowing the distribution of firms
positions within their (S, s) bands, except for a location parameter, b, that may take values
between 0 and A. The effectiveness   of monetary policy depends on the actual value of     .
Denote the correspondingmoney-elasticityof output by           '().   Then (see Lemma B12 in

Appendix B)
                                       pA
(21)                                  j0 I(i,b)ds,b
                                                      =   0.


This means that if the policy maker assigns equal probability to all possible locations of the
distribution of firms' positions within their (5, .s) band, then monetary policy is neutral on
average. The magnitude of (infinitesimal) monetary shocks may be expected to be larger
the furtheraway from the steady state the economy is. A measure of the average magnitude
of monetary shocks (at time t), when the policy maker has no knowledge about the location
of the distribution of price deviations, is given by:


                                            j pA
                                   M2(t) = 0 IIs('P)Idib.

It is shown in Lemma B13 in Appendix B that M2(i) is equal to (2A/) times dv(ct, U),
where dv(c, U) denotes the largest error made when approximating probabilities of events
under Zg by the correspondingprobabilityunderthe steady state distribution. This is the
notion of distance —known as the variation distance— related to the asymmetry between
the lengths of expansionsand contractions in Section 5.1. This asymmetry therefore grows
with the size of the potential effects of (infinitesimal) money shocks.
    An alternative measure of monetary policy effectiveness at time I is the difference be-
tween the largest and smallest values output can take —from time I onwards— over all
possible continuous,increasing paths of rn(t). This leads to the following index of mone-

                                              24
  tary policy effectiveness:

                   M3(t) = 5UPm()>m(t) y(m(s), a)   —
                                                        'r,)m(t)   y(m(a),s).

 The index M3(t) is equal to (1 + k) times the largest error made when
                                                                         approximating the
 probability of intervals (mod 1) under cm by the correspondingprobability under the
                                                                                     steady
 state distribution (see Lemma B7 in Appendix B). The correspondingconcept of distance
 between random variables is known as "discrepancy" it is proportional to the (lower
                                                           —



 bound) for the number of equilibria derived in Section 4.
    Average neutrality holds independently of how far from the steady state the economy
 might be. Increasing money without worryingabout the current output level has no average
 effect on output. The difference with full neutrality is that Mi(L), M2(t) and M3(t) —and

 typically I— are different from zero when the economy is not at its steady state. Increases
 in the money stock raise output during recessions but lower it during booms in such a
 way that these effects cancel each other. It may appear that this contradicts the result
 we derivedin the preceding section, according to which booms are longer—and recessions
shorter— the larger the degree of strategic interactions. Yet, as shown in Proposition
3, the speed with which output grows during expansions is decreasing in the degree of
strategic complementarity. Similarly, the larger the value of k, the faster output falls during
contractions. These effects exactly cancel ofT the asymmetry between the lengths of booms
and recessionsso that monetary policy is neutral on   average. An absolutely uninformed
monetary authority cannot exploit (on average) situations where Mj(t), M2(t) or M3(t) are
greater than zero.


                                   7     CoNcLusioN

    This paper begins by generalizing Caplin and Spulber's [1987] steady state-money neu-
trality result, by allowing for strategic interactions and various sources of heterogeneity
across firms. We then proceed to study non-steady state dynamics, first showing that
whether a unique equilibrium can be guaranteed or not depends not only on the degree of
strategic complementarity but also on how close the distribution of firms' positions in their
price cycle is from the steady state. Next, we argue that strategic complementaritiesintro-
duce realistic asymmetries into the business cycle; the stronger these complementaritiesare,
the longer and smoother are expansions relative to contractions. Finally we demonstrate

                                             25
that the conditional correlation between money and output is typically non-zero outside
the steady state, however the unconditional correlation remains zero. In other words, the
steady state neutrality result no longer holds for every time t but it holds on average.
    Throughout the paper we assume that the band-policy remains invariant to the exper-
iments we perform, and concentrate on distributional issues. For the most part, allowing
for different bandwidths for different parameters values is unlikely to change the qualitative
features of the   results. This is not necessarily true, however,          when we study the out-of-

steady-state behavior of an economy with strategic complementarities,since in this case
the first best policy        to involve endogenouschanges in firms' bands (i.e. fluctuating
                        is likely

bands). In this sense, our results should be viewed as a first step towards understanding
the complexities of stochastic dynamicmenu cost economies with heterogeneous agents that
are strategically related.




 29ASlong   a the value functionssatisfy standard regularity conditions.
                                                   26
                                           APPENDIX          A

     This appendix briefly presents the basic model underlying the macroeconomic frame-
  work used in the paper.3° To shorten the formulae, the derivation from first principles of
  the demand side of the model is omitted.
     There is a continuum of sectors indexed by the subscript i E [0,1], and within every

                                                               j
 sector a continuum of firms indexed by the subscript E [0,1]. Each sector faces at each
 time i the following isoelastic demand function:


                                     y.d(j) =
 (22)
                                                (•I)      Y(t)c(t),

 with   Y(i) the quantity of the (composite) good i demanded by consumers,q(t) the price
 of the (composite)good i, Q(t) the aggregate price index, Y(i) aggregate expenditure, q(t)
 the idiosyncratic shock to the demand for goods of sector i, and 0 the price elasticity of the
 demand for good i.
     Aggregate expenditure (equal to aggregate production in this model) is proportional to
 real balances:
 (23)                                       Y(t) =
with M denoting some measure of money holdings. Sectoral demands, as a function of rela-
tive prices, real balances, and idiosyncratic (sectoral) shocks, are obtained by replacing
                                                                                           (23)
in (22):

(24)

Firm
                                 yd(t) =   _6          (M(t)) q(t).
        j in sectori faces a demand, (t), that depends on its relative price (within the
sector), q5(t)/q(i), and on the total demand for the sector's compositegood:

                                                         "
(25)                                 }'(t) = (t)))

where ij >   1                                                         j
                 is the price elasticity of the demand faced by firm in sectori. In this context

   30This is a modified version of Blanchardand Kiyotaki's [1987] (henceforth BK) model. One difference
with BK and other similar models, is that consumers are assumed to solve a two stage—CES—budgeting
problem within each period. They first decide how much to spend in each sector. Then they decide
how to allocate these expenditures within each sector. Firms do not collude, and hence do not exploit
the monopolistic structure of the first stage. This modification expands the parameter space (demand
elasticities) for which the results can be applied (an alternative way to achieve this is by changing the
elasticity of output with respect to zeal balances).


                                                  27
the frictionless price of a firm with costs of producing      '(t)
                                                              equal to cY7(L)e(i), where c
is a constant, cx a parameter greater than one that reflects increasing marginal costs and

e(t) a cost shock that affects all firms in sector i equally, is:

                            =
                                     (Y
                    '
(26)
                                [A

where A   =   ()        . All firms in sector   i are affected by the same shocks, have the same
technology, and face identical demands. Therefore their equilibrium prices must be the
same. Furthermore, if qt(t) = qjj(1) for all (j,j') E (0,11, then this must be the value
of the sectoral price index, q(i). Replacing this equilibrium result in (27) eliminates the
subindex j from now on:
(27)                                     =

Equation (24) provides an expression for Y(t). Substituting this in (27) yields:


                                                (M(t\ v.
                                     Q(t)A
                                      t) —
(28)


with      (cx— 1)/(1+O(a— 1)) > 0 and V(i)             c(t)e(t)h/(0_1).Without loss of generality
it is assumed that M(0) = Q(0) and A = 1.
   Working with the logarithms of the variables makes the algebra clearer. Therefore
the following notation is introduced: v(t) log Vj(t), m(i) logM(t), p(t) log q(t),
p(t) log q(t), P(t) logQ(t), r(i) p1(t) — P(i) andr p(t) — P(t), where p,'
denotes the (frictionless)optimal price. A simple Cobb-Douglasaggregate price index (i.e.
fixed weights) is adopted: P(t) f0' p(t) di.31
    When a "menu cost" is introduced, firms follow some sort of (S, s) rule. The case of
fixed (S,a) bands, which is an approximation to the optimal pricing rule, is considered
here. They can be proved to be first best only in very special cases in the context of our
model. However, finding the true rule is technically very difficult and we have not yet found
a solution (we suspect that firms haven't either). Nonetheless, very interesting results can
be derived without questioningthe optimality of the proposed (S, a) rule too much.
    An important role is played by the difference of the (log of the) actual price charged by
sector i and the (log of the corresponding)frictionless optimal price. The variable z(t) is

  31This index should be interpreted as an approximation of the more appropriate CES-indea.



                                                  28
   defined as                 —.
                                   p(t), z,(t) E (s, S]
         Simple algebra yields:


  (29)                       p(t) = (m(t) — P(t)) + qv(t) + P(t) + z(t).

  Integrating with respect to i on both sides of (29), imposing that (since shocks are idiosyn-
  cratic) f0' v(t)di = 0, and using the definition of the aggregate price index, yields:


  (30)                                  P(t) = m(t) +
                                                             j ;(t)    di,

 wheref0' z(t) di denotes the averagepercentage departure of the actual
                                                                         price ofeach sector
 with respect to its optimal price at time t. From this it follows that:


 (31)                        p(t) = m(t) + v(t) + (!__) J0 ;(t) di.

 and

                         —z(t) + S =       S — (p1(i) — p;(0)) +
                                                                 (p(t) — p(O)).
 Let A = S — s denote the width of the rangeof percentage deviations of actual prices from
 their frictionlessoptimum. Taking (mod A) on bothsides, and using the fact that
                                                                                                    —z)+S
 belongs    to [0, A) and p(t) — p(0) is a multiple of A, yields:

(32)                          z() = S      —
                                               (S + pZ(t)   —
                                                                p(O)) (mod A).

It is easy to see that z(t) E (s, 5] since due to the properties of the modulus operator, the
second term on the right hand side of (32) belongs to [0, A).
   Finally, substituting (31) into (32) and denoting k = (1 — 4')/ yields the fundamental
equation of this paper:

                        =S—
(33)            z1(t)
                              (s + m() + v(i) + kf               z,(t)du — p(0)) (mod A).

If we interpret m(t) and v1(i) as deviations from their values at time t =           0,   and let   hz(t)
z(t) — z(0), equation (33) is equivalent to

(34)          z()       S—        + m(i) + v1(t) +
                                                      kj t.z,(t)du       —
                             (s                                              z(0)) (mod A).


                                                     29
Equations (3) and (4) are then obtained by setting w1(t) = qv(t).
   Substituting Y(t)' for Y(t) in (22), and tracing the steps of the derivation leading
to   (33) and (34), yields analogous expressions for        z(t), with k + 1   —
                                                                                   /3 in the place of k.



                                        APPENDIX              B

LEMMA Bl Let U        denote   a random variable uniform on [0,1], X any random variable
independentfrom U, and Y          (X + U)(mod 1). Then Y is uniform on [0,1].
Ptoor:      Since Y takes values in [0, 1], it suffices to show that its Fourier coefficients are
equal to those of a distribution uniform on [0, 1]. Thus it has to be shown that all non
trivial Fourier coefficients of Z are equal to zero. A calculation from first principles shows
that, given any random variable X, the Fourier coefficients of X and X(mod1) are the
same. Hence the Fourier coefficients of Y are equal to the product of those of X and U.
Since U is uniform on [0, 11, its non trivial Fourier coefficients are equal to zero. It follows
that all non trivial Fourier coefficients of Y are also equal to zero, completing the proof. I

LEMMA B2 Let      X   be   a random variable whose density f(x) has bounded variation. Then
X(mod1) also has a density, fj(x), and

(35)                                  fj(x) =   f(x+
                                                 k
                                                     k).


     Now assume that the characteristicfunction of X, 1(z), satisfies                    J(2irk)[   < +00.
Then:
(36)                           fi(u) = 1 + 2              [j(27rk)e_i2t1
                                               k>1

 where   [z] denotes the real part of the complex number z.
PitooF: Equation (35) is is a well known result in probability theory, for a proof under
the assumptions made above see Proposition 3.1 in Engel [1991].
    Next we derive (36). Since the Fourier coefficients of X and X(mod 1) are the same,
it follows that the Fourier coefficients of X(mod 1) are summable and X(mod 1) has a
continuous density, fj(x), with bounded variation. ApplyingPoisson's Summation Formula
(see Butzer and Nessel, 1971, p.202, for the version being used here) leads to the expression
for fi(u).   I
                                                     30
LEMMA B3 Let       X   denote a random variable whose characteristic function 1(z) sat2sfics

ik>1 IJ(2rk)l <+oo. Let G(a) = EftX+ a)(mod 1)]. Then:

(37)                           G(a)    =      —
                                                  Ik>1 [/(2rk)],
(38)                          G'(a) =      —2         [J(2irk)J,
                                                k>1

where     l[zJ and [z]   denote the imaginary and real parts of the complex number z, respec-

tively, and x(mod 1) the difference between x and the largest integer less than            or equal than
x.

PRooF: Substituting this expression for fs(x) derivedin (36) in E [X(mod 1)] = xfs(x) dx,     f
interchanging the order of integration and summation, and integrating the resulting terms,
leads to the expression for G(a). Differentiating under the summation sign,32 leads to the
expression for G'(a). I

LEMMA B4 Assume   X satisfies the assumptions in Lemma B3, let fs(x) denote the density
of X(mod1), and define G(a) as in Lemma 133, for 0 a 1. Then:


                                      G'(a)= 1—fj(1—a).

PRooF:       Follows directly from (38) and (36).         I
LEMMA B5    Let P(A) denote a probability measure on [0, 1] that has density f(x) with
respect to Lebesgue measure, and let Q(A) denote Lebesgue measure on the unit interval.
Define:

(39)                              dR(P,Q)    = supA
                                                         •A)
where the supremum is taken over         all sets   A    in   [0, 1] with   positive Lebesgue measure.33
Then:
(40)                               dR(P,Q)    = sup 1(x) — i.

PRooF:    Since limd,oP([x,x + dxl)/dx = 1(x), except for x belonging to a set of
Lebesgue measure zero (see Billingsley [1986, p.439]), letting A = [x,x + dx] on the right
hand side of (39) shows that dR(P,Q)          supf(x) — ii.
 32Addjtjonal smoothness assumptions are required at this step, see Caballero and Engel [J989a1.
 33Strictly speaking all the suprema mentioned in this lemma should be essential suprema.


                                                    31
       The remaining inequality needed to establish (40)                follows from:



                                                      —
                                                      —      fA(f(x)—1)dz
                                    Q(A)                          Q(A)
                                                      <
                                                      —
                                                                 Q(A)
                                                      < fAPzIf()
                                                      -                     lids
                                                                  Q(A)
                                                      =    sup[f(x)—l[.

LEMMA B6 Let   X denote a random variable taking values in [0, 1] that satisfies the as-
sumptions of Lemma B, denote its density by fj(x), and define G(a) as in Lemma BS.
Let

                                  di(X,U) = sup Pr{X 6 A) — m(A)j
                                             A

denote the notion     of distance —from X to a distribution U uniform on [0, 1]— known as
 discrepancy, where the supremum is taken over all sets A in [0,11 that are either of the
form [a, b] or [0, a] U [b, 1], 0 a < b < and m(A) denotes Lebesgue measure.
                                                      1,


       Then:
(41)                               dj(X,U) = supG(a)             —
                                                                     infG(a).

Paoor: For 0 a < b                 1 in [0,1] we have:


                                                  —
                                                      G(a)   =
                                           G(b)                  jb G'(u)du
Using Lemma B2 and a change of variables:
                                                             = (d—c) —
                                                                         jfi(v)dv
(42)                                                         = m([c,dJ) — Pr{X E [c,d]},
(43)                                                         = Pr{X E [0,c] U [d, 1])   —
                                                                                            m([0,c] U [d, 1]),

where d =      1 —   a and c =   1 — b.   Equation (41) now follows from (42) and (43).           I
LEMMA B7 With the notation                of Section 6:

                            = SUPm(j)m(i) y(m(s),s) — 1"m(s)>m() y(m(s),s).

PaooF:         Let   X and Y be independent random variables and denote Gx(a) = E[(X +

                                                           32
  a)(mod 1)1 and Cx+y(a) = E[(X + Y + a)(mod 1)]. Lemma B6 and the fact that idiosyn-
  cratic shocks are normal (with a variance that increasesover
                                                               time)imply that all that needs
  to be proved is that
  (44)                           sup,Gx+y(a)           Sup4 Gx(a)

  and

                                 inf,, Gx+y(a)         mi,,   Gx(a).
 Since both proofs are very similar, we only prove (44).
    Conditioning on Y = y and using the independence assumption yields:


                             Gx+y(b) =
                                                JGx(y+b)dF()
                                                J{supGx(a))dF(y)
                                            =   sup Gx(a).


 Equation (44) now follows from the fact that the latter inequality holds for all b.            I
 LEMMAB8 Given a random variable          X, define:

(45)                         h(a,b)   = E[(X + Zt + a)(mod 1)1,

 where   Z denotes a random variabk independent from X,                normal, with zero mean and
variance b. Let f(y) denote the density of Y         (X + Zo)(mod        1) arid   f'(y) its derivative.
Then:

                                       b)   = (f'(1 — a) — 1).

Paoor: Lemma B3 implies that:

(46)                 h(a,b) =    —    !   I,>1 e_21r2k2 [Ix(27rk)e2]


where Jx(t) denotes the characteristic function of X.
                                                      Straightforward calculations based
upon (46) show that
                                  Oh             102h
(47)
                                  (a,b) =
   Substituting the expression that is obtained from Lemma B4 for Oh/Oain (47) completes
the proof.   I

                                                33
LEMMA    139   (Paoor or    PRoPosITIoN 3)

Paoor: Equation (15) in the main text is equivalent to:
                                                 —
                                                     (1   —
                                                              4p(t) — y(O))
                        y(i) =
(48)                             H (rn(S)                                     z25)

where  H(a,b) is defined as in Lemma B8, with CO jfl place of X, and x2 =
Implicitly differentiatingboth sidesof (48) with respect to i, using Lemmas B4 and B8 to
evaluate OHfOa and OH/ôb, and rearranging terms leads to (20) in the main text. I


LEMMA BlO       (PRooF OF    EqUATION         (19))

PROOF:     From the definition of 1E(k)          it follows that:

                                                                a
(49)                             IE(k)                I{m:      -- <0}dm,
with I{A} denoting the indicator function of set A. An argument similar to that given in
the Proofof Proposition 3 shows that:

(50)
                                             —
                                             —        (1 —     f(1j)
                                     Orn         1—(1—)ft(1j
Since the denominator in (50) is positive, equation (49) is equivalent to:


(51)            IE(k) =
                          j"i{m:         10
                                              (      —(1— Xi,(m)
                                                                        —

                                                                            Y(O))) <1}
                                                                                         dm,


withfo(c) denoting the density ofCO. Introducingthe change ofvariable v = m—(1—)y(m)
in (51) and using (50) to evaluate dm in terms of dv leads to:

                IE(k)   =
                            j"i{v: fo() <1}{1+k(1_fo())}dv
                        =   !E(0)   +k   j    I{fo(u) < 1}(1 — fo(u))du.

The proof now follows from two elementary properties of the variation distance. First,
dV(CO, U) =     f
             1{fo(u) < l}(1 — fo(u))du. Second, since cg is obtained by rotating c0,
dv(c, U) = dv(co, U). The identity above then implies that

                                    IE(k) = lE(0) + kdv(c,U).

                                                          34
 LEMMA    Bli With the notation introduced in Section 6 we have

                                      M1(t) = (1 + k)dR(c,U).

 PROOF:    See Section 4 in Caballero and Engel [1991}.                     I
LEMMA B12 With the notation           of Section 6:

                                                                  = 0.
(52)                                        j0      I(i,1')di,b


PROOF:      Let G(a)    = E[(X + a)(modl)J, with X = CO + (wt/A). Equations (14), (4)
and (3) imply that y(m,t) = —(1 + k)(G(1) —     with I equalto a constant(that depends
on t). It follows that I(tJ') = G'(I +     ).
                                       Equation (52) now follows from this identity and
the (trivial) fact that G'(a) is periodic, with period equal to one.                •
LEMMA B13 With       the notation of Section 6:

                                                            2A
(53)                              j
                                  0
                                        IIt(i,b)I   db = —dv(cg,U).

PROOF:     Using   the same change of variables as in the proof of Lemma BlO leads to:

                                                        ), p1
                             J0   I(L') d,b = —J                  1 —
                                                                         f(v)Idv,

where fj(v) denotes the density of Cj. Equation (53) now follows from an elementary
property of the variation distance. I




                                                       35
                                         REFERENCES


AKERLOF, C. AND          J. YELLEN: "Can Small Deviations from Rationality Make Significant
Differences   to Economic Equilibria?," American Economic Review 75      (1985), 708—721.

BALL, L. AND D. ROMER: "The Equilibrium and Optimal Timing                of Price Changes,"
NBER Working Paper 2412 (1987).

BARRO,     R.J.:   "A Theory of Monopolistic Price Adjustment," Review   of Economic Studies
39 (1972), 17—26.

BENABOU,   R.: "Optimal Price Dynamics and Speculation with a Storable Good," Econo-
metrica 57-1 (1989), 41—81.

BILLINGSLEY,       P.: Probability and Measure,   2'" Ed. John Wiley, New York, 1986.
BLANCHARD,         O.J. AND
                      N. KIYOTAKI: "Monopolistic Competition and the Effects of

Aggregate Demand," American Economic Review 77-4 (1987), 647—666.

BUTZER,     P.L.,    AND   R.J.NEssEL: Fourier Analysis and Approximation      Vol.     1   One-
Dimensional Theory, Academic Press, New York, 1971.

CABALLERO,      R.J.     E.M.R.A. ENGEL: "The S-s Economy: Aggregation, Speed of
                         AND

Convergence    and Monetary Policy Effectiveness," Columbia Univ. Working Paper #420,
(1989a).

CABALLERO,      R.J.     AND   E.M.R.A. ENGEL: "Heterogeneity and Output Fluctuations in a
Dynamic Menu Cost Economy," Columbia Univ. Working Paper #453, (1989b).

CABALLERO,      R.J.     AND   E.M.R.A. ENGEL: "Dynamic (S,s)     Economies," Econometrica,

(1991) (forthcoming).

CAPLIN, A.S., AND D. SPULBER: "Menu Costs and             the Neutrality of Money," Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 102-4 (1987), 703—726.

Coopna, R.         AND   A. JOHN: "Coordinating Failures in Keynesian Models," Quarterly
Journal of Economics103 (1988), 441-464.

ENGEL,     E.M.R.A.: A Road to Randomnessin Physical Systems, Lecture Notes in Statis-
tics, Springer Verlag, New York, 1991.

HAMMOUR,    M. "Indeterminacy and Instability in Macro Models with External           Effects,"

(1989), Chapter II, MIT Ph.D. thesis.

                                                  36
MANK!W, N.C.: "Small Menu Costs and Large Business Cycles: A Macroeconomic Model
of Monopoly," Quarterly Journal   of Economics 100-   2 (1985), 529—539.

ROTEMBERG,  J.: "The New Keynesian Microeconomic Foundations," NBER Macroeco-
nomics Annual (1987), 69—104.

SHESRINSKI, E., AND Y.WElss: "Inflation and Costs of Price Adjustment," Review   of
Economic Studies, 44 (1977), 287—303.

SRESHINSK!,   E.,     Y.WEiss: "Optimum Pricing Policy under StochasticInflation,"
                    AND

Review of Economic Studies, 50 (1983), 513—529.




                                         37
