NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES

NONRATIONAL AC'IORS AND FINANCIAL MARKET BEHAVIOR

Richard Zeckhauser
Jayendu Patel
Darryll Hendricks

Working Paper No. 3731

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1991

Zeckhauser is also affiliated with the National Bureau of
Economic Research. Please direct correspondence to 79 JFK St.,
Cambridge, MA 02138, U.S.A. (phone: 617—495—1393, fax: 617—4951972). The research was partially funded by the Decision, Risk,
and Management Science Program of the National Science
Foundation. This paper is forthcoming in Theory and Decision.
This paper is part of NBER'S research program in Financial
Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Resea rch.

NBER Working Paper $3731
June 1991

NONRATIONAL ACTORS AND FINANCIAL MARKET BEHAVIOR

ABSTRAcr

The insights of descriptive decision theorists and
psychologists, we believe, have much to contribute to our

understanding of financial market macrophenomena. We propose an
analytic agenda that distinguishes those individual
idiosyncrasies that prove consequential at the macro-level from
those that are neutralized by market processes such as poaching.

We discuss five behavioral traits -

barn-door

expert/reliance effects, status quo

bias,

that

closing,

framing, and herding -

we employ in explaining financial flows. Patterns in flows

to mutual funds, to new equities, across national boundaries, as
well as movements in debt-equity ratios are shown to be
consistent with deviations from rationality.

Richard Zeckhauser
Jayendu Patel
Darryll Hendricks
John F. Kennedy School
of Government
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138

Nonrational Actors and Financial Market Behavior
Are financial markets efficient? Do their participants behave rationally? Does a positive
answer to the second question imply a positive answer to the first? And vice versa? These
remain open questions despite decades of effort by economists and numerous claims that the
issues have been resolved.

Financial markets are extremely competitive (with near-instantaneous price adjustments

and little room for strategic behavior), with virtually no externalities from participants'
actions. Under such conditions, individual rationality can aggregate to collectively efficient
outcomes. A body of work developing this view was honored by the Nobel Committee in
Economics when it awarded its 1990 prize to modem finance's pioneers, Harry Markowitz,

Merton Miller, and William Sharpe. But does this paradigm capture most financial market
behavior?

Clearly, some of the participants in financial markets do not act with perfect rationality;
that is, they make mistakes.' But more astute players stand ready to capitalize on their
mistakes — for example, to buy when panic leads to speculative market crashes, to extract I /8s

and l/4s from individuals who trade in and out in the mistaken belief that they can beat the

market, or to take positions to bring mispriced stocks into line. Given this sort of "poaching"
(which includes arbitrage), the collective outcome may be indistinguishable from the one that

would result if all participants behaved with perfect rationality.
Consequently, one might expect to find few instances of nonrational financial behavior at
aggregate levels. But then how can we account for speculative fads, from the Dutch tulip
mania of the seventeenth century to the rash of junk bonds in the 1980s (see Shiller, l989)?2

Equally puzzling is the crash of October 1987, which reduced the stock market's value by onethird, although no significant bad news had broken. Such events hint that the rationality
paradigm may not be universally applicable, but since each case is unique in important

respects, their true cumulative significance is difficult to interpret.
Academic attempts to identify inefficient aggregate behavior, or to refute the assumption
of a rational representative agent, have focused predominantly on asset prices. Shiller' s (1981,

1For our purposes, a nonrational or irrational agent is simply one who differs from the neoclassical homo
economicus prototype characterized by Von Neumann-Morgenstern utility, optimal expectatIons. Bayesian
updating rules for probability revision, and so on. The qualifier behavioral.' in our paper, is interchangeable with

"nonrational,' and carries no pejorative connotations.

2Bad overall outcomes can result from good individual choices as well as from poor ones. In this spirit, the
economist explains various undesirable social phenomena, from unemployment to traffic congestion. a,s collectively
suboptimal outcomes that result 1mm rational individual choices (Sehelling, 1978).

-21989) work, arguing that the equity prices are excessively volatile relative to dividend streams,
is a hotly debated example.3 In this paper, we focus instead on the evidence from financial
flows, which like asset prices are regular (not idiosyncratic) and therefore provide a usable
database. From a policy standpoint such flows are of vital concern since they represent the
investment patterns of our economy.4

We will argue that patterns in various types of flows — to mutual funds, to new equities,
across national boundaries — are consistent with deviations from rationality. The insights of
descriptive decision theorists and psychologists, we believe, have much to contribute to our
understanding of such financial market macrophenomena. We propose an analytic agenda that
distinguishes those individual idiosyncrasies that prove consequential at the macro-level from
those that are neutralized by market processes such as poaching.

The plan of the paper is as follows. Section I sketches the current state of the efficient
markets paradigm, and contrasts it with behavioral phenomena relevant to the study of
financial market outcomes. Section 2 highlights selected empirical results that show these

behavioral factors at work. Section 3 discusses further applications of the behavioral approach
in finance, and section 4 concludes.

1. Behavioral foundations of financial macrophenomena
We focus on behavior as it is revealed in market outcomes, rather than approach our

subject through surveys or controlled experiments.6 One would expect financial market
outcomes to avoid certain kinds of nonrationality that might appear under experimental
conditions, because investors play for significant stakes and have sustained opportunities for

practice. In experimental markets that permit practice and significant payment, Camerer
(1987) has found that many anomalies vanish, although individuals continue to suffer from

3AIso see the anomalies columns in the Journal ofEconomiLr Perpectiws jV0I. I, 1987, and subsequent issuesI.
and references in Leroy. 1989. section VII.
4The finance academy sheepishly acknowledges the relative lack of work on this topiC. For example. Ross (1989,
p. 94) admits that "there can be nothing more embarrassing to an economist than the ability to explain the price in
a market while being completely silent on the quantity." He suggests that the only way to explain the volume of
financial trade is with a model that, while rational, pennits divergent and changing opinions.

5Patel, Zeckhauser, and Hendricks (1991a) briefly review a portion of the material discussed here.
6We sidestep the philosophical debate on whether models should be judged by the realism of their assumptions or
the accuracy of their predictions — for instance, see Friedman (1953) and the vast subsequent literature. In the
present context, this debate would focus on whether good models must make realistic assumptions about individual
behavior, or need only make accurate predictions about aggregate outcomes.

-3representativeness bias (Kahneman, Slovic and Tversky, 1982; Arrow, l982). Camerer
concludes that "a program of empirical work ... could establish what kinds of nonrationality
seem to persist under the incentives and learning opportunities present in natural markets.

Such data might lead to economic theory that uses evidence of systematic nonrationality to

make better predictions." We accept this challenge and ask: what decision-making biases

remain in operating financial markets, where payoffs are significant, poaching is frequently
possible, information is extensive and material, and most players participate repeatedly?

Section 1.1 briefly reviews the status of the efficient markets paradigm. In section 1.2,
we consider a typology of markets that sheds light on the conditions under which the model of

efficient markets may have to give way to behavioral explanations. In section 1.3, we discuss
four behavioral hypotheses, which are subsequently used to explain a range of selected

financial market flows.

1 .1 The efficient markets paradigm
Financial economists assess the efficiency of a market in terms of its ability to incorporate
relevant information, rather than to minimize transactions costs or to attain social welfare

desiderata such as Pareto efficiency. More exactly, a market is said to be efficient with
respect to an information set if no participant with access to that information can make
systematic excess returns. Note that this definition does not require that prices be a sufficient

statistic for the information. For example, individuals may need to spend resources to avail

themselves of the information8 impounded in prices in order to form optimal portfolios, even if
information acquisition costs can not be justified by the likelihood of discovering mispriced
assets.

An efficient market implies that there should be no arbitrage opportunities; that it, it
should not be possible to make a sure profit with a zero-risk zero-investment strategy. This

seemingly trifling condition led to interesting and empirically successful pricing relations for

7The representativeness heuristic assigns probability on the basis of similarity. ignoring relevant information such
as base rates (prior unconditional probabilities) and sample sizes.

811 individuals can learn jsers' information by observing prices, that information will have a public goods aspect;
too little of it will be privately provided. If securities may be mispriced. on the other hand, there is a competitive
advantage in securing information not possessed by others: too much expenditures on information may be a
consequence (1-lirshlcifer, 1971).
9while simple models of financial market equilibrium generate a universal optimal portfolio (the "market" portfolio
in the context of the Capital Asset Pricing Model, for instance), recent models that sccommodate differences
between individual investors in the breadth of knowledge about assets imply optimal portfolios that must be
individually tailored — see Merton (l987a).

-4derivative securities such as options and collateralized mortgage obligations, for which
arbitrage strategies entail complex dynamic trading. The celebrated Black-Scholes option
pricing formula spawned a large derivative asset-pricing industry, within which the lines
between academia and practice have blurred. No-arbitrage conditions pin down relative prices

(e.g., how the price of a call option on IBM shares should be linked to the share price).
Whether the price level of the share itself is correct is more difficult to establish, since a model

of equilibrium pricing must be invoked. Black (1986) — a pioneer of the efficient markets
model — observes that the empirical tests to date may not reject the market efficiency

hypothesis even if the price levels are off by a factor of 100%.
Of course, as Fama (1990) notes, "The market efficiency hypothesis is an extreme null

hypothesis, a point on a continuum, and so almost surely false. The interesting task is ... to
measure the extent to which behavior of returns departs from its predictions." After nearly
four decades of intensive empirical investigation of investment market prices, the gross
evidence generally supports the hypothesis — see recent surveys in Merton (1987b) and Fama

(1990). The evidence from firm behavior and the market for corporate control is more
controversial: witness the raging debates about whether junk bonds or hostile acquisitions
promote efficiency, and whether associated transaction prices are ex-ante appropriate. We

know that some cities fail to discount for time in choosing capital projects. And there are
myriad stories of firms making uncritical and incorrect use of weighted average cost-of-capital
figures in their capital budgeting.
The power of the market efficiency principle provoked ingenious efforts to explain

anomalies. These efforts yielded insights in agency theory, asymmetric information equilibria,

signaling, and game theory. Clearly, the field gained by maintaining an intuitively wise
organizing principle as a null hypothesis. Compare the similar success of the genetic-fitness
paradigm for evolutionary modeling, which spawned a vast literature on evolutionary

psychology (with ripple effects in philosophy and sociology))0
After the early battles in academia, the efficiency benchmark has become a valuable null
hypothesis for organizing lessons and studies about financial behavior. Models that purport to
violate this principle have to be explicitly articulated and subjected to rigorous testing.
Unfortunately, many studies placed such a large prior probability on the market efficiency
hypothesis that falsifying findings were almost precluded. For example, the academic
consensus about exchange rates is that they are uncorrelated and unpredictable. Nevertheless
sophisticated speculators and technical advisors claim to consistently observe and take
°See Dawkins (1976) on the genetic fithes principle, which shares Overtones with the rational selfishness
principle in neoclassical economics and methodological individualism in sociology. Dupn (1987) has edited a
more recent collection of related essays.

-5advantage of subtle nonlinear patterns — see Goodman (1982), Engel and Hamilton (1990),

and Bilson (1990). Finally, the problem of joint hypothesis testing has led to some tests that

have very low power to reject plausible deviations from market efficiency. A priori faith in
the power of no-arbitrage has probably clouded the common sense recognition that human
errors might persist or even compound rather than cancel each other.
Nonetheless the efficient markets hypothesis provides a natural benchmark, and thus

financial markets are a promising arena in which to investigate deviations from rational

behavior. The research is facilitated by the facts that financial markets are liquid, and

individual motivations are relatively straightforward, in accord with wealth-maximizing
hypotheses (possibly modified by risk aversion). Moreover, the operation of these markets is
thoroughly recorded, with rich price and volume data readily available.

1.2 Typology of markets
The nonrational behaviors of individuals, although well documented, may not be apparent at
the market level because many financial markets offer poaching potential (that is, players can
take advantage of poor decisions made by others). More generally, aggregate social outcomes

reflect both prevailing levels of individual rationality and opportunities for poaching, as table 1
shows schematically. Poachability will play an important role in determining which macro
outcomes we study to draw inferences about levels of individual rationality.
Table

1. Mockts' for Outcomes of Social Interactions:

Poathability and Rationality
Poachability/Arbitrage Potential

________________________
Individual
Rationality
Substantial/Full

High
I. Efficient markets.

Low
II. Deviations due to sluggish

information flow (e.g.,
mispriced open-end mutual
funds).
Bounded/Low

IlL Continual movement

IV. Gross behavioral

(behavioral

to restore efficiency (see

outcomes (e.g., marriages —

anomalies observed)

Table 2).

poor fits frequent; bargains
— beneficial deals not struck;
finance — inadequate

personal savings).

-6When individuals are rational and there are many opportunities for arbitrage, we expect

the efficient markets paradigm to be dominant (cell I in Table I). At the other extreme (cell
IV) behavioral models should provide a better description of aggregate outcomes. For

example, because of long lead times, poor institutional planning, and individual failures of
foresight, we observe cycles of excess- and under-production of teachers. The situation is akin

to the corn-hog cycle familiar to economists, with the crucial difference that in the agricultural
arena, futures markets facilitate an efficient smoothing of suboptimal swings. Many of the
least happy areas of human activity fall into cell IV. The mischosen marriage partner or
poorly fitting job is prototypical. So too are patterns of preferences—such as excessive
attention to one's relative as to opposed to one's absolute position—that are inconsistent with

what we normally assume for rationality. For example, the inadequate levels of personal
savings in the United States may be due to excessive competition in consumption levels, as a
means to signal one's status (Frank, 1985).
Cell IV is also the sad domain where many an advantageous exchange is not made,

perhaps because of greed or desire to do better than the other party, or merely because of the

intractability of bargaining. One of the undersung virtues of the market is that by putting
many participants on each side of bargaining situations, it defines the way the surplus from
striking a deal should be divided, and thereby avoids costly impasses. Thus market outcomes

establish a price for carrots; as buyers we accept it when it is below our reservation price, or
else move on to the rutabaga stand, without wasting our time trying to cajole the carrot seller

into lowering his price.
It is in cells II and III that a merger of behavioral considerations and economic market
analysis can be most fruitful. In situations that are characterized by low poachability but in
which rational choice conditions predominate (cell H), we expect economic paradigms to
succeed, albeit with behavioral residues leading to periodic observable anomalies (see section

2). For example, if most drivers are rational, we would expect them to choose the most

economical route for commuting. This assumption is fruitfully invoked in transport models
even though rational commuter A can not derive any advantage for herself from (poach upon)

misguided B whose "shortcut" adds 10 minutes to his trip. Even if individuals are fully
rational, they may not possess all relevant information, and those with superior information
may not be able to capitalize upon it. Thus, open-end mutual funds can sell at inappropriate

prices, and firms with market power may produce inappropriate products. Rationality, by
itself, provides little guidance as to what outcomes are appropriate, If it did, the participants
would immediately gravitate to such outcomes.

The expected patterns for situations corresponding to cell Ill depend crucially on the
dynamics of the situation and the magnitude of flows that nonrational participants bring to the

-7market)' (See table 2.) If, as we suspect, many financial market participants are less than
perfectly rational, their actions will be well camouflaged in aggregate Statistics by the poaching

activities of better-informed, more rational, and ultimately richer participants.

Cell Ill is of particular interest for financial markets. Processes of natural selection
underlie its operation. If rational poachers are large relative to the market, they will quickly
restore rational aggregate outcomes. Thus, for example, it is widely accepted that one can not
make money speculating on major New York Stock Exchange securities on the basis of

publicly available information. Indeed, this very feature—the appropriateness of prices—
protects small, possibly nonrational investors whose stock purchases may be guided by
astrology, a worthless technical system, or mere whim. (They lose something nevertheless:
the transactions costs of buying and selling.)

Table 2. Detailing Cell III: Sinai!, Low-Rationality Paiidprnts

in Ma,*e1 inth Poaching
Scale of Poaching

Inflows of small, low-rationality participants
Low
High

Large relative to

Efficiency in observations

Strong progress toward

market size

(stock prices on NYSE).

rational outcomes, though
not without dangers for
poachers (Japanese stock

Small relative to

Natural selection over time

market size

(evolution of options market
from 1960s to the l9SOs).

market).
Sustained periods of

inefficiency (oil markets,
gold markets).

If a sustained flow of resources from nonrational investors is large enough, it may push a

market away from a rational equilibrium for long periods of time. Indeed, nonrational
investor psychology may defeat the efforts of rational poachers, who generally work on
borrowed money and high leverage; they can not wait forever for markets to come to

rational/fundamental equilibrium)2 The short-term speculator who knows long-term

tBounded rationality is substantially different from full rationality with regard to information acquisition and
processing costs — see Simon (1957) for discussion of procedural rationality (consistent with bounded rational
behavior) versus substantive rationality.
'2Consider an investor who, in the mid-1980s, conectly realized that that a PIE ratio of 40 for Japanese equities
was unsustainably high. By acting on this belief (i.e., shorting the Japanese equity market) the investor would
have 14)5* money eveIy year from 1985 to 1989. Finally in 1990. it still able and willing to persist in his faith, he

-8equilibrium values wants to have a reasonable number of naive speculators in the market, but
not an excess.

When poachers are small relative to the market, they may be able to profit for sustained
periods of time; eventually their prosperity will change the balance and the push toward

rational aggregate outcomes will accelerate. In the 1960s and early l970s, before option
pricing formulas became widely known and accepted, it was relatively easy for mathematically
oriented traders to make profits on American options exchanges)3

If poachers are small and new nonrational market participants flow in continuously, there
may be sustained periods of inefficiency. In certain markets, moreover, even dispassionate
experts may have little guidance as to appropriate prices. Examples include the market for
gold, which is driven predominantly by speculative expectations rather than by fundamental
forces of demand in use, or the market for oil, whose performance depends on a quirky

oligopoly and idiosyncratic international events (witness the price gyrations during Kuwait's
takeover by Iraq and the subsequent Gulf War). Many commodity futures markets may also

fall into this category.
Not all financial markets offer equal poaching potential. Open-end mutual funds, for
example, cannot be sold short. Portfolio balances (observed as flows) and adjustments are also

not directly poachable. We provide some selective evidence in the next section on such funds
and flows. Moreover, as Thaler and Ziemba (1988) show, poaching does not necessarily

eliminate irrational pricing even in places where we might expect it to do so: the markets for
place and show bets at racetracks are inefficient (in the sense of offering opportunities for

profit), despite the presence of many willing arbitrageurs)4 Similarly, Lee et al. (1991) report
behaviorally driven premiums and discounts for closed-end mutual funds, which are traded on
stock exchanges like common stocks, and are poachable.

would have been rewarded by catching the roughly 40% faIl in the Tokyo Stock Exchange that brought its PIE

ratio down from over 50 to 30 (which is still exceedingly high by U.S. standards).
'3By the 1980s the game had become much harder. Machines available on exchanges printed out 'scientifically
determined' values for options. In addition, dozens of professional bridge players, whose principal skill may be
rapid rational decision under short-term uncertainly, flooded the exchanges and diminished the returns to other
floor traders and poachers.
14ALSO, the favorite-longshot hiss leaves a positive expected value for racetrack betting on odds of 3-10 or below.

strategy of investing in closed-end hinds that trade at deep discounts (20% or greater) relative to net asset
value generates positive excess returns.

-91.3 Behavioral Hypotheses
Financial markets can be viewed as an ecosystem, populated by rational and nonrational

investors. Depending on their relative numbers, and the ability of the first group to capitalize
on the errors of the second, equilibria with varying qualitative features will arise. Generations
of economists have refined a well-specified theory of the way rational participants will behave.
Nonrational participants, however, come in many different species.
Behavioral hypotheses can be introduced into the study of financial markets in a range of

ways. For example, one might pose explicit behavioral hypotheses about individual activities
and then invoke the usual economic method for aggregation and market clearing — as Shefnn
and Statman (1989) do in developing a prospect-theoretic model of capital asset pricing. Or
one might conjecture that outcomes arise as if from a single representative agent endowed with

nonrational chan,cteristics. The latter approach provides a suitable framework for preliminary
investigation to predict patterns substantially different from the rational choice paradigm.
We discuss four behavioral hypotheses, variants of which are found within the
mainstream psychological literature, for explaining some aggregate features of financial
markets:'6

I. Barn door closing. Barn door closing, in the horse protection sense, refers to
undertaking behavior today that would have been profitable yesterday. Investors seek to
reproduce actual or imagined past investment successes by investing today in the same way.

(When the current strategy is to continue an actual past strategy, it is often called "riding the

winners.") In efficient markets, by contrast, prevailing asset prices capture all rational
expectations about future prospects; it is impossible to identify profitable strategies. If this
behavioral trait is significant, investors might be slow to re-enter the stock market after a
plunge (e.g., the 1987 crash'7), and foreign investors might withhold investment flows to the
United States after periods in which the dollar depreciated rapidly.

160fcounie. transactions costs and impediments to arbitrage (essentially nonbehavioral explanations) may he
sufficient to cause deviations from financial market efficiency. For example. ii institutions are prohibited from
trading or offering securities overseas, then cross-border assets may not be tightly related to each other — see
Oultekin ci at. (1989) and references therein.
Our hypotheses are illustrative. Many other behavioral tendencies identified in laboratory situations should be
tested in the cauldron of financial markets, where the stakes are big and most players are long-term participants.
'71n early 1990, NYSE telephone surveys found investors less likely in invest in stocks than they had been three
years earlier, with investors specifically citing the 1987 crash as a key reason (Ar1r1 Volstilityandfnseslor
Confidence, Report to the Board of Directors of the New York Stock Exchange. Inc., 1990).

- 102. Exoerl and Reliance Effects. An expert effect (i.e., overemphasizing the field you
understand best; Heath and Tversky, 1990) could explain the lack of international

diversification even by professionals who specialize in asset classes.
Complementing the expert effect in financial markets is a reliance effect: decision

makers often rely on the advice of individuals with expert knowledge, even though using the
expert is costly and there is no proof that such reliance will produce better outcomes. Thus,
despite meager evidence that experts can outperform the stock market, investors hesitate to

rely on their own judgment in selecting a portfolio. Instead they pay experts handsomely for
managing their funds. The extraordinary success of the mutual fund industry illustrates the
reliance phenomenon at work. Despite a modest overall performance record, consistent with

efficient markets, the mutual fund industry has grown spectacularly since the early 1970s; by
1988, there were more mutual funds (over 2700) than there were stocks on the NYSE.
3, Status Oup Bias. Investors tend to stick with strategies because of a reluctance to
depart from the status quo, a widely observed human tendency (Samuelson and Zeckhauser,
1988). Status quo bias may be promoted by reliance on rules of thumb, which is an outgrowth
of bounded rationality. Reinforced by expert effects, status quo bias may deter individuals
from investing in areas beyond their expertise. Most U.S. investors, for example, are
reluctant to hold significant positions in non-U.S. securities despite prospective gains in
diversification. Status quo bias is also stimulated by concerns about regret, which tend to
make errors of omission (failing to sell a stock that later goes down) much less serious than
errors of commission (selling a stock only to see it perform spectacularly))9 A period of
learning how to function in changing financial markets — a pattern not acknowledged in
conventional finance theory — could also explain status quo bias.2°
4. Illusions. Framing, and Data Packagin2. Since U.S. investors deal mainly in dollar
transactions, they may not pay enough attention to exchange rate fluctuations and their implied

IS
Over the past five years. only 45 or so of the 1100 funds followed by Schahacker investesent Management have
bettered the S&P 500's annualized return.

'9Status quo bias would be rationally reinforced by transactions costs incurred in getting out of a position
(brokerage fees, exit charges, and taxes).
20Most United States investors, for example. may not know how to go about investing in Japan, though that market
is now open. Indeed, the economic Costs of investing directly on the Tokyo exchange are small. Thus if the
Japanese stocks that issue ADRs in the United States, or the U.S. stocks that are traded on the Tokyo Exchange,
turn out to have much higher levels of cross ownership, that might be considered evidence for a learning factor
contributing to status quo bias. However, the causality may run the other way: ADRs may be made available
specifically for those stocks that are desired by foreign investors.

— II —

consequences; this would be a framing error.2' Similarly, investors with international holdings
may not fully understand the consequences of exchange rates. When the franc doubles against

the dollar, the rational investor should double the amount of incremental dollar-flows directed
to franc-denominated assets, but this requires an appreciation of exchange-rate effects on

optimum portfolio weights. Another variant of exchange-rate illusion arises when investors
conclude that certain currencies are weak or strong, beyond what is implied by interest rate

parity or exchange rate futures prices. Finally, the framing of data in the media (datapackaging) will affect the relations between ultimate variables (flows and prices) and their
proximate causes.

2. Observed Behavioral Traits in Financial Markets
This section reports on empirical evidence in favor of the behavioral hypotheses outlined

above. We focus first on incremental flows to open-end mutual funds. (It is fortunate for the
mutual fund industry that, despite the efficient markets paradigm, the typical individual
investor believes winners can be identified on the basis of some combination of marketing
materials, investment philosophies, and evidence on past performance.) We also discuss
investment flows, both to U.S. equities and across national borders.

2.1 Holdings in and flows to mutual funds
If financial markets price assets efficiently, why do many individuals invest through
professionally managed funds even though they must pay fees, and uncontrollably realize
capital gains that are subject to tax? Neither average returns nor reduction of risk justifies this

strategy. For example, 20 judicious individual-stock purchases would give reasonable
diversification. We made a rough calculation of the returns to four buy-and-hold strategies
over the 13-year period 1975—1987, involving funds and individual securities (table 3). One

strategy (a) is to randomly select a no-load growth fund from a sample of 96 such funds.
Three alternative homemade buy-and-hold strategies were considered by taking equally

2Ig Kahneman and Tversky (1986).

PopuIar publications such as Money or Forbes rarely point out how easily one can diversiti. Most financial
publications carty detailed rankings of mutual fund performance, but virtually no comparisons with stock portfolios
chosen at random. Fabled money manager Peter Lynch. in his recent book One Up On Y.1IStreef(l989), has
suggested that individuals should purchase individual stocks on the basis of personal expertise, say about the
companys products. Though perhaps working against diversification, such a strategy might give investors
sufficient confidence to invest for themselves.
See Hendricks, Paid, and Zcckhauser (1990) for the eSact sample and its adequate representativeness.

- 12 -

weighted positions in 20 stocks randomly selected from the 100 largest NYSE stocks and 100
bottom-decile NYSE stocks. Strategy (b) consists of positions in 10 big and 10 small stocks.

Strategy (c) involves only small stocks, while strategy (ci) involves only big stocks.

Table 3. Buy-and-Hold Peffonnance:
Mutual Fundc ve,us Home-made Portfolio
Strategy

Mean Returns

Standard Deviation

of Mean Returns
(a) No-load growth mutual fund (96 selections)

16.1%

5.1%

(b) Portfolios of 10 big stocks & 10 small stocks (10

19.6%

2.6%

(c) Portfotio of 20 small stocks (5 simulations)

23.3%

3.5%

(d) Portfolio of 20 big stocks (5 simulations)

14.3%

1.6%

simulations)

In table 3, both strategies containing small stocks (b and c) produce a higher mean
return than a random mutual fund as well as reduced uncertainty in expected outcome, as the
standard deviations suggest. These results support the view that mutual fund ownership offers
negligible diversification gains over easy homemade portfolios. Also the active "experts
management of mutual funds evidently led to a wider divergence of overall performance than
would have resulted from a passive random allocation of funds among stocks. That individuals
rely so heavily on mutual funds — despite the ease of diversification in a personal portfolio,
the widespread discussion of efficient markets, and (frequently) personal evidence that their
fund has underperforrned the market — indicates, in our belief, the importance of the reliance
phenomenon.
In the rational framework, the annual flows across funds from year to year are puzzling
too. Markowitz (1952, 1959) and Sharpe (1964) address the rational portfolio choice problem
and its implications for market pricing and efficient portfolio decisions. Their models imply
that the optimal mix of asset holdings should be the same for all individuals, namely proportional to the total market values of the securities.24 When combined with the efficient

markets hypothesis (Fama, 1970), this view leads to a passive (i.e., nontrading) portfolio
strategy. If all investors followed this strategy, observed flows should display no patterns and
should be due entirely to liquidity/consumption needs or incremental savings.

24The recently introduced multifactor Arhitrae Pricing Theory (APT) is no more successful than the CAPM in
explainmg mvestor (lows. Moreover, the factors that APT posits to underlie security pricing remain to be
identified, though Chen. Roll, and Ross (1986) have made a tirst cut at this important task.

- 13 -

We hypothesize, in contrast, that flows to open-end mutual funds may reflect status quo

bias, framing, and data-packaging. The strength of status quo bias can be assessed by
examining flow persistence over time and the relationship of flows to fund size. Although
learning costs may justify a modicum of persistence, the opportunity costs of persistent
behavior are often high enough to warrant an investment in self-education. The main cause of
persistence seems more likely to lie in such phenomena as regret avoidance — an attempt to
avoid a mistaken act of commission, such as selling a fund that goes up subsequently.
The framing/data-packaging conjecture is consistent with psychological evidence that
people follow simple rules based on direct evidence available to them. Not surprisingly,
mutual fund performance rankings are compiled on a regular and timely basis, and are widely
followed. Mutual funds that do relatively well tout their performance prominently in their
advertising. Those that don't, seareh for the measure that puts them in the best possible light.
With some caveats, the investment advisory literature advocates investing in top-ranking
performers. The data-packaging effect can be studied by comparing the effects on flows of (a)
widely reported ranks, and (b) cardinal measures of absolute or risk-adjusted
performance,which are preferable from the standpoint of financial theory but may not be easily
understood.
Consider table 4, which is based on Patel, Zeckhauser and Hendricks (1991b, tables 2
and 3).

- 14 Table 4. Explaining Annual Flous to Open-End No-Load Gmt.lJi

Mutual Funds: .96 fum'k during 1976-1987
+ j31Flow111 + $2Size1,t_i + /33ReIurnti {+ /34Ranktt +
Regression: FIow1t =

Base case

Areranksimportant?

f3

/32

/33

/34

2

0.75

0.05

0.20

--

0.76

-0.17

(27.07)

(11.05)

(5.10)

0.70

0.05

-0.18

0.21

0.73

-0.15

(24.63)

(10.93)

(-2.13)

(5.43)

Notes: Size' is the dollar value of the fund. Fiow is the change in the size of the fund (MM$) after correcting
for fluctuating values of the assets in which the fund is invested (but net of dividends declared by the fund in the
period). "Return is the realizable return to an investor who buys the fund at the beginning of the period and sells
it at the end of the period, i.e., total asset return perfonnance of the fund (inclusive of capital gains and dividends)
but net of management fees and expenses. Rank is an ordinal measure constructed from Retum". The
regression is estimated using feasible generalized least squares (GLS), which allows for different error variances
between years. Here i-statistics are in parentheses. R2 is the usual measure of proportion of variance in dependent
is the estimate of the first-order
variable that is explained by the regression after degrees-of-freedom correction.
autocorrelation of the residuals; it is always small and suggests that the regression adequately captures timedependencies.

The results strongly confirm the expected associations. About three-quarters of the cross-

sectional time-series variation in annual flows (96 funds over 1976-87) can be explained by
four main patterns:
1. Status quo bias (persistence): other things equal, a one-dollar flow in the past year implies a

75 cent flow in this period.
2. Status quo bias (size): being one dollar bigger in size at the beginning of the period induces
a 5 cent increased flow.
3. Past performance: a return I % above the cross-sectional mean return in the previous period

implies a $200,000 increased flow in this period. (The median fund in the sample held
approximately $80 million in assets and grew by $5 million per period.)
4. Effects of data packaging: rank measures, which are widely reported, appear to be more
relevant in explaining flow patterns than quantitative performance measures.

Why might investors rely on past performance? Perhaps, following Tversky and
Kahneman (1971), investors expect the properties of large samples, such as convergence of
relative frequency to population parameters, to hold in small samples too: that is, they tend to
generalize too readily from small samples, or incorrectly infer autocorrelated performance

from observed runs in mutual fund returns that actually arise from random walk processes. A
more straightforward justification follows from the results of Hendricks, Patel, and Zeckhauser

- 15 -

(1990), who report significant excess returns of 1-2% per quarter from selecting the open-end
mutual fund that performed best in the previous quarter. (This result, in itself, is inconsistent
with the efficient market hypothesis).2'
Aggregate flows from the household sector to mutual funds also have behavioral

features. If the barn-door-closing hypothesis is germane, individuals will buy more mutual
funds after the stock market goes up, and sell after it plunges. Further, if there is some
behavioral threshold effect, this reaction will manifest itself mainly for large changes.
Consider the fraction, f, of the U.S. household sector's flow of financial purchases (composed
of direct and intermediated net purchases of equities, bonds, and short-maturity or demand

deposits) directed to mutual funds. Quarterly data on f are constructed from the Federal Flow
of Funds for the 1952Q1-l990Ql period and exclude households' indirect claims, such as pensions.

Table 5 reports on a regression of f on four of its own lags, returns on the equity market
(as proxied by the value-weighted NYSE index), and changes in yields from investing in

Treasury bills.

These results, however, do not restore a rational explanation for the flows' dependence on past performance
ranks, since the optimal strategy is to select only the top performers and shift investments away from all other
funds. Also, the observed persistence in flows to funds is now identified with opportunity costs of failing to
switch. Further, since predictable underperfomers do attract substantial funds, there are evidently some overpriced
managers in the financial marketplace, and some less than fully rational mutual-fund buyers are not protected by
overall market efficiency. In sum, although there are rational grounds to justify active management of fund
purchases, the actual aggregate behavior is. at best, rational in limited aspects.

- 16 Table 5.

Exaining the U.S. household Sector's Qua,ferly Purchases

of Mutual Funds (as a Fnicllon of Direct and Inte,rne(Eated Net Purchases of
Equities, Bonds, and Shoz1-Matusiy or Deniaudl)epsitc th,iing 1952-89)
Base regression:

t

4

a0 +

(3- + fl5R.1 +

4
Threshold eftct:

f = a0 +

j= I

3jtj +

j3Rsmatl11 + %Rbig..j

+

+ pJbig1..1 + I1sma1lti +

Estimates of statistically significant coefficients or coefficients of interest:

(l
Base regression

0.49
(6.15)

fl4
0.15
(1.8)

Threshold effect

0.47
(5.83)

0.14
(1.94)

a5

a6

2

0.26
(3.55)
0.06

—

0.44

0.35
(4.09)

0.45

(0.47)

Notes: 'R' is the return on the equity market (as proxied by the value-weighted NYSE index). Rbig'
(RsmaIl') includes only equity returns that are greater (smaller) than 10% in absolute value, and is zero otherwise.
'M' is the change in the quarterly return that is realizable by rolling over I-month Treasury bills. 'Mbig'
('slsma1l') includes only changes in I that are greater (smaller) than 0.25% in absolute value, and is zero
otherwise.
Here I-statistics are in parentheses. R2 is the usual measure of proportion of variance in dependent
variable that is explained by the regression after degrees-of-freedom correction. The second regression, with
decomposed returns, finds that only large returns have significant effects on net household flow purchases of
mutual funds. Tests for autocorrelated errors, not reported, do not indicate any misspecification of the estimated
regression.

In the first row of the table, we observe an economically large and statistically
significant positive coefficient, 35 in the base regression, on equity returns, which is consistent
with barn door closing. (Simultaneity problems are avoided since most mutual funds are open
end, and hence their supply of shares is highly elastic.) When the market has done well, one
wishes that one had invested there, rather than purchase short-term assets (which normally
represent more than 50% of the households' flows) and fixed-interest assets (which represent

about 21%), and vice-versa. After the fact, one makes such investments. The second row of
Table 5 reports on a regression that decomposes quarterly equity returns into large (> 10% I)
and small changes. We observe a threshold effect: only large changes matter, a further
indication of nonrational or bounded rational behavior.26

26Specitically. a I % change in equity returns beyond a threshold change of 10% induces a 6% change in the rate
of investment in mutual funds by households. (The results are not restricted to a particular suhperiod; of the 25
large-change observations. 10 are from the 1950s and 1960s, and 15 are from the 1970s and l980s.)

- 17 -

2.2 Net Flows into Equities and Transnational flows
These behavioral approaches can be extended to explain the flows of net new issues of equities

as a percentage of GNP, We conjecture that the issuance of equities is at least partly driven by
nonrational traits of participants. Again, we posit status quo biases and expert and reliance

effects on the market. (Firm managers rely on investment bankers who try to issue equities
when market conditions are "good," though with efficient markets this is an impossibility.)
Empirical studies of security flows have typically assumed rational behavior on the part
of all market participants. Studies of the supply and demand for long-term bonds (Friedman,
1977 and 1979) have posited structural equations that are linear in expected returns and

homogeneous in wealth. Such a specification implies, however, a separation of the
investment-consumption decision and the portfolio allocation decision. This assumption is
implausible with regard to the supply of financial assets, since casual observation suggests the
presence of boom-and-bust cycles in corporate security issuance.

We examine the evidence on the net flow of funds to equity markets (new issues less
repurchases in constant dollars) by the non financial corporate sector of the United States

during the period 1953-1984. Our particular concern is whether firms that issue equities seek

to identify times when they can realize a relatively high price for new stock, implying that they
reject the efficient markets hypothesis.

Consider the regression of net equity flows on (i) lagged equity flow; and level of and
most recent change in (ii) dividend yield based on the Standard and Poor's 500 portfolio
(inversely related to cost of the issue for pre-issue shareholders), (iii) vector of interest rates

(proxy for cost of bond substitute), (iv) internal cash flows (readily available alternative), and

(v) capital expenditures (proxy for need for funds). The well-fitting regression (numerical
estimates not shown) explains 60% of the time-series variation in net equity flows. The
significant marginal relations are the following: a positive partial correlation with own lag; a
negative partial correlation with own cost; and a negative partial correlation with cost of bond
substitutes. The latter two relations are consistent with attempts by firms to issue equity when
market conditions are favorable.

An efficient-markets explanation for the correlation between market conditions and new
equity flows can be proposed: the flow of prospective positive net-present-value projects
increases in periods when security market conditions are good, which induces an increase in
security issues to raise needed funds to invest in such periods. Assuming that the capital
expenditure in the regression equation is not an adequate proxy for projects' needs, the net

effect is to generate the observed marginal correlations. However the case for the simpler
behavioral explanation — that issuers believe they can identify windows of opportunity (in

violation of the efficient markets hypothesis) — is reinforced by corroborating evidence from

- 18 other markets. Kim and Stulz (1988) document bond issue timing between domestic and

Eurobond markets; Lee, Shleifer, and Thaler (1991) document timing of closed-end fund
issues; and Ritter (1991) documents timing of initial public offerings of equity.

We have explored a supply-side phenomenon in the flow of funds. What can we learn
about demanders? In particular, how do overseas investors choose their levels of investment in

U.S. securities? For example, many commentators have attributed the much-remarked jump

in Japanese purchases circa 1984 to the relaxation of Japanese government rules limiting
foreign purchases by Japanese institutions. In this case a known pdlicy change has led us to
look for its effects within financial markets, a form of availability bias.
Unfortunately, this Japan-oriented theory is undermined by data on other international
investors. Figure 1, for example, contrasts U.S. security purchases from the United Kingdom
and Canada with those of Japan. British and Canadian investors began to boost their U.S.
holdings at the same time as Japanese investors. We observe that theories and explanations are
themselves subject to an availability hypothesis.27 It appears that some more general
phenomenon relating to the U.S. market itself is required for a robust explanation of these
transnational flows.

3. Fields for Exploration
Looking predominantly at flows of funds, a relatively unexplored area, we have
documented nonrational behavior in financial markets. A fleet of additional behavioral
anomalies have been identified in the psychology literature. Do they too appear in financial

markets? A systematic investigation of this question could proceed in threedirections: (1)

assessment of behavior in financial markets, seeking evidence of anomalies documented in
other realms; (2) empirical testing of models of nonrational behavior, and (3) attempts to
explain observed phenomena that seem inconsistent with rational behavior assumptions, and

shed light on nonrational behaviors. The first path has been illustrated in the previous
sections. The second and third are considered below in our discussions of herd behavior and

the survival of financial markets respectively.

3.1 Herd Behavior: Model and evidence from debt-equity ratios
In addition to the four behavioral traits discussed earlier, we posit that flows in financial
markets are influenced by herd behavior — a tendency to incline actions to some group norm.

Such clustering of behavior is well known in clothes fashions or recreational activity, such as
27The availability heuristic assesses probability by recalling similar occurrences from on&s available store of
memories, which leads to biases related to retrievability of instances and imaginahility.

- 19 -

newly popular mountain biking. There would seem, however, to be little justification for
clustering fads in financial markets. Presumably, each decision-maker is choosing for himself,

and there is no explicit cost associated with being away from others. But we shall argue, first
theoretically and then with suggestive empirical evidence, that commonality in actions is

significant.
At least three different effects tend to produce herding behavior:

(a) Free-riding in information acquisition. Some individuals, by luck or skill or effort, will
obtain superior information on which they can act. Less advantaged individuals will mimic
the actions of others who they believe are better informed. Recent models in this vein
include those of Hendricks and Kovenock (1989) and Scharfstein and Stein (1990).

(b) Protection from being close to the group. The agency paradigm emphasizes that agents
(e.g., managers acting on behalf of shareholders) often know more about their own tastes,
abilities, and actions than the principal does. Under such conditions of asymmetric

information, it may be efficient to make payoffs to agents that are based on their reIatie

performances. In such a scenario, agents may find it advantageous to herd, particularly if
they are risk averse.28

(c) Fundamental preference-level concern with group norms. For example, if outcomes are
poor, the costs of self-reproach may be greater if one has "stepped out" on one's own, away

from the group.
These factors may have nonrational underpinnings. We suspect that in many situations
individuals overestimate the information possessed by others, not recognizing the covariance of

all players' ignorance. (A good recent example was provided by investors in Rhode Island
who maintained large accounts in local banks, which faced serious prospects of nonperforming
assets and were backed by an insurance agency of dubious means, simply because nobody else

withdrew their funds. They jointly realized painful outcomes when deposits were frozen at the
beginning of 1991.)
Consider a decision maker who is concerned about how his action affects his self-image,

or the ways others perceive and will reward him. An additional component of utility, well
established in the behavioral literature, captures a concern about matters such as regret.

Regret in the traditional literature derives from choosing an action that is revealed to be

28Beyond risk and return, individuals responsible for university endowments, be they portfolio managers or boards
of trustees, are likely to consider how they perform relative to competitor endowments. Portfolios are likely to be
tilted toward some common allocation and away from the efficiency frontier. Stanfords endowment managers
may thus worry about their holdings relative to Flarvard's. and vice versa (Jack Meyer, President, Harvard
Management Company, personal conversation, 3/12/91). Leading American universities, for example, appear to
underinvest in foreign equities as a group. Many individual managers may recognize this missed opportunity hut
may be hesistant to step out of line.

- 20 inferior given the state of the world that later turns out to prevail. Our hypothesis is that a
more complex measure of regret is needed, because the actor cares about the choices of other

players confronted with roughly the same decision problem. For any given loss, regret is
tempered when others have made a greater mistake ex post, and augmented when one would
have done better by acting more like others: one sees oneself as less blameworthy for a poor
outcome if one has taken roughly the same action that others took in equivalent circumstances.

Attending to such concern will draw together the actions of individuals who are commonly
situated. Thus we should expect to see herding when players have preference functions with

other-regarding regret. Herding would also be expected in situations where falling below an
external norm, say on how hard a professor should work, imposes severe losses in self-regard
or external attitudes.
A prospect theory (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979) like phenomenon may apply as well,
with further implications for herding. Rising above the norm gains less than is lost by an

equal deviation below, and further rises offer diminishing benefit. Where adherence to the
norm is likely to be a binding constraint on many participants, we should expect to see many

players very close to the norm, not seeking to rise above it. Moreover, falling below the
reference point — in this case the group norm — imposes a diminishing marginal cost, and

those who do fall below might do so significantly.
If actions are uncoordinated, particularly if players' situations differ, the group norm
will be fuzzy. In such circumstances the group norm will exert less pull, and individual
behavior will be less responsive to social factors. Other things being equal, herding behavior
should be less common in situations where group norms are ill-defined or nonexistent.

For illustrative evidence on herd behavior in financial markets, consider the annual ratios

of debt (book value) to equity (market value) for the 200 largest U.S. firms (by sales) during
the period 1971-89. Presumably, this choice of the debt-to-equity ratio represents a careful
weighing of the prospects of higher returns from leverage against the desire to be prudent.
On the COMPUSTAT database, 15 of these firms had some missing observations, and three
clearly had outlier debt/equity ratios (in excess of five); this left us with a usable sample of
182 firms. We assigned firms to 10 industries based on a classification by two-digit SIC
codes.

We investigated the herd migration explanation by regressing the firm's debt-equity ratio

on two own lags and one lag of the industry ratio. (The expected industry ratio is proxied by

29The literature on the detenninants of capital structure choice has mushroomed in the last decade, with recent
models drawing on agency theuty. asymmetries in information, corporate control contests, and so on. See Hams
and Raviv (1991) for an excellent survey. We do not control for the competing explanations in our exploratoty
investigation.

- 21

-

its lagged value; its contemporaneous value may exhibit a positive relation simply because of
common shocks that influence the market value of equity across firms in an industry.)

A herd migration tendency for a firm is indicated by a significant positive sign, a tstatistic > 2, on the industry ratio. Figure 2 summarizes the distribution of the t-statistics of

firms grouped by industry in the form of box-plots. The heavy horizontal line at the center of
each box-plot represents the median of the distribution; the box includes the central 50% of the
distribution.30 We observe that the coefficients are positive and several are significant (t-

statistic above 2.0), more than half for food and tobacco, paper, and oil and gas.3! The
median t-statistic is never significantly below 1.0; moreover six out of ten industry medians

are not significantly below 2.0.
The evidence suggests that corporate executives determining debt/equity ratios are
strongly influenced by the choices of their peers within the industry. Three reasons may be

posited: (1) decision makers gain information from what similar firms are doing; (2) they
secure protection from criticism (including self-criticism); (3) participants on the other side of
the market (such as lending institutions or the buyers of new issues) are engaging in herd
behavior, thereby inducing observed clustering among participants on this side.

3.2 Survival of Financial Markets
Future investigations should also proceed in the opposite direction, starting with puzzling
phenomena within financial markets and attempting to identify the types of behaviors that

could produce them. Consider futures markets, in which speculators account for the
overwhelming volume of business. For almost thirty years it has been recognized, as the Wall

Street Journal recently underscored in a recent special supplement on futures markets, that the
typical small speculator loses more than 20% of his stake annually. What induces small
speculators to participate despite such unfavorable odds? An ecological metaphor asks what

will enable such markets to survive, since they are expensive to operate, and their outcomes
are highly unfavorable to many participants, who have the option of placing their moniesback
in stocks and bonds (Zeckhauser and Niederhoffer, 1983). The survival puzzle goesdeeper:

30me vertical lines extending beyond the box are drawn to the outermost values up to the median 1.5 X boxheight. Each outtier beyond (only paper in our saniple) is indicated by a circle.
31The angled sides of the box (notches) enable comparison of medians: informally, the medians are dtfferent if the
angled sides do not overlap.

-22not only must small speculators systematically lose money; their resources and/or their ranks
must continually be replenished.32

We conjecture that financial markets must offer prospective expected losers the abilityto
convince themselves that they could (should) have made the right choices had they tried

harder, or that they will be able to do so in advance in the future. An appropriate metaphor is
the widespread American activity of Monday morning quarterbacking: fans of professional
football believe by Monday (with the unacknowledged benefit of hindsight) that they would
have been better able than their team to identify the strategy that would have won the Sunday

game. To confirm the general pervasiveness of Monday morning quarterbacking, the reader
should ask finance-oriented friends whether they realized that the stock market was overpriced

in October 1987, shortly before the worldwide crash.
Individuals who can delude themselves into thinking they could have made money given
past market behavior. may then act on that delusion by trading securities in contexts where

they will now be losers on average. In retrospect, such individuals can rationalize past losses

by pointing to a couple of missed trades that they "should have" undertaken. Moreover,
participants can construct quasi-scientific underpinnings to trading strategies. If the trader
ignored the Agriculture Department's fall report on soybeans, which ex-post proved to predict
price movements, he will "know better" next year. (In much the same way, social scientists

may offer ingenious justifications for modifications that rescue failed models.) Delusion is
required, for if the individuals were accurate in forecasting their prospects — a loss, on
average — they would withdraw money from the markets, and the markets would die.33

4. Concluding remarks
If individuals' behaviors could be observed, financial markets would offer a fruitful
arena in which to identify behavioral as opposed to fully rational individual choices. The

32A useful parallel for futures markets may he the race track, with its high overhead expenses—the state takes mote
than 15% of total wagers in most U.S. jurisdictions—and few winners. Some participants come for recreation.
expecting to lose. Many losers, however, believe they have insights and systems that give them an edge. What are
the properties of horse races that keep a flow of individuals and their monies coming to the track?
The ohservationthat the survival of expensive markets needs explanation complements the paradox of
Grossman and Stiglitz (1976): ii markets are efficient, there is no incentive to gather any information; but then

bow can markets incorporate aU information to sustain efficiency?
33Zeckhauser and Niederhoffer (1983) present this insight using an ecological metaphor, likening the losing
individual investors to the gra.ss at the bottom of the food chain, which must be replenished from outside the system

if the ecosystem is to survive. They argue further that market behavior must change over time to continue to fool
the Monday morning quamierbacks.

-23-

stakes are big, the players serious, the games repeated — circumstances

that promote rational

outcomes.
Direct verification is impossible though financial markets throw up great amounts of
data; unfortunately, most of it is aggregated, and the rivulets caused by individual investor
actions are lost beneath the waves and tides of market movements. In many instances,

sophisticated investors ("poachers) capitalize on the poor decisions of others and in so doing
restore market efficiency. A central lesson of financial economics is that the confluence of
such individual actions can guide the market back to an efficient path, so that present prices
reflect future prospects.
However, it is difficult to judge whether aggregate data themselves reflect rational
patterns. For example, there is no clear consensus in the professional literature whether
speculative bubbles reflect nonrational excesses, or rather a deviant macrophenomenon
resulting from the actions of a multitude of rational individual investors.34 A consideration of
the prospects of poaching helps identify those areas of financial activity where rational
outcomes will fail or prevail.
We advocate a fresh strategy for investigating the behavioral underpinnings of financial
phenomena: build from known traits of individual behavior to predictions about anomalies that
will appear in aggregate data. We have followed this approach here, first identifying five
behavioral traits — barn-door closing, expert/reliance effects, status quo bias, framing, and
herding — and then outlining the implications for aggregate financial statistics, focusing on

financial flows. Finally, turning to the real world, we found empirical evidence from firms'
debt/equity ratios to investors' purchases of mutual funds to support our hypotheses. We hope
this demonstration will encourage others to use models of individual rionrational behavior to
elucidate financial market phenomena.

34Various observers have tried to explain speculative bubbles without jettisoning the assumption of full rationality
on the part of individuals — see the discussion from the Symposium on Bubbles (1990). Shiller (1989) argues that
the evidence points to a phenomenon of investor psychology rather than a pathological aggregation.
Future research, we believe, may take a third tack. Given the behavioral patterns that are being documented
in financial markets, what sorts of bubble behaviors and speculative excesses might we expect? Will markets be
more or less stable than they would be with full rationality? Some behavioral assumptions would increase stability,
others reduce it. For example, if individuals overreact to recent information (compared with base-rate data), the
result could be excess volatility and quite possibly destabilizing speculation. On the other hand status quo bias in
financial choices would be a force for greater stability. (Rational bubbles in several models disappear if
expectation formation is adaptive, i.e., nonrationa!.)

-24-

References
Arrow, Kenneth: 1982, 'Risk perception in psychology and economics', Economic Inquiry 20,
1-9.
Bilson, John: 1990, '"Technical" currency trading', working paper, The Chicago

Corporation, Chicago, August.
Black, Fischer: 1986, 'Noise', Journal of Finance, 41, 529-43.
Camerer, Cohn: 1987, 'Do biases in probability judgment matter in markets?', American
Economic Review 77, 981-997.

Chen, Nai-fu, Roll, Richard, and Stephen Ross: 1986, 'Economic forces and the stock
market', Journal of Business 59, 383-403.
Dawkins, Richard: 1976, The Selfish Gene. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dupré, J. (editor): 1987, The Latest on the Best: Essays on evolution and optimality.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Engel, Charles, and Hamilton, James: 1990, 'Long swings in the dollar: Are they in the data
and do the markets know it?', American Economic Review 80, 689-713.
Fama, Eugene: 1970, 'Efficient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical work',
Journal of Finance 25, 383-417.
Fama, Eugene: 1990, 'Efficient capital markets, H', working paper, Graduate School of
Business, University of Chicago, December.
Frank, Robert: 1985, Choosing the Right Pond: Human Behavior and the Quest for Status.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Friedman, Milton: 1953, Essays in Posithe Economics, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Friedman, Benjamin: 1977, 'Financial flow variables and the short-run determination of longterm interest rates', Journal of Political Economy 85, 661-689.
Friedman, Benjamin: 1979, 'Substitution and expectation effects on long-term borrowing
behavior and long-term interest rates', Journal of Money Credit and Banking 11, 131-150.
Goodman, S: 1982, 'Two technical analysts are even better than one', Euromoney (August),
85-96.

Grossman, Sanford, and Joseph Stiglitz: 1976, 'Information and competitive price systems',
American Economic Review 66, 246-253.

Gultekin, M., Gultekin, B., and Penati, A.: 1989, 'Capital controls and international capital
market segmentation: The evidence from the Japanese and American stock markets',
Journal of Finance 44, 849-70.

Harris, Milton and Raviv, Arthur: 1991, The theory of capital structure', Journal of Finance
46, 297-356.

-25-

Heath, Chip, and Amos Tversky: 1990 'Preference and belief: Ambiguity and competence in
choice under uncertainty', forthcoming in Journal of Risk and Uncertainty.
Hendricks, K., and Kovenock, D.: 1989, Asymmetric information, information externalities,
and efficiency: The case of oil exploration', Rand Journal of Economics 20, 164-82.
Hendricks, Darryl!, Pate!, Jayendu, and Zeckhauser, Richard: 1990, 'Hot hands in mutual
funds: The persistence of performance, 1974-87', mimeo, John F. Kennedy School of
Government, Harvard University.
Hirshleifer, Jack: 1971, 'The private and social value of information and the reward to
inventive activity', American Economic Re'ew6I, 561-574.

Kahneman, Daniel, and Tversky, Amos: 1979, 'Prospect theory: An analysis of decision
under risk', Econometric.a 47, 263-291.
Kahneman, Daniel, Slovic, Paul and Tversky, Amos: 1982, Judgment under Uncertainty:
Heuristics and Biases. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kahneman, Daniel and Tversky, Amos: 1986, 'Rational choice and the framing of decisions',
Journal of Business, 59, 251-78.
Kim, Yong and Stulz, René: 1988, 'The Eurobond market and corporate financial policy: A
test of the clientele hypothesis', Journal of Financial Economics 22, 189-205.
Lee, Charles, Shleifer, Andrei, and Thaler, Richard: 1991, 'Investor sentiment and the closedend fund puzzle', Journal of Finance 46, 75-110.
Leroy, Stephen: 1989, 'Efficient capital markets and martingales', Journal of Economic
Literature 28, 1583-1621.
Lynch, Peter: 1989, One Up On V/all Street. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Markowitz, Harry: 1952, 'Portfolio selection', Journal of Finance 7, 77-91.
Markowitz, Harry: 1959, Portfolio Selection: Efficient Diiersification of In vestments. New
Haven: Yale University Press.
Merton, Robert C.: l987a, 'A simple model of capital market equilibrium with incomplete
information', Journal of Finance 42, 483-5 10.
Merton, Robert C.: 1987b, 'On the current state of the stock market rationality hypothesis', in
S. Fischer, R. Dornbusch and J. Bossons (eds.), Macroeconomics and Finance: Essays in
Honor of Franco Modigliani, pp. 93-124. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Patel, Jayendu, Zeckhauser, Richard, and Hendricks, Darryll: 1991a, 'The rationality
struggle: Illustrations from financial markets', American Economic Revew81, 232-6.
Pate!, Jayendu, Zeckhauser, Richard, and Hendricks, Darryll: l991b, 'Investment flows and
performance: Evidence from mutual funds, cross-border investments, and new issues', in
Rama Ramachandran and Ryuzo Sato (eds.), International Financial Markets. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, forthcoming.

-26Ritter, Jay: 1991, 'The long-run performance of initial public offerings', Journal of Finance
46, 3-27.
Ross, Stephen: 1989, 'Discussion: Intertemporal asset pricing', in S. Bhattacharya and G. M.
Constantinides (eds.), Theory of Valuation, pp.85-96. Totowa, New Jersey: Rowman and
Littlefield.
Samuelson, William, and Richard Zeckhauser: 1988, 'Status quo bias in decision making',
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 1, 7-59.
Scharfstein, Daniel, and Stein, Jeremy: 1990, 'Herd migration and investment', American
Economic Review 80, 465-79.
Schelling, Thomas.: 1978, Mlcromotives and Macrobehavior. New York: W.W. Norton and

Company.
Shefrin, Hersh and Statman, Meir: 1989, 'Introducing prospect theory preferences into general

equilibrium: Implications for CAPM and portfolio insurance', working paper, Leavey
School of Business, Santa Clara University, July.
Sharpe, William: 1964, 'Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions
of risk', Journal of Finance 19, 425-42.
Shiller, Robert: 1981, 'Do stock prices move too much to be justified by subsequent changes
in dividends?', American Economic Rewew7l, 421-435.
Shiller, Robert: 1989, Market Volatility. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Shiller, Robert: 1990, 'Speculative prices and popular models', Journal of Economic
Perspectives 4, 55-66.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Summers, Lawrence: 1990, 'The noise trader approach to finance',
Journal of Economic Perspectives 4, 19-34.
Simon, Herbert: 1957, Models of Man. New Yoric John Wiley and Sons.
Symposium on Bubbles: 1990, Journal of Economic Perspectis 4, 13-102.
Thaler, Richard and Ziemba, William: 1988, 'Anomalies: Parimutuel betting markets:
Racetracks and lotteries', Journal of Economic Perspectives 2, 161-74.
Tversky, Amos and Kahneman, Daniel: 1971, 'The belief in the "law of small numbers",
Psychological Bulletin 76, 105-10.
White, Eugene: 1990, 'The stock market boom and crash of 1929 revisited', Journal of
Economic Perspectives 4, 67-84.
Zeckhauser, Richard and Niederhoffer, Victor: 1983, 'Futures markets as ecological systems:
Survival? Efficiency? Rational participants', Presented at American Economic Association
meetings, December 28.

