                    NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




                     A FALLACY OF COMPOSITION




                       Ricardo J. Caballero




                      Working Paper No. 3735




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            June 1991




I am grateful to Phillip Cagan, Andrew Caplin, Mohammed Hanunour.
Anil Kashyap and Brendan O'Flaherty for very useful comments. This
paper is part of NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #3735
                                        June 1991

                    A FALLACY OF COMPOSITION

                            ABSTRACT

     The representative agent framework has endowed
macroeconomists with powerful microeconomic tools.
Unfortunately, it has also blurred the distinction between
statements that are valid at the individual level from those that
apply to the aggregate. In this paper I argue that probability
theory puts strong restrictions on the joint behavior of a large
number of units that are less than fully synchronized, and that
many fallacies arise from disregarding these restrictions. For
example, the observation that the aggregate price level is more
rigid to downward changes than to upward changes, has led many
authors to suggest asymmetries at the firm level as responsible
for the alleged macroeconomic fact. However, the basic insight
developed in this paper shows that asymmetric pricing policies at
the firm level do not necessarily imply asymmetries in upward and
downward adjustments of the aggregate price level; and
asymmetries in the aggregate price level need not come from
asymmetries at the firm level. Similarly, asymmetric factor
adjustment costs at the firm level need not imply asymmetric
responses of the aggregate capital stock and the level of
employment to positive and negative shocks.

     Fallacy of composition: A fallacy in which what is true of a
part is, on that account alone, alleged to be also true on the
whole. Samueleon (1955>


                                        Ricardo J. Caballero
                                        Department of Economics
                                        Columbia University
                                        New York, NY 10027
                                               and
                                        NBER
    The representative agent framework is one of the most important tools for macroeconomists.
On the one hand, sophisticated optimization arguments can be directly applied to aggregate
data. On the other, microeconomic arguments are typically "intuitive" and therefore easier
to handle; it is not rare for each new macroeconomic fact raised, to hear several appealing
microeconomic stories accounting for it.
    Of course, researchers have never pretended that all agents are literally the same in every
dimension, but only that idiosyncrasies have no chief impact on the aggregate. This argument
is certainly valid in many cases, however it is nol universally true. In some important cases,
idiosyncrasies not only do not wash away but also undo —at least partially— the basic microe-
conomic feature used to provide the macroeconomic argument. Perhaps the most prominent
and extreme example of this is due to Caplin and Spulber (1987), where menu cost pricing at
the firm level is fully consistent with complete aggregate price flexibility.
    In this paper I attempt to isolate the mechanism underlying the source of several fallacies
of composilion. I argue, through a simple example,1 that the essence of these fallacies relies
on the fact that direct microeconomic arguments do not considerthe strong restrictions that
probability theory puts on the joint behavior of a large number of units that are less than
fully synchronized; put differently, the endogenous evolution of the cross section distribution of
individual units is often restricted, by the microeconomic problem itself, in such a way as to
rule out many direct microeconomic explanations of aggregate phenomena.
    Examples of such fallacies are plenty, both in the literature and in everyday discussions. For
example, the observation that the aggregate price level is more rigid to downward changes than
to upward changes, has led many authors to suggest asymmetries at the firm level as responsible
for the alleged macroeconomic fact.2 However, the basic insight developed in this paper shows
that asymmetric pricing policies at the firm level do not necessarily imply asymmetries in upward
and downward adjustments of the aggregate price level; and asymmetries in the aggregate price
level need not come from asymmetries at the firm level. Similarly, asymmetric factor adjustment
   aCaballero and Engel (1989a,b) and (1990) develop the basic methodology to analyze economies in which
transaction costs yield a prevalent role for idiosyncrasies. In this context, the dynamic behavior of aggregate
variables depends in nontrivial ways on the evolution of the cross section distribution.
   2Foran accounting of aggregate price level asymmetries, see Cagan (1979); for an attempt to use direct
microeconomic arguments to account for such asymmetry, see Kuran (1983). For evidence on the absence of price
asymmetry at the firm level, see Carlton (1986).
  costs at the firm level need not imply asymmetric responses of the aggregate capital stock and
 the level of employment to positive and negative shocks.
      To illustrate these issues I use as an example the recent finding by Davis and llaltiwangcr
 (1989) and Blanchard and Diamond (1989) (the DH/BD fact, hereafter), that the cyclic behavior
 of gross job reallocation in the U.S. is driven by job destruction as opposed to job creation.
 Our natural tendency is to propose microeconomic asymmetries (e.g. bankruptcy, asymmetric
 adjustment costs, etc.) as an explanation for this. I show below, however, that direct arguments
 based on microeconomic job creation and destruction asymmetries do not necessarily imply
 aggregate flow asymmetries. Of course the arguments used extend to the aggregate price level
 asymmetry and capital stock examples mentioned above as well as many others.
     The remainder of the paper is organized in four sections and several appendices. The basic
 microeconomic model together with the corresponding limit probability arguments are presented
 in Section 1. The long run behavior of aggregate flows is illustrated in Section 2, and dynamics
 are discussed in Section 3. Conclusions are given in Section 4, and the appendices present some
 of the derivations and additional empirical properties of the models discussed in the paper.


 1 Microeconomic Behavior
The model presented here is highly stylized and is devoid of the microeconomic theory justifying
the behavior of individual units. Furthermore, the policy rules adopted by these units are
assumed to be invariant to the different experiments performed. In most circumstances the
latter is unrealistic and suboptimal but it permits us to isolate the aggregation issues more
cleanly; no important qualitative conclusion depends on this.3
     Let each individual firm i have a desired (frictionless) level of employment at time i, equal
to L. Due to some friction (e.g. hiring and firing costs), actual employment at the firm level
(L0) is not always equal to the frictionaless optimal level; the difference between L, and                       is
denoted by          Suppose now that firms have a threshold nile —as is typically the case in the
presence of non-convexities in the adjustment technology (see Bertola and Caballero 1990)— so
they fire workers (destroy jobs) when-Dt crosses an upper threshold T and hire (create jobs)
    3See Bertola aad Caballero (1990) for a justification of the miccoeconomic rules adopted here, and a discussion
of the dependence of these rules on deep parameeru.



                                                         2
 when D crosses a lower threshold B. The quit rate is zero, so actual employment is constant
 at all other instances.
     The frictionless level of employment is driven by a siniple random walk:

                                               11       with probability 1/2
                              L = L_1 +            —1   with probability 1/2.
    The asymmetry takes the following form: during a job creation period the firm hires (II)
lessworkers than it dismisses (F) during job destruction periods (as would happen, for example,
when larger fixed costs are involved in job destruction than in job creation). To fix ideas, let
me start with a very simple case in which T = 1, B = —1, H = 1 and F = 2.
    In this case D,1 can take only three values: -1, 0 and 1. When D, is at -1, there is a
probability equal to 1/2 that desired employment will increase further, leading the firm to hire
another worker. In this case D,g1 remains at the same position as D1 since the hiring offsets
the shock (D1+1 = —1 — 1 + 1 = —1). It is equally likely that desired employment falls, so
that the firm does not act and D,i+i = 0. When D,1 = 0, there is neither hiring nor firing at
  + 1, and D+5 can be either at -1 or 1 with equal probability. Finally, when D1 = 1 there
is a probability 1/2 that in the next period the firm will destroy two jobs, and D,1+j               = 0 with
probability 1.
    Let p(—1), pg(O) and pg(l) be the probability of D being at -1, 0 and 1, respectively (of
course they sum up to one at every time t). For now I concentrate on the characteristics of the

limiting probability vector, denoted by p.4
    By definition, each stationary probability p(h) must be equal to the sum of the probabilities
p(k) weighted by the probabilities of moving from each state k to state h. Thus,

                                          p(O)=

                                        p(—l) = p(0) +

                                               p(1) =

and of course the adding up condition must be satisfied:

                                         p(—l)+ p(O) + p(1) = I.
   LI is immediate to show that this Markov chain is ergodic; i.e. starting from any vector or probabilities Pu,
eventually the time subindex becomes irrelevant.


                                                        3
    Stationary probabilities can be interpreted as the relative time spent in each state. A direct
consequence of this is that job creation will occur with frequency (l/2)p(— 1) and job destruction
with frequency (l/2)p(l). But

                                         p(1)=p(-1),
thus the counterpart of the asymmetry in the size of hiring and firing, is that job creation
occurs twice as often as job destruction. This very simple observation is at the root of the
results obtained for the aggregate level in the next section, where probability statements for
individual firms become cross section statements.



2     Aggregate Long Run Counterbalance Effect
Suppose now that there is a large number of firms following identical hiring and firing rules with
their respective L paths described by standard random walks.
    Also assume, for the time being, that firms have the same initial       and that their shocks
are perfectly correlated. In this case, all the statements for the individual firm are valid for
the aggregate. Most importantly, job creation occurs twice as often as job destruction but
when they occur, job destruction is twice as large as job creation; the strong microeconomic
asymmetry remains intact at the aggregate-level validating the microeconomic story of aggregate
phenomena. This, however, is an extreme version of the representative agent model, where at
all times everything is exactly the same for every firm.
    In this paper, I keep the assumption of identical policies but allow idiosyncrasies to be
reflected in a less than perfect correlation of shocks across firms. It is convenient to start
with the case in which this correlation is zero. In this case, the Glivenko-Cantelli theorem
(see Billingsley 1986) allows us to interpret statements about probabilities at the firm level, as
statements about the fraction of firms in different positions of the state space of D,. In other
words, starting from any cross section distribution on the space of the D's, eventually the
cross section becomes stationary; i.e. individual firms change their positions continuously but
the cross section distribution remains unchanged.
    The importance of this is that eventually job destruction and job creation become constant.
In this state there is a fraction (i/2)p(—l) (per period) of firms hiring one worker each, and a
fraction (l/2)p(l) of firms firing two workers each. But as p(l) = (l/2)p(—l), job creation and

                                                4
 destruction are not only constant but equal. Thus, from the point of view of the flow variables,
 the microeconomic asymmetry washes away completely.
     In what follows, I reduce the impact of the state space discreetness by enlarging it, so
 the D,'s take values between -7 and 7 (i.e. there are 15 positions in the state space), and
 the asymmetry is made even more pronounced: job creation is still equal to one, whereas job
destruction is now equal to six.5 So, on the one hand, firms walt until the shortage of workers
 (respect to the frictionless optimal) exceeds (in absolute value) -7 to hire one worker, returning
to the position 0,, = —7; on the other, they wait until the excess of labor go beyond 7 to fire
six workers, returning to the position D,, = —2. Of course, the basic fact that flow asymmetries
wash away is invariant to any of these modifications. Figure 1 illustrates the invariant cross
section distribution. The asymmetry in the size of hiring and firing adjustments is perfectly
offset by the distribution of firms in state space; p(—7)/p(V) is equal to 6/1 (the inverse of the
ratio of the adjustment sizes), hence (l/2)p(—T) = 6(l/2)p(7) and job creation is equal to job
destruction.
    In the absence of aggregate fluctuations, the size of the flows in and out of employment has
nothing to do with the microeconomic asymmetry.


3 Aggregate Dynamic Counterbalance Effect
When aggregate fluctuations are added, the cross section does not reach an invaziant state;
therefore, job creation and destruction are no longer constant. However, the statements of the
previous section are true for the average flows: average job destruction is equal to average job

creation, regardless of the degree of microeconomic asymmetry.
    On average, since the ergodic probability distribution of each firm is still as in Figure 1, there
is six times as many firms near the job creation barrier than near the job destruction barrier.
More importantly, I provide examples below that show that provided that idiosyncrasies are
present,6 the average cross section distribution effect impedes the microeconomic asymmetry
from generating similar asymmetry in the aggregate dynamic flows.
   'Note that the fact that the center of the state space is kept at nero is just a matter of notational convenience;
a change in the center is easily obtained by adding a constant to the definition of the Do's.
   'Otherwise the impact of initial conditions in general does not wash away



                                                          5
3.1 Aggregate cycles
Before introducing aggregate uncertainty, it is convenient to study the implications of adding
aggregate deterministic cycles to the model discussed above. This framework puts the strictest
tests to the proposition above, as it strengthens the chances for the microeconomic asymmetry
to permeate the aggregate (this is discussed in more detail below).
    To consider aggregate cycles, I modify the model above by changing the microeconomic
probabilities of positive and negative shocks. The L are now driven by switching random
walks. In "good" times:

                                                1 1     with probability A,
                                                    —1 with probability 1 — A,

and in bad times
                                     with probability Ai,
                                                I   1
                           L=L.1+ —1 with probability 1 —
with 1/2 < A, < 1 and 0 < Ab < 1/2. In addition to transition probabilities at the individual
level, if shocks are independent (given A,) across firms,7 A, represents the fraction of firms that
receive a good shock in good times, whereas A5 is the fraction of firms that receive a good shock
during bad times; good and bad times are then determined by whether more or less than half
of the firms are affected by good shocks, respectively. This classification of states of the overall
economic environment is arbitrary but hardly controversial.
   A full cycle is defined as a given string of consecutive good periods followed by a given string
of bad periods. Since in this case the transition matrix —i.e. the matrix that determines the
fraction of firms that, being at each position h, move to positions k in the state space— is not
constant, there is no longer a stationary cross section distribution; however it is fairly easy to
show that there is a 8aLionary cycle of cross section distributions. The simplest case to illustrate
this is one in which good and bad periods alternate; in this example, the transition matrices
during good and bad times are denoted by P, and F5, respectively (their explicit form is not
important). The products P,P5 and P5P, are denoted by P,5 and Psg respectively. Assume
now that the first period (time 1) is good; then the Markov chain can be decomposed into two

  'Or at Ieaat eatialy iome mixing condiLion.
     chains, one for even periods and one for odd periods:

                                                = Pt_2P96          if I is even,
     and
                                              Pt Pt2Po4            if I is odd.

     Again, it is trivial to show that both chains are ergodic, thus eventually the time subindices can
     be removed, obtaining two stable but alternating cross sections, p, and P6g.
         This can be generalized fairly easily as long as there is some repeated pattern in the way
     good and bad times arrive.8 In what follows I continue assuming that there are 15 positions
    in the state space, that firms hire one worker when creating jobs and dismiss six worker when
    destructing jobs. In addition 1 assume that it, and at, the number of consecutive good and
    bad periods, respectively, are equal to five. Certainly n9 and a6 need not be equal;9 I make
    this assumption to isolate the main issue addressed in this paper from aggregate sources of
    asymmetry. For the same reason, I assume A6 =1 —A,. Later, I relax all these assumptions.
         Recalling that aggregate job creation and destruction flows are equal to )ttpt(—7) and 6(1 —
    A)p(7), respectively, and that A, =            1 —   A6,   any strong asymmetry in these flows dynamics
    must be reflected in a strong asymmetry in the evolution of the fraction of firms near each of
    the boundaries. Furthermore, given that firing, when occurs, is six times larger than hiring,
    when occurs, it seems sensible to look at whether there is any evidence of larger volatility in
    6 pt(l) than in p(—7) to settle the issue. Figures 2a and 2b show that such asymmetry is not
    present in the example provided here. Figure 2a illustrates the path of p(—7) for a complete
    cycle, and Figure 2b does the same for 6 p(7). Even though they are not mirror images of
    each other, 6 pt(7) is far from having peek to trough differences six times larger than that of
    pt(—7). These figures correspond to the case A, = 0.65, but the fundamental result is invariant
    to reasonable values of this parameter.
        The story of the previous figures is not complete since the covariance between pg(—7) and
V
    A may differ from that of p(7) and (1 — A,); the figures below show that this is not the case,
    however. Figure 3a shows the path of aggregate job creation (solid line) and job destruction
      'The lack of such pattern is what determines that when the allocation of good and bad times is stochastic.
    there is no form of stable cross section distribution. See the next subsection.
      9Let alone equal to hve'


                                                               7
 (dashed lines) for four complete cycles. It is apparent that, even though at the microeconomic
 level job destruction (when it occurs) is six times larger than job creation (when it occurs),
 no comparable implication carries over to the aggregate flow8
                                                             (the peak to trough differences in
both series is about the same). Figure 3b reproduces Figure 3a but with a9 =          a6   = 30; the
basic conclusion is the same.
      It is interesting to note, however, that microeconomic asymmetries do have implications for
aggregate dynamics (job destruction and creation cycles are not identical) but these are far from
trivial and direct. Comparing figures 3a and 3b it is poesible to see that fluctuations in aggregate
job destruction flows may be smaller or larger than fluctuations on aggregate job creation flows,
depending upon the path of aggregate shocks. In this particular case, the asymmetry in the
direction of the microeconomic asymmetry increases as both 'states of the world" become more
persistent; the reason for this is that a long string of positive shocks bunch more units together
than a long string of bad shocks, since the return point is farther from the trigger point in the
job destruction case than in the job creation case. Thus, when a long string of positive shocks
is followed by some negative shocks the units are highly bunched creating an 'over-response"
of job destruction. More important than the explanation per-se (for the purpose of this paper),
is the fact that the role of microeconomic asymmetries on aggregate fluctuations is far more
intricate than suggested by direct microeconomic stories.
    To summarize, when aggregate fluctuations are present, the steady state result of the previ-
ous section is preserved in a much more subtle way; the offsetting of the microeconomic asym-
metry through the cross section distribution occurs at the mirror image states of the world (very
good booms with very bad recessions, mild booms with mild recessions, etc.). The consequence
of this is that fluctuations in aggregate job creation and destruction are not fundamentally
different in their size, in spite of the strong microecononiic asymmetry.


3.2     Aggregate uncertainty
The next step is to show that the fallacy of composition is not an artifact of the particular form
of the deterministic cycle considered above. The same conclusions carry over to the case in
which changes in the state of the world (the A9) are stochastic and there is no stationary cross
     section distribution.'0
          Assume that each period is good with probability 1/2 and bad with the same probability.
     It is easy to show" that in this case:

                                                                                                                        (1)
     where 6 is the fraction of the total uncertainty faced by an individual firm that is due to aggregate
     uncertainty.'2 A value of A, of 0.65 —as used here— corresponds to a 6 equal to 30 percent; i.e.
     30 percent of the total uncertainty faced by individual firms comes from aggregate uncertainty.
     In good times 65% percent of the firms receive a positive shock and 35% a negative one. During
     bad times these proportions are reversed.'3 Again, none of the main conclusions of the paper
    depends on the precise value of A, assumed.
         Table 1 provides Monte Carlo evidence on the claim that microeconomic asymmetries do not
    necessarily imply aggregate asymmetries. Row 1 (Asymm.) corresponds to the results obtained
    from 1,000 replications of samples of 200 hundred periods (the parameters are those described
    above).'4 Row 2 (Symm.) corresponds to the same experiment (with the same seeds for the
    random generator) but for a case in which there is no microeconomic asymmetry (firms hire
    and fire one worker). The first two columns are the mean job creation (o) and destruction
    (±j,6d), respectively (standard deviations in parenthesis). There is no evidence of significant
    difference between average job creation and job destruction in any of the two cases, nor is there
    significant difference across the two cases. Both statements are a reflection of the long run
    aggregate counlerbalance mechanism. Columns 3 and 4 report the average standard deviations
    of aggregate job creation               and job destruction (a,6d) (standard deviations in parenthesis);
    they show that microeconomic asymmetries neither add to the overall aggregate flow fluctuations
    nor, more importantly, generate significant differences in the fluctuations of job creation and job
      '°Not eve.i in the weaker sense described in the previous subsection.
      "See the appendix.
      "Note that A = . (16)
p     "A nice property of the model here described is that in the continuous time limit the stochastic process
    describing the path of each L converges to the sum of two independent Brownian motion, one for the common
    shock across firms and another for the idiosyncratic component.
      '4Strictly speaking, using substantially longer sample sizes take the simulations closer to their theoretical limits;
    I have chosen relatively small samples in order to analyze the results in a context more comparable to that of the
    actual empirical evidence. Conversely, smaller samples increase the dispersion of the results.


                                                               9
                               Table 1: Aggregate Flows Statistics

                             2job       Xjobd           0.io6     0,obd     P',o&,",o4
                Asymm.      0.0435      0.0437          0.0299    0.0300      -0.42
                            (0.0106)   (0.0106)     (0.0069)     (0.0068)
                Symm.       0.0362      0.0364          0.0250    0.0250      -0.50
                            (0.0103) (0.0100)       (0.0068)     (0.0064)
                                 = 0.3, q = 0.5,        = 0.65 = 1 — Ab.


destruction (the ratio of job destruction standard deviation to job creation standard deviation
is above 2.5 at the firm level). This is a reflection of the dynamic counterbalance mechanism.
    The last column of Table 1 shows the correlation between the standard deviation measures.
In both cases —the asymmetric and symmetric— the correlation is highly negative; this means
that within any given sample there can be important differences between the standard devia-
tions of aggregate job creation and job destruction. This is illustrated in Figures 4a and 4b.
They present the histograms of the log difference of job creation and job destruction standard
deviations, for the asymmetric and symmetric case, respectively, resulting from the Monte Carlo
experiment described above: Both figures show that samples in which the standard deviation of
one of the flows is fifty percent larger than that of the other one are not too rare. What is more
important, however, is that there is no significant differences across the figures nor a systematic
bias in the direction of larger standard deviations of job destruction in Figure 4a.
   The results in Table 1 and Figures 4a and 4b also show that large aggregate asymmetries
may arise in certain samples. These are not,        however, a consequence of the microeconomic
asymmetry (compare Figures 4a and 4b), but of the particular draw of good and bad aggregate
realizations. This suggests that if we are to provide meaningful explanations for phenomena
where heterogeneity is non trivial much more effort is needed in modeling the evolution of cross
section distributions and their driving forces.
   The following is a simple example of this type of explanations, where the samples generated
are characterized by aggregate job destruction series that are typically, more volatile than job
creation series. For this let me modify the previous example so expansions are typically longer


                                                   10
lived than contractions; I capture this by letting q, the probability of a good aggregate real-
ization, be larger than 0.5. In particular,     I choose 0.75, by which a positive aggregate shock is
three times morelikely than a negative one. In order to maintain the average equality between
job creation and job destruction,'5 I compensate the increase in q with a deterioration of bad
times (i.e.   A < 1 — ),).16 It is easy to check that, in order for the aggregate flows to be equal
on average, it must be the case that:

                                     =
And this implies that equation (1) is replaced by:


                                            = (+
and

                                        Ab(1_6.
It is also interesting to notice that in this case the contribution of idiosyncratic shocks to the
uncertainty faced by firms changes with the state of the world; in bad times more units move
together. This can be conveniently summarized by the ratio of conditional (on whether the
state is good or bed, respectively) variances (minus one), I:

                                             = A9(1 — A17)   —1
                                                Ab(1—Ab)

This index is equal to zero when A9 = 1 — A and positive when 0.5 < ) < 1 — A6, as is the
case here. In this model, therefore, negative aggregate shocks are accompanied by a decrease
in the relative importance of reallocation shocks. With a slight abuse of terminology, I call this
change in relative importance of both shocks, a change in the "intensity" of reallocation shocks

(see DII).
   Table 2, under these new assumptions, is the equivalent to Table 1. Columns 3 and 4
show that, on average, job destruction is more volatile than job creation, regardless of the
microeconoinic asymmetry. Also notice that the volatility of job destruction varies substantially
across samples (see the standard deviations in parenthesis). Figures 5a and 5b below reveal this

 '5l.e. to avoid adding a drift to employment that would clutter the comparisons with the previous section
 'Note that many models will provide asymmetric aggregate flows under these assumptions.


                                                     11
                               Table 2: Aggregate Flows Statistics


              j              1jobc      Xjobd                   jobd
                  Asymm.    0.0508     0.0506         0.0492   0.0710     -0.47

                           (0.0198)   (0.0227)    (0.0141)     (0.0306)
                  Symm.     0.0423     0.0420         0.0416   0.0588     -0.53

                           (0.0195) (0.0214) (0.0149) (0.0286)
                             5 = 0.3, q = (J.(t, A9 = U.1,A6 = U.U1.



more clearly; it is not rare to find the log-difference of the standard deviations of job creation
and job destruction to be lower than -1.
    The mechanism through which this happens is, again, firmly rooted in simple probability
laws. Typically firms here receive positive shocks; these tend to bunch them near the hiring
barrier (even in the symmetric case), although not completely since in good times idiosyncratic
shocks are important (.\ << 1). When bad times come, firms find themselves relatively bunched
and have no time to spread out since bad times are accompanied by smaller idiosyncrasies
((1 — Ao)    1); the result is abrupt aggregate job destruction as the cluttered firms hit their
firing barriers. Conversely, when good times come after bad times, idiosyncrasies reappear, thus
firms typically do not reach their hiring barrier simultaneously.
   This mechanism is better isolated in the context of the model with deterministic aggregate
cycles; for this I let ng = 45 and nb = 15 (thus, (n9/nb) = (q/(1 — q))). Figure 6a depicts four
complete cycles for aggregate flows (it should be compared with figures 3a and 3b), illustrating
the asymmetry in job creation and job destruction dynamics, and figure 6b illustrates the path
of total employment.


4 Conclusion
The complexities underlying many of the issues I have discussed in this paper can be significant,
however, the basic message is not: direct application of microeconomic explanations to aggre-
gate data can be seriously misleading, since they typically do not take into account the natural
probability forces that tend to undo such explanations.

                                                 12
     The principle is far more general than the simple examples used in this paper. For example, it
 would certainly apply to circumstances in which firms adjust their factors of production and/or
 prices at different speeds in the upward and downward directions (e.g. as would happen in an
 asymmetric convex cost of adjustment model). In this example (assuming no drift) firms would
 typically spend more time in the slow region, thus the cross section would tend to have a larger
 fraction of firms in this region; as a consequence, the aggregate would exhibit substantially less
 asymmetry in its instantaneous response to positive and negative shocks than individual firms
 would.
    This paper should not be interpreted as an argument for the irrelevance of microeconomic
stories as explanations oç aggregate phenomena.17 Underlying any cross section story there
 has to be a microeconomic story. Furthermore, even though long episodes of relatively stable
stochastic environments disperse firms on the state space in such a way that certain aspects
of microeconomic arguments become second order most of the time, they are not necessarily
so at all times; very large events reshape the cross section and reduce the relevance of ergodic
arguments, allowing microeconomic stories to permeate the aggregate more freely.
    The point emphasized, however, is that we need to be substantially more careful when using
direct microeconomic arguments to account for aggregate phenomena'8.




  'TActually, modem with microeconomic rigidities (both upward and downward) can generate strong macroe-
conomic asymmetries —as Tsiddon (1987) shows in the context of pricing and Bertola and Caballero (1990) in
a more general context— however these are the result of the cross section evolution, not of the microeconomic
asymmetry.
  "See Sainueteon (1956).


                                                     13
A Asymmetric Aggregate Shocks
Let
                                       I1     with probability A,
                            iXL =
                                        —1    with probability 1 —   A.
if the aggregate has a good realization (v9), and

                                   —   J1     with probability A6
                                        —1 with probability 1 —      A6.

if the realization of the aggregate is bad (—vi).
      The aggregate shock is "good" with probability q and "bad" with probability 1 — q. The
no-drift condition then implies:
                                             =
and therefore the standard deviation of the aggregate shock,               is equal to:

                                              = Vs

Denoting the relative contribution of aggregate uncertainty to the uncertainty faced by individ-
ual firms by 6 cA/L., and using the fact that:

                                            E[Llv,] =
and

                                    EELZI — Vt] =

yields the expressions used in the paper:

                                        =
                                              (i   +oI)
and
                                        =
                                             (i-


                                                   14
 B Index of Reallocation Intensity
 The expected change in L' given a positive aggregate shock is equal to (2A9 — 1), and the
 conditional variance is:

                                      ALjg = A,(1 — A9).
 Similar steps show that the expected change in L7 given a negative aggregate shock is equal to
 (2A6 — 1), and the conditional variance is equal to:


                                      a4L.lb = A6(1 —

The index I follows trivially from the expressions for the conditional variances.


C      Identification and VAR's
Not only microeconomic features may be erased by the natural forces shaping the cross section
distributions, but also econometric identification may become more complex. For example, in
the job destruction / job creation literature a natural identifying assumption for aggregate ver-
sus reallocation "intensity" shocks is whether job creation and destruction move in the same
(reallocation shock) or the opposite (aggregate shock) direction. The tables below show, how-
ever, that the issue may be more complex once the dynamic behavior of the cross section and
the microeconomic strategy are taken into account.
    Table 3 reports the fraction of the total number of changes in job creation and job destruction
that corresponds to changes of equal sign in the two flow variables (i.e. the type of changes that
are typically imputed to reallocation intensity). These fraction are obtained from Monte Carlo
simulations with 1,000 replications of samples of 200 observations each. Row 1 corresponds to
the case in which hiring and firing are asymmetric at the firm level, as described above, and row
2 corresponds to the case in which hiring and firing at the firm level are symmetric. j represents
the average fraction of positively correlated changes (measured every i periods), and Xjm is
the maximum fraction of positively correlated changes observed in the 1,000 replications. The
first two columns correspond to the asymmetric aggregate ca8e, i.e. when q = 0.75, A9 = 0.65
and Aô = 0.15. The following columns correspond to the symmetric aggregate case, i.e. when
q = 0.50, A9 = 0.65 = 1 — A5.


                                                15
                         Table 3: Aggregate versus Reallocation Shocks



                           Asymm.      0.11
                                               Xjm,
                                                0.33
                                                          '
                                                         0.05     0.25

                                      (0.08)             (0.05)
                           Symm.       0.00     0.00     0.00     0.00

                                      (0.00)             (0.00)



   The table shows that when the microeconomic rule is asymmetric the measured average im-
portance of reallocation shocks is 0.11 with a maximum importance of 0.33. The first surprising
result is seen when the microeconomic rule is symmetric; in this case, if no time aggregation
problem is present, the measured relative importance of intensity reallocation shocks is identi-
cally equal to zero (remember that the presence of reallocation intensity shocks depends on the
aggregate asymmetry). Conversely, when the aggregate is symmetric (i.e. there are no intensity
reallocation shocks), the measured average importance of these shocks is 0.05 with a maximum
of 0.25. The chief conclusion from this table is that identification of these shocks may be more
difficult than expected; microeconomics and aggregation are mixed in complex ways. Table 4
shows results similar to those in Table 3 but for the model with deterministic cycles; 2 is the
fraction of positively correlated changes, with n9 = i and vs = i/3, except for the symmetric
aggregate row, where n = 1. Two results are worth stressing; first, the measured importance
of intensity reallocation shocks is increasing on the persistence of the state of nature, and sec-
ond, in the deterministic framework symmetry at either the micro or the macro level yield zero
relative importance for intensity reallocation shocks.




                                                16
                              Table 4: Aggregate versus Reallocation Shocks

                                                Z9        X27   Z54    XlO$

                                   Asymm.      0.42 0.45 0.60 0.73
                                   Symm.       0.00    0.00     0.00   0.00
                                   Sym aggr.   0.00   0.00      0.00   0.00
                                                A, = 0.65.


    References
     (1] Bertola, C. and lt.J. Caballero, "Kinked Adjustment Costs and Aggregate Dynamics", in
           NBER Macroeconomic Annual 1990 ads. O.J.Blanchard and S.Fischer, (forthcoming) 1990.

     2J Biffingsley, P., Pmbabüity and Measure, 1986, 2'" Ed. John Wiley, New York.

     (3] Blanchazd, O.J. and P.Diainond, "The Beveridge Curve," Bmokings Paper on Economic
           Activity 1989:1, 1989, pp.1—60.

     (4) Caballero, lU. and E.M.R.A. Engel, "The S-a Economy: Aggregation, Speed of Conver-
           gence and Monetary Policy Effectiveness," Columbia Working Paper, 1989a.

     [5] Caballero, lU. and E.M.R.A. Engel, "Heterogeneity and Output Fluctuations in a Dynamic
           Menu Cost Economy," Columbia Working Paper, 1989b.

     (6]   Caballero, R.J. and E.M.R.A. Engel, "Aggregation, Coordination and Convergence,"
           Columbia Working Paper, 1990.

     [7] Cagan, Ph., Persistent Inflation: Historical and Policy Essays, New York: Columbia, 1979.

     (8] Caplin, A. and D. Spulber, "Menu Costs and the Neutrality of Money", Quarterly Journal
           of Economics 10 2-4, 1987, pp.703-726.
v
     [9] Carlton, D.W., "The Rigidity of Prices," American Economic Review 76-4, 1986, pp.637-
           658.

    [10) Davis, S.J. and J.Haltiwanger, "Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction, and Employ-
           ment lteaflócation," Working paper, 1989.

                                                     17
[11] Kuran, T., "Asymmetric Price Rigidity and Inflationary Bias," American Economic Review
    73-3, 1983, pp.373-382.

[121 Samuelson, P. A., Economics: An Iniroductory Analysis, McGraw-Hill Inc., 1955.

(13] Tsiddon, D., 'On The Stubbornness of Sticky Prices," Hebrew University Working Paper
    #174, 1988.




                                            18
                    figure 1
             Stationery Cross SeGtion
                    H—I F—6




C',
E
'I-
'4-
0
C
0
C-)
 0
 L.
'I-




        —3       —1 0          1   234567
      position in state space
GMISS   S.n , o. ISO igo
                                             FiQure 2u
                                            p(—7) path
               (0                              )—1—),—O65

               d


         (I)
         E
         9-
         4-
         0
         C
         0
         0
         0
        4-



               0
               C
               0           2   3   4   5        6        7   8   9   10   11
                                             time

G¼ S. OS Itbl 1000                          Figure 2b
                                           6pt(7) path
                                              ),—1—,—O.65




         U)
         E
        .4-
        9.-
         0
         C
         0
         0
         0
        4-




                    1      2   3   4   5        6        7   8   9   10
                                            firre
 ceuss   S.... . OS LItIO 1550
                                                FtQure 3o
                                 A.gr.gts Job Creation and Destruction




                                                time
05I00    is. * — ItI5OS 1150
                                               Figure b
                                 Aggreçate Job Creation and Destruction
                                               ne—nb—30




         -cJ
          00
         -o
          C..-
          00
          U
         _0 U:'
         •00
           0
GAUSS   Th. Apr 12 20.S9IO 19A0
                                        Figure 40

                                       GeyrIl. q—O.b




              rJ


              0
         0>
         aD
         CT
         a)
         '-(0
        1o
        N




              0
                         —1.2 —0.8 —0.4 —0.0           0.4   0.8   1.2
                                      Midpoint

        Ih. p. II 21L22 I
                                        Figure 4b

                                             q—o.5




              0
         >
         C)
         C


         a)
        1(
        L.
        N




                         —1.2 —0.8 —0.4 —0.0 0.4             0.8   1.2
                                      Mid point
C.USS   fl,. Ap. 12 2I04O3 1990
                                                      FiQure 50
                                                 In(cj)—ln(1)
                                                  Osym. q—O.75




                                  —2        —1           0            1       2
                                                 Midpoint

WUU l9. A..• 12 2I,0S23 till
                                                      Figure 5b

                                                  lyrn. q—O.75




                            —3         —2        —1               0       1       2
                                           flgure 6a
                                  Job Crotion ord De.tn.ction
                                         n1—12 no4




                        10   20        30           40          50   60   70
                                             time
GmJ$S   r. m U 2O37I eeeO
                                          Figure 6b
                                         Employment
                                         n1—12 b4
              i)
              0

              0

              I
        -j00
              N
         00
         E
         Q)

              d
              0
              d

              d                          I
              I0        10   20        30           40          50   60   70
