                    NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




           A MODEL OF OPTIMAL FINES FOR REPEAT OFFENDERS




                       A. Mitchell Polinsky
                        Daniel L. Rubinfeld




                      Working Paper No. 3739




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge. MA 02138
                             June 1991




This paper is part of NBER's research program in Law and Economics.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NEER Working Paper #3739
                                        June 1991




          A MODEL OF OPTIMAL FINES FOR REPEAT OFFENDERS




                            ABSTRACT


     This paper analyzes optimal tines in a model in which
individuals can commit up to two offenses. The fine for the
second offense is allowed to differ from the fine for the first
offense. There are four natural cases in the model, defined by
assumptions about the gains to individuals from committing the

offense. In the case fully analyzed it may be optimal to punish
repeat offenders more severely than first-time offenders. In
another case, it may be optimal to impose less severe penalties
on repeat offenders. And in the Iwo remaining cases, the optimal
penalty does not change.



A. Mitchell Polinsky                   Daniel L. Rubinfeld
School of Law                          School of Law and
Stanford University                    Department of Economics
Stanford, CA 94305                     University of California
     and                               Berkeley, CA 94720
NBER
I. Introduction

     It is a common practice to punish repeat offenders more severely for the

same offense than first-time offenders. One influential study of sentencing,

by von Hirsch (1976, p. 84), describes this policy as follows:

           "in the American criminal justice system, and in most others

     with which we are familiar, an offender's record of previous

     convictions considerably influences the severity with which he is

     punished. The first offender can expect more lenient treatment than

     the repeater."

In a similar vein, guidelines promulgated by the United States Sentencing

Commission (1989, p. 4.1) state that "A defendant's record of past criminal

conduct is directly relevant to fthe purposes of sentencing]." These

guidelines also provide for higher sentences for repeat offenders.

     In light of this practice, it is perhaps surprising that there is

relatively little discussion in the literature on deterrence concerning the

optimal policy for punishing repeat offenders4l] This paper adds to that

discussion by developing a simple model in which individuals can commit up to

two offenses and are subject to a fine when they are caught. The fine for the

second offense is allowed to differ from the fine for the first offense.

Individuals take into account that the decision to commit the first offense

may affect the size of the fine imposed on them if they later commit a second

offense.

     It will be seen that there are four natural cases within the model,

defined by assumptions about the gains to individuals from committing the

harmful act. In the case fully analyzed it may be optimal to punish repeat

offenders more severely than first-time offenders. In another case,


                                     -I-
illustrated by a numerical example, it may be optimal to impose less severe

penalties on repeat offenders. And in the two remaining cases, the optimal

policy is to keep the penalty the same. The rest of the introduction focuses

on the intuition behind the first case.

     At first glance, it might appear that the analysis of optimal penalties

for repeated offenses would not differ from the analysis for a single offense.

If the penalty is set optimally with respect to the first offense, and the

harm caused by the second offense is the same, there is no apparent reason to

change the penalty for the second offense. This argument suggests that, if

multiple offenses are possible, a uniform sanction would be optimal (with the

levol of the sanction determined by the conventional one-offense analysis).

     The potential superiority of a policy of increasing penalties for repeat

offenders can be explained in the following way. Imagine some characteristic

of an individual - -   other   than the socially-acceptable gain he would get from

engaging in the harm-creating activity -     - that   affects his propensity to

engage in the activity.[2J Call this the individual's "offense

propensity." For example, an individual's offense propensity might be

associated with his obtaining an illicit gain from committing the offense (say

he receives pleasure from causing harm to others). The higher is his illicit

gain, the more likely he is to engage in the harm-creating activity and the

higher is his offense propensity.

     To optimaLly deter individuals --      that   is, to deter them if and only if

their socially-acceptable gain is less than the harm caused -       - it is necessary
to make the punishment an increasing function of the individual's offense

propensity. Otherwise, individuals with relatively high offense propensities

(for example, high illicit gains) might be underdeterred --        they might engage

                                         -2-
in the activity even when their socially-acceptable gains ate less than the

han. And individuals with relatively low offense propensities (low illicit

gains) might be overdeterred -      they   might not engage in the activity even

when their socially-acceptable gains exceed the harm.

        But suppose that the enforcement authority cannot observe individuals'

offense propensities. This is a reasonable assumption, for example, if

variations in offense propensities are due to variations in illicit gains.

Obviously, the enforcement authority then cannot make the penalty depend on art

individual's offense propensity.

        Imoosin   hifher nenalties gfl repeat offenders fl n indirect         21
imoosing hifher penalties 211 individuals EStli hither    offense ørooensities. To
see   why, observe that individuals with relatively high offense propensities

will be more likely to engage in the harmful activity the first time,

everything else equal. Thus, it can be inferred that individuals who are

caught having engaged in the harmful activity a second sJa        are,   on average,

those with relatively high offense propensities. For reasons discussed above,

to properly deter such individuals, a higher penalty is required.f31

        This result can be reconciled with the intuitive argument discussed

initially that led to the conclusion that a uniform penalty policy is best.

The essence of that argument was that if the penalty is set optimally with

respect to the first offense, and the harm caused by the second offense is the

same,    there is no reason to change   the penalty for the second offense. It is

now clear that the imolicit assuirotion in that argument     is   that the

consideration of offense propensity is irrelevant (for example, illicit gains

are zero for everyone). Then a uniform penalty policy based on han           alone is
optimal.     Rut if offense propensities are relevant, increasing penalties night


                                           -3-
be better.

     Section II analyzes the model in the case in which an increasing fine

policy may be optimal. Section III briefly discusses the three remaining

cases and provides a numerical example in which optimal fines decrease.

Section lv   contains   some concluding comments.



II. Ontimal Fines in a Two-Offense Model

     To make the distinction between the first and the second offense

meaningful, it is assumed that the offenses are committed sequentially.

Reference will be made to a first period" -        - during     which at most one offense

can be committed - -    and   to a "second period" -   - also   during which at most one

offense can be committed. Because time per Se is not essential to the

analysis, it is assumed that the discount rate is zero.

     All individuals are risk neutral. An individual's gain from engaging in

the harmful activity is the sum of two components: a socially-acceptable gain,

which is included in social welfare; and an illicit gain, which is not

included. [4] It is assumed for simplicity that there are two possible

levels of the acceptable gain and two possible levels of the illicit gain.

     In the case analyzed in this section, an individual's acceptable gain in

each period is stochastic -     - but   revealed to him at the beginning of the

period --   while   his illicit gain is fixed (and invariant from period to

period). For example, a driver may obtain a socially-acceptable gain from

driving fast that depends on circumstances -       - whether    rushing to a hospital or

a golf game -. whereas he may obtain an "illicit thrill" from recklessly

endangering others that does not depend on the circumstances. Section III

discusses three other cases in which different assumptions are made about


                                           .4.
whether the acceptable and the illicit gains are stochastic or fixed.

      In general, the enforcement authority chooses both the probability of

detection and the fine for first and second offenders. Because the principal

concerts of this article is with the structure of fines1 it is assumed that the

probability of detection is fixed and, without loss of generality, equal to

one. (5J

      Social, welfare is defined to be the sum over both periods of the
aggregate level of acceptable gains less the aggregate harm. (Because the

probability of detection is fixed, enforcement costs will be ignored.)

Obviously, the first-best oitcome is that only individuals with acceptable

gains greater than the harm engage in the activity. If this outcome is

achieved, potential injurers will be said to be optimally deterred.

     The following notation will be used:

            h    — harm   if   an individual engages in the activity

       a1, a2 —   levels   of acceptable gain, with 0     a1 < h < a2

       b1, b2 —   levels   of illicit gain, with 0      b1 <

            a —   probability      in each period that an individual's acceptable

                  gain is a1 (0 < a < I)

            fi
                 — fraction     of individuals with illicit gain b1 (0 < ft   < I)
            f —    fine   imposed on an individual who    engages   in the activity

      Clearly, a11-b1 < a1+b2 and a2+b1 < a2+b2.       Whether a1+b2 is less than or

greater than a2+b1 requires a further assumption.(61 If

                                      a1+b2 < a2+b1,                                   (1)

then the enforcement authority could achieve the first-best outcome by

choosing a uniform fine between a1+b2 and a2+b1; such a fine would deter

individuals with a low acceptable gain even if their illicit gain is high, but


                                             -5-
would not deter individuals with a high acceptable gain even if their illicit

gain is low. Therefore, to make the study of optimal fines interesting, it is

assumed that

                                               < at+b2.                                 (2)

        Given (2), there are three relevant ranges of the fine, referred to as

 low," "moderate," and "high" fines              and denoted f, f,, and 4, respectively.
The   three   ranges are defined as follows:(7J

                       a11-b1 <   f   < a2-I-b1 <   4, < a1+b2 < 4 <   a2+b2.           (3)

It can be shown that 1, is inferior to both of the other fines. Relative to

f,, it   overdeters    soiee individuals with high acceptable gains; and relative to

4'    it underdeters    some individuals with low acceptable gains.

         Thus, there are four possible fine policies that could be chosen by the

enforcement authority, depending on whether a low fine or a high fine is

imposed for the first offense, and on whether a low fine or a high fine is

imposed for the second offense:

                            "low-low"

                            Thigh-high"             (4,4),                              (4)
                            "low-high"
                            "high-low"

       Before considering the         behavior      of individuals in response to the
enforcement authority's policy choice, it will be useful to define "types" of
individuals in terms of the revealed value of their acceptable gain in the
first period and their illicit gain. An individual with an acceptable gain of
a1 in the first period and an illicit gain of b1 will be referred to as an
"(a1,b1) type"; other types will be defined similarly. The gain and



                                                 -6-
fraction of each type are (assuming the acceptable gains and the illicit gains

are uncorrelated):

                                    Fraction




                                                                                   (5)

                                      (l-a)fl

                          a2's-b2   (l-a)(l-fi)

Total population will be normalized to equal one.

     There are potentially sixteen cases to analyze -      - the   behavior of each of

the four types of individuals defined by (5) under each of the four possible

fine policies defined by (4). Because it would be tedious to examine all of

these cases explicitly, only one case will be analyzed here.

     Consider the behavior of an (a11b2) type under the low-high (('h) fine

policy. By definition, an individual of this type has a high illicit gain b2

in both periods and a low acceptable gain a1 in the first period. In the

second period, with probability a he again will have a low acceptable gain,

but with probability (1-a) he will have a high acceptable gain. The

individual must decide whether to engage in the harmful activity in the first

period and in the second period.

     Suppose the individual, engages in the harmful activity in the first

period. He then will face a high fine A     if he engages in the activity in the
second period. If his acceptable gain in the second period is a1, he will not

engage in the second period because a1+b2 <     f,   (see (3)). However, if his

acceptable gain in the second period is a2, he will engage in the second

period because a2+b2 > f. Therefore, if he engages in the first period, his

expected gain net of his expected fine payment is


                                      -7.
                                   + (l-a)((a2+b2).fAj.                          (6)

The first term (in brackets) is his net gain in the first period and the

second teni is his expected net gain in the second period.

     Suppose, alternatively, that the individual does not engage in the

harmful activity in the first period. He then will face a low fine f1 if he

engages in the activity in the second period. Regardless of his acceptable

gain in the second period, he will engage in the second period because a2-i-b2 >

     > f.     Therefore, if he does not engage in the first period, his

expected gain net of his expected fine payment is

                       a((a1+b2)-f1) +   (l-a)((a2+b2)-f,J.                      (7)

     It is straightforward to show from the second-to-last inequality in (3)

that (7) exceeds (6). In other words, an (a1,b2) type subject to the (f,,%)

fine policy will not engage in the harmful activity in the first period but

will engage in the second period. Consequently, social welfare associated

with an individual of this type under this fine policy is

                           e(a1-h) +     (1-a)(a2-h).                            (B)

     The behavior of each type of individual under each possible fine policy

can be derived in a similar fashion. The social welfare consequences are

summarized in Table 1. Thus, for example, in the row corresponding to the

(a1,b2) type of individual and the column corresponding to the (,'h)      fine
policy, the entry is the one derived in (8) above. All of the other entries

are self-explanatory except in two cases. Under the (h.:)      fine   policy, the

behavior   of both the (a1,b2) and (a1,b1) types depends on the parameters of the
model (see the appendix for details). In these cases, there are two possible
outcomes and therefore two possible levels of social welfare; both levels are

shown in Table I.


                                          -8-
                                                 TABLE I
              THE SOCIAL WELFARE IMPLICATIONS OF ALTERNATIVE FINE POLICIES,

                                       BY TYPE OF INDIVIDUAL




    Individual.                                          Fine Policy

Type      Fraction          f,,f1               f,.f,,            f%              1h'tI
                                         f



a11b1        afi        (l-a)(a2-h)                 0          (l-a)(a2-h)          0



                                                                              (Il-a) (a1-h)
                                                                              -I-(l-a)(a2-h)
                        (l-fa)(a1-h)                             a(a1-h)
a11b2      a(l-fl)     +(1-a) (a2-h)         (1-a) (a2-h)     +(l-a) (a2-h)
                                                                               (1-a) (a2-h)


                                                                                   0
a2,b1      (l.-a)ft     (2-a)(a2-h)                 0             (a2-h)
                                                                               (2-a)(a2-h)


                           a(a1-h)                                              a(a1-h)
a21b2    (l-a)(I-fl) +(2-a)(a2-h)            (2-afla2-h)       (2-a)(a2-h)    +(2-a)(a2-h)



                      Under the (k',)        fine
                                             policy, the behavior of the
                      (a1,b2)   types and
                                        the (a21b1) types depends on the
                      paraiseter values. In each case there are two possible
                      behavioral outcomes and resulting levels qf welfare.
                      Both levels are provided in the table. See the appendix
                      for details.




                                                 -9-
        Anregate social welfare under each fine policy can be calculated from

 the information in Table 1 by multiplying the fraction of each type of

 individual by the level of social welfare associated with that typo. For

 example, under the                  fine    policy aggregate social welfare is:

                     afl(l-a)   (a2'h) + e(l-ft) [a(a1-h)s-(1-c) (a2-h)]
                         +   (l-a)fl(a2-h)   +   (1-c)(l-fl)(2-a)(a2-h)                                (9)
                         —
                              a2(1-fl)(a1-h) + (l-a)[2-$(l-a)J(a2-h).
        Next consider whether a policy of increasing fines, decreasing fines, or

uniform fines is optimal. It can be shown that                       a decreasing       fine policy

           never is preferred in the case studied in this section. The proof of

this result, which is complicated by the fact that individual behavior is

indeterminate for the (a1,b2) and (a2,b1) types under the decreasing fine

policy, is provided in the appendix.

        Under the low uniform fine policy (f,,f,) aggregate social welfare is

                                 2o(l-fl)(a1-h) +     2(l-a)(a2-h),                                   (10)
and    under the high uniform fine policy (1a.1h) it is

                                           2(l-a)(l-fl)(a2-h).                                        (11)

        A comparison of the levels of aggregate social welfare under the three

relevant policies -- see (9), (10), and (11) --                      leads directly to the
conclusion that:              increasing fj Dolicy ff144 i superior SQ k2.tls

uniform fj policies, 11tJ4 and                                 fl an 2111X it
              a1 (l-fl)a(2-a)+aØ(1-a)2                         a1(1-fi)a2+a2fi(l-a2)
          -
                                             Ch <                                         .           (12)
                (1- $)0(2 -a) +$ (1-a) 2                          (I-fl)   2+p (1 a2)
The   first inequality follows from the circumstances underwhich (9)                          is   greater
than   (10), and the second inequality follows from the circumstances under

which (9) is greater than (11). If h is less than the left-hand ratio in

                                                  -   10   -
(12), the low uniform fine policy (f,,f,) is superior to the others, while if

h is greater than the right-hand ratio in (12), the high uniform fine policy

       is preferred. 181

     To understand intuitively why each of the fine policies might dominate,

consider how each policy does relative to the first-best outcome. In the

first-best outcome, individuals with low acceptable gains are deterred from

engaging in the harmful activity in both periods, and individuals with high

acceptable gains are induced to engage in the harmful activity in both

periods. The individuals' illicit gains are irrelevant.

     First consider how the low uniform fine policy (f,,f,) does relative to

the first-best outcome. Because the fine does not vary with the number of

offenses, an individual's decision whether to engage in the harmful activity

does not depend on the probability distribution of his acceptable gain in

subsequent periods. Thus, it is straightforward to see from (3) that, with a

fine corresponding to f,, this policy never causes overdeterrence but does

lead to underdeterrence when an individual's acceptable gain is a1 and his

illicit gain is 4. This underdeterrence occurs among all (a1,b2) types in

the first period, certain (a1,b2) types in the second period (those whose

second-period acceptable gains remain at a1), and certain (a2,4) types in the

second period (those whose second-period acceptable gains become a1).

     Similarly, it can be seen from (3) that the high uniform fine policy

       never causes underdeterrence but does lead to overdeterrence when an

individual's acceptable gain is a2 and his illicit gain is b1. This

overdeterrence occurs among all (a2,b1) types in the first period, certain

(a2,b1) types in the secend period (those whose second-period acceptable gains

remain at a2). and certain (aj,b1) types in the second period (those whose


                                     -   11   -
 second-period acceptable gains become a2).

      The increasing fine policy (,'A)       eliminates   some of the underdeterrence

 that occurs under the low uniform fine policy as well as some of the

 overdeterrence that occurs under the high uniform fine policy. However, the

 increasing fine policy still leaves some underdeterrence -- among (a1,h2)

 types whose second-period acceptable gains remain at a1 -      - and   some
overdeterrence - - among
                         (a2,b1) types whose second-period acceptable gains
remain at a2.

     This discussion shows why each of the three fine policies can be the

preferred one. If the principal concern is with eliminating overdeterrence,

the low uniform fine policy is the most desirable policy; and if the main

concern is with eliminating underdeterrence, the high uniform fine policy is

the most desirable one. In some circumstances, however, partially reducing

both overdeterrence and underdeterrence by using the increasing fine policy

provides a better compromise.

     The argument for increasing fines discussed in the introduction can be

illustrated in the two-offense model. The essence of that argument was that

individuals with high offense propensities were, everything else equal, more

likely to engage in the harmful activity. Under the low uniform fine policy,

the fraction of offenders in the first period with high illicit gains is

(l-fl)/(l-op), which exceeds the fraction of individuals in the general

population with high illicit gains, (1-fl). And under the high uniform fine

policy, all offenders in the first period have high illicit gains. Thus, if a

uniform fine policy is used, individuals who commit offenses in the first

period are more likely than average to have high illicit gains.

    Under the increasing fine policy, however, the fraction of offenders in


                                    -   12   -
the first period with high illicit gains is (1-fl), which is smaller than the

fraction under either uniform policy. Thus, the increasing fine policy can be

viewed as a response to the disproportionate number of high illicit gainers

who otherwise would engage in the activity under a uniform fine policy.

     The potential advantage of an increasing fine policy can be illustrated

by the following numerical example. Suppose the population is divided equally

between individuals with low and high acceptable gains, and low and high

illicit gains: a —   fi — 1/2.   Also1 suppose that the levels of the acceptable

and the illicit gains are a1 — $5,000. a2 —          $10,000,   b1 —   $15,000. and b2 —
$25,000.   Then the three fine ranges, corresponding to (3), are:

             $20,000 < f1 C $25,000 < f',, C $30,000 < f < $35,000.                        (13)

The condition for the increasing fine policy to be superior to the others,

corresponding to (12), becomes:

                                 $6,250 C h C $8,750.                                      (14)

Suppose, for example, that h —      $7,500.    Then, using (9), (10), and (11). it is

straightforward to compute that aggregate social welfare under the increasing

fine policy is $1,875, whereas aggregate social welfare under each of the

uniform fine policies is $1,250. Thus, in this example, the optimal policy

would be to impose a fine of $20,000 to $25,000 for the first offense and a

fine of $30,000 to $35,000 for the second offense.



Iii. The Choice of Assumntions within the Model

     A key assumption in the model in section II was that individuals'

socially-acceptable gains are stochastic, while their illicit gains are fixed.

There are three natural alternatives to this assumption: that both types of

gain are stochastic; that both are fixed; or that acceptable gains are fixed


                                         -    13 -
 and illicit gains are stochastic. This section briefly considers the optimal

 fine policy in these cases.

      If both types of gain are stochastic, then second offenders would not

differ systematically from first offenders, and there would be no reason to

punish them differently. If both types of gain are fixed, then although

second offenders would differ from first offenders -      - they   would on average

have higher illicit gains and higher acceptable gains -      - the   differences do

not imply that higher fines for repeat offenders are desirable. Essentially,

this is because the marginal costs and benefits of raising the fine for second

offenders above that for first offenders have not changed.

     Suppose, however, that acceptable gains are fixed and illicit gains are

stochastic. For example, a driver may attach an approximately constant value

to the time saved from driving fast --   the     acceptable gain -- whereas his

illicit thrill may depend on who is with him in the car to be impressed, his

mood, etc.t9] Then for reasons that are essentially the reverse of those

discussed in the previous section, it can be demonstrated that a decreasing

fine policy may be optimal (and that an increasing fine policy never is

desirable).

     To see why decreasing fines might be beneficial, consider starting with a

high uniform fine poLicy. Then, in both periods, only individuals with high

acceptable gains and high illicit gains will engage in the harmful activity;

individuals with high acceptable gains and low illicit gains will be

overdeterred. Now suppose instead that a high fine is imposed on first

offenders and a low fine on second offenders, and assume that in the first

period only individuals with high acceptable gains and high illicit gains

engage in the harmful activity.lo) This decreasing fine policy has, by


                                    -   14   -
 assumption, the same effect as the high uniform fine policy in the first

 period. But it improves welfare in the second period: since all
                                                                      potential
 second offenders are individuals with high acceptable gains1 by
                                                                     lowering the
 fine for second offenders some individuals who would have been overdeterred

because their illicit gain in the second period is low can be      encouraged to
engage in the activity.

     The numerical example at the end of section II can be used to illustrate

the potential superiority of a decreasing fine policy. Let the       parameter
values be the same as before (with Ii —   $7,500),   but now assume that the

acceptable gains are fixed and the illicit gains are stochastic. Under a

decreasing fine policy, the behavior of certain types of individuals depends

on the particular levels of the high fine f,, and the low fine f1. (This

complication was ignored in the example in section II because, under the

assumption there, the decreasing fine policy was dominated by one of the other

policies.) Thus, for concreteness, suppose f — $34,000 and f1 — $24,000.           It

can then be calculated that social welfare under a decreasing fine policy is

$1,562. whereas social welfare under each of the uniform fine policies is

$1,250. and social welfare under an increasing fine policy is $625.



IV. Concluding Remarks

     This section contains comments about the exclusion of socially-acceptable

gains as a basis for offense propensities; generalizations of the model;

alternative bases for offense propensities; and another deterrence rationale

for punishing repeat offenders differently.

     (a) Ih exclusion      socially-accemtable nins         basis f2 offense
oroDonsities: In section I it was noted that an individual's socially-


                                    -   15   -
acceptable gain could not serve as the basis for his offense propensity (as

that term is used in this article). At first glance this may seem peculiar

because socially-acceptable gains vary among individuals, affect their

decisions whether to engage in harm-creating activities, and may be difficult

for an enforcement authority to observe. However, if individuals differ only

in terms of their socially-acceptable gains, optimal deterrence can be

achieved by a penalty that is based solely on the harm caused and, therefore,

that   does not change with the number of offenses. For if individuals are made
to take into account the han caused, they will engage in the harmful activity
if and only if their socially-acceptable gains exceeds the harm. This claim
is not valid if   individuals differ in other ways that affect their propensity

to   engage in the harmful activity.
       (b)   Generalizations g     model:       There are two natural ways to

generalize the model. First, both the socially-acceptable gains and the

illicit gains could be made continuous rather than discrete. When this

generalization was attempted, the model became analytically intractable.

However, we believe that if the model were generalizable along these lines,

results similar to those discussed in sections Ii and III would occur. A

second generalization of the model would be to allow the number of possible

offenses to be greater than two. Our conjecture is that in a model with more

than two offenses the optimal fine would strictly increase with the number of

offenses in the case studied in section II (provided an increasing fine policy

is preferred), and strictly decrease in the reciprocal case.

       (c) Alternative bases f offense Dropensities: In this article,

variations in offense propensities were attributed to variations in illicit

gains. There are at least two other plausible sources of variations in


                                       -   16   -
offense propensities. One is the pure disutility of time spent in jail. The

lower this disutility, the higher the offense propensity. Another source of

variation might be due to risk aversion. The less risk averse an individual,

the more likely he is to engage in a harm-creating activity, and therefore the

higher is his offense propensity. in each case additional complexity arises

because of the need to include another factor in the determination of social

welfare --    either   the disutility of time in jail or risk-bearing costs. It is

not clear without further analysis whether the insights derived from the

illicit-gain model would apply when variations in offense propensities are due

to these sources(llj

     (d) Another deterrence rationale f2r             ounishinc   reyept offenders

differently: It was assumed throughout the article that the probability of

detecting a repeat offender is the same as for a first-time offender. More

generally, however, this probability might be expected to change. For

example, because repeat offenders are more experienced in committing offenses,

they may be less likely to be detected. Then, to achieve optimal deterrence,

it would be necessary to make the level of punishment rise with the number of

offenses to make up for the declining probability of punishment. Conversely,

repeat offenders may be more likely to be detected and punished -             - perhaps
because the enforcement authority already has some information about

thea(12J --    in   which case the optimal penalty would fall with the number

of offenses.




                                         -   17   -
ADoendix

      The appendix demonstrates that the decreasing fine policy (4.f,) is

strictly inferior to the other policies when the socially-acceptable gains are

stochastic and the illicit gains are fixed. This will be done by showing that

either the low uniform fine policy (f,,f,) or the high uniform fine policy

         leads to a higher level of aggregate social welfare.

      Under the decreasing fine policy there are two possible outcomes for both

the   (a1.b2) and the (a21b1) types. An (a1,b2) type of individual either will
engage in the harmful activity in both periods (if (l+a)(a1+b2)   < fg+afj,).   in

which case the top entry in the corresponding box in Table•l applies; or he

will not engage in the first period, but will engage in the second period if

his acceptable gain is high, in which case the bottom entry applies.

Similarly, an (a2,b1) type of individual either will not engage in the first

period and will engage in the second period if his acceptable gain is high (if

(2-a)(a2+b1) > (l.a)f1+f), in which case the top entry applies; or he will not

engage in either period, in which case the bottom entry applies. (13j

      It will be useful first to show that under the decreasing fine policy

only two of the four combinations of   these outcomes are possible: the top
entry   for the (a1,b2) types combined with the bottom entry for the (a21b1)

types; or the bottom entry for the (a1,b2) types combined with the top entry

for the (a2,b1) types.

      The argument involves a proof by contradiction. Assume initially that

the top entry applies for both the (a1.b2) and the (a2,b1) types, that is,

                            (l+a)(a1+b2) <                                      (Al)
and

                           (2-a)(a2+b1) > (l-a)fj + 4.                          (A2)


                                        18 -
It will be shown that (Al) and (A2) cannot hold simultaneously. Recall from

(5) that:

                              C f < a2tb1 C a1+b2 C 4 C a2it2.                    (A3)
Let

                                f1 — a1+b1 + 91(a2-a1),                           (A4)

where 0 <    <      and

                                4   — a1+b2     + 62(a2-a1),                      (AS)

where 0 C 62 C 1.    Substituting (A4) and (AS) into (Al) and (A2) and rewriting

yields:

                                     C (a2-a1) (811092)                           (A6)
and

                           (a2-a1)(2-a-(l-a)91-92)      > b2-b1.                  (A7)
Note that (A3) implies that (b2-b1) >      (a2-a1).    Therefore, for (A6) and (A?) to

hold, it must be that:

                                    61+062>1                                      (AS)

and

                                    (1.0)91+62 C      i-a.                        (A9)
Multiplying both sides of (AS) by (I-a) and comparing the resulting inequality

to (A9) shows the contradiction. A similar argument also can be used to

demonstrata that the two bottom entries cannot hold simultaneously.

      To distinguish between the two mutually exclusive combinations that can

occur under the decreasing fine policy, let Case I refer to the situation in

which the top entry for the (a11b2) types and the bottom entry for the (a2,b1)

types applies. Similarly, let Case II refer to the situation in which the

bottom entry for the (a11b2) types and the top entry for the (aj,b2) types

applies.


                                       -   19    -
     In Case I aggregate social welfare under the decreasing fine policy is

(see Table 1):

                   2a(l-ft)(a1-h) +   (l-o)(2-oft)(a2-h).                 (AlO)

A comparison of (AlO) to (10) shows that aggregate social welfare under the

low uniform fine policy is greater (since 2-aft <     2).
     Similarly, in Case II aggregate social welfare is:

                 a(l-a)(1-ft)(a1-h) +   2(l-a)(l-ft)(a2-h).               (All)

A comparison of (All) to (11) shows that aggregate social welfare under the

high uniform fine policy is greater (since a1-h <     0).
     Thus, the decreasing fine policy always is inferior to one of the uniform

fine policies.




                                         20 -
Notes

        [*]    Polinsky's research was supported by the John M. Olin Program in Law

and Economics at Stanford Law School and Rubinfeld's research was supported by

the National Science Foundation Programs in Law and Social Science and

Economics. During the writing of this paper we benefitted from conversations

or correspondence with Michael Block, Rayner Cheung, Michael Davis, Hugh

Cravelle, I.ouis Kaplow, Paul Rubin, Ariel Rubinstein, Steven Shavell, Edward

Sherry, Ceorge Stigler, and two referees.

        fi]    In   the modern economic literature on deterrence, Stigler (1970,

pp. 528-529) was the first person to discuss informally why first offenders

should be punished more leniently than repeat offenders. There also is an

interesting informal discussion by Posner (1985, pp. 1216-1217; 1986, pp. 213-

215). To our knowledge, only Rubinstein (1979. 1960) has formally analyzed

optimal penalties in a dynamic model with repeat offenses. His first paper

shows how prior offenses should be taken into account in deciding whether to

impose any      punishment   at all; he does not consider whether the level of

punishment      should depend on the number of prior offenses. His second paper
demonstrates that there exists a utility function        for which a policy of

imposing      higher penalties on repeat offenders increases deterrence.
Landsberger and Meilijson (1982) also develop a dynamic model with        repeat

offenses,     but their   concern is with how prior offenses should affect the

probability     of detection rather than the level of punishment. Keenen and
Rubin   (1986) analyze a static model that tangentially relates to repeated

offenses, but they acknowledge that "what is apparently needed (to study

repeat offenders] is a dynamic model" (p. 14). The focus of their paper is on

how the optimal penalty varies with the severity of the harm.


                                           -   21   -
     12) The reason for excluding his socially-acceptable gain (any gain

that counts toward the determination of social welfare) in the statement in

this sentence is explained in comment (a) in section IV below.

     (3] This rationale for imposing higher penalties on repeat offenders

is analogous to the rationale for charging an insured a higher premium after a

claim is made ("experience rating") and for rewarding a worker with higher pay

after a successful outcome ("merit rating"). See, for example, Venezia and

Levy (1983) and Viscusi (1966).

     It will become clear in section III below that the explanation provided

here requires that individuals' offense propensities are fixed and that their

socially-acceptable gains are stochastic.

     (4) In Becker's (1968) article on crime and punishment, all gains

were treated as socially-acceptable. However, in response to that article,

Stigler (1970, p. 527) wrote: "The determination of this social value [of the

gain to offenders) is not explained, and one is entitled to doubt its

usefulness as an explanatory concept: what evidence is there that society sets

a positive value upon the utility derived from a murder, rape, or arson? In

fact the society has branded the utility derived from such activities as

illicit."

     (5)    To the extent that the investment in enforcement effort applies

to a wide range of harms, it is appropriate to treat the probability of

detection with respect to any one type of harm as fixed. See generally

Shavell (1991). If the probability of detection were less than one, the only

effect on the results would be that the optimal fines would have to be raised

(assuming that the wealth constraint of individuals is not binding) so that

the expected fines equal those discussed in this article.


                                      -   22   -
        (6) The special case in which a1+b2 — a2+b1 will not be considered.

        (71   It can be shown   that a fine    less than a1+b1 or greater than a2+b2

never is optimal.

        18] Because the ratios in (12) are arithmetic weighted averages of a

and a2, the left-hand ratio is greater than a1 and the right-hand ratio is

less than a2. In addition, it can be demonstrated that the left-hand ratio is

less than the right-hand ratio.

        (9) This example was suggested by Louis Kaplow.

        (10) Under a decreasing fine policy, other types of individuals also

may engage in the first period depending on the parameter values and the

levels of the fines. The assumption made in the text simplifies the

discussion.

        [11] Another generalization would be to allow for the possibility of

false   convictions. In the conventional analysis of deterrence in which only
one offense is considered, false convictions reduce deterrence because the
incremental cost of becoming an offender is reduced. In the repeat offense
context, there may be an opposing tendency if          a   false conviction raises the
fine    that a potential offender would face in the future, and a reinforcing

tendency if it lowers the fine. Also, Rubinstein (1979) has shown that if

individuals can be found liable by mistake, it is optimal to punish an

individual only if his long-run record is 'unreasonably' bad" (p. 407).

        112) See Stigler (1970, p. 530). Also, Posner (1985, p. 1216, n.

43) has pointed out that a previous           offender is easier to convict than a
first   offender, because if he takes the stand the prosecution can introduce

his record of convictions to try to undermine his credibility.




                                          -   23   -
     [13) If (1+a)(a1+b2) —           the (a11b2) types are indifferent
between the two alternatives described. Siailarly, if (2-a)(a2+b1) —

(l-a)f,+f*, the   (a2,b1) types are indifferent between their alternatives. It

is assumed in the proof, arbitrarily, that the second alternative is chosen in

each case. The conclusion in the appendix also holds if the first alternative

is chosen.




                                       -   24   -
References

Becker, Gary 5., 1968, Crime and punishment: An economic approach. Journal

     of Political Economy 76, 169-217.

Keenen, Donald1 and Paul H. Rubin, 1986, The economics of evil deeds,

     unpublished manuscript.

Landsberger, Michael, and Isaac Meilijson, 1982, Incentive generating state

     dependent penalty system: The case of income tax evasion, Journal of

     Public Economics 19, 333-352.

Posner, Richard A., 1985, An economic theory of the criminal law, Columbia

     Law Review 85, 1193-1231.

Posner, Richard A., 1986, Economic analysis of law, 3rd edition (Little, Brown

     and Company, Boston).

Rubinstein, Arid, 1979, An optimal conviction policy for offenses that may

     have been committed by accident, in: S. J. Brains, A. Schotter and C.

     Schwodiauer, eds., Applied game theory (Physica-Verlag, Wurzburg) 406-

     413.

Rubinstein, Ariel, 1980, On an anomaly of the deterrent effect of punishment,

     Economics Letters 6, 89-94.

Shavell, Steven, 1991, Specific versus general enforcement of law, Journal of

     Political Economy ??, ???-'Z??.

Stifler,    George J., 1970, The optimum enforcement of laws, Journal of

     Political Economy 78, 526-536.

United States Sentencing Commission, 1989, Guidelines manual (U.S. Government

     Printing Office, Washington, D.C.)

Venezia, Itzhak, and Bairn Levy, 1983, Optimal multi-period insurance

     contracts, Insurance: Mathematics and Economics 2, 199-208.


                                       -   25 -
Viscusi, V. Kip, 1986, Moral hazard and merit rating over time: An analysts of

     optimal incertemporal wage structures1 Southern Economic Journal 52,

     1068-1079.

von Hirsch, Andrew. 1976, Doing Justice: The choice of punishments (Hill and

    Wang. New York).




                                    -   26
