NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES

THE EQUITY PREMIUM AND THE RISK FREE RATE:

MAHING THE MOMENTS

Stephen G. Cecchetti
P0k-sang Lam

Nelson C. Clark

Working Paper No. 3752

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1991

Ohio State University and N.B.E.R; Ohio State University; and
Ohio State University, respectively. We thank George
Constantinides, Lawrence Christiano, Paul Evans, James Hamilton,
N. Gregory Mankiw, Tony Smith, Robert Staxnbaugh, Alan Viard,
Stanley Zin and seminar participants at the 1989 NBER Summer
Institute, Claremont, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,
the University of Illinois, Indiana University, Queens, Purdue,
Vanderbilt, University of Virginia and the University of
Washington for their comments and suggestions. Cecchetti
acknowledges the financial support of the National Science
Foundation. This paper is part of NBER's research program in
Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3752
June 1991

THE EQUITY PREMIUM AND THE RISK FREE RATE:
MATCHING THE MOMENTS

ABSTRACT

This

paper investigates the ability of a representative

agent model with time separable utility to explain the mean
vector and the covariance matrix of the risk free interest rate

and the return to leveraged equity in the stock market. The
paper generalizes the standard calibration methodology by

accounting for the uncertainty in both the sample moments to be
explained and the estimated parameters to which the model is
calibrated. We develop a testing framework to evaluate the
model's ability to match the moments of the data.
We study two forms of the model, both of which treat
leverage in a manner consistent with the data. In the first,
dividends explicitly represent the flow that accrues to the owner
of the equity, and they are discounted by the marginal rate of

intertemporal substitution defined over consumption. The second
form of the model introduces bonds and treats equities as the
residual claim to the total endowment stream. We find that the
first moments of the data can be matched for a wide range of
preference parameter values. But for both models the implied
first and second moments taken together are always statistically
significantly different from the data at standard levels. This
last result contrasts sharply with other recent treatments of
leverage in the literature.
Stephen G. Cecchetti
P0k-sang Lam
Nelson C. Mark
Department of Economics
Ohio State University
Columbus, Ohio 43210—1172

1 Introduction
A primary goal of financial economists is to understand the dynamics of asset price movements. Recent research has focused on
measuring and explaining both the degree of serial correlation and
the size and variation of asset returns. In an earlier paper, Cecchetti,
Lam and Mark (1990), we study the first of these issues.1 Here, we
examine the second. We show that a representative agent model
based on Lucas (1978), calibrated either to historical consumption
and dividend growth jointly, or to consumption alone but including
bonds, can explain the first but not the second moments of the equity
premium and the risk free rate found in the data.
The empirical issues that concern the work here were first discussed by Mehra and Prescott (1985). They show that for plausible
values of the discount factor and the coefficient of relative risk aversion, a simple representative agent model that is calibrated to certain
features of historical consumption data implies values of the equity
premium that are 'too low' together with values of the risk free rate
that are 'too high.' The difficulty that Mehra and Prescott found in
using a frictionless, pure exchange Arrow-Debreu economy to match
the first moments of the equity premium and the risk free rate is
what has come to be known as the 'equity premium puzzle.'

This paper has two features that distinguish it from previous
studies of equity returns.2 First, we explicitly model equities as a
leveraged claim on the consumption process. It is common in the literature to set consumption and dividends equal, and then calibrate
paper shows how the negative serial correlation in asset returns found
in sample is consistent with the equilibrium model described in Section 2 below.

2Numerous solutions have been proposed to this puzzle. A partial list includes Mankiw's (1986) suggestion that the high risk premium is the consequence of nondiversifiable risk; Reitz's (1988) examination of big crashes; Nason's (1988) study of the consequences of assuming that consumption has some
lower bound; Abel's (1988) work on heterogeneous beliefs; Weil (1989) and Epstein and Zin's (1990) use of nonexpected utility; Constantinides's (1988) and
Abel's (1990) models based on habit formation; Labadie's (1989) monetary model;
and Mankiw and Zeldes' (1990) separation of stockholders from nonstockholders.
1

the model to estimates of a univariate consumption process. But this
practice ignores the fact that equities are actually levered claims to
firms' production. Recently, both Kandel and Stambaugh (1990a,
1990b, 1991) and Benninga and Protopapadakis (1990) report success in matching the first and second moments of returns data using
models with leverage. Those papers treat the leverage ratio — the
ratio of debt to the market value of the firm — as a free parameter.
These authors are implicitly allowing the share of dividends to consumption to vary in order to match the moments of returns. But the

data provide a precise guide as to what this share should be. The
payments to equity holders represent only a very small fraction of total consumption during the twentieth century total dividends have
averaged between 3% and 5% of aggregate consumption. When this

ratio is imposed on the model, the model still cannot fully explain
the data.
The second salient feature of this paper is that we develop a testing framework to measure the ability of the model to match the data.
This addresses a common problem in the calibration literature. Previous authors generally fail to provide a well articulated criterion for
evaluating the models they examine. To understand the problem, let
1J)T be a vector of sample moments and jt(9; ) be the corresponding implied moments from a completely specified economic model
with parameter vectors 9, representing technology, and q5, representing tastes. Inspired first by Kydland and Prescott (1982) and then
Mehra and Prescott (1985), recent asset pricing and business cycle
research has explored various parameterizations in an attempt to set
[&' — t(9; )] = 0. In this calibration method, the parameters of the
technology, 9, are estimated in order to conform to certain features
of the actual economic environment. The investigator then searches
over 'plausible' values of the preference parameters, , in an attempt
to find implied moments of the economic model that are 'close' to the
sample moments. But this ignores two sources of uncertainty. Since
l,&T is an estimator for the moments of interest, and 9 is set equal to
9T, an estimator of the parameters of the technology, the compari2

son can be thought of as testing to see if the difference between two
jointly distributed random variables is zero.
By explicitly accounting for uncertainty that arises from the fact

that T and OT are estimated, we can calculate the distribution of
—
/(OT, )], conditional on a particular choice of , the taste
parameters. This allows us to formulate a test statistic and apply
standard inference procedures to evaluate the fit of the model.3
Our starting point is an equilibrium asset pricing model based
on Lucas (1978), generalized to incorporate nontraded assets. We
make assumptions about preferences and the stochastic process governing endowments that yield a closed form solution for asset prices.

The utility function is time separable and in the constant relative
risk aversion class, while the endowment obeys a form of Hamilton's (1989) Markov switching model.
We present two forms of the model. In the first, we assume that
dividends represent the flow that accrues to the owner of the equity,

and that these are discounted by the marginal rate of intertemporal substitution defined over consumption. This model mirrors the
theory exactly in that equity prices are based solely on the flow that
accrues to their owner.
The bivariate model requires that we estimate a stochastic process for consumption and dividend growth rates jointly. In the second
model we pursue an alternative formulation in which we need only

estimate the consumption process alone. Here we introduce single
period bonds and price equity as the residual claim alter the payments to the bonds have been made.
Both models are calibrated by setting the parameters of the endowment process equal to estimates of the Markov switching model
31n a recent paper, Hansen and Jagannathan (1990) suggest an alternative
method for evaluating whether an asset pricing model is capable of matching
the unconditional moments of the data. They examine the ability of various
preference specifications to generate marginal rates of intertemporal substitution
that match those implied by asset returns data. They find that time separable
utility functions require substantial curvature to meet their criterion.

3

using annual observations on U.S. real consumption and dividends
from 1892 to 1987. In the bond model, we restrict the leverage ratio
to values that ensure that the share of the endowment to equity holders matches the average value in the data. We proceed to examine the
ability of each model — the bivariate consumption-dividends model
and the univariate consumption model with bonds — to explain the
equity premium puzzle, i.e., the first moments of the equity premium
and the risk free rate. As first suggested by Constantinides (1990),
we also study the ability of the models to match the covariance matrix of the returns data. While leverage allows us to match the mean
equity premium and risk free rate fairly easily, we find that our attempts to match the second moments requires a quantity of bonds
that is inconsistent with the data.
The remainder of this paper is organized into six parts. Section 2
describes the asset pricing model and derives the closed form solution for asset prices for both the bivariate consumption-dividends
model and the univariate model with bonds, assuming that endowment growth follows the Markov switching process. In section 3 we
report estimates of the parameters of the processes constructed using
Hansen's (1982) Generalized Method of Moments (GMM). Section 4
discusses the methodology for evaluating the performance of the
models. Section 5 examines the ability of the bivariate consumptiondividends model to match the first moments of the equity premium
and the risk free rate alone, as well as the first and second moments
of the returns data together. In Section 6 we report results for the
univariate consumption model with bonds. Section 7 contains concluding remarks.

2 The Model
This section presents the model of asset pricing we use and
derives the solution for returns. We consider a variant of the Lucas model in which a single nonstoreable consumption good is made

4

available through an exogenous endowment process.4 Throughout,
we assume that the endowment can be described by the Markov
switching model first introduced by Hamilton (1989).

Two forms of the model are considered. They differ in their
treatment of leverage. In the first version, we assume that the consumption good is generated by two distinct processes. Call the first
process dividends, and let the claim to dividends be called equity. The
price of equity is determined in a competitive market. The claim to
the other endowment, which can be thought of as labor income, is
not traded. Total consumption in any period is the sum of dividends
and labor income. The economy is populated by a large number of
identical individuals who are aggregated into a representative agent.
This model is presented in section 2.1. By contrast, in the second
version of the model we assume that the equity is a residual claim on
the endowment after one period real bonds have been paid off. This
model is discussed in Section 2.4

Bivariate Consumption-Dividends: The Investors

2.1

We begin with the first order conditions for the generalized Lucas

economy in which consumption and dividends are not necessarily
equal. These are

I _____

I_i —IJ1:it1

U'(C) Lrt+1+t+1

and

P/=/3E,

(2)

4The model presented here generalizes our earlier results presented in Cecchetti, Lam and Mark (1990). We follow the standard practice of the aggregate
asset pricing literature and study an endowment economy. Since we are unconcerned with consumption decisions themselves, this makes little difference. In
principle, we could specify a production economy and derive the stochastic pro—
cess for technology that would be required to yield the consumption process we
assume. All that is important for our work is that the consumption process fits
the data.
5

where

P=

Pf =

C=
=

U' =
/3 =

E=

the real price of the traded asset, or equity
the real price of the risk free asset,
per capita real consumption,
the payoff or dividend from owning one unit of equity,
the marginal utility of the representative agent,
the discount factor, 0 < j3, and
the mathematical expectation conditional on

information at time t.
Let preferences be given by,

U(C) =

,

(3)

where 0 < y < oo is the coefficient of relative risk aversion.
Now substitute (3) into (1) and (2) to obtain

PC = fiEtC(P4i + D1),

(4)

and
(5)

We note here that in the empirical computations below 3 is allowed to exceed unity. Kocherlakota (1990a) has shown that a unique
solution to the asset pricing problem exists in economies where the
discount factor is greater than one.5
5There are a number of ways to understand values of /9 that are greater than
one. For example, it can be thought of as a simple, but crude, way of approximating habit formation behavior of the type described in Constantinides (1990)
and Abel (1990). In their models, marginal utility is an increasing function of
the level of past consumption. This implies behavior similar to that implied by a
discount factor greater than one.

6

2.2 Bivariate Consumption-Dividends: The Endowment
We assume that consumption and dividends are governed by a
bivariate version of Hamilton's (1989) Markov switching model.6 Our

earlier paper [Cecchetti, Lam, and Mark (1990)] demonstrates the
empirical usefulness of the Markov switching process for modeling
consumption and dividend growth. In particular, we showed that
this model is able to characterize the significant negative skewness
and excess kurtosis that is found in the consumption and dividend
growth data. Furthermore, the Markov switching model also admits
a closed form solution to the asset pricing problem.

Let Ct lnC and d lnDt. We assume that {ct,dt} is governed
by the following bivariate random walk with two state Markov drift:

(:)
where (

"

=

Ct

(:' ) + (1) + ( : )s+ ( ) ,
I

(6)

is i.i.d. normal with mean zero and covariance matrix

(°
', and St is a Markov random variable which takes
\acd Cdl

on values of 0 or 1 with transition probabilities

Pr[S = 1ISti = 1] = p
Pr[St=OISt_i=1] = i—p

(7)

Pr[S = liSt_i = 0] = 1 — q
Pr[Sj = 01St_i = 0] = q
The model requires estimation of nine parameters: (ag, cg,a, c4,
p, q, o, C, Ccd).7
6We model consumption, rather than labor income, jointly with dividends to

maintain tractability of the model. We note that this formulation places implicit restrictions on the production technology that we do not investigate. See
footnote 4 above.
TBecause consumption is nearly 20 times the size of dividends in the data, the
7

As a normalization, we restrict the o1's to be negative. Consequently the economy will be in a good state when St = 0, and in
a bad state when St = 1. The parameter q is the probability of
remaining in the good state next period given that the economy is
currently in the good state, while p is the probability of remaining in
the bad state given that the economy is currently in the b.d state.
The transition probabilities between the two states are (1 — q) and

(l—p).
The Markov components of the dividend and consumption processes are assumed to be perfectly correlated, and so dividends and
consumption are in the good or the bad state simultaneously. The
mean consumption and dividend growth rates are a and ag in the
and
+ c4) in the bad state.
good state, and ( +
The bivariate Markov switching model generalizes the Markov

)

(c

growth process of Mehra and Prescott in three ways. First, consumption and dividends are modeled jointly. Second, the continuous
random variable c is included. Third, the transition matrix in (7) is

permitted to be asymmetrical. We obtain the Mehra and Prescott
endowment process by setting C = D, p = q and E =
2.3

Bivariate Consumption-Dividends: The Solution

Assuming that consumption and dividends follow the bivariate
process given by (6) and (7), we obtain the closed form solution for
the price of a share of equity and the price of the risk free asset by
the method of undetermined coefficients.8 Conjecture the following
solution:
= p(St)Di .
(8)
probability that the model will ever imply a negative value for nonlabor income
(C — D) is vanishingly small, even though is nearly 10 times o'. See Table 1
for details.
8The technique presented here can also be used to obtain a solution for the
general case in which the endowment follows an n-state Markov switching process
in the mean, the variance, or both.

8

The problem is to verify that (8) solves (4), and to find the function
p(S). To do this, first substitute (8) into (4) to obtain:

p(S)DC = /3EjCjDt÷i[p(Sti) + 1].

(9)

Next, write (6) in levels,

Ge +oSt+i +q.)
[

(10)

D÷i
c+1]

Now substitute (10) into (9) and note that
with covariance matrix E to obtain

p(St) =

3e

and

are i.i.d. normal

)]Ete_St+1 [p(S÷1) + 1]
(11)

Because S can take on only two values, 0 or 1, (11) is a system of
two linear equations in p(O) and p(l). Solving these two equations
yields

-

- l—(p+q_1)äi/3

—1

1 —/3(pã1 + q)+/32j(p+ q— 1)
l—(p+q—1)/3
—1

and

1_$(pai+q)+12&1(p±q_1)

(12)

(13)

where

=
and

ci

eal -iai

This establishes that (8) is the solution to (4).9
9The solution for the equity price can also be obtained by iterating the stochastic difference equation (8) forward and exploiting results in Hamilton (1989) to
evaluate the resulting geometric series. The conditions required for this series to
converge also guarantee that p(St) is nonnegative. The nonnegativity of p(St) is
always imposed in the empirical work that follows.

9

The price of the risk free asset is obtained using (6) and (7) to
evaluate (5). That is,

= e(

,

(14)

q)e,

where çc(O) = q + (1 —
and o(1) pe + (1 — p). The
implied rates of return to holding the equity and risk free assets from

date t to t + 1 are,

R = Re(S÷l,S,4+1) = P+1 +D+1

—1

(15)

= p(S+i) + ' (+4+i+t+i) — 1
p(S)
and

= Rf(S) =
Next, integrate
obtain

P1(S)

—1

.

(16)

out of the expression for the equity return to
= p(St+i) + le(aod+7+aidSt+1)

—1

Finally, the implied means of the risky and the risk free rates of
return are computed by summing over the probabilities:

= E[Re(S+1,S)I =

Pr(S1 = st+ilSt = st)Pr(S = st)Rc(St+l,st) , (17)
St+1=O St=O

and

= E[R'(S)] =
8t0

Pr(St = st)R1(sj).

(18)

The expected equity premium follows as

(19)
10

The implied covariance matrix for the premium and the risk free
rate is:

Var

(

,)=

1

1

Pr(St+i = st+iSt = si)Pr(St = 8t)X

St+1=Oat=O

R'—"
R( —

R—u
/
—

.

(20)

2.4 Univariate Consumption with Bonds
An alternative to the bivariate consumption-dividends model
above is to ignore dividends and examine the role of bonds instead.
To study the implications of this for equity returns, we introduce a
leverage parameter that determines the quantity of bonds outstanding. These bonds are the primary claim on the consumption flow,
while equity holders have the residual claim. Put another way, we
explicitly model the total endowment flow as accruing to the holders
of two assets: bonds and equity shares.
The Modigliani-Miler theorem holds in this economy —the value
of the firm is unaffected by the presence of the bonds. But while the

existence of the bonds does not change the price and return of the
sum of bonds and equity, it does change the value of the two pieces.
The riskiness of equity is increased by the issuance of bonds because

the return to the bonds must be guaranteed in advance.
To derive the return to equity, we first use the results of Section 2.3 to calculate the total market value of the firm, i.e. debt
plus equity. Next, we introduce single period bonds and derive their
price in the presence of costless bankruptcy risk. This enables us to
compute the price and return to holding the equity as the residual
claim on the income of the firm.
To see how this all works, start by defining P to be the beginning of period value of the firm. Each period B bonds are issued.
At t + 1 the bonds pay off either one unit of the consumption good,
11

or (Ptm +C+1) , whichever is smaller. If (P', + C+1) is greater than
B, then the holder of the equity shares receive a distribution equal
to (P, + Ct÷, — Be). If B is greater than
+ C+,), then there
is costless bankruptcy in which the entire value of the firm is transferred to the bondholders. In other words, solvency requires that the
liquidation value of the firm be sufficient to pay off the outstanding

debt'°
Next, using the results of Section 2.3 we compute the value of the

firm P. Since the entire endowment stream accrues to the owner
of the firm, we can compute pm from the first order condition (1) by

setting the dividend D equal to consumption C. The solution is

Pm(S) = p1(St)Ct

,

(21)

where p1(S) is defined by (12) and (13), the definition of p(St), after
setting dividends equal to consumption. In other words, to obtain
p€(S), replace with c, c4 with a, a with o, and acd with o
in the expressions defining p(S).

The next step in computing the effect of bonds on the return
to holding equity, is to calculate the price and return to holding a
bond. In the context of this model, bonds represent all of the claims
to the endowment not accounted for by equity." We assume that
the debt issue in period t is a constant multiple of the date t level of
consumption,
B=
,
(22)
10Kandel and Stambaugh (1990a,1990b,1991) treat leverage in a way analogous

to ours. Benninga and Protopapadakis (1990) also consider the impact of the
existence of bonds on the equity premium. In their model, bonds pay the risk
free rate and their is no possibility of bankruptcy. This formulation would be
incorrect in our context since the probability of bankruptcy is never zero when
the endowment follows the Markov switching process.

111n their original paper, Mehra and Prescott (1985) note that equity is the
residual claim to output after labor has been paid, but in contrast to Benninga
and Protopapadakis (1990), they find that it does not help in generating a large
equity premium. Brainard and Summers (1990), who also examine the impact of
bonds, claim that the Mehra and Prescott analysis is misleading.

12

7 Conclusion
This paper addresses two issues central to the literature in calibration and aggregate asset pricing. First, we develop a testing
framework for rigorously evaluating the ability of an economic model
to match specific sample moments of the historical data. Second, we
reexamine the ability of leverage to solve the equity premium puzzle.

Using a methodology that combines the features of model calibration and classical statistical inference, we conclude that a simple
general equilibrium model is capable of matching the first moments of
asset returns alone, but not the first and second moments together.3°
This suggests that previous authors who examine the implications of
leverage for matching the moments of aggregate asset returns have allowed themselves too much leeway to do so. In general, the amount
of leverage required to rehabilitate the intertemporal consumption
based asset pricing model with time separable utility is far below
what we see in the real world.
We conclude that modeling leverage is not sufficient to salvage the

Lucas asset pricing model with time separable utility. The original
Mehra-Prescott form of the equity premium puzzle, based solely on
first moments, does not seem to present a challenge for the model.
But when the endowment is forced to conform closely to the data,
as it is in the Markov switching model, and leverage is forced to
imply that the dividend flow match what we actually observe, then
the model can not match the five first and second moments taken
together.

30As we demonstrate in our earlier paper, Cecchetti, Lam and Mark (1990),
this model is capable of matching the serial correlation in equity returns.

33

Appendix
Here we describe the procedure we use to obtain the GMM estimator of the parameters of the endowment process, 9T, the sample
moments, "r, and the estimate of their asymptotic covariance matrix.
Let {Xt} be a vector valued sequence of observations on stock
and bond returns, and consumption and dividend growth rates. Let
A' = ('çb', 9') denote the parameter whose true value is A, =
9,).
Finally, let f(xt, A) be the vector of moment conditions used in the
estimation of Ef(x,, A0) = 0. To construct f(z, A), we stack moment

conditions used to compute the sample moments of returns with
those for estimating the endowment process parameters. That is,

/ .' . = fi(xt,')
fxt,

/

\

A1)

When both the first and second moments of returns are required,

rf,t

fi(xt,&) =

(r,t — )2 —
(rf,t

(A2)

J.,f)2 —

(rp,t—t,bP)(rj,t—i,b') —

Ppf

where

and rI,j are the observations in the data at time t for the
risk premium and the risk free rate. When we require oniy the first
moments of returns, we use only the first two elements of (A2).
f2(xt, 9) is a vector of deviations of the population moments
from their sample counterparts implied by either Hamilton's Markov
switching model, the Mehra-Prescott style Markov model, or the geo—
metric random walk model. Let
and Xd,g denote the consumption

and dividend growth rate at date t. For the bivariate consumptiondividends model we use the following moments:

34

Markov switching model —

10

moments:

E(x) j = 1,2,3; k = c,d.
E(x,xd,t_l)

E(x,x)

j = 1,2

E(x,txd,j_l)
Mehra-Prescott style model — 5 moments:

E(x)

j = 1,2;

k = c,d

Random Walk model — 5 moments:

E(x,)

j = 1,2;

k = c,d.

E(x,txd,t)
To evaluate the bond model, we need to estimate only parameters
of the consumption process. For this, we use the following moments:
Markov switching model — 7 moments:

j = 1,2,3,4.
j = 1,2

E(x,)

E(xx,_1)
E(xx,_1)

Mehra-Prescott style model — 3 moments:

E(x,)
E(x,x,t_i)
35

j=1,2.

In order to construct the GMM estimator, let

9T =
WT,O =

WT, =

Wj,m = 1m+1 '
WT = WT,o +

Wj,m[WT,j + WJ,

DT = 1 ôf(xt,A)
The GMM estimator, AT, minimizes the quadratic criterion function

(A) = gWrg,

(A3)

and the asymptotic covariance matrix of AT is consistently estimated
by

[DW1DTJ1,

(A4)

where WT is the Newey and West (1987) estimator of the spectral
density matrix of f(xt, A) at frequency zero. We set m = 3, which
conforms to Newey and West's T rule. We obtain estimates of the
covariance matrices , and
from the relevant blocks of (A4).
While the selection of any particular set of moment conditions for
estimation using the GMM procedure is necessarily arbitrary, it is
immaterial asymptotically under the null that the model is correctly
specified. But in any finite sample, different estimates will emerge
when different moment conditions are used.
The moment conditions that we used to obtain the Markov switch-

1

36

ing model estimates reported in the text were chosen using two criteria. First, that the number of moments conditions should be relatively small, and second, that the estimates lie close to the maximum
likelihood estimates.
It is not possible to use a Hausman test to assess whether the
GMM estimates lie close to the maximum likelihood estimates, since
both estimators may be inconsistent under the alternative. We can
do a Wald test by assuming that one set of estimates is a vector of
constants. Let 8mI and E,mi be the maximum likelihood estimator
of the endowment process parameter vector, and its asymptotic covariance matrix. Suppose we view 6T as a vector of constants and
construct a Wald test for the hypothesis that m1 = 1T• That is, we
compute the Wald statistics T(Omi — 8T)'Enj(9m1 — OT). Setting 0T
to the estimates obtained from the GMM procedure, the Wald statistic are 14.91 (p-value 0.09) for the bivariate consumption-dividends
model, and 1.69 (p-value 0.89) for the univariate consumption process.

Alternatively, we can use the estimate of the asymptotic covariance matrix of the CMM estimator to compute the Wald statistic and
view 9mj as a vector of constants. In this case, the Wald statistic are
16.92 (p-value 0.05) for the bivariate consumption-dividends model,
and 3.22 (p-value 0.66) for the univariate consumption process.

Finally, we mention that Hansen's test of the overidentifying
restrictions does not indicate much evidence against the Markov
switching model. His J-statistic, [J = T4(AT)], is 0.007 (p-value
0.93) for the bivariate consumption-dividends model, and 2.185 (pvalue 0.34) for the univariate consumption model.

37

REFERENCES
Abel, Andrew B., 'Asset Prices under Heterogeneous Beliefs: Implications for the Equity Premium Puzzle,' mimeo., Department
of Finance, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, January
1988.

,'Asset Prices under Habit Formation and Catching Up with
the Joneses,' American Economic Review 80 (May 1990) 38—42.

Balke, Nathan S. and Robert J. Gordon, "Appendix B. Historical Data," in It. J. Gordon, Ed., The American Business Cycle.
Chicago, 111.: University of Chicago Press (for NBER), 1986.

Benninga, Simon and Aris Protopapadakis, 'Time Preference and
the "Equity Premium Puzzle",' Journal of Monetary Economics
25 (January 1990) 49—58.

Brainard, William C. and Lawrence H. Summers, 'Leverage and the
Equity Premium Puzzle,' mimeo., Department of Economics, Yale
University, May 1990.

Burnside ,A. Craig, "The Comovement of Asset Returns with Time
Non-Separable Preferences," Department of Economics Queens
University, August, 1990.
Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller, 'Cointegration and Tests of
the Present Value Model,' Journal of Political Economy 95 (October 1987) 1062—1088.

Cecchetti, Stephen G., Pok-sang Lam and Nelson C. Mark, 'Mean
Reversion in Equilibrium Asset Prices,' American Economic Review 80 (June 1990), 398—418.

Constantinides, George M., 'Habit Formation: A Resolution of the
Equity Premium Puzzle,' mimeo., Graduate School of Business,
University of Chicago, October 1988, and Journal of Political
Economy 98 (June 1990) 519—543.

Epstein, Larry G. and Stanley E. Zin, "First-Order" Risk Aversion
and the Equity Premium Puzzle,' Journal of Monetary Economics
26 (December 1990) 387—407.
38

Gregory, Allan W. and Gregor W. Smith, 'Calibration as Testing:
Type I Error in the Equity Premium Puzzle,' mimeo., Department
of Economics, Queen's University, August 1988.
Grossman, Sanford J. and Robert J. Shiller, 'Consumption Correlatedness and Risk Measurement in Economies with Non-Traded
Assets and Heterogeneous Information,' Journal of Financial Economics 10 (July 1982) 195—210.

and
, 'The Determinants of the Variability of Stock
Market Prices,' American Economic Review 71 (May 1981), 222—
227.

Hamilton, James D., 'A New Approach to the Economic Analysis of
Nonstationary Time Series and the Business Cycle,' Econometrica
57 (March 1989) 357—384.

Hansen, Lars Peter, 'Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method
of Moments Estimators,' Econometrica 50 (November 1982) 1029—
1054.

______ and Ravi Jagannathan, 'Implications of Security Market Data
for Models of Dynamic Economies,' Journal of Political Economy
99 (April 1991) 225—262.

Kandel, Shmuel and Robert F. Stambaugh, 'Modeling Expected Stock
Returns for Long and Short Horizons,' mimeo, Department of Finance, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, 1990. (a)
______ and
, 'Expectations and the Volatility of Consumption
and Asset Returns,' The Review of Financial Studies 3 (1990) 207—
232.

and

,

'Asset Returns and Intertemporal Preferences,'

Journal of Monetary Economics 27 (February 1991) 39—72.

Kocherlakota, Narayana R., 'A Note on the "Discount" Factor in
Growth Economies,' Journal of Monetary Economics 25 (January
1990) 43—48. ()
'On Tests of Representative Consumer Asset Pricing Mod-

els,' Journal of Monetary Economics 26 (October 1990) 285—304

(h)
39

Kuznets, Simon. National Income and Its Composition. Volume 1,
New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1941.
Lee, Bong-Soo and Beth Fisher Ingram, 'Simulation Estimation of
Times- Series Models,' Journal of Econometrics 47 (February/March
1991) 197—206.

Kydland, Finn and Edward C. Prescott, 'Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations,' Econometrica 50 (November 1982): 1345—
1370.

Labadie, Pamela A., 'The Effects of Stochastic Inflation on Asset
Prices,' Journal of Monetary Economics 24 (September 1989):
277—298.

Lucas, Robert E. Jr., 'Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy,' Econometrica 66 (1978) 1429—1445.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, 'The Equity Premium and the Concentration
of Aggregate Shocks,' Journal of Financial Economics 17 (1986)
211—219.

______ and Stephen P. Zeldes, 'The Consumption of Stockholders

and Non-Stockholders,' Harvard Institute of Economic Research
Discussion Paper No. 1533, December 1990, Journal of Financial
Economics, forthcoming.
Mehra, Rajnish and Edward C. Prescott, 'The Equity Premium: A
Puzzle,' Journal of Monetary Economics 15 (March 1985) 145—
161.

Nason, James N., 'The Equity Premium and Time-Varying Risk Behavior,' Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, Finance and
Economics Discussion Paper No. 11, February 1988.
Newey, Whitney K. and Kenneth D. West, 'A Simple, Positive Definite, Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix,' Econometrica 55, May 1987, 703—708.

Reitz, Thomas A., 'The Equity Premium: A Solution,' Journal of
Monetary Economics 22 (July 1988) 117—133.

Weil, Phillipe, 'The Equity Premium Puzzle and the Riskfree Rate
Puzzle,' Journal of Monetary Economics 24 (November 1989) 401—
422.
40

Wilson, Jack W. and Charles Jones, 'Inflation Measure for the Period,' mimeo., Department of Economics and Business, North Carolina State University, September 1988.

41

