                   NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




      REAL INTEREST RATES AND THE SAVINGS AND LOAN CRISIS:
                    THE MORAL HAZARD PREMIUM




                         John B. Shoven
                         Scott B. Smart
                         Joel Waldfogel




                     Working   Paper No. 3754




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            June 1991




We would like to thank Mark Vaughan and seminar participants at
Indiana University and the Tax Program Meeting of the National
Bureau of Economic Research for helpful comments. This paper is
part of NBER's research program in Financial Markets and Monetary
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #3754
                                        June 1991


      REAL INTEREST RATES AND THE SAVINGS AND LOAN CRISIS:
                    THE MORAL HAZARD PREMIUN



                            ABSTRACT


     Real interest rates rose to historically high levels in 1980
and remained high throughout the decade. Macroeconornists
attribute this phenomenon to a combination of tight monetary

policy, fiscal deficits, and variable inflation rates. This

paper presents preliminary evidence for an additional explanation
of high real rates that is related to the decade-long crisis in

the savings and loan industry. Deposit insurance, moral hazard,
and regulatory forbearance provide the incentives and the means

for insolvent thrifts to issue liabilities that compete with
Treasury securities in the market for funds. Thus, as the

magnitude of the thrift crisis grew during the 1990s, so did

pressure on Treasury yields. Even if the effect of the S&L
crisis on interest rates is small, the increased cost of

financing the public debt adds significantly to the total costs
associated with the savings and loan fiasco.


John B. Shoven                          Scott B. Smart
Department of Economics                 Department of Finance
Stanford University                     Indiana University
Stanford, CA 94305                      Bloomington, IN 47405
and NEER

Joel Waldfogel
Economics Department
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06520
         Real Interest Rates and the Savings and Loan Crisis:
                       The Moral Hazard Premium

I. Introduction

     Real interest rates were extraordinarily high in the l9SOs by
historical standards. From 1926 to 1981, the average real rate of

interest on short—term Treasury bills was 0.1%, whereas the real
rate averaged 4.7% for the final nine years of the decade'. The
break in the time series appears equally sharp if one examines the
monthly data from 1975 to 1989. Figure 1 shows the real rateof
return on six—month Treasury bills over that period.2 In the late

l970s, the peaks in the rates of return were under 1 percent,
whereas in the l9SOs the troughs were at a comparable level. Very
few time series illustrate such a sharp shift upwards. We have
done some simple statistical tests on this time series; the results

confirm what is apparent in the figure.        Real interest rates
shifted upwards by four or five percentage points in approximately

1980. The question is why. In this paper we review two of the


     'Ibbotson (1989).
     2 These are ex post real rates, calculated by converting both
CD and Treasury rates to an annual yield basis and then subtracting
the realized rate of inflation over the term of the investment.
The dramatic jump displayed in Figure 1 also holds for ex ante
rates calculated using lagged inflation rates or survey data.
     3In regressions of the form,

                          r = c + a8° +
                                              C)
                                              co
                                              C,
                                              aD
                                              a,
                                              0)

                                              a,
                                              0)
                                              CD
                                              a,
                                              C)
                                              to
CI)
                                              a,
                                              C)
Cl)


                                              a,
                                              C)

                                              c)
                                              a,
                                              0)
                                              c'J
                                              a,
                                              C)


                                              0)
                                              oaD
                                              C)

                                              C)
                                              C)

                                              a,
                                              C)


                                              C)



           0a                    _>           CD
                                              N-
      CJ         CD   -   c'.l   0    C\J   CO.-

                O4I seeui ieu
more popular explanations and point out that they have some
inconsistencies with the facts. We then present a new explanation

which may partially account for the dramatic increase in the level
of Treasury bill real interest rates.

     The foremost conventional explanation blames high real
interest rates on the large federal government deficits of the
1980s. Alan Greenspan has consistently expressed this view in his
annual testimony to Congress. A related hypothesis attributes the
real interest rate rise to the combination of expansionary fiscal

policy and the anti-inflationary shift of Federal Reserve Policy in
October 1979. A third explanation involves the slow adjustment of

inflation expectations to the disinflation of the early 1980s. The

argument goes that the anticipated real returns were not nearly as

high as the ex—post realized returns, because inflation
expectations were still based on people's experience in the late
l970s.   While each of these theories is a plausible cause of an
increase in real rates, we question whether individually or
collectively they can fully explain the magnitude and persistence
of the shift shown in Figure 1.



(where r is a real treasury bill or certificate of deposit rate in
period t, c is a constant term, 680 is a dummy which is 1 in the
l980s and 0 before, ,      is   an error term, and a measures the
difference between real rates in the 1980s and a previous period),
the point estimate of a is four to five hundred basis points and
always significant at the 95 percent level.     The difference in
rates is significant whether one divides the sample at 1980, 1981,
or 1982, although the difference in rates is largest when 1980 is
the break point.

     4For example, see Greenspan's testimony before the House
Committee on the   Budget, March 3, 1988.
     Our additional explanation is quite different. We suggest
that the high real yields on Treasury bills in the 1980s may be
directly connected with the decade-long crisis in the savings and
loan industry and the federal government's handling of that crisis.

In a nutshell, our argument is that savings and loans (and banks)
offer savers assets which are close, if not perfect, substitutes
for Treasury bills.       Certificate of deposit accounts, in
particular, tend to have the same 3 and 6 month maturities, the
same $10,000 and up denominations, and the same ultimate guarantor

(the U.S. government) as Treasury bills.       We argue that the
existence of federal deposit insurance combined with the policy of
allowing institutions which had little or no owner's capital to
remain open and to compete for business had predictable effects
outlined below.

     There is a moral hazard problem in a troubled thrift.5 The
down but not out thrift institutions have every reason to take
extra risks. The bigger the risk and the higher the stakes, the
greater the chance that the firm might be saved. Of course, there

also is a great chance that things will just go from bad to worse,
but neither the owners (who may have had none of their money at
stake at this point) nor the depositors (who are insured) have




    5See Kane (1989, 1990).  The moral hazard problem is
essentially the same as that found in a corporation with
outstanding bonds, though it is exacerbated by the fact that S&Ls
typically are leveraged to a much greater degree than most
corporations.
                                3
anything to lose.6 In their quest for money to play out the high—

stakes, high-risk strategy, the troubled savings and loans bid up
deposit interest rates. But, due to the federal deposit insurance,

these high yield institutions offer assets which are nearly perfect

substitutes for deposits in safer institutions. Naturally, the
safer institutions have to follow the movement up in yields if they

want to remain competitive in the market for funds. The yield on
other safe, short—term assets, such as Treasury bills, must also
increase to remain as attractive as certificates of deposit.

     We are not the first to point out a link between the savings
and loan crisis and high interest rates. However, we think our
mechanism is different and should be added to the list of
connections. A number of authors have written that high nominal
interest rates jeopardized the health of S&Ls engaged in the
business of maturity intermediation.      The fact that the high
nominal rates of 1979 and 1980 devastated the market value net
worth of the industry was first documented by Carron (l982).
Others have noted that the recent borrowing of the Resolution Trust

Corporation to finance the cleanup of the industry will make normal

Treasury borrowing more costly.8 Neither of these connections is
related to our claim that the yield on truly safe assets such as

     6The equity holders essentially have a call option on the firm
with an exercise price equal to the firm's outstanding debt. The
value of this call option increases with the riskiness of the
firm's assets.

     7See also Kane (1985) and Brumbaugh (1988).

     8That is, Treasury borrowing costs will rise if the supply or
loanable funds curve is upward sloping.

                                4
Treasury bills has increased to allow them to remain competitive
with risky assets which look safe to depositors due to underpriced

deposit insurance.

     The impact of the high real interest rates of the 1980s on the

economy was certainly severe. Presumably investment was crowded
out, economic growth was slower, merger activity and corporate
restructuring were affected, and the levels of foreign holdings of
U.S. assets were increased.9 The deficit problem was made far more

severe, possibly adding as much as $100 billion per year to federal
government interest costs by the end of the decade.         If the
government's handling of the S&L crisis explains even a small part

of high real interest rates, then the cost of the S&L bailout may
be significantly increased.

     The next section briefly discusses the existing theories of
why real interest rates were so high in the l980s. Then, section
3 discusses the extent to which Treasury bills and securities
offered by S&Ls are close substitutes. We argue in section 4 that
even if we observe only modest deposit flows into S&Ls, rates
offered on CD5 may have significant effects on Treasury rates.
Section 5 presents evidence that troubled thrifts raised their
rates in an apparently successful attempt to attract additional
funds. Section 6 presents some very rough estimates of the cost of
the "moral hazard premium" to the Treasury due to the higher rates




     9For a discussion of these effects see the volume edited by
Rivlin (1984), or the article by Blair and Litari (1990).

                                 5
forced upon it by the competitor created by deposit insurance.
Finally, section 7 contains some concluding remarks.




II. The Traditional Explanations

    Elementary macroeconomics teaches that large federal budget
deficits cause high real interest rates. The argument underlying
this view is straightforward: the increase in government borrowing

to finance budget deficits is not fully offset by increased private

saving, so the interest rate must rise. As intuitively appealing

as it might be, this proposition may be questioned on both
empirical and theoretical grounds. It falls short as an empirical
explanation, in part because of the mismatched timing of deficits
and high real interest rates. Real interest rates began to rise
substantially in 1980—81, but the dramatic shift in the U.S. budget

deficit did not occur until 1982. From 1974 to 1981 the average
annual deficit was $55 billion.      Since then, the deficit has
averaged $176 billion per year.'°

     Robert Barro (1974) questions the theoretical basis for the
conventional view. He argues that consumers anticipate the higher

future tax burdens associated with higher deficits and of fset
government borrowing with reductions in their own consumption.
That is, consumers know that the present value of current and
future deficits must be zero, so a higher current deficit implies


     '°Econcmic Report of the President, 1990. The latter figure
covers the years 1982—89.   In 1982 dollars, the average annual
deficit was $76 billion from 1974—81 and $158 billion from 1982—89.

                                 6
that taxes must be higher in the future.          Barro postulates a
sequence of intergenerational linkages by which real effects of
fiscal policy are offset. Altruistic parents who care about their

children increase their saving today to help their children (and
their children....) meet future tax payments. y this mechanism,
individuals neutralize the effects of fiscal policies.

     Consistent with this hypothesis, Plosser (1982, 1987) and
Evans (1987a) find no relationship between actual or expected
budget deficits and interest rates in the U.S.11 Using monthly

data from 1908—1984 (and many subperiods), Evans regresses real
interest rates on measures of the deficit, government spending, and

the money supply and finds no evidence of a positive relationship
between interest rates and deficits. These results persist when
Evans aggregates the data over time, and when he uses instrumental
variables   to estimate the equations in his model •12
     Blanchard and Summers (1984) and Iluizinga and Mishkin (1986)
argue that the primary force behind the increase in real rates was
the change in Federal Reserve policy in October 1979. They present
evidence  that the change to "tight" money regime shifted the
stochastic process governing real rates.     To buttress this
argument,   Mishkin (1988)   points to a similar episode in the 1920s
     '1Evans (l987b) finds no evidence of a link between deficits
and interest rates for Canada, France, Germany, Japan, the U.K., or
the U.S.

     121n his exhaustive review of the literature, Bernheixn (1987)
criticizes the theoretical foundations and empirical evidence for
the proposition that deficits do not affect interest rates or other
real variables. See also Bernheim and Bagwell (1988), Bernheim,
Shleifer, and Summers (1985), and Poterba and Summers (1987).
                                   7
in which an unusually large increase in real rates followed a move

to tighter money. However, monetary policy was not as "tight"
throughout the decade as it was in the late 70s and early 805, but
real interest rates remained at very high levels.

     Expectations provide the basis for another explanation for
high real rates in the 1980s. According to this theory, lenders
who had earned very low or negative real rates of return on their
investments in the inflationary 70s were slow to adjust their
expectations of inflation. Because of the relatively rapid pace of
disinflation in the early 1980s,       the high real rates of return
earned by investors in Treasury securities in the 1980s were just
as much a "surprise" as the negative returns during the previous
decade.      While it is plausible that investors did not anticipate

the rapid pace of disinflation during 1980—81, the rate of
inflation was relatively stable throughout the mid and late 80s'.
Real interest rates on Treasury bills, however, remained
significantly higher than in previous decades. Explaining this as
the result of a consistent inflation "surprise" strains credulity
when the actual rate of inflation is steady.        For example, in
Figure 2 we plot the expected real rate of interest on Treasury
bills using inflation forecasts obtained from Eggert's Blue Chip
Consensus.14    While the real rates reported in this graph are

     '3The   December—to—December changes in the Consumer Price Index
were 3.9%, 3.8%, 4.0%, and 3.8% in 1982, 1983, 1984, and 1985
respectively.

     '4Eggert surveys approximately 40 forecasting services each
month and reports their current predictions for GNP, inflation,
unemployment, etc. The consensus forecast is simply the average of
                                   8
                         Figure 2
            Expected Real Interest Rates Using
          Blue Chip Consensus Inflation Forecasts




ci

C,)


a)


G)
a:
a)
a)
a
L1




      4
generally lower than those from Figure 1 (implying that inflation

expectations were higher than realizations), it is not the case
that forecasting services were Completely surprised by the jump in
real rates.

     We do not wish to dismiss any of the above explanations. All

have some merit.'5 At the same time, we believe that none of these

theories alone can completely explain the pattern of interest rates
described above.     Below we present evidence consistent with our
theory that the savings and loan crisis contributed to high real
interest rates in the past decade.


III. The Substitutability of CDs and Treasury Bills

     The argument that Treasury security yields have carried a
moral hazard premium in the l980s does not require that Treasury
bills and CDs be perfect substitutes.     However, it does require
that they be close substitutes in the sense that the demand for one

of them decreases significantly when the terms offered on the other

improve. The purpose of this section is to clarify the degree to
which Treasury bills and CD5 are substitutes, and the degree to
which federally insured CDs offered by weak institutions are
substitutes for CDs of sound thrift institutions.




all the forecasts.

     "One could construct an argument that the monetary policy
shift in 1979 initially caused real rates to increase and that
deficits kept rates high throughout the decade.      Given the
empirical evidence against the proposition that deficits have
affected interest rates (in any historical period), we believe that
the persistence of high real rates requires further explanation.
                                 9
      Treasury bills are generally considered to be risk—free
securities. While unpredictable inflation causes the real return
to be somewhat uncertain and interest rate variability may cause
uncertainty regarding the return when the bill is not held until
maturity, the full 3 month or 6 month nominal return is safe and
predictable. Are insured CDs equally safe?
    Insured CDs have turned out to be extraordinarily safe ex—post.

All such deposits have been honored at all of the troubled thrifts

in the past decade.    Even deposits over the $100,000 insurance
limit have often been protected, such as in the highly visible
cases of Continental Illinois in 1984 or American Savings and Loan

in 1988.16 Not only has depositors' money been safe, but it has
been available in a timely manner. Few of the failed institutions

have been closed for even an hour. There have been some cases
where the principal and interest on CD accounts have been paid out

prior to maturity. For example, in some cases people who opened
two—year CD accounts two months before an institution failed found

that the government insurers returned their money with interest.
It is as if the deposit was called and the money returned. Even
this has occurred in only a minority of cases; most often the CD
contracts are completed by an acquiring institution. We believe
that ex—post insured CD5 have proven to be extremely safe
investments, comparable in that regard with Treasury bills.



     '6The Southern Finance Project (1990) reported that accounts
over $80,000 represented about one-third of the total value of
protected deposits in a sample of 54 large failing thrifts.
                                10
     Certificates of deposit are not identical to Treasury
securities, nor are they completely risk—free. Cook and Spellman
(1990) argue that thrifts may offer high CD rates to offset two
types of risk. First, they argue that investors may have doubted
that the federal government would honor its promise of deposit
insurance.17 Second, even if the government fulfills its promise

of insuring deposits, a thrift failure may be costly to a
depositor. Payments may be delayed, and the depositor may face
reinvestment risk if the CD is redeemed prior to the original
maturity date.   Treasury bills avoid these risks.

     Taxes and transaction costs provide additional reasons why
Treasury bills and CDs are not identical securities. Treasury bill

income is exempt from state—level tax while CD income is taxable at

both the state and federal levels. Even if Treasury bills and CDs

had identical risk and maturity characteristics, in order to
attract CD investors in states with income taxes, thrifts would
need to offer higher rates than are available on Treasury bills.
An investor would be indifferent between holding CDs and Treasury

bills only if,

                 i[l   —
                           (1 —   t)t   —
                                            t,]   =   r(l — tf)


     "Since the Joint Resolution of 1982, federal deposit insurance
has been backed by the "full faith and credit" of the U.S.
government. Despite similarities in the language, the full faith
and credit guarantee contained in the 1982 Resolution and the 1989
bailout legislation does not impose the same legal obligation on
the government to cover insured deposits as in the case of Treasury
securities. See Cook and Speliman for details.
                                    11
where i is the interest rate on CDs, tf is the marginal federal tax

rate, t is the marginal state tax rate, and r is the interest rate

on Treasury bills. The equation implies that the spread between CD
and Treasury bill rates equals,'8

                                i-r =   its.
For   example, when the nominal rate on CD5 is 8% and an investor
faces a 6% state tax rate, the required spread is 48 basis
points.'9

      The costs of obtaining CDs and Treasury bills also differ.
One can invest in CD5 at very little cost through a local (or
national) bank or thrift.        Investing in high-yield CDs became
increasingly easier during the l980s as major financial
publications began printing lists of the institutions currently
paying the nation's highest yields.'° Both the Wall Street Journal


     18The equation assumes that the taxpayer itemizes and that
state tax payments are deductible at the federal level. If the
taxpayer does not itemize, then it can be shown that the CD -   Tbill
spread equals
                          i—r   = itd(l—tf).
As   long as tf is greater than zero, the loss of the state tax
deduction increases the spread. Note that in both equations the
spread   equals zero in the absence of a state income tax.

      'SIt is interesting to note that the average nominal yield from
1975-1989 on CD5 was 9.6%, while the average spread was
approximately 56 basis points. Given these values, the marginal
tax rate "implied" by the formula above is 5.83%.       In 1984,
marginal state tax rates ranged from 0% to 14.1% for an investor
with a $40,000 income. Across states, the average marginal rate
was 5.3% and the median marginal rate was 5.4%.

      20The Wall Street Journal, The New York Times, and Money
Magazine regularly publish this information, and investors can also
obtain a list of high-paying thrifts by calling a 1-900 service.
                                   12
and MoneY Maaazine published articles advising readers to seek out

these "no—risk, high—yield" investments. Finally, brokers became
much more active in channeling funds from investors to S&Ls.2' In
contrast, to invest in Treasury bills, one can avoid commissions

only by dealing directly with the Treasury or with a federal
reserve bank or branch. Otherwise, a Treasury bill investor pays
a brokerage commission.

     Differences aside, it is important to stress that Treasury
bills and CDs are available in similar denominations and
maturities. Advertisers, as well as the business press itself,
have described CDs as a risk—free alternative to Treasury bills.
A Money Magazine article entitled "Savings: Everything is Bigger
in Texas Except the Risk" advised readers to invest in risk—free
CDs offered by Texas deposit institutions.      bether or not it
is absolutely correct, there is a widespread belief that CDs have
risk characteristics similar to those of Treasury bills.
     It is difficult to demonstrate that two securities are close
substitutes. If Treasury bills and CDs are perfect substitutes and

if financial markets equilibrate instantaneously, then CD and


See also a recent issue of the A.A.R.P. Bulletin advising readers
to make use of this data in seeking out profitable short—term
investments.

     21The Federal Home Loan Bank Board attempted to stem the flow
of this so—called "hot money" by limiting its insurance coverage,
but their proposal was struck down by the U.S. Court of Appeals.
     "The bottom line: go for the yield, but deal with federally
insured institutions, and stay within the $100,000 limit." Money
Magazine, page 22, November, 1986. See also, Wall Street Journal,
November 2, 1988.

                                13
Treasury bill rates should move together, with a tax—induced spread
between them. We would thus expect a high correlation between CD
and Treasury bill returns.

     If Treasury bills and CDs are not close substitutes, then
investors' required rates of return on the two instruments may
diverge.   Substitutability disciplines the relationship between
movements in the two series. As Table 1 indicates, from 1975 to
1988 correlation coefficients on three and six—month nominal CD and

Treasury bill rates were 0.99 and 0.98 respectively.            First
differences in these rates have correlations of 0.93 and 0.95
respectively. In other words, the series move together.
                              Table 1

            Correlations of Treasury Bill and CD Rates
           3 month   (1975:1—1987:12)          0.992
           6 month   (1975:1—1987:12)          0.977

     Spreads (CD rates minus Treasury bill rates) have not been
constant, however. Between 1975 and 1986 the spread averaged about

50 basis points for six—month CDs; in late 1987 and 1988 the spread

persisted at a high level of 82 basis points.          Since 1989 the
spread has averaged roughly 70 basis points.    The large spread of
1987-1988 may have reflected an additional risk premium that
investors required for holding CDs. The fact that the spread fell
in 1989 could reflect investors' perceptions that FIRREA23 reduced

the risk that the government would not honor its promise of deposit



     23Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act
of 1989.

                                14
insurance. A risk—related spread that changes over time is not
consistent with the notion that CDs and Treasury bills are perfect

substitutes over this period.24 All that we require -      that    high
CD rates drive up the government's cost of borrowing —   is that   when
CD rates rise enough, insured deposit institutions attract funds
that might otherwise have bought Treasury bills.         We examine
deposit flows to troubled thrifts below, but the next section
discusses a caveat in the interpretation of deposit flow data.

IV. Why Deposit Flow Numbers are Misleading

     We have argued that deposit insurance made CDs very close
substitutes for Tbills, and that moral hazard problems associated
with the S&L crisis increased CD rates, making them very attractive

investments vis a vis Tbills. One conceivable mechanism by which
developments in the CD market could have affected Tbill rates is a

movement by some investors out of Tbills and into CD5. Thus, one
might conclude that if our theory is valid, one should observe
funds flowing from Tbills to CD5, perhaps in massive quantities.

     Validation of our theory does not require such an empirical
observation. Indeed, there are several reasons to expect little
change in the relative quantities of Tbills and CD5. Consider the

nature of Treasury auctions. The government simply announces a
quantity of securities that it wishes to sell at, a particular
auction, and investors submit either competitive or noncompetitive

bids for those liabilities. The government accepts the number of

     24Alternatively, part of the movement in spreads during this
period might be explained by changes in state tax rates.
                                15
competitive bids that, in combination with noncompetitive bids,
just exhausts its supply of securities for that auction. After the

orders are filled, the quantity data reveal only that the Treasury
sold its block of securities.    The quantity of bills offered is
determined primarily by the current shortfall in revenues and the
stock of maturing liabilities. Pressures on Tbills from competing

assets are likely to be observable only in price (rate) changes.
     Even if the demand for funds by the Treasury was (somewhat)
elastic, it is not obvious that one would observe large quantity
flows from Tbills to CDs. The following analogy illustrates our

point. Consider two gas stations on opposite street corners. Both
firms sell a homogeneous product, both have self service and full
service pumps, and so on. Now suppose that one station (Station A)

reduces its price. The new price is easily observable by potential

customers and by the competing station (station B). If the price
difference were sufficiently large, and if it persisted, then the
likely outcome would be that station B would lose customers to
station A (i.e., quantity data would reveal a flow from the high-

price to the low—price station).     Naturally, the proprietor of
station B is awarc of the potential loss of customers, so station
B matches its competitor's price cut.        The two firms find
themselves in the hlbadtl Nash equilibrium of a classic prisoner's

dilemma. We emphasize that in the midst of such a price war, each

station may retain its original clientele, and there may be little
or no observable quantity flows between the two stations.       The

absence of an effect on quantities does not necessarily lead one to


                                16
conclude that there was not a significant effect of the actions
taken by one of the stations on the other.

     This is a very simple analogy, but one which we believe is
relevant for our analysis. Certainly it is plausible to expect
that institutions offering the highest rates should be attracting
new funds, at least in the short run. Below we present evidence
that this is the case. However, it is inappropriate to Conclude

that Only extremely large Capital movements into S&Ls could have
affected Treasury rates significantly. In equilibrium, as Treasury

rates respond to pressure from competing assets, financial flows
between the assets may not appear unusually large by historical
standards.


V. Are Marginal Thrifts Attracting Funds with High CD Yields?
     Marginal thrifts might offer high rates on CD5 for two
reasons. First, they might offer high rates to offset the apparent
riskiness of their securities. In this case, high rates would
simply allow marginal deposit institutions to "hold their own'
against institutions offering more solid securities.        Second,
marginal deposit institutions might offer high rates on CDs to
attract above—normal deposit flows. In the first case, the high
rates available at some institutions would not spread to government

securities, or even necessarily to other deposit institutions.




                                17
Rather, the high rates would simply compensate depositors in high-
risk thrifts for bearing additional risk.25

     In order for high rates to be contagious, marginal deposit
institutions need to offer rates high enough not only to compensate

investors for any additional risk, but also to entice them out of
their current investments, at least if those current investments
did not change their terms. Indeed, this is the central mechanism
of our story:   deposit institutions offer rates high enough to
reduce the supply of money for government securities, thus raising
the cost of borrowing.

     One can present evidence, some anecdotal and some more
systematic, that "bad" deposit institutions raise the cost of funds

at "good" S&Ls.26   On the anecdotal front, the New York Times
(February 16, 1989) reports of a cross—town CD rate war between
Houston—area S&Ls. Two S&Ls, Bancplus in Pasadena and Commonwealth

Savings in Houston, repeatedly matched each other's rate increases,

quoting new rates several times in only a few days. Both of these
institutions were slated for a federal takeover, but regulators had

not stepped in to stop the rate war. Executives at other S&Ls in


     25For example, Lawrence White argues that the so—called "Texas
premium" paid by thrifts in that state did not come about because
those institutions were aggressively seeking new funds. Texas S&Ls
paid higher rates to compensate depositors for increased risk. At
the same time, however, White recognizes that even healthy Texas
thrifts were forced to pay a (smaller) premium. If solvent thrifts
raise their rates to compete with insolvent ones, then it is
plausible that this "contagion" effect could spread to thrifts in
other regions and to other types of assets.

     26Stiglitz has suggested that this is a kind of Gresham's Law
for S&Ls.

                                18
the Houston market complained that they were forced to keep pace
with their financially-troubled rivals to maintain their deposit
base.      Thus, the managers of healthy S&Ls regarded their rival's
CDs as close substitutes for their own, despite their healthier
financial position.

        The funds that an S&L attracts when it raises its CD rates
need not come only from its local market.         During the 1980s,
increasing amounts of CD deposits were placed with brokers who
looked for the highest yields nationwide.        Merrill Lynch, for
example, reportedly sold $800 million in CDs for anerican Savings
and Loan, a troubled California thrift.      Drexel Burnham Lambert
also specialized in selling CD5 of Texas S&Ls.27 Expressing his
view that insolvent thrifts were able to attract huge inflows by

raising rates, William Seidinan, chairman of the Federal Deposit

Insurance Corporation (FDIC), was recently quoted as saying that,

"Thrifts were essentially printing money through deposit
insurance".      Richard Breeden, chairman of the Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC) agreed that, "The institutions that grew
2,000% or 3,000% weren't getting those funds because investors
thought they were well—run businesses.       Deposit insurance made
those funds available".28




    27Wall Street Journal, November 2, 1988. An official at one
of the largest retail brokerage establishments informed us that his
firm advised clients interested in low-risk investments to buy CDs
rather than Treasury issues. In many cases these funds came from
maturing Treasury securities.
    28Wall Street Journal, July 3, 1990.
                                  19
     At a more systematic level, one can examine the movement of
funds to states with deposit institutions offering high CD
yields.29 That funds chase high CD yields is an indication that
high CD rates reflect more than a simple risk premium.        It is
possible to identify the states with high—rate institutions, and,
furthermore, to see whether these states have experienced above

average deposit growth. Movement of deposits to institutions in
high—rate states provides a mechanism for thrifts to raise the cost
of federal borrowing.

     Table 2 provides some evidence of a link between high interest

rates and deposit flows into savings institutions. Part A of Table
2 reports a measure of a particular state's net deposit inflows
relative to deposit flows nationwide. The measure is the ratio of
the state's fraction of national net deposit flows into thrift
institutions to the state's fraction of national thrift assets.
That is, Table 2(A) reports relative growth rates of deposits. In

1986, for example, Texas institutions experienced deposit growth
that was sixty percent greater than the national average. The data
are reported as of the end of each calendar year.

     In section B of Table 2 we document the incidence of high CD

rates offered by S&Ls in these states. Each month, Money Magazine

reports the five banks or thrifts offering the highest yields in
the U.S. We tabulate the number of times an institution from a

     29of course, an even better test would be to examine the
reaction to increases in CD rates at the institution level. We do
not have firm—level data at this time, though the quotes from
William Seidmari and Richard Breeden above indicate that S&Ls which
raise their rates are sometimes able to attract huge deposit flows.

                                20
given state appears in this list during the third and fourth
quarters of each year (note that during two quarters Money Magazine

lists a total of thirty high-rate institutions).30 For example,
in the last half of 1986 the S&Ls offering the thirty highest rates

on six—month CD5 operated in only four states, with Texas
accounting for twenty—two of these institutions.

     Table 3 provides evidence that institutions offering high
rates are successful, at least to some degree, in attracting
larger-than—normal deposit flows.31 In 1986 and 1987 most of the
high—rate thrifts were in Texas, and that state experienced rapid

deposit growth. Arizona, which in 1986 was second to Texas in the

number of high—rate institutions, had deposit growth at twice the

national average. Similarly, Virginia thrifts appeared
on Money Magazine's list for the first time in 1989, and deposits

expanded rapidly in that state despite negative deposit growth in




     "The specific rates we are using are quotes on six—month CDs.
We count only those institutions that appear during the latter half
of a given year since we are comparing the rates on six—month CDs
offered by these S&Ls to end—of—year deposit flows. Finally, since
we do not report results for all states, the row sums do not always
equal thirty.
     31Note that the states with high-rate thrifts tend to be the
states known to have significant S&L failures: Texas, California,
and in the latter years, Massachusettes. Though we do not have
data on institutions offering the highest rates prior to 1986,
Texas S&Ls experienced dramatic inflows throughout the early and
mid 1980s, not a surprising finding given the well-publicized
"Texas premium" that these institutions were offering at the time.

                                21
thrifts nationwide.          The same was true for thrifts in
Massachusettes and New York.32

                                    Table 2
                 A.   Relative Growth Rates of Deposits
Year       MA         NY     TX            CA    MD    VA    AZ
1986       1.9        0.9     1.6          1.2   1.3   1.1   1.9
1987       1.8        0.9    1.4           1.7   1.5   1.1   1.7
1988       1.9        1.1   —0.3           1.3   2.6   2.0   1.1
l989       2.0        0.6    —7.7         —0.7   2.3   1.6   0.6
       B. Number of Thrifts Offering High Interest Rates
Year      MA          NY     TX           CA     MD    VA    AZ
1986       0           0     22            3      1     0     4
1987       4           1     18            3      3     0     1
1988       8           4      6            6      0     0     0
1989       9           1      0            5      0     3     1




     32The link between high rates and deposit flows is not perfect.
Despite offering high rates, Texas thrifts began to lose funds in
1988. However, in 1988 regulators adopted and aggressively pursued
their Southwest Plan, designed to drastically reduce the number of
institutions operating in Texas. This accounts for a large part of
the decline in Texas deposits. Note that the outflow of deposits
in Texas accelerated once those institutions no longer offered the
highest rates in the country.

     331n 1989 the S&L industry experienced net deposit outflows.
This changes the sign of the relative growth rate measure. For
example, if a state has a net deposit inflow its relative growth
rate (using the formula described above) would be a negative number
since deposit growth for the industry was negative. To simplify
interpretation of the table, we reverse the sign of the numbers
reported for 1989 only.   Thus, Nassachusettes S&LS experienced
deposit inflows during the year while deposits in Texas thrifts
actually decreased.

                                     22
     Table 2 indicates that thrift deposits have chased high rates.

Demonstrating that these funds would have been invested in Treasury

securities had rates not been so high is extremely difficult, and

we provide no direct evidence on the source of the funds flowing

into S&Ls here.3 Instead, given various possible effects of S&L
behavior on government borrowing costs, we ask what is the
additional cost of the deposit insurance crisis attributable to the

channel outlined in this paper.


VI. What is the Additional   Cost of Government Borrowing?
      If the   argument outlined above is correct (that high CD rates

have driven up federal borrowing costs), then it is interesting to
ask what is the additional cost to the U.S. Treasury.

     Suppose that deposit institutions are able to raise the rate
on Treasury securities by some amount ()    for   ten years. Over the
ten—year period, old, low—rate debt is gradually replaced with new
high—rate debt (where the high rate is    higher than the low rate).

For example, in the first year of the high—rate period, all
existing government debt with maturity of less than a year is
replaced with high-rate debt; a portion of the longer—maturity low-

rate debt is replaced with high—rate debt. After ten years, all of

the old (low-rate) debt with maturity less than ten years has been

replaced with high-rate debt.     After ten years (when the rate has


     34Ainple anecdotal evidence suggests that funds flow between
Treasury bills and CDs. See, for example, the statements of Janies
Barth, then chief economist of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, in
1989 FHLBB News Bulletins.     He is quoted repeatedly explaining
flows from CDs in terms of current movements in the spread between
CD and Treasury bills.

                                  23
fallen to its original low level), the fraction of outstanding debt

at the high rate declines.    Table 3 presents very rough estimates
of the present value of the additional borrowing costs, under
various assumptions about the maturity distribution of the debt,
the discount rate, and the size of the moral hazard premium. The
appendix describes the calculations in more detail. For example,

if borrowing costs have risen by fifty basis points, and one
discounts at 5 percent, then the present value of the additional
cost is about $75 billion (in 1990 dollars), which is significant
compared with the direct government costs of the savings and loan
crisis.

                               Table 3

              Additional Government Borrowing Cost

                     (billions of 1990 dollars)

Increase in Interest rate             Discount Rate
     (basis points)             5%                      10%


               5               7.3                      5.3

               50             73.2                     53.2
               100           146.4                    106.5

     We are unable to determine what fraction of the roughly 500
basis point shift in real Treasury bill interest rates to attribute

to the moral hazard situation of the troubled thrifts. It is our
opinion, however, that the 100 basis point case is reasonable and

that the 50 basis point figure is conservative. If this is the



                                 24
appropriate range, then the phenomenon that we have described in

the paper is, indeed, very important.




VI. Conclusions
     In this paper we have presented a new explanation for the high

real interest rates in the l980s. Owners and managers of troubled

thrifts, responding to the incentives provided by underpriced
deposit insurance, offered higher and higher rates in an attempt to

attract new funds. Depositors, anticipating that the government

would protect their investments, actively sought out higher yields
in local and national markets. The end result was predictable:
the rates offered by Treasury securities rose to compete with these

quasi—risk—free substitutes sold by S&Ls. This added (and indeed,
continues to add) a significant "indirect" cost to the savings and

loan bailout.

     While we do not wish to dismiss any of the existing
explanations for high real rates discussed above, we believe our
theory succeeds where earlier work fails to account for the timing

and persistence of high real rates. Furthermore, our theory has an

important         implication. As long as insolvent thrifts are
allowed to remain open, and, more importantly, as long as the price

of deposit insurance does not reflect the risks taken by insured
institutions, real interest rates will contain a moral hazard

premium.



                                25
                                Appendix
             Calculation of Additional Borrowing Cost

If Treasury bill rates rise for ten years, then return to their
former level, over the ten—year period, the fraction of outstanding

debt paying the high rate will rise. We simplify by assuming a
fixed maturity distribution with five maturity categories:



Maturity       Percentage of Total Debt

1 year                    35%

5 years                   35%

10 years                 14%
20 years                  5%
30 years                 11%

     The assumed maturity distribution was obtained by averaging
the actual distribution reported in the Treasury Bulletin from
1985—90. The actual maturity classes are intervals (i.e., 5-10
years, rather than just 5 years), but we make the conservative
assumption that all securities in a given maturity class have the
maximum maturity for that class. This is conservative in the sense

that the fraction of the total debt that must be financed during
the 10—year period of high rates is reduced.

     Given the fraction of the debt in each maturity category,we

calculate a, the fraction of debt paying the high rate, for years

1 through 40 (the first year of high rates until 30 years after the

rates go down, when the last high-rate 30-year bill is retired).
For example, at the end of the first year of the high rate period,

                                  26
all debt with maturity of one year or less is at the high rate,
while one fifth of the five—year debt pays the high rate, one tenth

of the ten-year debt pays the high rate, one twentieth of the
twenty—year debt pays the high rate, and one thirtieth of the
thirty—year debt pays the high rate.
      We calculate the additional cost to the government as follows:

      EDeaJ(l +    r)t,   where t runs from 1 to 40, and

D =   the   average real national debt, 1980—1989,
r the discount rate, and
 =    the   effect of CDs on Treasury bill rates.

This method gives us an order—of—magnitude estimate of the cost to

the Treasury of the moral hazard premium in interest rates.




                                     27
                            References


"Bailed out Thrifts: A Profile of America's Biggest S&L Failures,"
Southern Finance Project, September 1990.

Barth, J.R and R.D. Brumbaugh, "The Rough Road from FIRREA to
Deposit Insurance Reform," Stanford Law and Policy Review, v.2,
no.1, Spring 1990.

Bartlett, Sarah, "Battle Erupts for Texas Deposits Making Savings
Plan More Costly," New York Times, February 16, 1989, pAl.
Bernheim, B. D., "Ricardian Equivalence: An Evaluation of Theory
and Evidence," mimeo, Stanford University,, 1987.

Bernheim, B.D. and K. Bagwell, "Is Everything Neutral?" Journal of
Political Economy, v.96, no.2, April 1988.
Bernheim, B.D., A. Shleifer, and L.H. Summers, "The Strategic
Bequest Motive," Journal of Political Economy, v.93, no.6, December
1985.

Brumbaugh, R.D., Thrifts Under Siege, Ballinger, Cambridge, MA
1988.

Carron, A.S., The Plight of the Thrift Institutions, The Brookings
Institution, Washington, DC, 1982.
Cook, 0.0. and L.J. Speliman, "Repudiation Risk and Restitution
Costs: Toward Understanding CD Premiums and Their Implications,"
University of Texas, College of Business, Working Paper Series,
1990.

Eggert, Robert, Blue Chip Economic Indicators, various issues.
Evans, P., "Interest Rates and Expected Future Budget Deficits in
the United States," Journal of Political Economy, v.95, no.11,
1987a.

Evans, P., "Do Budget Deficits Raise Nominal Interest Rates?
Evidence from Six Countries," Journal of Monetary Economics, v.20,
no.2, l987b.

Federal Reserve Board of Governors, Federal Reserve Bulletin,
Washington, DC, various issues.

Greenspan, Alan, testimony before the Committee on the Budget, U.S.
House of Representatives, "Economic Outlook in Relation to Fiscal
and Monetary Policy," March 3, 1988.


                                  28
Kane, E.J., The Gathering Crisis in Federal Denosit Insurance,
M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, Massachusettes, 1985.
Kane, E.J., "The High Cost of Incompletely Funding the FSLIC
Shortage of Explicit Capital," Journal of Economic Perspectives,
v.3, no.4, Fall 1989.

Kane, E.J., "Principal—Agent Problems in S&L Salvage," Journal of
Finance, v.XLV, no.3, July 1990.
Plosser, C.I., "Government Financing Decisions and Asset Returns,"
Journal of Monetary Economics, v.9, May 1982.

Plosser, C.I., "Fiscal Policy and the Term Structure," Journal of
Monetary Economics, v.20, September 1987.
Poterba, J.M. and L.H. Summers, "Finite Lifetimes and the Effects
of Budget Deficits on National Saving," Journal of Monetary
Economics, v.20, September 1987.

Rivlin, A.M., editor, Economic Choices 1987, The Brookings
Institution, Washington, DC, 1987.
U.S. Department of the Treasury, Office of Thrift Supervision,
Savings & Home Financing Sourcebook. 1988, Washington, DC, 1989.

U.S. Department of the Treasury, Treasury Bulletin, Washington, DC,
various issues.

White, L.J, The S&L Debacle: Public Policy Lessons for Bank and
Thrift Regulation, forthcoming, Oxford University Press, 1991.




                                   29
