                    NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




                  THE SEARCH FOR R&D SPILLOVERS




                          Zvi Griliches




                     Working Paper No 3768




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            July 1991




This paper is part of NBER's research program in Productivity.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                          N8ER Working Paper #3768
                                          July 1991




                    THE SEARCH FOR R&D SPILLOVERS




                              ABSTRACT


     R&D   spillovers are, potentially, a major source of
endogenous growth in various recent New Growth Theorr models.
This paper reviews the basic model of R&D spillovers and then

focuses on the empirical evidence for their existence and

magnitude. It reviews the older empirical literature with
special attention to the econometric difficulties of actually
coming up with convincing evidence on this topic. Taken

individually,, many of the studies are flawed and subject to a

variety of reservations, but the overall impression remains that
R&D spillovers are both prevalent and important.



                                         lvi Griliches
                                         NBER
                                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                                              and
                                         Harvard University
                                                     Zvi Criliches
                                                     Harvard University and NEER
                                                     June 1991




                          The Search for R&D Spillovers*



       The recent reawakening of interest in increasing returns end R&D

externalities (see, e.g, Banhabib and Jovanovic 1991, Romer 1990e and b, and

Sale-i-Martin 1990) provides the motivation for a review of the empirical

literature   on this topic to see what is   known about the actual magnitude of

such effects. The 'New" growth economics has re-emphasized two points; 1.

Technical change ia the reault of conscious economic investments and explicit

decisions by many different economic units.      2. Unless there are significant

externalities, apillovers, or other sources of social increasing returns, it

is   unlikely that economic growth can proceed at a constant, undiminished rate
into   the future. The first observation is not new. It has been articulated

by Criliches (1957, 1958. and 1964), Mansfield (1968), Schisookier (1966),

Schultz (1954) and many others. The second point, the importance of

externalities for growth theory and for the explanation of productivity growth

is the driving force behind the research effort to be surveyed here. Whether

R&D spillovere will allow us to escape the fate of disinishing returns,

depends on their empirical magnitude, which is indeed the topic of this psper.

Before we turn to it, however, we need to stake a brief detour into taxonomy.

       Both publicly supported snd privately funded R&D produces ideas and

information ahout new materials or compounds, about new ways of arranging or

using them, end shout new ways of designing new good or services for the



                                 1
satisfaction of potential wants of consumers and producers. Often the idea or

compound are embodied in a new product or range of products. In that case, the

social returns to the particular stream of R&D expenditures can be measured by

the sum of the producer and consumer surplus generated by it.         Consider, for

oxseple, the development of hybrid corn seeds in the public agricultural

research sector. If the seed is supplied to agriculture at marginal production

cost and the official input price indexes do not adjust for such a "quelity'

change, then the product of this research will appear as part of the iseasured

productivity growth in agriculture. If the seed is produced by a seed induetry

but still priced at iserginal cost, because of conipetition there, and the

pricing agency adjusts for this quality change, showing a decline in the

Hreal•I price of equivalent quality seed, then the product of this research

will appear in the hybrid seed industry,      rather   than in agriculture per se.

If the hybrid seed industry hes some monopoly power which is competed away

slowly snd the price indexes do not register this as a quality change, the

gain from this innovation will be divided, with shifting shares between both

industries. To the extent that the new product is sold directly to consumers

and the CPI components are not adjusted for the associate "quality changes,

as   nay be the case with certain drugs or personal computers bought by the
household    sector directly, the social Mproductn of the associated research may

be mIssed entirely.

      What   these examples are intended to   illustrate is that   to the extent a
psrticular   innovetion is embodied in a product or service, its social product

is computable in principle. How it actually will show up in our national

product accounts will depend on the coapetitive structure of the industry and

the ingenuity and energy of the "price" reporting agencies, In principle, a



                                 2
complete hedonic calculation would produce the right prices in the right

industry and would allow us to attribute productivity growth where it actually

occurred.      Its   influence in downstream industries could then be viewed as just

another   response to declining real factor prices, a pecuniaryt externality,
one   that is relatively familiar and easy to deal with.

      The more difficult to measure end the possibly wore interesting end

pervasive     aspect of R&D externalities is the impact of the discovered ideas or
compounds on the productivity of the research endevours of others. This is a
non-pecuniary externality which is not embodied in a particular service or
product, though it might be conveyed by a printed article or a news release, It
has   the classic aspect of a non-rivalrous good end it    is usually very hard to
appropriate more than a tiny fraction of its social returns. Even if it were

possible to establish some property rights in the idea (e.g. via patents), the

resulting second-best prices would be non-linear and would not provide us with

appropriate measures of either marginal or total social returns. To measure

them directly in aoaa fashion, one has to assume either that their benefits

are   localized in a particular industry or range of products or that there are
other ways of identifying the relevant channels of influence, that one can
detect the    path of the spillovers in the sands   of the data.
      There   are other public goods which raise somewhat similar measurement

problems; the provision of roeds to the motor transport industry, of airports

and flight controllers to the airlines, and of security services to private

businesses. All of theae have certain aspects of increasing returns to them

but are also subject eventually to congestion in use and hence reasonable

pricing schemes are fessibla in principle. The education sector is possibly

somewhare     in between, providing both a private product which could be better
priced and knowledge externalities, both in the small        and in the lerge. In
this paper I will limit myself primarily to a discussion of the work on R&D

spillovers though some of the issues discussed apply also to attempts to

estimate other kinds of externalities.




                                        -'-




     There are basically two types of estimates to be found in        the literature:

estimates of social returns to a particular wall identified innovation or a

class of innovations whose effects are limited to         a particular industry or
sector end can be measured there; and regression based estimates of overall
returns   to   a particular stream of "outside" R&D expenditures,    outside the firm

or sector in question. Most of the earlier work in either vein was devoted to

measurement of social returns to public investments in agricultural research.

This reflected, in pert, the greater availability of agricultural data and, also,

the more advanced state of applied econometric research in agricultural economics

in the 1950s and early .1960s,

     Table I lists selected references on "spillover" studies both in

agriculture end outside of it. (For additional references and reviews see

Griliches 1979. Norton end Davis 1981, Neiresse and Mohnen 1990 and Huffman

and Evenson 1991). Perhaps the earliest attempt to compute something like a

sociel rste of return (actually a benefit-cost ratio) to public R&D         appears    in

Tb!, Schultz's book The Economic Organization of Agriculture (1954) where,

after having computed en index of total factor productivity growth for U.S.

agriculture, he estimates the amount of       resources   seved by the technological


                                  4
change that occurred and compares it to the total public investments in

agricultural research and finds it to have been a good investment.

      Having seen this work and having collected much data for my Ph.D. thesis

on  hybrid corn, 1 thought that such a computation could be improved by putting
it explicitely within the consumer surplus framework (here the influence of Al
Harberger's Public Finance Workshop at Chicago must have also been present).
Using   an estimate of the average yield improvement brought on by the use of

hybrid seed, from a variety of experimental and observational data, detailed

data on   the cost of hybrid corn research collected   from various agricultural

experiment stations, and an estimate of the price elaaticity of deaand for

corn from the existing agricultural economics literature       I computed current

and   future consumer surplus flows, discounted them back to the present1 end
compared thea    to the cumulated research coat (Griliches, 1958). The resulting

benefit-cost ratio of about 7 was interpreted, wrongly, as implying a 700

percent rate of return to public investments in hybrid corn research. The

associated internal rate of return was on the order of 40 percent. still very

high, but it was the first number that got the moat publicity and I did little

to   corrett   the record on this. In the sane paper, similar computations were

made using Schultz's numbers for total agricultural research and my own more

sketchy numbers on the potential social returns to hybrid sorghum research.

        This paper was quite influential and in the work that followed, improvements

were made both in the approximation formula for consumer surplus and in the

range of data used for the computation. Some of the major examples of

subsequent work in sgriculture were Peterson's (1967) estimate of returns to

poultry breading research, Ardito-Barletta's (1971) estimate of the returns to

corn breeding research in Nexico (both Ph.D. dissertations et Chicago), and
the Schmitz and Seckler (1970) estimate of returns to the tomato harvester.

Weisbrod (1911) used a similar approach to estimate the social return to

poliomyelitis rasearch. Probably the moat elaborate and impressive

application of such ideas was in the work of Mansfield and his students

(Mansfield et al 1977). It is also the only set of case studies availeble for

manufacturing innovstione. In computing social returns they tried to take

into account also the research expenditures of related unsuccesful innovators

and the losses in rents inourred by competitors. For the 17 innovations

exasined by them, the median social rate of return was 56 percent. somewhat

more than double the comparable median private rate of return of 25 percent.

One can also classify Bresnahsn's (1986) study of computer industry spillovers

to the financial sector as en extension of this general approach. In his

study, Bresnahan uses the estimated decline in resl" computer prices from

earlier studies by Knight and Chow and an assumed elasticity of derived demend

for   computers by the financial services sector to compute the implied totel
welfare gains from such apillovere. Trsjtenberg's (1990) estimates of welfare
gains    from CT Scanners is besed on a much more elaborate and estimated model

but could also be viewed as a descendent from this line of research.




                                        -   II   -



        Such case studies suffer from the objection that they are not

"representative," that they have concentrated on the calculetion of social

rates of returns or spillovers only for "successful" inventions or fields.

They are also much more difficult to do, requiring usually significant data

collection, familiarity with the topic or event being analyzed end expose one,
    potentially, to criticism by those who actually know     something   about the

    subjsct. For these reasons, especially the desire to be more general and

    inclusive, and   because   of the growing availability of computer resources, much

    of the recent work hes shifted to regression based studies. In these studies.

    measures of output or TFP or of their rates of growth, across firms or

    industries, are related to measures of R&D "capital" or the intensity of R&D

    investment (R&D to sales or value-added ratios). A subset of such studies

    includes also measures of "outside" or "borrowable" R&D capital in an attempt

    to estimate the contribution of spillovers to the growth in productivity.

           Again, both the earliest end some of the most sophisticated studies of

    thia topic have been done in agriculture. The first regression study listed

    in Table 1, Criliches (1964), used the differences in agricultural outputs and

    inputs across states in the U.S. in three different time periods (1949, 1954,

    end 1959) in production function estimation and included, among other

    veriables,   a measure of public expenditures on agricultural research, which
    differed from   state to state and over time. The resulting elasticity estimsta

    was on the order of 0.06, statistically significant, and implied the rather

    high social rate of return of $13 per year (at the average farm level) for

    each   dollar of public investments in research in agriculture. A number     of

    other   studies followed (see especially Evenson 1968 and Uuffman and Evenson
    1990 end Evenson 1968) which improved on the original study in many respects,
    first   by exploring more complicated leg functions in the construction of the
    public R&D variable, but second, and more    importantly, raising the question

S
    and facing up to the possibility of geographic spillovers, the fact that Iowa
    research isay also have an effect on agricultural productivity inNebrasks. I
    shall come back to s discussion of such issues leter on, in considering, the

                                      7
more general problem of .seasuring both the hIsizeu and the range' of the

relevant spill.

     Regression based studies raise problems of their own, The main set of

issues revolves around the question how output is measured and whether the

available measures actually capture the contribution of R&D (direct or

spilled-over), and how R&D "cspital" is to be constructed, deflated1 and

depreciated. Since I have discussed these issues at some length in Griliches

(1979 and 1988), I will focus here only on the particular issues raised by the

attempt to measure spillovers.




                                 8
                                                -"-
            The notion of externalities as a source of increasing returns end

    productivity growth has a long history in economics. Originally it was based

    on gains from specialiration, from the development of 'icnow-how," and on the

    interactinn of       craftsmen   and engineers. The idea of reconciling competitive

    equilibrium with increasing returns by modelling the individual firm

    production (or cost) function as depending parametrically, on industry

    aggregate activity variables (output or capital) goes hack to Edgeworth end

    before, (See Chipman 1965 end 1970 for surveys of the earlier literature.)

    Explicit algebraic formulations appear in Simon (1947), and Chipman (1970),

    and also in Arrow (1962) and Sheshinski (1967). In the latter papers the

    externality arises from leerning by doing" and is proxied by the size of the

    capital stock.       I came scross this kind of formulation first in an unpublished

    note by Grunfeld end Levhari (1962) and applied it to R&D in Criliches (1979).

           In that version, from which the following paragraphs borrow heavily, the

    level of productivity achieved by one firm or industry depends not only on its

    own   research   efforts but also on the level of the pool of general knowledge

    eccessible to it. Looking at a cross section of firms        within a   particular

    industry, one will not he able to distinguish such effects, If the pools of

    knowledge differ for different industries or aresa, some of it could he deduced

    from interindustry comparisons over time and space. Moreover, the productivity

    of    own resesrch   is affected by the size of the pool or pools it can drew upon.

    This leads to a formulation in which there is an interaction between the size
S

    of    individual and eggrogate research end development efforts.

           A simple model of within'industry spillover effects is given by


                                          9
                           YI —        i     is


where      is the output of the ith fire which depends on the level of

conventional inputs X its specific knowledge capital I(j. and on the state
of   aggregate   knowledge in      this     industry K. Note that constant returns are

assumed in the firm's own inputs, X and K .                     This simplifies      the example

greatly. Assuming also that (1) the aggregate level of knowledge capital

K— EK is simply the sum of all specific                     firm research   and development

capital levels and that (2) own resources ere ellocated optimally and all

firms in the industry face the same relative factor prices, then the

individual K1 to               ratios will he given by

                                  Ki



where P and Pk are the prices of K end K. respectively, and r, the K/K

ratio does not depend on I. The individual production functions can then be

aggregated to yield:

                                iii e
              S Y — S BK (K /X )7K' —                S   BKi rTKa — Br7K DI
                                                                        au

Since   the Ki/Ki ratios are all equal to r, ao elao is S Ku                            which we

ran substitute back into this equation, yielding:

                     —    Z(S                     S K1 —   BX1 KIL+7
                                u/ X)7K'
Where. Ka —              g —               and the coefficient of aggregate knowledge

capital is higher (y 1- p) than at the micro level (                   only),   reflecting at the

aggregate level not only the private but also the social returns to research




                                                    10
    and development, providing thereby a framework for reconciling the results

    from micro and macro based R&D studies.

           Of course, this formulation is rsther simplistic and is based on a whole

    string of untenable assumptions, the major ones being: constant returns to

    scale with respect to        and Ki and common factor prices for mu finns

    within an industry. These assumptions could be relaxed. This would add a

    number of "mix" terms to the equation, indicating how aggregate productivity

    would shift if the share of ,   say, the larger firms, were to increase (in the
    case of economies of scale). If the mix of firma and/or the firm specific

    prices stay stable then the above formula remains a reasonable approximation

    to a more complicated underlying reality.

           The problem is much more complicated when we remlize that we do not deal

    with one closed industry, but with a whole array of firms and industries which

    "borrow" different amounts of knowledge from different sources according to

    their economic and technological distence from them. (See Kislev and Evenson

    1975. chapter 4, for sn example of modelling such borrowing.) The relevant

    concept of "distance" is very hard to define empirically. 'if we return to

    our previous example snd now interpret the index i as referring to industries

    rather than firms it makes little sense to define K am t K .
                                                           a         ii    Rather
                                      Kei    —   1w   K
                                                  ijj
    is the amount of aggregate knowledge borrowed by the ith industry from all

    available eources. K measures the levels available in these sources, while

    wij the "weighting" function, can be interpreted as the effective fraction

    of knowledge in j borrowed by industry i. Presumably w becomes smaller
5
    as   the "distance," in some sense, between i end j        increases. Thus we need



                                        11
as the diatance," in some sense between i and j           increases, Thus we need

an additional distributed (lag) over apace function to construct a measure of

the stock of borrowed knowledge.

     What should such a weighting funotion be based on? Earlier suggestions

were based on "vertical" borrowing: Frown   and Conrad   (1967) used the input-

output table to aeaaure the closenesa" of industries proportional to their

purchases front each other, while Terleckyj (1971i) used the capital and

intermediate inputs purchases matrix weights, assuming that "borrowed"

research and development is embodied in purchased inputs. Raines (1968) used

the "horizontalTM product field classification of NSF to include as inputs

also the research and development expenditures of other industries which were

reported as belonging to its product field. More recent examples of these

approaches can be found in Terleckyj (1980), Wolf and Nsdiri (1987), and also

partially in Strelacchini (1989).

     Actually, as already noted in the introduction, there are two distinct

notions of research and development "spillovera" here which are often confused

in the literature. In the first one, research end development intensive

inputs are purchased frost other industries at lees than their full "qualicy"

price. This is a problem of measuring capital equipment, materials and their

prices correctly and net really a case of pure knowledge spillovers. If

capital equipment purchase price indices reflectedfully the improvements in

their quality, i.e., were based on hedonic calculations (Griliches, 1971),

there would be no need to deal with it. As currently measured, however, total

factor productivity in industry i is effected not only by its own       research
end development hut also by productivity improvements in industry j to the

extent of its purcheses from that industry and to the extent that the



                              12
    improvements in j have not been spproprieted by its producers and/or have not

    been incorporated in the officiel price indices of that (i) industry by the

    relevant statistical agencies. The use of purchase flow weighted research and

    development measures assumes that social returns in industry j are

    proportional to its research and development invsstaent levels and that the

    amount   of such returns transferred to industry i is proportionsl to its
    purchases from industry j.
          A good example     of   such productivity transfers would be the computar
    industry. It has had a tremendous reel productivity growth, though most of
    it,   until recently was unmeasured in the officisl indices, and      unappropriated
    within   the industry itself (because of rather intensive competitive

    pressures). Different industries have benefitted differentislly from it,

    depending on their rate of computer purchases. One way of accounting for it

    would be to adjust upward the relevant capital equipment figures by their

    computer content. (See Eerndt and Morrison 1991. end Siegel end Criliches

    1990 for recent attempts along this line.) The alternative is to 'import the

    computer industry's research and development in proportion to an industry's

    purchases from it.

          But   these era not real knowledge spillovers. They are just consequences
    of conventional measurement problems. True epillovers are ideas borrowed by
    research teams of industry i from the research results of industry j. It
    Ic not clear that this kind of borrowing is particularly related to input
    purchase flows.    The photogrephic equipment industry and the scientific

    instruments   industry   may not buy much from each other hut say hem e sense,
I
    working on similar things and hence benefiting much from each other's

    research. One could argue that this is vhst the SIC classification is for.



                                        13
Presumably, the usefulness of somebody else's research to you is highest if he

is in the same    four-digit    SIC classification as you are; it is still high if

he is in the same three-digit industry group; and, while lower than before,

the results of    research by   a firm in   your   own two-digit classificstion (but

not three-digit) are more likely to be valuable to you than the avsrage

results of research outside of it. The problem arises when we want to extend

this notion across other two-digit industries. Here there is no natural order

of closeness (e.g., is "leather closer to 5food" or to "textiles"?). The

situation   is complicated further by the fact that micro R&D data are collected

from firms rather than establishments and that major R&D performers are

conglomerates, spanning several four-, three-, and even two-digit SIC

classifications. The NSF's applied R&D by product field data help here a

little but not enough. Ideally, such data, should be collected at the

business-unit level. Unfortunately, the collection of such within-fin

product line R&D data was stopped by the FTC in 1977.

     There are two possible epproachea to the construction of "spillover"

stocks or "pools": 1. A symmetric approach, where every firm in a sub-

industry is treated equelly, and all R&D within the industry or some

alternative classification scheme ia aggregated with equal weights. 2. Where

every possible    pair of fins, industries, or countries is        treated separately,

and the relevant stock of spillovers for the "receiving" unit is constructed

specifically for it, using its "distance" from the various spilling units es a

weight.

     The first type of construction corresponds         to the first formula given
shove. At   the two digit level, total industry R&D was used as a measure of

within-industry    spillovers by Bernstein end Nadiri (1989) in analyzing


                                   14
     individual fins cost functions.           Rather   than using     the   SIC classification as

     is, one    could   group three-digit SIC categories            into clusters based on a priori
     notions    about the extent of cosisonality in their technological and scientific

     base. This is similar to the use           of   crop-climatic regions by Evenaon and

     Kialev (1973) with all units having equal access to all the research done by

I!   othera    in   the same industry   or region. In some models            (especially Evsnson end

     Kislev 1973, and      Schankersian 1979, chap. 5)        the   amount borrowed depends also
     on    the level of own   research expenditures,         allowing thereby for an interaction

     and potential synergy between the two flows of research expenditures:

     "inside'    snd   'outside." In the Huffmsn snd Evenson (1991) work there is an

     effect not only from the      research of       others within the same climatic region

     but    also an additional spillover, at a lower rate, from -neighboring regions.
             In the second type of construction1 there is a wide choice of possible
     wsights    to model what is, essentielly, an intellectual-scientific-

     technological "distance" between firms and industries. Among the various

     possibilities would be; (1) using         the   NSF's applied research and development

     product field by industry table to induce s distance metric, on the assumption

     that    if an industry is doing resesrch and development on sotse other industry's
     products, it is in some sense closer            to it   technologically than if it does not
     (Raines 1968, Schankerisan     1979,     chapter 5); (2) using compsny industrial

     diversification data from the Census of Enterprises or Compustst data to

     compute an alternative measures of closensss in the sales-demand space (see

     Jaffe 1986); (3) using information on rates of cross referencing of patents

     across product fields to infer the technological distance between them. (4)

     using a cross-classification of patents (Scherer 1982, Englander et al 1988)

     or innovations (Robeson et el, 1988, Sterlacchini 1989) by industry of



                                         15
production and industry of use, to Irflow.thM R&D expenditures from

performing to "using" industries, and (5) using the diversification of a

firm's patenting activity across technologically determined patent classes to

infer 'overlap' and closenees measuree for inventive activity (as in .Jaffe

1986).   I will discuss the last two approaches in some more detail further on.

In each of these cases one has to assume some simple weighting functions

(e.g.. influence declining exponentially with the particular concept of

diatance) or group the data into a few categories: immediate neighborhood.

related fields, and the rest. The available data will not support very

refined approaches. There are not enough degrees of freedom or independent

variation in such productivity and research and development series to allow

one to estimate very complex distributed lag schemes over both time and all

the other firms and industries.

     Much of the recent work has used patent data to develop measures of the

"direction' of spillovers. A major data construction effort was pursued by

Scherer (1982. 1984) who classified a lsrge sample of patents both by the

industry where the invention occurred and by the industry (or industries) where

it was expected to have its major impact. Having constructed such a

'technology flows" table Scherer used it to reweight the available R&D data by

line of business into measures of both 'origin" and 'imported" (used) R&D from

elsewhere, assuming that the flow of knowledge to industry i from industry j

was proportional to the fraction of j's patents deemed to be "destined' for

industry i. In explaining labor productivity growth at the 2 and 4-digit SIC

level Scherer showed that the 'transmitted' user R&D variable had a higher

coefficient and was often more significant than the own   "origin'   or process

R&D variables. His results were quite sensitive, however, both to the time



                              16
    period chosen for the analysis and the particular subset of industries

    included in it. Criliches and Lichtenberg (1984) used a store detailed set of

    data on TFP growth at the 4-digit SIC level and found lesa of en effect for

k   the    Husedn R&D component. They also interpreted the equation as meesuring

    improvements in materials end equipment bought f row other industries, with the

    improvements    being proportional to the R&D investments of the producing
    industries    and the size of their flows being related to the allocation of R&D
•
    effort as measured by patents destined for the using industry.        Englander et

    el    (1988) use   Canadian   patent data cross-classified by industry of origin and
    industry    of potential use to construct similar measures of own R&D    and s
    reweighted    measure of the R&D from other industries and countries. Mobnen end

    Lepine (1988) usa the estee Canadian data to analyze cost reductions in 12

    Canadian industries. In both etudies the results differ by industry and time

    period snd are sensitive to the exclusion of en over-all measure of

    disembodied technical change, such as a time trend.

            In a series of papers Jaffe (1986, 1988, end 1989) comes closest at

    looking for the second type of       spillovers, the disembodied kind. His distance
    measure    is one of proximity in technological research space end does not iisply

    flows in a particular direction. His measure of "closeness" between any two

•   firma uses    the overlap     in the distribution of their patents by detailed patent
    class    and indexes it by the uncentered correlation coefficients between them,

    their "angular separation." The assumption is made that two firms that arm

    active    in the same   technological areas, as indicated by their teking out

    petenta in the same pstent classes, are more likely to benefit from each

    others research results. Jeffe constructs for each firm a measure of en

    available "pool" of outside R&D, with the R&D of other firma being weighted



                                        17
inversely to their estimated technologicaL distance from the particular firm,

Jaffe "validates this measure by including it in the estimation of a

production function and patent equation for theee finns, finding a positive

effect of the "pool" variable. He elso estimates profit and Tobin's Q

equations where the pool variable shows up with a negative coefficient. More
recently, Jaffe (1989) has studied the effects of geographic proximity to

university based research on the patenting of closely located firms with

similar research objectives. Henderson, Jeff e end trajtenberg (1990) era

currently uaing patent citation frequencies to university based patents to

assess the contribution of universities to industrial productivity in general.

     The alternative to the search for a concept of technological closeness or

distance is to use the research invastaents of different industries as

separate variables, But that is not really feasible. At best we would have

about 30 years of data for eech of about 20 industries. We cannot include 20

separate R&D variables in each of the industry equations; there simply are

not enough degrees of freedom there. Bernstein and Nadiri (1991) "solva" the

problem by choosing only a few industries each, using "correct" sign restrictions

for this purpose. But the multicollinearity between the various R&D seriea can

easily produce "wrong" siBns at some point in such a procedure. The alternative

of using "significance teats" is also unattractive. Statistically insignificant

spillers may still be economically quite important. More generally, it is

doubtful that such a discontinuous "in-er-out' modelling is really the right way

to approach this problem. We need to weight and to aggregate somehow and that is

what the idea of technological distance is for: to tell us how to weight the

different research seriea and collapse them into one or a few variables so that

the empirical importance of R&D spillovera can be estimated and assessed. With



                              18
such estimates it would be possible to coapute not only the return to a particular

R&D expenditure in its fownu   industry but   also the total returns to R&D including

the spillovers beyond its own industry's borders.

     A number of studies have used the cost function framework to estimate the

effects of spillovers (Bernstein 1989, Bernstein and Nadiri 1988, 1989. and

1991, and Hohnen and Lapine 1988). The advantage of the cost function

approach is thst it is often more flexible in the functional form used and

that it benefits from imposing more structure, considering the impact of R&D

spillovers not only on total costs but also on the amount of labor and

intermediate products demanded. The disadventage is the required use of

prices and the appearance of output on the right-hand-side of the equation.

One is unlikely to have good input price data which differ significantly

across firms and across time, especially R&D and physical capital prices.

Moreover, both prices and output should be "expected" rather thsn actual

values. The use of er-post output produces an unwarrented appearance of

economies of scale and is likely to bias upward the own and outside R&D

capital coefficients, especially in the absence of any other trend-like terms

in the equations.

     Another way of looking for R&D externalities is to look for measures of

R&D output rather than input (expenditures). Schankerman (1979) uses a

weighted measure of patents granted in other industries in explaining the

productivity of R&D, in terms of patents granted, in a particular industry.

lie gets positive results for the variable, but their significance is suspect,

since the underlying data, patents granted by SIC, were constructed by the

Patent Office (OTAF) on the basis of a "concordance" between patent classes and

SIC's which had a large amount of double counting of the same patents in



                               19
different industries (see Griliches 1990 for more details on this). Wu (1990),

following Cabbalero and Lyons (1989), uses total factor productivity growth in

other industries (with an attempt to adjust for cyclicality) as her measure of

potentially available externalities. This raises the more general question of

what can be learned from looking et productivity residuals across and between

industries.

     The hypothesis of R&D spillovers does not really require the assumption

that these effects are larger in the "home' industry and that they can be

measured by the fraction of the total effect spilled out, using the own effect

as a base of measurement. It is quite possible for an idea to have its entire

effect elsewhere than where it was originated. Nevertheless, a common approach

to the measurement of spillovers eesumes that they are proportional to the

'first order' effects within the 'sending" industry. That is, an industry that

has more productivity growth baa also more to spill out. This view leeds one to

look for correlations, contemporaneous and lagged, among TFP or production

function residuals across industries. Wu, for example, using 36 manufacturing

industries tries to construct 'spillover" measures weighting other industry

residuals by various technological and input consumption distance measures. Her

results are meager and difficult to interpret both beceuse the mean effect of

technological change across all industries, including the overall spillover

effect, is already absorbed in the industry constants and cannot be distilled

agsin from the residuals, and because, current cross-correlations dominate the

results. But it is unlikely that reel technological spillovere sre

cnntemporeneous. One would expect them to be subject to quite long lags.

Statistically, the procedure is equivalent to looking for perticular patterns of

spatial' residual correlations, in some technological epmce spanned by the



                              20
    various industries, both across and between industries and across time. While

    there   is literature on both spatial correlation and on dynamic    factor models,   it
    ia doubtful that ws can estimate today convincing models of overlapping, shifting

    relations of mutual causality, given the poorness of the underlying detailed

    industry productivity measures. They are subject to significant common cyclical

    influences and to large measurement errors induced by the well-known difficulties

    in measuring output, output prices, capital, materials and the changing skill

    levels of the lsbor force. Moreover, it is clear that such models are in general

    not identifiable in the context of a free contemporansous cross-correlation of

    disturbances (errors) across industries. The prior information necessary to

    identify such models consists exactly of the same kind of information on patterns

    of influence and their reletive leg structures discussed earlier in the context of

    R&D spilovers. In econometrics there is also no free lunch.

         The problem of the timing of such effects has yet to be given adequate

    attention.   The   usual   procedure has been to construct some measure of R&D
    capital for each unit and then use it in the construction of the aggregated
    "pool" or available "spillover" measure. But this ignores the possibility

    that spillovers take more time than "oWn" effects, both because of relative
    secrecy end publication delays, and the time it may take for them to be

    expressed in new products end processes and diffused through out the relevant

    industrial structure. Civen the diffuse nature of such effects end the likely

    presence of long and variable legs, it is not surprising that "significant"

    findings are far end in between in this area. Moreover, it makes one somewhat

•   skeptical about the positive findings already reported even though one vents

    very much to believe in their reality.

        The expectation of significant lags in such processes is also one reason



                                      21
why I do not put much trust in recent studies which find effects of

"aggregate externalities, either from aggregate activity (Caballero-Lyons 1989)

or froa investments in aggregate public capital (Aschauer 1989 and Munnell

1990). Besides partially adjusting for errors of measurement in the other

variables and proxying for left out capacity utilization effects, the more or

less contemporaneous timing of such affects is just not plauaibls. The

apparent correlations are due more to common business cycle effects, partially

induced by shifts in government expenditures, then to direct externalities.

Not that I do not believe in the contribution of public capital to the

functioning of our economy, only that I doubt that it can he measured

adequately in this fashion.

     The major research questions in this area remain measurement questions.

how much of the R&D in an area or industry is "spillable"? Who are the

potential recipients? And is there an interaction between their own research

sndevours and what they get out form the potentially available pool of the

results of others? The first question is related to the level of aggregation

in the data. This has been explored to some extent in the agricultural

economics literature, especially by Evenson. The research done within a

paricular state experiment station is a mixture of a variety of research

programs devoted to different sub-areas and sub-products. Only a part of it

is relevant to the outside world. The larger the unit and the more variegated

it is, the more likely it is that there will be less there to spill out than

may ha indicated by the aggregate numbers. Evanson, in his work, tries a

number of "deflators" which sre either proportional to the sire of a state or

unit, to the number of different climatic regions within a state, or to a

variance like measure of the internal concentration of research within fields



                              22
or subfields. The issue of the relevant size unit becomes very difficult but

also   cruciel when we abandon the    eafe harbor of constant returns iitodals end

set sail looking for externalities. It is clear that a small specialtzed
computer firm is likely to benefit froa some of IEi's reeearch results but

probably much less than would be implied by      the total resources devoted by lEft

to   computer research. The small firs is likely to have specialized in a much
narrower   niche then is described by the available SIC clasaification.

       One other way of measuring externalities of R&D remains to be mentioned.

If there are aignificant externalities to R&D within an industry, then the

computed   returns should be higher at the     industry thsn the firm level. A

comparison   of firm based R&D results with those found using various industry
aggregates (e.g.. see Tables     2 and 3   in Maireeee and Mohnen 1990) does not
indicate, however, consistently higher R&D coefficients at the aggregate
level. There may be two reasons for this negative finding. In the R&D
"intensity" version of estimated productivity equations, the coefficient of

the R&D variable can be interpreted as a gross rate of return, conteining also

a depreciation component. The relevant private rate of depreciation of R&D

stock at the firm level is potentially much higher (see Rakes and Schankerman

1984) than what is   likely   to prevail et the overall industry level. The

latter contains a large component of social returne whose depreciation or

obeoleeance should be much less. Hence, without taking into account

explicitly the difference between private and social obsoleaence rates it may

prove difficult to make much of such comparisons. Morever, for the same

reason, one should probably use different R&D capital concepts at different

levels of aggregation, based on rather different depreciation aseumptions.

       In spite all of these difficulties, there hes been a significant number of



                                 23
reasonably well done studies all pointing in the saute direction: R&D

spillovers are present, their siagnitude may be quite large, and social rates

of return remain significantly above private rates. A selective list of such

findings is presented in Table 2. The estimated social rates of return look,

actuelly, surprisingly uniform in their indication of the importance of such

spillovers. While one must worry whether this is not just the result of self-

imposed publication filters, my own involvement in this work end my acquintance

with many of the other researchers in this ares leads ate to believe in the

overall reality of such findings.

        Can R&D spillovers account for a significant proportion of the observed

growth in per capita income and measured TFPI If we take the estimates in

Table 2 seriously, they imply en estimate of u         • the elasticity   of output

with respect to aggregate "outside" R&D between about a half end double of y

the elasticity of output with respect to private R&D. Taking the upper range

of these estimates, with a y              .1 (see Mairesse end Sassenou for e survey of

estimates), and a eat of "stylized and optimistic facts about economic

growth:

y --    growth    in output per worker       —   .03

c --    growth    in capital peE worker      —   .03
Is -   - growth   in R&D capital per worker —    .04

I --    growth    in the nuaber of workers —     .01

n --    share of capital — .3
which includes the assumption of rather rapid growth in knowledge capital

(due, say, to a lower social depreciation rate), yields the folloving values

for the growth equation




                                    24
(y-l) — cr(c-l) + Y(k-l) +      i.tlc   + t

 .03 —      .Sit   .03+ ,lx .04+ .2,c .OS+t
 .03 —      .009 + .004 + .010 + .007



where R&D returns can account for up to half of the growth in output-per-man

and about   three-quarters   of the     measured TFP growth most of the explanatory

effect   coming from the apillover component which is Large, in       part,   because

it is the source of increasing returns (the growth in 1 not being subtracted

from it). A decline in overall R&D growth from about 5 percent per year, to 2

percent (or less), such as happened between the early 1960s and middle 1970s

(see Grilichea 1986 end 1989) could in this interpretation, have contributed

significantly to the productivity slowdown, with the R&D contribution to

growth dropping from .014 to .005, and accounting for about a half or more of

the slowdown.

     This 5backoftha envelope" calculation probably exaggerates the

potential magnitude And effect of such spillovers, both because of the upward

selectivity-biaa in the resulta reported in Table 2, and because of a range of

measurement issues discussed at greater lengths in Griliches 1979 and 1989.

It does indicate, however, the importance of knowing the actual magnitude of

such effects. 8ut, the evailable data on this topic are rather meager, and

hence, additional progress will have to await the appearance of better data

and the development of better econometric techniques for tracing the

interaction between firms and industries over time, in an ill-defined end

changing multi-dimensional space of technological opportunities.




                                  25
                                       Footnote




*Harvard University and the NBER. I have benefitted (received apillovers?)

from reading and re-reading other surveys on this topic, especially,

Schankerman (1979, Chapter 5). Mohnen (1989), Huffman end Evenson (1991),

Mairesse and Mohnen (1990), and Mairesae and Sassenou (1991). This work has

been   supported by grants from   the Bradley and Guggenheim Foundations. An

earlier   version of   this paper was presented at the NEER Conference   on Econoaic
Growth at Vail, Colorado, April 1990.




                                   1
                                    References


Agnew. CE. and Wise, D.E., 1978, 'The Impact      of R&D   on Productivity: A

     Preliminary Report,' Peper presented st the Southern Economic Association

     Meetings. Princeton: Msthtecb, Inc.

Arrow,KJ., 1962, 'The Economic Implications of Leaning by Doing,'         Review of
     Economic Studies, 29(3). 155-173

Aschauer, D.A., 1989, 'Is Public Expenditure Productive?', Journal of Monetary

     Economics1 23(2), 177-200
Barlette, N. A., 1971, 'Costs and   Social   Benefits of Agricultural Research in

     Mexico.' unpublished PhJ). thesis, University of Chicago

Benhabib, J. and B. Jovanovic, 1991, 'Externalities and Crowth Accounting,'

     The American Economic Review, 81(1) 082-113

Berndt, E. and K. Morrison, 1991, 'Assessing the Productivity of Information

     Technology Equipment in U.S. Manufacturing Industries,' NBER     Working
     Paper   No. 3582

Bernstein, 3., 1989, 'The Structure of Canadian Interindustry R&D Spillovers,

     and the Rates of Return to R&D,' Journal of Industrial Economics, 37(3),

     315- 328

Bernstein, J.I. end MI, Nadiri, 1988, lnterinduetry R&D Spillovers, Rates of

    Return, and Production in High-Tech Industries,' American Economic Review

    tBB2L and Proceedings, 78(2), 429-434

Bernstein, J.I. and M.I. Nadiri, 1989, 'Research and Development end Intra-

     industry Spillovers: An Empirical Applicetion of Dynamic Duality,"

    Review of Economic Studies, 56, 249-269
Bernstein, J.I. and MI. Nadiri, 1991, "Product Demand, Cost of Production,

     Spillovers, and the Social Rate of Return to R&D." EBER Working Paper

     No. 3625

Bresnahan, T.F,, 1986, "Measuring Spillovers from 'Technical Advance'

     American Economic Review. 76, 741-755

Brown, M. and A. Conrad, 1967, "The Influence of Research on CES Production

     Relations," in M. Brown (ed.) The Theory and Eispirical Analysis of

     Production, Studies In Income and Wealth, Vol. 3, New York: Columbia

     University Press for NBER,       275-340
Cabbalero, R. end R.K. Lyons, 1989, "The Role of External Economies in U.S

     Manufacturing." flEE Working Paper 3033, July

Chase Econometrics Associates Inc., 1975, "The Economic Impact of NASA R&D

     Spending,"   Balm Cynwynd, PA.

Chipman, 3., 1965. "A Survey of the Theory of International Trade: Part 2,

     The Neo-ClassIcal Theory," Econometrics, 33(4), 685-761

Chipmen, J., 1970 "External Economies of Scale and Competitive Equilibrium,"

     The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84, 347-385

Englander, AS. , R. Evenson and N. Hanazaki, 1988, "R&D, Innovation and the Total

     Factor Productivity Slowdown," CECD Economic Studies, No. 11

Evenson, it., "The Contrihution of Agricultural Research and Extenaion to

     Agricultural Production," 1968, unpublished Ph.D. thesis, University of

     Chicago

Eveneon, R., 1984, "Technical Change in U.S. Agriculture," in R. Nelson, ed.,

     Government and Technical Change: A Cross   Industry   Analysis, New York:

      Pergamon Press




                                  2
    Everison, k. 1988, "Research, Extension, and U.S. Agricultural Productivity: A

          Statistical Decomposition Analysis," in Agricultural Productivity:

         Measurement end çp],anation, Susan M. Capalbo and John 14. AnUs Cede.),

         Washington: Resources for    the   Future

    Evenson, R. and Y. Kislev, 1973, "Research end Productivity in Wheat and

         Maize," Journal of Politicel Economy, 81(6), 1309-1329

    Coto, A. and IC. Suzuki, 1989, "R&D Capital, Rate of Return on R&D Investment

         end Spillover of R&D in Japanese Manufacturing Industries," Review of

         Economics and Statistics, U0tI(4), 555-564

    Crilichas, Z., 1957, "Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of

         Technological Chamuge." Econometrica, 25(4), 501-522

    Criliches, Z., 1958, "Research Cost snd Social Returns: Hybrid Corn end

         Related Innovations," Journal of Political Economy," LXVI, 419-431

    Criliches, B., 1964, "Research Expenditures, Education, and the Aggregate

         Agricultural Production Function," American Economic Review, LIV(6),

         9 61-974

    Criliches, B., Ced.) 1971, Price Indexes and fty Change, Cambridge,

         MA. Harvard University Press

    Criliches, B. ,   1979,"Iaeues in Assessing the Contribution of Reaeerch and
         Development to Productivity Crowth," The Bell Journal of Economics,

         10(1), 92-116

    Crilichea, B., 1988, 5Productivity Puzzles end R&D: Another Nonexplanation,"

         Journal of Economic I'erapectives, 2(4). 9-21

4   Crilichea,   Z., 1990, Petent Stetiatica as Economic Indicators; A Survey,"

         Journal of Economic Literature, 28, 1661-1797




                                     3
Griliches, Z., and F. Lichtenberg, 1984, "Interindustry Technology Flows end

     Productivity Growth: A Reexamination,"         Review f Economics

     Statistics, LXVI(2), 324-329

Crunfeld, Y. and 0. Levhari, 1962, "A Note on External Economies."

     Mimeographed

Uenderson, R. • A. Jeffs, and M. Trajtenberg, 1990, "Telling Trails out of

     Schools: University Patents and Their Citations." papar presented at the

     ALA Meetings in Washington, D.C.

liuffaan, W.E. and R.E. Evanson, 1991. Science for Agriculture, Iowa State

     Univeraity Press, forthcoming

Jaffa, A., 1986, "Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R&D: Evidence

      frow Firms' Patents Profits and Market Value, Americen Economic Review,

      76, 984-1001

.Jaffe, A. .   1988, "Demand and Supply Influencea in R&D Intensity and
      Productivity Growth," Review of Economics end Statistics, Lfl(3),

      431-437

Jaffe, A., 1989, "Real Effects of Academic Research," The American Economic

      Review, 79(5), 957-910

Kislev, Y. and R. Evenson, 1975, Agricultural Research and Productivity,

      Yale University Press

Knutson, M. and L.G. Tweeten, 1979, "Toward an Optimal Rate of Growth in

      Agricultural Production Research and Extension," American Journal of

      Agricultural Economics, 61, 70-76

L.avin, R.S. and P.C. Reiss. 1988, 'Coat-Reducing and Demand-Creating R&D with

      Spillovara," The Rand Journal of Economics, 19(4), 538-556




                                   4
     Mairesse, J. and P. Mobnen, 1990, "Rscherche-Developpement at Productivite:

          Un sorvol   de is litteraturs econometrique,' Economie        Ststistigue,
          No. 237-8. 99-108

•   Mairesse, J. and M. Saasenou, 1991, "R&D and      Productivity:   A Survey of

          Econometric Studies at the Fire Level," fl Review. No. 8, April 1991,

          9-43, OECD, Paris

    Mansfield1 E.. 1968, Industrial Research          Technical Innovation, New York

         W.W. Norton & Co.

    Mansfield, E., J. Rapoport, A. Romeo, S. Wagner and C. Beardsley, 1977, "Social

         and Private Rates of Return from Industrial Innovations," Quarterly

         Journal of Economics, 77, 221-240

    Mansfield, E., J. Rapoport, A. Romeo, E. Villani, S. Wagner end P. Music, The

         Production end 4pp]Jcation of New Industrial Technology, 1977, New York:

         W.W. Norton and Company

    Meyer-Mrahmer, F., 1990, "Effects of New Technologies on Employment," German

         Institute for Economic Research (01W), January.

    Mohnen, P.,    1989,   "New Technologies and Interlndustry Spillovsrs," presented
         at   the OECD International Seminar on   Science, Technology end Economic

         Growth,    Paris,   France, June 5-8

    Mobnen, P. and N. Lepine, 1988, "Payments for Technology es e Fector of

         Production," University of Montreal, Depertzsent of Economics, Paper No.

         8810

    Munnell, AAI., 1990, "Why Has Productivity Growth Declined: Productivity and

         Public Investment," New En&lend Economic Review, Jan/Feb, 2-22

    Norton, 0.67. end J.S. Davis, 1981, "Evaluating Returns to Agricultural Research:

        A Review," American Journal of &riculturel Economics, 63, 685-699
Peterson, W.L. •      1967. "Return to Poultry Research in the United States'

     Journal of Farm Economics 49. 656-669

gaines, F,, 1968, 'The Impact of Applied Research and Development on

     Productivity," Washington University Working Paper No. 6814

Robson, M. •    J.   Townsend and K. Pavett, 1988, "Sectoral Patterns of Production

     and Use of Innovations in the U.K.; 1945-83,' Research Policy, 17(1).

     1-14

Roeer, P.N. •    1990a, 'Endogenous Technological Change,' Journal of Political

     Economy, 98(5), 571-5102

Romer, P.M., 199Gb, 'Capital, Labor, and Productivity," Brooking Papg on

     Economic Activity: Microeconomics 1990, 337-367

Sala-i-Martin, X., 1990, 'Lecture Notes on Economic Growth," NEER        Working
     Paper No. 3563

Schanker,san, N., 1979, 'Essays on the      Economics of Technical Change: The

     Determinants, Rate of Return and Productivity Impact of Research end

     Development,' Harvard Ph.D. thesis

Scherer, F.M., 1982, "Interindustry Technology Flows and Productivity Growth,"

     Review of Economics and Statistics, LXIV,       627-634
Scherer, F.M., 1984, 'Using Linked Patent and R&D Data to Measure

      Interindustry      Technology Flows,' in 1. Griliches, ad., i. Patents       end

      Productivity, Chicsgo: University of Chicago Press

Schmitz,    A. and    D. Seclcler, 1970, 'Mechanized Agriculture and Social Welfare:

      The   Case of the Tomato Harvester," American Journal of Agricultural
      Economics, 52, 567-577
Schmookler, J., 1966, Invention and Economic Growth, Cambridge,        MA;   Harvard

     University       Press
Schultz, T.W.,     1954,   The Economic Organization of Asriculture, New York;

     McGraw-Hill

Sheehinaki, E., 1967,       "Optimal Accumulation with   Learning by Doing." in Karl

     Shell   (ed.), Essays on the Theory of Optimal Economic Growth. Cambridge,
     NA: MIT Preaa

Siegel,   0. and   2. CrUtches, 1990, •Purchaaed Services, Outsourcing,
     Computers,    and Productivity in Manufacturing," paper presented at the

     NEER Conference on Reaearch in Income and Wealth on Output Measurement in

     the Services Sector, Charleston, South Carolina, May 4-5. Forthcoming in

     MBER Conference Book,

Simon, H,, 1947, "Some Models for the Study of the Economic Effects of

     Technological Change," Cowles Commission DP 213, University of Chicago,

     unpublished

Strelacchini, A., 1989, "R&D Innovations, and Total Factor Productivity

     Growth in British Manufacturing," Applied Economics, 21, 1549-1562

Sveikauskas, L, 1981. "Technological Inputs and Multifactor Productivity

    Growth," Review of Economics end Statistics, 63(2), 275-282

Terleckyj, N., 1967 "Comment on Brown and Conrad," in N. Brown, ed., The

    Theory and pical Anelysis of Production, Studies in Income and Wealth,

    Vol. 3, New York: Columbia University Press for NBER, 372-378

Terleckyj, H., 1974 ,      Effects   of R&D on the Productivity Growth of Industries:

    An Exploratory              National   Planning Association, Washington, D.C.

Terlecky), N., 1980, "Direct and indirect Effects of Industrial Research and

    Development on the Productivity Growth of Industries," in J.N. Kendrick

    and RN. Vaccare (edsj, New Developments in Productivity Meesuresant and

    Analysis, Chicago; University of Chicago Press
Trajtanberg, M., 1990, Economic Analysis of Product Innovations, Cambridge,

    MA; Harvard University Press

Weimbrod1 B.A., 1971, •Costs and Benefits of Medical Research: A Case Study of

     Poliomyelitis,"Journal of Political Economy, 79(3), 527-544

Wolf, E.N. and MI. Nadiri. 1967, uSpillovar Effects, Linkage Structure,

     Technical Progress, and R&D, New York University. C.V. Starr Center

    Research Report 87/43

Wu, J.Y. 1990, An Empirical Investigation into R&D Externalities at the

     Industry Level, Honors thesis, Harvard College
                     Table 1; R&D Spillovers; Selected References



Case   Studies                                      Regression Eatteates


                                  Agriculture


Schultz (1953)                                       Grilichee (1964)

Crutches (1958)                                      Evenson    (1968, 1984 1988)
Paterson (1967)                                      Evenson and Kislev (1975)

Schmttz and   Seckler    (1970)                      Knutson and Tweeten (1979)

Ardlto-Barletta (1971)                               Huf titan and Evenson (1991)

                                    Industry


Mansfield et al (1977)                               Brown and   Conrad (1967)

Bresnaban   (1986)                                   Raines (1968)
                                                     Terleckyj   (1974, 1980)

                                                     Agnew4Jise (1978)

                                                     Scherer (1982)

                                                     Crlliches-Lichtcnberg (1984)

                                                     Jaffe (1986, 1988, 1989)

                                                     Englander et al (1988)

                                                     Mohnen-Leptne (1988)

                                                     Bernatein-Nadiri (1988, 1989, 1991)

                                                     Strelacehini (1989)


  Health                                                 NASA

Weisbrod (1971)                                      Chase Econoeetrjcs (1975)

TraJtenberg (1990)
        Table 2; Selected Estimates of Returns to R&D end R&D pi1lovere


I. Agriculture*                                Rates of Return to Public R&D

    Grjljches (1958) Hybrid corn                              35 - 40
                     Hybrid sorghum                              20

    Peterson (1967) Poultry                                   21 - 25

    Schsiitz-Seckler (1970) Tomato harvester                  37 - 46

    Crutches (1964) Aggregate                                 35 - 40

    Evenson (1968)   Aggregate                                42. -    50

   Knutson-Tweeten (1976) Aggregate                           28 - 47

    Huffinen-Evanson (1990) Crops                             45   -
                                                                   62
                            Livestock                         11   83
                                                                   -

                            Aggregate                         43 - 67


II. Industry
                                                    Retes of Return to R&D

1-0 Weighted                                        Within                  From Outside

    Terleckyj (1974) total                             28                        48
                     private                           29                        78
    Svetkauskas (1981)                             lOto23                        50
    Coto-Suzuki (1989)                                 26                        80

R&D Weighted (patent flows)

    Cruliches-Lichtenberg (1984)                   46 to 69                   11. to 62

    Mohnen-Lepine (1988)                               56                        28

Proximity (technological distance)

    Jeffe (1986)                                                            30% of within

Coet functions

    gernstein-Hsdiri (1988, 1989)                                           20% of within
      differs by industry                           9to27                     lOtolSO
    Bernstein-Nadiri (1991)                        14 to 28     median: 56% of within


*Adapted from Huffeen-Evenson (l99l) Table 14.2
