                   NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




        WHAT WENT WRONG? THE EROSION OF RELATIVE EARNINGS
        AND EMPLOYMENT AMONG YOUNG BLACK MEN IN THE 19805




                           John Bound
                       Richard B. Freeman




                     Working Paper No. 3778




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                           July 1991




We acknowledge the research assistance of Marshall Cummings,
Janet Larsen, and Chris Young and received useful comments by
Charles Brown and participants at the NBER Summer Workshop. This
paper is part of NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                         NBER Working Paper #3778
                                         July 1991


                        WHAT WENT WRONG?
         THE EROSION OF RELATIVE EARNINGS AND EMPLOYMENT
               AMONG YOUNG BLACK MEN IN THE 1980s



                              ABSTRACT

     This paper shows a widening in black-white earnings and

employment gaps among young men from the mid-l970s through the

1980s that differs among subgroups. Earnings gaps increased most
among college graduates and in the midwest while gaps in

employment-population rates grew most among high school dropouts.
We attribute the differential widening to distinct shifts in
demand for subgroups due to changes in industry and regional

employment, the falling real minimum wage and deunionisation, the
growth of the relative supply of black to white workers that was

marked among college graduates, and to increased crime, that was

marked among high school dropouts. The differential factors

affecting the groups highlights the economic diversity of black
Americans.




John Bound                               Richard B. Freeman
Population   Studies Center              NBER
University   of Michigan                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
1225 South   University                  Cambridge, MA 02138
Ann Arbor,   MI 48104-2590                    and
and NBER                                 Harvard University
        From the mid 1960s to the mid 1970s black Americans made large gains in the labor

market relative to whites. Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act, affirmative action, and

court interpretation of anti-bias laws combined with a tight job market and a consensus to

redress historic inequities to raise the demand for black workers. The racial earnings gap

among young men fell, effectively disappearing for those with the same years of schooling

[Bound and Freeman, 1989; Freeman, 1976; Smith and Welch, 1986J. In ensuing years the

environment for black advancement worsened. Economic growth slackened; the

manufacturing share of jobs plummetted; wage inequality grew; and drugs and crime

pervaded many inner city neighborhoods. The Reagan Administration opposed affirmative

action before the Supreme Court and debated eliminating requirements, time tables, and

measures of compliance from Executive Order 11246. Courts made it harder to prove

discrimination.

       In this study we use data from the Current Population Survey [CPS] and other sources

to examine the relative economic position of young black men in this new environment and to

assess the causes of observed changes. We focus on young men because their wages and

employment are more sensitive to current market realities than those of older workers, whose

specific human capital and seniority buffer them from market developments. Our evidence

shows that the era of relative black economic advance ended in the Mid 1970s. The racial

earnings gap for recent male labor market entrants widened from 1976 to 1989, especially

among college graduates and workers in the Midwest. Racial differences in employment-

population rates also widened. The mid-1970s Onset of erosion rules Out weakened

affirmative action as the prime cause of change. The large increase in racial earnings gaps

among college graduates and in the Midwest, where gaps had effectively disappeared in the
                                                                                                 2

early 1970s, suggests that more was involved than the overall widening of the pay distribution

that characterized the 1980s: a widening in the overall distribution could explain why lower

paid blacks fared worse relative to higher paid whites but not why blacks fared worse

compared to similarly paid whites. Finally, the decline in the relative employment of young

black men rules Out a selectivity-based explanation of the erosion of earnings given the usual

assumption that the least productive (lowest paid) workers are the first to exit employment.

        What, then, went wrong? Our analysis indicates that no single race-related factor

explains the pattern of erosion. The increased differentiation of the black population post-

1964, evinced in the development of an elite of college graduates and professionals on the

one side and of labor force dropouts and criminal offenders on the other, makes any unicausal

explanation difficult to sustain. This does not, however, mean that the erosion is

inexplicable. To the contrary, we attribute much of the change to quantifiable but different

shifts in the relative demand and supply of specific groups that occurred against the backdrop

of weakened affirmative action and equal opportunity pressures. The economic decline of

inner cities, loss of manufacturing jobs, fall in the real minimum wage, and drop in union

density underlie, for example, the erosion of relative earnings among men with high school or

less education, particularly in the midwest. Growth of crime went hand-in-hand with the

joblessness of high school dropouts. Occupational downgrading, possibly due to weakened

affirmative action and shifts in demand toward the most highly skilled, and a huge increase in

the ratio of black to white college graduates reduced the relative earnings of black college

graduates. Our stress on developments that differ among groups lacks the trenchancy of a

unicausal explanation of change but has the virtue of reflecting the genuine economic

diversity of the black American community.
                                                                                                 3
                                        1. Dimensions of chanee

        Our primary source of data are the usual weekly earnings and usual weekly hours

worked questions of the CPS, available in usable micro form since 1973.' The Census asked

the usual earnings and hours questions of all respondents in the May surveys through 1978

and of outgoing rotation groups in all months in later years, producing differently sized

samples over time. The sample of men with less than ten years of potential work experience

for whom earnings data exists averages 12,000 to 15,000 from 1973 to 1978 and 40,000 and

over thereafter. The main virtue of the usual weekly data file is that since 1979 it has

roughly three times as many observations as the widely used March CPS annual earnings

data, yielding more reliable estimates of differentials. Another advantage is that the usual

weekly data link current pay and characteristics whereas the March survey links last years'

earnings to current characteristics2.

        There are still problems with the data. First, through 1988 weekly earnings are

capped at $999, biasing downward the earnings of high earners. While potentially important

for all men, less than one percent of the young black workers on whom we focus are at the

cap. Also, in 1989 an edited earnings field capped at $1923 was available; using this field

we calculated the geometric mean weekly earnings for men at the $999 cap in 1989 and used

this figure in alt years.

        Second, beginning in 1976 the CPS oversainpled small states, leading us to use

sample weights in statistical analyses, with little effect on results. It also began to report

residence in a central city as well as in a metropolitan area. To deal with this we estimated

racial earnings differentials from 1976 to 1989 controlling for central city and metropolitan

residence and from 1973 to 1989 controlling only for metropolitan residence, and obtained

similar trends, with and without central city controls.
                                                                                                   4
       Third, in 1975 the Census changed its hot deck procedure3 for imputing earnings for

the 15 or so percent of whites and 20 or so percent of blacks who do not report earnings.

This change does not appear to affect our results. The fraction of imputed observations was

roughly constant over the period; regressions for 1979-89 that excluded observations with

imputed earnings gave similar trends to those with imputed data; and the Census Bureau

reports that the changed hot deck barely affected black/white earnings ratios in the year of the

change [U.S. Bureau of Census 1977].

       Fourth, approximately 30 percent of young black men and 10 percent of young white

men are missing from the CPS. Many of these men are missing due to the undercount in the

decennial Census [Fay, Passel, and Robinson, 1988]; others are missing because CPS counts

of these groups fall short of the Census counts. This biases cross-section earnings and

employment differentials. As long as the undercount proportions are stable over time,

however, this need not bias trends. In any case, we can do little beyond noting the problem.

We are about the counted population.

A. Earnings and Employment-Population Differentials

       To see how the relative earnings of young black men changed from the early 1970s

through the 1980s, we regressed the log of hourly earnings (= usual weekly earnings/usual

weekly hours) on a race dummy and on dummy variables for individual years of potential

employment experience4 and for individual years of education. We limited our samples to

black or white wage and salary workers with less than 10 years of potential work experience

whose major activity was working; and excluded those whose imputed hourly pay exceeded

$100 or was below $1 in 1983 dollars.

       Figure I displays the resultant estimated hourly earning differentials from 1973 to

1989. The sample sizes in these regressions range from approximately 7,000 for all young
                                                                                                5
men in 1973 to 23,000 in 1989; approximately 10 percent of each years' sample are black;

and the standard error of the differential is on the order of .01 to .02. The estimates show

that after narrowing from 1973 to 1976, the black/white earnings gap widened through 1981,

fell sharply in 1985, and was considerably below its peak level at the end of the decade. The

magnitude of the erosion depends on the years one compares. The gap increased by .12

points from -.06 (.02) in 1976 to -.18 (.01) in 1989; and by .07 points from -.11 (.02) in

1973 to 1989 (standard errors are in parenthesis). A regression of these points on time shows

the differential widening at 0.0057 (0.001) points per year from 1973 to 1989 (see table 2)

for a 16 year trend drop of .086 log points ( 16 x .0057).

        Figure II records black-white differentials (net-of-experience and schooling) over a

longer time period, 1963-1989, in weekly earnings (= yearly earnings/weeks worked) from

the March CI'S files.5 These data show the massive decline in the black-white earnings gap

in the late 1960s-early 1970s in the aftermath of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and

accompanying national anti-bias policies and a rough stability or modest erosion of those

gains from the mid-1970s through the end of the 1980s. Here, the black-white earnings gap

bottoms out in 1975, rises through 1983, then fluctuates. The 1989 gap of -.18 is nearly

seven percentage points greater than the 1975 minimum, but is smaller than the 1973 gap of -

.21. Because the May/outgoing rotation group files contain so many more observations than

the March files, we stress the erosion shown in the May/outgoing rotation data; if we pooled

the two data sets, the erosion shown in figure 1 would dominate.6

        Figure III turns from earnings differentials to employment rates (ER). It records ER5

by race from the outgoing rotation group files, standardized for single years of experience

and single years of education. The samples in these calculations include all persons in the

relevant group who report a major activity other than attending school; this yields
                                                                                                   6
substantially larger samples than those in   Figure I. The standardization is based on logit

equations that estimate the effect of individual years   of experience and schooling on the

probability a person is employed; the figure records estimated employment rates for a

reference group of men with 5 years of potential work experience and 12      years of schooling.
For this group black ERs fell sharply from .84 (1973) to .69 (1975) as the economy turned

down and recovered only to .74 in 1989. White ERs dropped from .93 (1973) to .86 (1975)

and then rose to .89 in 1989. The gap in employment rates between the groups increased

from .09 points at the beginning year to .15 points at the end.7 The picture of deterioration

in the relative economic position of young black workers thus shows up in quantity as well as

price terms.

B. Differentials for Disaggregated Groups

       We also estimated black-white earnings Cifferentials for men in three education

categories: high school dropouts; high school graduates; and college graduates; and in the

three regions where blacks are found in sizeable numbers: the midwest (East North Central

Census division), the northeast (New England and the Mid-Atlantic), and the south (South

Atlantic, East South Central, and West South Central divisions). Our analyses controlled for

individual years of experience and schooling; our regional analysis treated high school

graduates or dropouts for whom labor markets are relatively local; analyses that include

college graduates are similar.

       Table I presents the estimated racial earnings differentials from multivariate

regressions that control for individual years of experience and education for all young men

and for the disaggregated groups. It shows that the erosion in relative earnings was

exceptionally large for two groups: black college graduates and less educated men in the

midwest. Black college graduates, who in the mid-l970s earned a premium over young
                                                                                                  7
white graduates (possibly the result of affirmative action), had such a severe drop in relative

earnings that by 1989 they earned 0.17 log points less than whites. Even if one discounts the

mid-1970s premium, the differential rose by .13 from the near equality established in 1973

(Cotton (1990) gives parallel results for the occupational earnings of the black male middle

classi. Since the differential among high school graduates increased by less from 1973 to

1989 (.11 points to .18 points) and by much less from its minimum value to its 1989 value

than did the differential among college graduates, by the end of the 1980s black/white

differentials for college graduates were as large as for high school graduates -- in sharp

contrast to the situation in the early/mid 1970s. The drop in relative black earnings in the

economically depressed midwest is equally striking. In 1973 the black-white differential in

the midwest was .01. In 1989, it was -.21, greater than the differential in the south where

blacks have historically fared worst.

        Finally, as a concise summary of the secular trends of interest we regressed our

estimated annual earnings and employment differentials net of education and experience on a

linear time trend over 1973-89. We chose this starting year rather than a later trough to

avoid exaggerating the trend due to sampling error, and because 1973 and 1989 are at similar

points of the business cycle. The resultant trends (and their standard errors) are given in

table II for hourly earnings differentials and for employment-population rate differentials.

The estimates for education groups shows that while black high school dropouts suffered only

modest losses in relative earnings, their relative employment deteriorated greatly. The

estimates for regional groups shows that young black men in the midwest suffered sharp

drops in relative employment as well as in relative earnings.

       To explain the pattern of trend erosion among groups — the exceptional decline in

relative earnings for college men and for those in the midwest; and the sharp drop in relative
                                                                                                   8

employment for black high school dropouts -- we use two analytic tools. First, we develop a

regression based earnings decomposition model in which we add potential explanatory

variables to our log earnings regressions and estimate trends in race differentials net of those

variables. The difference between trends with/without a given variable is its contribution to

erosion. To interpret these estimated effects, we further decompose them into a part due to

shifts in employment and a part due to changes in the wage structure of the groups. Our

second method of analysis estimates the effect of shifts in fixed coefficent indices of changes

in employment among industries and demographic changes in the ratio of young black to

young white men on earnings and employment differentials in a market-clearing model.



                             H. Repression Decomnosition Analysis

        Our regression decomposition analysis estimates the effect of changes in the following

variables on the erosion of relative black earnings: location by region and metropolitan status;

industry and occupation of employment; deunionization; and the fall in the real minimum

wage.

A. Decomposition model

        To show how the decomposition works, we provide a step-by-step accounting of how

we estimated the effect of region on outcomes. First, as our starting point, we take the

estimated black-white earnings differentials in the absence of region as given in table I:

        (1)ln(w)= A,+bD+c1X
where D is 1 if the worker is black and 0 if he is white; X is a vector of the variables for

individual years of experience and individual years of schooling; and t indexes year. The

coefficients b, are our measure of the hourly earnings differential in t.

        Second, we estimate the racial differential net of region by adding a vector of eight
                                                                                                   9

 dummy variables (R) for Census division to equation (1):

         (2)ln(w1J=
         Here b1' is the racial earnings differential net of region. The difference between
                                                                                            b,'
 and b, shows how region affects relative earnings in year t. If blacks are overrepresented in

 low wage regions. b1' will be less than b1. Changes in the regional location of blacks and

 whites or in regional pay differentials can lead b,'-b, to change over time. If, for instance,

black employment becomes relatively more concentrated in low wage regions, or if wages fall

in regions in which blacks predominate, region would contribute to the erosion.

         Third, we estimate trends in differentials with and without regional controls by

regressing our annual estimates of b and b' on linear time. The difference between the trend

coefficient for b and that for b' we identify   as   the part of the trend "due to region'.

        Fourth, we divide the effect of region into "a quantity effect" due to changes in the

relative distribution of blacks by region and a "price effect" due to changes in
                                                                                 regional
earnings differences. To make this division we averaged the coefficients on region dummies

from our annual regressions to obtain a vector of average regional wage effects,
                                                                                       W;
multiplied this vector by a vector of the difference in the regional employment distribution of

blacks (Ru,) and whites (R,,,) to obtain a single measure of the effect of regional distribution

on racial earnings: RQ, (= W x (R,,-R,,J. Since WR has no time subscript changes
                                                                               over
time in RQ, represent the effect on earnings of changes in the regional location of blacks and

whites at a constant set of prices. Regressing the time series of RQ on a trend variable

yields our estimate of the contribution   of the quantity component of region on the earnings
differential. The price component of region is the difference between the full region trend in

b'-b and our estimated trend in RQ,.

        We perform a similar analysis for other factors, adding them
                                                                     sequentially so that the
                                                                                                    10
effect of each factor's effect is measured net of the effects of those already in the regression.

The ordering is from location to industry, occupation, unionization, and the minimum wage.

The factors are sufficiently orthogonal that re-ordering has a marked effect only on

unionization and industry: if union coverage is entered first, the effect of unionism is

increased notably relative to the effect of industry.

B. Decomposition results

       Table Ill gives the contribution of each factor to the annual percentage point trend in

the black-white earnings gap, as estimated by our decomposition analysis. The first line in

the table, labelled "trend", is the estimated trend in b without region controls, as in table 2.

The -.565 in the upper left column shows that there was decline in relative black earnings by

over one-half percentage point per year over the period. The next line "Due to Region"

gives our estimate of the effect of region on the trend; it is obtained by adding eight region

dummy variables to the earnings regression and estimating the trend net of region (b') as

described above. For the United States as a whole correcting for region has a negligible

effect on the adverse trend in black-white earnings differentials, raising it by .02 points

from -0.57 to -0.59. There is no effect for persons in the midwest since this is a single

Census division, and relatively little effect in the South. Region has an impact in the

Northeast, where it accounts for .25 points of the .80 erosion in relative earnings. The lines

"quantity" and "price" under 'Due to Region' estimate the effect of changes in regional

employment distribution at the average regional wage pattersn and of changes in regional

wage differentials on the trend erosion, estimated by the procedure described above. This

calculation shows that the limited regional effects are due primarily to changes in regional

wage differentials rather than to changes in regional employment distributions. The sizeable

regional effect in the Northeast reflects black concentration in the Mid Atlantic states rather
                                                                                                 11

than in New England, where earnings rose rapidly in the period, rather than a shift in relative

concentration from high to low wage areas in the region.

        While regional changes have relatively little effect on the trend in relative earnings in

the United States as a whole, metropolitan residence accounts for .08 points of the annual

erosion, or 15% of the trend (= .084/565) For men in the midwest, metropolitan residence

has a larger effect, reducing the trend by .19 points per year. Separating changes in the

distribution of blacks and whites from changes in pay differentials between metropolitan and

other areas shows that metropolitan residence adversely affected the relative earnings of

young blacks because relative earnings fell modestly in metropolitan areas where blacks are

exceptionally concentrated rather than because employed blacks were increasingly

concentrated in inner cities.'°

        If black employment grew relatively rapidly in lower paying industries or if blacks

were concentrated in industries with declining relative wages, addition of industry controls to

the regressions will reduce estimated trends in racial differentials. Accordingly, we added 18

industry dummy variables to our earnings equations (which already controlled for location,

education, and experience) and obtained yearly net-of-industry differentials, which we then

regressed on time. The results under the item 'due to industry" in table 111 show that

industry had a moderate effect on the trend in differentials for all young men, accounting for

.06 log points of the .57 point 1973-89 erosion. As with metropolitan status, however,

industry has a massive effect on workers with high school or less education in the midwest --

accounting for over one-third of the increased racial earnings differential (.46 points of a total

drop of 1.42 points). What drives this large effect is the huge drop in the proportion of

young black workers in manufacturing." Decomposing the industry effect into its quantity

and price components following the same methodology described for region effects'2 shows
                                                                                                  12
that for most groups (college graduates are the notable exception) the industry effect is

dominated by shifts in industrial employment rather than in the industrial wage structure.

        Turning to occupation,   CPS   data show that the occupational attainment of young black

men worsened from 1973 to 1989 relative to that of young whites with similar years of

schooling. In the 1970s young black college graduates were as likely to be managers or

professionals as were young white college graduates; in 1988-89 black graduates were 13

percentage points less likely to be in those occupations than whites. Similarly, young blacks

with high school education were underrepresented as craftworkers but overrepresented as

operatives in the 1970s; whereas by 1988-89 they were no more likely to be operatives than

whites but had fallen further behind as craftworkers." To quanti' the effect of these and

related shifts on relative black earnings we applied our earnings decomposition analysis to

occupations, adding nine one-digit occupation dummy variables to our regressions. The

results are given in the item "occupation' in table 3. For all young men, occupation

contributed .11 points to the 1973-88 erosion. Most of this is due to the fact that blacks were

in occupations with falling relative pay rather than to disproportionate shifts of young blacks

into low wage occupations. For college graduates, on the other hand, the .30 point

contribution of occupation to the erosion was due to deterioration in the relative occupational

attainment of young blacks.

       Overall, controlling for location, industry, and occupation reduces the adverse trend in

black-white earnings differentials among all young men substantially, from -.57 to -.34,

suggesting that 40% of the erosion of relative earnings is attributable to these "structural

factors'. For the two groups with the greatest loss in relative earnings, however, the

structural factors account for very different proportions of the erosion in relative earnings:
                                                                                                 13

they explain 31% of the adverse trend among college graduates compared to 57% of the

adverse trend among workers in the midwest.

C. Institutional Factors

       Two changes in labor market institutions are potential contributors to erosion: falling

union density and the decline in the real minimum wage.

       The fall in union density is likely to reduce relative black earnings because young

blacks were overrepresented in unions at the outset: in 1973 31 percent of young blacks were

unionised compared to 26 percent of young whites. Controlling for education and industry,

the unionisation rate for blacks was 6 points higher than for whites in the United States and

10 higher in the northeast and midwest. As union density fell, black and white unionisation

rates converged, so that by 1989 blacks were no more likely to be unionised than similarly

educated whites in the same industry.

       To quantify the effect of declining black union membership on relative earnings, we

estimated black-white differentials after inclusion of a union dummy. The results, given in

the item unionisation" in table III, show that for the United States the decline in unionism

reduced the relative earnings of young blacks by just .03 log points per year -- roughly 5

percent of the trend. For young male workers with no more than a high school education,

however, the effect was large in regions of traditional union strength, the northeast (.11

points) and midwest (.13 points).

        The decline in the real value of the minimum wage from 1980 to 1989 was a likely

contributing factor to the erosion in relative black earnings because young blacks have

historically been at the lower tail of the earnings distribution, where the minimum has some

bite. To estimate the effect of the declining real minimum, we simulated a distribution of

earnings for 1989 in which we held the real minimum constant from 1981 to 1989. We
                                                                                                 14

raised the reported hourly earnings of workers earning $3.35 per hour (the 1981 minimum) to

$457 in 1989 by the 36 percent rate of inflation in the CPI from 1981 to 1989; raised the

hourly earnings of workers paid less than $3.35 an hour by a similar percentage, keeping

their earnings a constant percent below the minimum; and conservatively raised the earnings

of workers earning between $3.35 and $4.57 to the new $4.57 postulated minimum. We then

estimated the black/white earnings differential controlling for experience, education, location,

industry, occupation, and union status with and without this wage adjustment. The minimum

wage effect is the difference between the differentials with and without the adjustment,

making it net of the other factors. It indicates that the black-white differential would have

been 1.55 percentage points smaller in 1989 than it was. In terms of annual trends over the

1973-89 period under study this 1.55 percentage point decline translates into -.097 percentage

points per year, accounting for 17% of the 1973-89 erosion. For high school dropouts, the

trend would have been .20 points smaller per year than it was, explaining all of the modest

drop in the relative earnings of dropouts. Among regions, the fall in the real value of the

minimum accounted for the 75% of the erosion in the south but for only 7% of the decline in

the midwest where pay levels were substantially above the minimum. As minimum wage

laws fix pay at rates above potential market clearing rates, their reduced importance in the

1980s presumably acted to raise employment. Given estimated elasticities of employment to

the minimum [Brown, 1988; Castillo-Freeman and Freeman, 19911, however, these effects

are unlikely to have been large. They were certainly too weak to offset the adverse factors

that lowered the relative employment of young black men.

       All told, our decomposition does a surprisingly good job accounting for the level and

pattern of erosion. As the bottom line in table Ill shows, the decomposition explains 62% of

the erosion in relative earnings for all young men, all of the erosion for groups where blacks
                                                                                                     15

    suffered modest declines in relative earnings, and nearly three-quarters of the massive erosion
S

    for less educated workers in the midwest. By contrast, our analysis does a poor job

    accounting for the declining relative earnings of young black college graduates.



                                   HI. Demand-SuDDly Shift Analysis

            An alternative way to assess the determinants of erosion is to calculate indices of

    demand and supply for young black and white workers and estimate how changes in these

    indices altered relative wages and employment. On the demand side, we examine shifts that

    result from differences in the industrial composition of employment of blacks and whites and

    the differing growth of employment across industries.'4 For the ith (race, race-education, or

    race-region) group we calculate the shift in demand (Di') as the weighted percentage growth

    of employment by industry (EMP'):'5

           (3) D', =   E; EMP'J,
    where j indexes industry; a is the fraction of the group employed in the jth industry in the

    base year; and where ; and EMP', relate to the specific group under consideration (i.e., we

    use ; and EMP'J for workers in the Midwest in our analysis of those workers; a, and EMP'J
    for workers in the South in our analysis of the South and so on).

           To the extent that workers are overrepresented in a sector because they have a

    comparative advantage in the type of work performed there, contraction will lower their

    relative pay. Comparative advantage must, however, be viewed loosely to account for

    differences in the industrial employment of black and white men with the same years of

    schooling. Differences in industry mix between these workers presumably reflect historic

•   (discriminatory) recruitment patterns, the location of industries relative to the residence of

    workers, and differences in the quality of education [Card and Kreuger, 1990]. Whatever the
                                                                                              16

reason, however, blacks are likely to suffer, at least in the short run, when sectors employing

them in large numbers contract.'6

        For fixed coefficient demand indices like (3) to explain differences in the labor market

experience of workers, it is necessary that the workers have different distributions of

employment among sectors; and that sectoral growth rates of employment vary greatly. Both

of these criterion are met in our data: in the early 1970s less educated blacks are more highly

represented in manufacturing than whites, while black college graduates are overrepresented

in government employment.'7 Both of these sectors experienced substantial relative declines

in employment. In addition, however, black employment fell disproportionately rapidly in

manufacturing, particularly in the midwest where blacks went from 6 percentage points more

likely to be in manufacturing than whites in the 1970s to 10 points less likely in 1988-89.

        Column 1 of table IV records the estimated growth of In demand for young black men

relative to young white men from our fixed coefficient analysis. To obtain these numbers we

chose 1973 as our base period and calculated the 1973 proportion of young blacks and of

young whites employed in each of the 18 industries used in our regressions." Then we

estimated the trend in the growth of employment in each industry (in each industry by region

in our regional analysis) by regressing each industry's share of men with 0-9 years of

potential work experience on a 1973-89 time trend. The relative demand indices in the table

are the difference between the average of the growth rates weighted by the 1973 black

employment distributions and the average of the growth rates weighted by 1973 white

employment distributions. A negative number implies that blacks were concentrated in

industries whose employment growth was less than the employment growth in industries in

which whites were concentrated; a positive number has the opposite meaning. Most of the

numbers are negative. Many are large. The estimates show that the industrial composition
                                                                                                      17

    of employment shifted against black young men relative to whites by 0.33 percent per year

    overall, but by much greater rates for the groups with the largest erosion of relative

    earnings -- college graduates (1.87 percent per year) and for men with high school or less

    education in the midwest (1.49 percent per year).

            The substantial effect of industry on the relative demand for black college graduates in

    Table IV contrasts markedly, the reader will note, with the absence of a significant industry

    effect for college graduates in the decomposition analysis in Table ill. The difference reflects

    the different components of change that the two analyses stress. The decomposition analysis

    treats a shift in employment from a low wage declining industry in which a group was

    initially overrepresented as improving the groups' economic position, whereas the fixed

    coefficient model treats such a decline of employment as adversely affecting demand. For

    college graduates, the decomposition treats the shift of graduates from the contracting public

    sector (where black graduates were highly concentrated in the 1970s) as raising the earnings

    of black graduates whereas the fixed coefficient analysis treats the contraction as reducing

    demand for them. Which analysis more closely reflects reality depends on the ease with

    which workers obtain jobs in nontraditional sectors'.

            Turning to the supply side of the market, we estimate relative supplies by the ratio of

    the noninstitutional population of blacks to the noninstitutional population of whites in the

    relevant group. Column 2 of table IV shows that overall the number of young blacks

    increased substantially from 1973 to 1989 comparedso the number of young whites --the

    result of differing patterns of baby boom births two decades or so earlier. The relative

    supply increase was, moreover, greatest among groups experiencing the largest erosion of

•   relative earnings: college men (blacks increased enrollment greatly due to the opportunities

    and high returns for black college-going following the Civil Rights Act [Freeman, 19761);
                                                                                                   18

and men in the Midwest (possibly due to migration responses to the opportunities of the

1970s). By contrast, the ratio of black to white high school dropouts fell, while the ratio of

blacks to whites with high school or less education in the South was roughly constant.

        Taken together, the direction of and magnitude of the changes in the demand and

supply indices are, with the notable exception of dropouts, consistent with the pattern of

erosion. For the overall sample, relative demand for young black mate workers decreased

and relative supply increased, with the increase in supply markedly larger in absolute value

than the decrease in demand. The largest declines in demand and increases in supply are for

college graduates and less educated men in the midwest, the groups with the greatest erosion

of relative wages. To transform the shift analysis into quantitative predictions of changes in

relative earnings and employment is, however, difficult, for it requires well-specified

elasticities of responses that our data are not rich enough to yield and that are unavailable in

existing literature. Still, we can assess crudely the quantitative fit of the model by

considering the supply and demand elasticities that would allow it to account for observed

changes. In a market clearing model, shifts in demand and supply alter relative wages by the

inverse of the sum of the elasticities of labor supply and labor demand and alter employment

to population ratios with a parameter equal to the elasticity of supply divided by the sum of

the supply and demand elasticities. Formally, defining all variables as log differentials

between blacks and whites, if Ed' = D' - hW' is the relative demand curve and E,' = S' + e

W' is the relative supply curve, market clearing yields: W'=(D'-S')/(e + h) and E'-S'= e

(D'- S')f(e+h). Given W', E', and D' (our fixed coefficient shift indicator and S' (the

change in relevant population) we can solve for the demand and supply parameters that fit

each groups' experience. Parameters of plausible magnitudes that are reasonably similar for

all the groups would lend support to the model;- whereas parameters that differed widely
                                                                                                19

among them would raise questions about its validity.

        Columns 3-4 of table IV record the trends in In earnings and employment-population

ratios necessary to calculate the implicit supply and demand parameters. Since the shift

analysis does not treat location, the trends are net of location; the earnings trends are derived

from table Ill, line 4; the employment trends differ modestly from those in table 11 because

they are for log employment-population ratios, adjusted for location. Given these statistics

and the estimated shifts in supply and demand, we calculated the implicit supply and demand

elasticities for each group. The results recorded in columns 5 and 6 show that for the groups

for which the model works elasticities are of roughly comparable magnitudes. The relative

supply elasticities are considerably below uniity. The elasticities of labor demand for black

relative to white workers are large, presumably because the comparisons are between workers

with the same education, though far from infinite.19 The failure of the model to yield

sensible estimates for the south is not a major drawbook as actual and predicted changes are

slight so that the data do not provide the variation needed to obtain reasonable estimates.

Indeed, the earnings changes were fully explained in table HI as resulting primarily from the

declining real minimum wage. The failure to account for the experience of black high school

dropouts is another matter. The fixed coefficient index shows an increase in relative demand

due to the expansion of service industries where black dropouts were initially

overrepresented, while the ratio of black to white dropouts increased. These shifts should

have raised relative employment and earnings, contrary to fact. The implication is that

factors beyond those in the shift model affected the relative economic position of black high

school dropouts. The evidence in table III suggests that the modest relative hourly earnings

decline among dropouts is attributable to the decline in the real value of the minimum wage

and the fall in unionisation, leaving the decline in relative employment of black dropouts as
                                                                                                20

the major anomolous development. We explore next two factors that may help account for

this development: changes in unmeasured skills; and increased participation in crime.

A. Unmeasured Skills

       We find little support for the hypothesis that deteriorated labor market skills of young

blacks due, say, to poor schooling, worsened family background resources, or increased drug

use, explains their declining economic position. The notion that the school skills of young

blacks deteriorated runs into an immediate problem: standardized test scores show that on

average black achievements rose modestly relative to those of whites in the period [National

Center for Educational Statistics, 1988, p 144]. While this does not rule out the possibility

that the skills of dropouts deteriorated as the dropout share of the population declined, it

creates a hurdle for such a story, as selectivity would have to dominate changes in the mean

for the population.° The hypothesis that declining family background resources accounts

for the erosion fails because the cohorts suffering erosion were brought up prior to the big

growth in single parenting and widening family income differentials at a time when the

numbers of siblings among blacks fell and parental education increased [Kane, 1990]. As

blacks report no greater use of drugs or alcohol than whites and as drug use among youths

fell in the 1980s (National Institute of Drug Abuse, 19891 increased drug use among blacks is

not likely to have caused the deterioration. The likelihood that the CI'S undercounts persons

with drug problems also makes this explanation of erosion untenable: serious drug users are

unlikely to be in the CPS.

       Two direct CPS-based tests also lead us to reject the declining skills hypothesis. In

one test we added marital status to our regressions on the argument that if marriage is a valid

indicator of unobserved quality, and the declining skills argument were correct, its inclusion

should reduce the estimated erosion, Instead, it had essentially no effect on the coefficient on
                                                                                                   21

the race dummy variable. Further, if declining skills were behind the drop in marriage and

the loss in relative earnings, erosion would have been concentrated among unmarried men.

In fact, the reverse is true. In our second test we contrasted changes in the economic

position of black and white cohorts as they age. If erosion was due to deteriorated skills of

entering black cohorts, the relative position of older cohorts, whose skills were determined in

earlier periods, ought to be constant; in fact the relative earnings of those cohorts follows

closely the pattern in figure 121, with sizeable erosion for the youngest cohorts as they age --

a result also found in the March CPS tapes [Bound and Freeman, 1989].

B. The Crime-Employment Trade-off

        The tremendous increase in crime among young black men in the 1980s [Freeman,

19911 is another possible cause of the eroding employment of black high school dropouts.

On the one side, greater criminal opportunities may have induced some young men to forego

employment. On the other side, the deteriorated job market for the less skilled may have also

made crime more attractive, producing a cohort with criminal records that adversely affect

future employment prospects.

    To see how criminal activity affects high school dropouts, we used the the National

Longitudinal Survey of Youth. This longitudinal survey of youths aged 14-22 in 1979 asked

detailed questions about involvement with the criminal justice system in 1980 and records

imprisonment at ensuing survey dates. Our measure of criminal behavior is based on a set of

mutually exclusive dummy variables measuring the person's most serious involvement with

the law as of 1980: incarceration, probation, conviction, charged with a crime, being stopped

by police. We supplement this with additional information on whether the respondent was

interviewed in jail or prison post-1980, which is available for all succeeding surveys. We

categorized men interviewed in jail or prison after 1980 but before the date of our regression
                                                                                                  22
as having been incarcerated, and gave them zeros in the other criminal involvement dummy

variables to maintain the dummies as a mutually exclusive set. We regressed the 0-1 dummy

variable 'employed in survey week' on the vector of crime dummies and a set of control

variables for all dropouts in the noninsitutional population in 1983 and 1988. The survey

population is aged 18-26 in 1983 and thus in the same age and experience range as our CI'S

sample.

          Table V records the regression coefficients and standard errors on the criminal

involvement variables. It shows a striking adverse effect of past incarceration on

employment: dropouts currently in the noninstitutional population who had been incarcerated

have a 21 percentage point lower chance of employment in 1983 and a 17 point lower chance

of employment in 1988. Dropouts whose most severe brush with the law resulted in

probation as of 1980 have 16 and 11 points lower employment probabilities in the two years;

while those with less criminal involvement are correspondingly less adversely affected.

Analyses with other samples and data sets and with before-after longitudinal designs to

control for unobserved heterogeneity show comparable effects (Freeman, 1991], indicating

that the crime-employment trade-off is robust across data sets and specifications and cannot

be explained as resulting from fixed unobservables.

          Did criminal participation by dropouts rise sufficiently rapidly in the 1980s for the

crime-employment trade-off to account for a substantial portion of the decline in the relative

employment of black dropouts? Tabulations from the 1980 Census of Population files A

show that 7.4% of 18-29 year old black male dropouts were in prison or jail in 1980. On the

basis of figures from the 1986 survey of state prison inmates [U.S. Department of Justice,

19881 73% of 18-29 year old black male prisoners were high school dropouts, and 40% of all

black male prisoners were 18-29 year old dropouts. Given that some 347,000 black males
                                                                                                  23
were in prison or jail in 1986, we estimate that 140,000 black male dropouts aged 18-29 were

incarcerated in that year. Current Population Survey data shows some 557,000 black male

dropouts not enrolled in school in l986. Thus we estimate that 20.1% of black male 18-

29 year old dropouts were incarcerated in 1989 -- an increase of 12.7 percentage points over

the 1980 proportion. Between 1986 and 1989 the prison and jail population increased by

about 20% whereas the number of 18-29 year old black dropouts not enrolled in school fell

by 10% The implication is that from 1980 to 1989 the proportion of black dropouts

incarcerated rose by more than between 1980 and 1986 -- conservatively by 15 percentage

points, by our estimates.24

        Since there is turnover in the prison or jail population, with short sentences given to

many first offenders, and since some are given probationary sentences or convicted without

being sent to prison, the proportion of young dropouts with criminal records is likely to be

larger than the proportion in jail at a moment in time, and the increase in the fraction with

criminal records correspondingly greater. From the NLSY we estimate that in 1988 16.8%

of black dropouts in the noninstitutional population had been incarcerated at one time in their

life whereas 12.2% of black dropouts were in jail or prison on average in that year. This

suggests a ratio of young men with a prison record in the noninstitutional population to the

incarcerated of 1.4 to one. In addition, the NLSY data indicate that in 1980 for every

black dropout who had been incarcerated, 1.2 had been put on probation as of 1980

(unfortunately the survey did not ask about probation after 1980). Multiplying our estimated

.15 point increase in the percentage of 18-29 year old black dropouts incarcerated between

1980 and 1989 by these ratios, we estimate that the proportion of black high school dropouts

in the noninstitutional population with a prison record increased by 21 percentage points (1.4

x .15) while the proportion on probation increased by 18 percentage points.26 Multiplying
                                                                                                24

these proportions by the relevant coefficients from column 2 of table V yields an estimated

reduction in employment by 5 points in 1989 due to the rise in the proportion with a prison

or probationary record. While crime also rose rapidly among young white dropouts, the

levels of white youth involvement are so much smaller as to have little effect on their labor

market outcomes: in 1980, for instance, 1.3% of 18-29 year old white dropouts were

institutionalized, implying negligible effects on the employment of the age group.

       How much of the adverse trend in employment for black dropouts may be due to the

increased proportion with an incarceration history? In our data, the employment rate of

young black male dropouts fell from 62% in 1979 to 55% in 1989 while the employment rate

of young white male dropouts remained constant at 80%. The increased proportion of young

black dropouts with criminal records could thus account for 71% (= .051.07) of the trend.

Over the longer period, 1973-1989, the downward trend in employment population rates was

15 percentage points. As there was no rise in incarceration of young blacks in the 1970s, the

implication is that the growth of the population with a criminal record accounts for one-third

of the longer run erosion of employment. As some young men involved in crime are not

caught, however, these statistics underestimate the full reduction in employment potentially

due to crime.

C. Omitted Factors: the role ol the state

        Diverse statistics show that government pressures to increase minority employment

 lessened in the 1980527 and analyses of court interpretations of the law suggest that in the

mid 1970s it became increasingly difficult to win discrimination Suits [CuIp, 1985]. Although

 our CPS-based analysis provides no evidence on how these developments affected black-white

 differentials, there is reason to expect that they contributed to the observed erosion of gains.

 Evidence that Equal Employment Opportunity and Affirmative Action help explain the huge
                                                                                                 25

improvement in relative earnings of the late 1960s-early 1970s [Freeman, 1976; Leonard,

1984; Heckman, 1989] implies by symmetry that weakened pressure would have the converse

effect. The large decline in the relative earnings and downgrading of the occupational

position of young black college men found in our data is what one would expect from firms

no longer facing an affirmative action gun, since young college men were the major

beneficiaries of the previous decades' pressures [Freeman, 1976]. Leonard's (1987] finding

that federal contractors, who have mandatory affirmative action plans, maintained the same

(roughly constant) black male share of employment as noncontractors from 1980 to 1984

when AA pressures were off whereas they increased their black share of employment relative

to noncontractors from 1974 to 1980 when affirmative action pressures were severe, is also

consistent with weakened governmental pressures contibuting to the erosion of gains.

        Note also that weakened government anti-bias pressures offers a way to reconcile the

decline in the relative earnings of black college graduates with explanations of erosion based

on the overall widening of the distribution of the earnings distribution [Juhn, Murphy, and

Pierce, 1989]. According to the widening distribution hypothesis blacks lost ground in

relative earnings because they were initially lower in the earnings distribution than whites

with similar measured attributes during a period when the earnings distribution widened. The

fact that young black college graduates (and the less educated in the midwest) with earnings

parity/premia with whites in the mid 1970s suffered the greatest erosion is inconsistent with

this hypothesis unless parity resulted from government (other) pressures that put blacks

higher in the earnings distribution than employers would have otherwise placed them. In this

interpretation, these young black men suffered a double hit: weakened affirmative

action/equal employment activity that removed the pressures that put them high in the

distribution; and the widening distribution of earnings among college graduates itself.
                                                                                               26


                                        IV, Conclusion

       This study has documented that the relative earnings and employment of young black

men declined from the mid 1970s through the 1980s and found that the rate of erosion of past

gains differed markedly across education groups and regions. Black college graduates and

blacks with high school or less education in the midwest had the biggest losses in relative

earnings while dropouts had the largest drop in relative employment. We used two analytic

techniques to examine the pattern of erosion among those groups: a regression decomposition

analysis that accounts for changes in relative earnings by changes in the structure of

employment and wages of groups; and a demand-supply shift analysis that accounts for

changes by shifts in industry employment and in relative supplies. Despite the differing

aspects of change stressed by the two procedures, they told a fairly consistent story of the

causes of erosion. Both show that different economic forces affected different groups of

young blacks. For those in the midwest, the decomposition analysis direct attention at

changes in the industry and occupation composition ce jobs, decline in unionism and the real

minimum wage, and the growth of relative supply as major contributors to erosion. On the

demand side, our analysis supports William J. Wilson's (1987) stress on the decline in

manufacturing as a major cause of the problems faced by young black men in that region.

For college graduates, the analyses directs attention at changed occupational composition,

shifts in industry demand, and the growth of relative supply as the prime factors at work,

with weakened affirmative action a likely cause of the occupational downgrading. For high

school dropouts, the decline in the minimum wage explains the modest drop in relative

earnings while increases in the proportion of young blacks with criminal records is a major

cause of reduced employment. If our interpretation of the evidence is correct, relying on a
                                                                                                  27
single race-related factor to explain changes, as is the practice in traditional discrimination

literature, is no longer adequate. There Is too much diversity in the black economic

experience for a single factor story   of change to stand up to scrutiny.
                                                                                           28


                                        BiblloEraphy

Administrative Office of U.S. Courts Annual Reports.

Bound, J. and Freeman, R. 'Black Economic Progress: Erosion of the Post-1965 Gains in the
1980s?" in S. Shulman and W. Darity (ed) The Ouestion of Discrimination (Wesleyan Univ
Press, Middletown Conn 1989).

Brown, C. 'Minimum Wage Laws: Are they Overrated?' Journal of Economic Perspectives
(Summer 1988), Pp. 133-45'

Card, D. and A. Krueger, 'School Quality and BlackfWhite Relative Earnings: A Direct
Assessment' (Princeton University, Industrial Relations Section Working Paper 272, Sept
1990)

Castillo-Freeman, Alida, and R. Freeman. 'Minimum Wages in Puerto Rico: Textbook Case
of a Wage Floor?' Harvard, mimeo, 1991

Cotton, Jeremiah 'The Gap at the Top: Relative Occupational Earnings Disadvantage of the
Black Male Middle Class', Review of Black Political Economy, Winter 1990.

Cuip, Jerome. 'A New Employment Policy for the 1980s: Learning from the Victories and
Defeats of Twenty Years of Title VII'. Rutsers Law Review vol 37 #4 Summer, 1985, pp.
895-919.

Donahue, John and Peter Siegelman 'The Changing Nature of Employment Discrimination
Litigation' April 1989 draft.

Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, 20th Annual Reoort (Wash D.C. USGPO).

Fay, R. E., J. Passell, and G. Robinson 'The Coverage of Population in the 1980 Census'
U.S. Census of Population Document PHC-80-E4 February 1988.

Freeman, R. Black Elite (McGraw-Hill, NY 1976)

Freeman, R. 'Black Economic Progress After 1964: Who Has Gained and Why' in S. Rosen
(ed) Studies in Labor Markets (Chicago, Univ Chicago Press, 1981).

Freeman, R. 'Crime and the Economic Position of Disadvantaged Youth", Urban Insitutue,
mimeo, 1991.

Hindelang, M. J., T. Hirschi and J. Weis 1981 Measurins Delinauincy Beverly Hills, Calif:
Sage.

Heckman, J. "The Impact of Government on the Economic Status of Black Americans' S.
Shulman and W. Darrity, (ed) The Ouestion of Discrimination (Wesleyan Univ Press
Middletown Conn, 1989).
                                                                                                29


Heckman, J. and B. Payner 1989 "Determining the Impact of Government Policy on the
Economic Status of Blacks: a Case Study of South Carolina" American Economic Review 79:
138-177.

Juhn, C., Murphy, K. and Pierce, B. "Accounting for the Slowdown in Black-White Wage
Convergence" University of Chicago 1989.

Kane, T. "College Enrollments by Blacks Since 1970: the role of tuition, financial aid, local
economic conditions, and family background' (Harvard, mimeo, September, 1990).

Katz L. and Murphy, K. 1990. 'Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-87: Supply and Demand
Factors', this journal

Leonard, J. "Employment and Occupational Advance Under Affirmative Action' Review of
Economics and Statistics (August 1984), 377-385.

Leonard, J. Affirmative Action in the 1980s: With a Whimper, Not a Bang' University of
California September 1987.

Murphy, K. and Welch, F. 1988. 'The Structure of Wages" Unicon Research Working Paper
Nov 1988.

National Center for Education Statistics, 1988 Education Indicators, USGPO, Wash,
September 1988.

National Institute of Drug Abuse, "National Trends in Drug Use and Related Factors Among
American High School Students and Young Adults, 1975-1986'(U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services 1987).

Smith, J and Welch, F. 1986 "Closing the Gap: Forty Years of Economic Progress for
Blacks' Santa Monica Calif, Rand Corporation R-2295.

The Sentencing Project, "Young Black Men and the Criminal Justice System: A Growing
National Problem' Washington D.C. February 1990.

U.S. Department of Justice, Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics -- 1989 (Washington,
USGPO, 1990).

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Emolpyrnent and Earninas, January 1987 and 1990

U.S. Department of Labor, Handbook of Labor Statistics Bulletin 2340 August 1989

U.S. Bureau of the Census, Current Population Reports Consumer Income, Series P-60 No.
105 June 1977.

US. Bureau of the Census, Statistical Abstract of the United States 1990 (USGPO, 1990)
                                                                                         30
U.S. Department of Defense, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense, Profile of
American Youth: 1980 Nationwide Administration of the Armed Forces Vocational Aptitude
atirx (USGPO, 1982)
U.S. Department of Defense, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense, unpublished
                            flig
tabulations updating tables in

Wilson, William J. The Truly Disadvantaaed (University of Chicago Press, 1987)




                                                                                              4
                                                                 31


                                  Endnotes

1.   The CPS first asked these questions in 1969 but data prior to
1973 are reported in broad intervals and are thus not readily
useable.

2. The March CPS asks respondents annual earnings and weeks worked
over the past calendar year; the data from 1964 to the present are
available in micro files.    Until 1976 the CPS did not include
continuous measures of weeks or hours worked, so that estimates of
hourly or weekly earnings are subject to measurement error due to
the bracketing of earnings and hours before 1976.       The yearly
earnings data in the Annual Demographic Files tell a similar story
to the one in this paper [Bound and Freeman, 1989].

3. The hot deck procedure is the method the Census uses to impute
earnings for individuals who do not report earnings. It matches
them with people having similar characteristics and imputes for
them the earnings of the matches.

4.Potential experience was defined as mm [age—l8,age—education—6].

S.Because blacks have less schooling than whites, differentials
based on regressions that include controls for education are
invariably smaller than those without education controls. In the
1960s and 1970s the difference between the two sets of estimates
fell as the black—white education gap narrowed substantially. In
the 1980s, by contrast, there was a roughly constant gap between
differentials with and without education controls. This is not
because educational attainment narrowed less in the l980s ——
narrowed about as much as in the l970s —— but because returns to
                                                                it
schooling rose, benefitting the more educated whites by enough to
of fset the effects of the reduced gap.


6. We examined whether the difference in the 1973-1989 trend in
relative earnings shown in Figure I and Figure II is due to Figure
I treating hourly earnings while Figure II treats weekly earnings.
Our analysis shows the contrary: that the trend in racial earnings
differentials is greater in usual weekly earnings than in usual
hourly earnings. We also examined whether seasonal or rotation
effects on earnings created an incompatibility between the data
from the May CPS and that from the Annual File by looking rotation
effects on the race coefficient using the May Tapes from 1973
through 1978 and looking for calendar month effects in the Annual
files. We found no such effects.
7.   This pattern is      found     in the raw    (unstandardized)
employment/population rates and in comparable published data for
similar age groups [U.S. Department of Labor, 1989).
                                                                 32

8. The fact that the racial earnings differential rose more rapidly
for college graduates than for high school graduates does not,
however, imply that the returns to college—going fell for blacks.
The returns to college rose for both whites and blacks, but they
rose much less rapidly for blacks.

9. The earnings differentials are from table I; the employment
differentials are from logistic equations that standardize for
experience and schooling, as in figure III.

10. In the underlying regressions the coefficient on metropolitan
status fell modestly, but it has a relatively large effect because
young black men are 50 percentage points more likely to be in
central cities than comparable young whites.
11. Our data shows that in the mid-l970s over 40% of young black
men in the midwest were employed in durable manufacturing. By 1989
this had fallen to 12% -- a 28 point drop! By contrast, among
young white men in the midwest the drop in durable manufacturing
employment was just 10 percentage points.    We suspect that an
important part of this differential change is the closing of older
plants in the central cities of the midwest.

12. That is, we average industry coefficients from our annual 1973—
89 regressions; form the vector product of these differentials with
differences in the shares of blacks and whites in each industry;
regress the resultant effect on time to obtain the trend effect of
changes in industry employment on earnings differentials; and
derive the effect of changes in industry pay as a residual,

13.    We group 1970—79 for reasons of sample size in these
comparisons. Our figures show that in 1970—79 68% of black college
graduates were in professional/managerial jobs, whereas in 1988—89
46% were in such jobs. The comparable figures for white college
graduates are: 1970—79: 69%; 1988—89, 59%. In 1970—79 16% of black
high school graduates were in crafts jobs and 32% were operatives
(including transportation), while in 1988—89 14% of blacks high
school graduates were in crafts jobs and 23% were in operative
jobs. In 1970—79 27% of white high school graduates were
craftsworkers and 27% operatives; in 1988—89 the percentages were
28% (craft) and 22% (operatives).
14. It is possible, of course, to examine shifts in demand due to
changes in the occupational mix, as well, just as we examined
occupation in our decomposition analysis. Such an extension would
presumably add to the explanatory power of the shift model.

15. This formulation follows directly from the usual fixed
coefficient demand index in which the shift in demand equals the
sum of fixed ratios of the group to total employment in sectors
multiplied the absolute growth of employment in those sectors. It
is simply the percentage change analogue of that relation.
                                                                  33

 16. For displaced workers the costs of adjustment are loss of
 sector specific skills and the need to search for new jobs. For
 young entrants the costs are less clear: loss of networks into
 jobs, potential geographic mobility when industries are locally
 concentrated. If blacks are in industries where discrimination is
 least, there is the additional cost of finding employers or co-
 workers with minimal prejudice.

 17. The percentage of young blacks in manufacturing was 33% in
 1970—79 and 20% in 1988—89; the percentage of young whites in
 manufacturing was 28% in 1970—79 and 23% in 1988—89.            The
 percentage of young black college graduates in education and public
 administration was 38% in 1970—79 and 17% in 1988—89; the
 percentage of young white college graduates in those sectors was
 28% in 1970—79 and 14% in 1988—89.

18. Had we used an average of a for the 1973-79 period we would
have obtained similar results.

19. To some, the implied elasticities may seem low, as blacks and
whites with the same years of schooling should, absent unmeasured
differences in school quality, be nearly perfect substitutes. We
explored this issue with data from the 1970 and 1980 Censuses of
Population and found support for the notion that young blacks and
whites with similar years of education are imperfect substitutes.
Using data on the 31 states with a high concentration of blacks, we
regressed changes in black—white earnings differentials on changes
in relative demand indices (defined as in equation (3)). Depending
on specification the estimated coefficients on the demand indices
were between .44(.29) and .50(.26) for college graduates and
between .77(.38) and 1.24(.4l) for high school graduates and
dropouts combined. These coefficients are consistent with modest
elasticities of demand, implying imperfect substitution between
black and white workers

20. Another possibility is that the tendency of the armed forces
to draw disproportionately on able black young men may have reduced
the qualifications of young black men in the civilian work force.
While there is evidence that the fraction of black and white
military recruits with high AFQT scores rose in the 1980s, the
proportion of 20-29 year old black men in the armed forces fell
from 10% in 1979 to 8% in 1988, while the proportion of 20—29 year
old whites in the military was virtually unchanged at about 5%.
(U.S. Department of Defense, 1982, and Unpublished Updated
tabulations)     Thus,  any adverse military effect on the
qualifications of blacks in the noninstitutjonal population would
have to come through the change in the proportion with high AFQT
scores. We simulated what might happen to earnings given normal
distributions of AFQT scores for whites and blacks (with whites
having 1 standard deviation higher means) and the observed changes
in the proportions in the military and in the AFQT scores of
military recruits for the two populations. Our estimate is that
the military accessions had at most a negligible .001 effect on
relative earnings.
                                                                  34

21. We estimated racial earnings differentials for the age cohorts
that had 0—9 years of experience from 1973, 1979, and 1983, and
compared trends in racial earnings differentials for these cohorts
over time. For instance, we compared the differentials for men
with 0—9 years of experience in 1973 with figures giving the
differential for men with 15-24 years of potential experience in
1988. The data showed that during the 1973—89 period of erosion in
earnings the relative earnings of older cohorts of black workers
fell roughly as much as did that of entering cohorts.

22. In addition, we examined the effect of past incarceration
experience on earnings of dropouts: for 1983 we have negligible
statistically insignificant effects; for 1988 sizeable effects. As
other data sets show little impact of incarceration on future
earnings for youths from the same poverty neighborhoods (Freeman,
1991], we focus solely on the employment relation.

23. To get the number of black men in prison in 1986 we took the
number of males in state and federal prisons from the U.S. Bureau
of the Census Statistical Abstract 1990 table 328 and the number in
jail from table 323. We multiplied the prison figures by 0.47, the
proportion of proportion of state prison inmates in table 323. To
get the number of black men in jail we took 41% of the number of
men in jail from table 323.    Our estimates of the high school
dropout population are based on our own calculations of the
proportion of 18-29 year olds not enrolled in school and civilian
noninstitutional population figures in Bureau of Labor Statistics
Employment and Earnings, Jan 1987.

24. This is a conservative figure. The black proportion of men in
jail rose between 1986 and 1989 so that the black male prison
population increased more rapidly. However, we lack data on the
educational distribution of these prisoners.     Adjusting our
estimated .20 incarceration rate by the 20% increase in the overall
prison and jail population and by the 10% drop in black dropouts
yields a 1989 incarceration rate of .266, for a 1980—89 trend
increase of 19.2 percentage points.

25. The Sentencing Project (table 1, p. 8] estimates from Justice
Department data that among 20-29 year old blacks, 8% were
incarcerated in 1989, 12% were on probation, and 3% were on parole,
implying that there were roughly 1.9 times as many persons on
parole or probation as in jail or prison. This is of comparable
magnitude to our estimates.

26. Some of those who were on probation committed additional
offenses and went to prison: 17% in our black dropout sample.
However, others who were not on probation in 1980 were convicted of
crimes and given probationary sentences in later years. Thus, our
use of the 1980 ratio of persons on probation to those incarcerated
is only a crude approximation.

27. The number of employment discrimination suits in federal
district courts stabilized in the 1980s at about 9,000 per year
after having risen rapidly (Administrative Office of U.S. Courts);
                                                                 35

the number of class action discrimination suits fell; and most
employment discrimination cases involved termination rather than
hiring (Donahue and Siegeiman, 1989). From 1979 to 1985 the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, which monitors Title VII,
reduced its staff by 20 percent while holding real expenditures
virtually constant; and the Office of Federal Contract Compliance,
which administers afffirmative action, reduced its employment by 10
percent and its real budget by 20 percent (Leonard, 1987).
                                                                                            36


                                    Table I:
             Estimated Black—white Earnings Differentials. 1973—89
          (controlling for years of experience and years of schooling)
                United States                  Region (High school or Less)
         Total Dropouts High College           Midwest Horth South
                         school Grad                           East
1973   —.109   —.179   —.109   —.038             .008         —.004         —.150
1974    — .107 — .167  — .138    .067           — .065        — .006        — .168
1975   —.076   —.129   —.106     .059            .079          .044         —.142
1976   —.062   —.116   —.107     .104            .026         —.041         —.107
1977   — .119 —.181    — .144    .027          — .037         —.004         — .183
1978   —.104   —.195   —.113   —.005           —.027          —.058         —.155
1979   —.115   —.191   —.133   —.025           —.025          —.068         —.172
1980   —.136   —.177   —.172   —.025           —.091          —.077         —.180
1981   —.114   —.162   —.141   —.032           —.062          —.097         —.157
1982   —.131   —.143   —.155   —.060           —.112          —.103         —.176
1983   —.137   —.186   —.141   —.099           —.052          —.117         —.170
1984   —.153   —.180   —.171   —.133           —.083          —.115         —.202
1985   —.190   —.222  —.201    —.151           —.155          —.071         —.226
1986   —.170   —.198   —.189   —.146           —.148          —.085         —.210
1987   —.161   —.160  —.174    —.163           —.193          —.089         —.166
1988   —.139   —.191  —.142    —.133           —.189          —.082         —.135
1989   —.179   —.180  —.183    —.169           —.209          —.148         —.183

Source: Calculated from May CPS files from 1973 to 1978 and from Annual
Demographic Merged Files from 1979 to 1989. All the regressions include
controls for individual years of potential experience, years of schooling, 8
region dussnies snd a duzmny for metropolitan status (1973—75) or one for
central city and one for suburbs (1976—89) . The standard errors on the
estimates range from .01 to .02 for the total and from .01 to .06 for the
disaggregated groups. Detailed susmaary statistics for the beginning year
1973 and end year 1989 are:

                          US                    Hiohs School Grads or less
                  All College High Dropouts       Northeast Midwest South
                       grads   grads
                                               1973
sample size      7029    1479   2857    1249           867            896       1424
number blacks     640      52    201     187             62            86        289
std error
of differential .017     .060   .024    .034          .052        .042          .027

                                               1989
sample size      23412   5642   9259    3120          2751       2059            4328
number blacks     2503    340   1204     325           273        193                851
std error
of differential .009     .025   .013    .022          .025        .029               .014
                                                              37

                        TABLE II:
 Regression Estimates of 1973—89 Trends in Black/White
 Differentials (Net of Years of Exoerience and Years of
                    Schooling) X l00

                 Ln Earnings                   Snip/Pop
                 const      trend      const       trend
United States, by education
total           —8.43       —0.57      —12.01       —0.35
                 (0.92)      (0.10)      (1.40)      (0.15)

College           6.96      —1.55      —3.57        —0.20
Graduates        (1.85)      (0.20)    (1.09)        (0.12)

High school    —11.23       —0.45      —13.01       —0.25
Graduates        (0.93)      (0.10)      (1.06)      (0.20)

Dropouts        15.73       —0.21      —15.66       —0.95
                (1.11)      (0.12)      (1.86)      (0.20)


High School Graduates and   Dropouts   By Region
Midwest          3.53       —1.42      —16.78       —0.88
                (1.82)      (0.19)      (2.55)      (0.29)

North East      —0.19       —0.80      —19.16        0.06
                (1.39)      (0.15)      (2.52)      (0.27)

South          —15.01       —0.24      —7.45        —0.66
                (1.23)      (0.13)      (1.73)      (0.18)


a All the coefficients have been multiplied by 100 for
ease of presentation. Standard errors are in
parenthesis.


Source: Calculated by regressing estimated annual
racial differentials on a time trend variable. The
underlying differentials in the employment equations
are obtained from logits with single years of
experience and education. The reference groups was men
with 5 years experience and 16 years of schooling for
college graduates, 12 years of schooling for high
school gradutaes), and 10 years of schooling for
dropouts; 12 years of schooling for the region groups.
                                                                                   38


                                 Table III:
Estimated Contribution of Factors to Average Annual Percentage Point Trends in
    Racial Earnings Differentials. Men With 0—9 Yrs of Exterience. 1973—89

                             United States                       Region (H.S. or lass
                     Total      College High           Drop-     Hid    North    South
                                 Grad Sch Grad out               West    East
1. Initial Trend        —.565   —1.547       —.449     —.208    —1.424    —.797   —.241
                                                     LOCATION
2.   Due toRegion        .022    —.113        .052       .198       —     —.246    .032
        Quantities       .005    —.021        .001       .033       —      .000   —.002
        Prices           .017    —.092        .051       .165       —     —.246    .034

3. Due to Metro.        —.084    —.054       —.094     —.090      —.188 —.053     —.046
     Quantities          .023     .009        .010       .047      .001    .059    .010
     Prices             —.107    —.063       —.103     —.137      —.187 —.112     —.056
4. Trend Net of Loc. —.503      —1.380       —.408     —.317    —1.236 —.497      —.227
                                              EMPLOYMENT STRUCTURE
5. Due to Industry      —.057    —.108       —.045     —.106     —.455 —.140       .062
     Quantities         —.087     .029       —.105     —.133     —.491 —.033      —.031
     Prices              .029    —.137        .060       .027     .036 —.106       .093

6. Trend Net of led. —.445      —1.272       —.362     -211        .781    .357    .289
7. Due to Occupn        —.109    —.295       —.157      .018     —.163     .043   —.107
      Quantities        —.021    —.231       —.040      .058     —.047     .034   —.015
      Prices            —.088    —.064       —.117     —.040     —.116 —.076      —.091
8. Trend net of Einp. —.336      —.976       —.205     —.229     —.619 —.315      —.183
                                              INSTITUTIONAL CHANGES
9. Due to Union         —.027    —.024       —.046     —.047     —.126 —.108      —.058
      Quantities        —.026    —.018       —.050     —.049     —.125 —.121      —.051
      Prices            —.001    —.006        .004      .002       .001    .013   —.007
10. Due to Mm wage —.097         —.042       —.120     —.203     —.101 —.034      —.181

                                               TOTAL ACCOUNTING
11. Trend net of
     Instit. Change —.212        —.910       —.039      .021     —.392 —.173       .056

12. Percent explained      62       41          91       100+       72      78      100+
Source: Calculated from regression analyses using CPS files as described in the
text. Note that initial trend and all succeeding regressions include duinzuy
variables for individual years of schooling and experience.
                                                                                  39


                                  Table IV:
         Effects of Annual Shifts in Ln Relative Demand Indices and
       Supply on Trends in Black—White Ln Earnings and Emolovlnent—Rpte
                   Differentials Net of Location. 1973—89
                            (changes multiplied by 100)

                    Relative     Relative
                     Demand       Supply     óLn       L.n Emp   Elasticities
                     Shifts       Shifts    Earnings     Rate    Supply Demand
                      (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)      (5)     (6)


U.S.

All Young males      —.33          .87       —.50       —.32      .64     1.8
By education

College Grads       —1.87         3.19      —1.38       —.64      .46     3.2
High School          —.77         1.41       —.41       —.22      .54     4.8
Grads

Dropouts              .44       —1.53        —.32      —2.11       *          *

By Region (High School or Leas)
Midwest             —1.49          .67      —1.24      —.48       .39     1.3
Northeast            —.51        1.50       —.50       —.26       .52     3.5
South                 .06        —.08       —.23         .14       *      a



 These are the elasticities that enable the shift model to explain
perfectly the changes in relative earnings and in the in employment
rate.

A (*) indicates that the model does not account for the changes.

Source: Authors tabulations, as described in the text. The actual
changes are changes after controlling for region and metropolitan
status, as given in Table III.
                                                                             40


                                        Table   V:
                  Estimates of the Effect of Criminal Records on
              Working in Survey Week of Young High School Dropout Men
                         in the Noninstitutional Pooulation

                                 1983                      1988
                          mean coefficient           mean coefficient
                                 (std error)                 (std error)
  dependent variable       .61          ——           .79           ——

  incarcerated
  in prior yrs            .11      —.21              .16          —.17
                                   (.06)                          (.04)
   1980/earlier:
  probation only           .12     —.16              .10          —.11
                                   (.05)                          (.05)

  convicted only           .03     —.07              .02          —.06
                                   (.10)                          (.09)

  charged only             .07     —.03              .07          —.10
                                    (.07)                         (.05)

  stopped only             .16          .00          .15          —.00
                                   (.05)                          (.04)

  controls                          YES                            YES
  R2                                .11                             .09
  sample   size                         819                        930


Notes: Estimated using 1989 wave of National Longitudinal Survey of Youth.
Controls include: age, age—squared, dwniey for race, dummy for marital status,
three region dummies. years of schooling, urban dummy, smsa dummy, two dummies
for level of unemployment in local labor market, dummy if person came from the
"random'S sample of the survey as opposed to the special oversampling of minority
and poor youths; dummy variables for drinking; recent and lifetime use of
marijuana and cocaine.
           Figure 1: BlackiWhite Earnings Gap for Men with less than 10
                yrs Experience - 1973-89 (controllIng for education)


       0


   -0.02



   -0.04



   -0.06



   -0.08



 8. -0.1
.2

   -0.12



   -0.14



   -0.16



   -0.18



    -0.2


                                      years
                                                                                    42




                     Figure 2: Black/White Weekly Earnings Gap for Men with less
                     than 10 yrs Experience - 1963-89 (controlling for education)


             0-
         -0.05



          -0.1 — -




         -0.15




          -0.2


     I   -0.25




          -03



         -0.35



          -0.4




         —0.45'''''IIIIIIlIIIIIIllIllj
                                                 years


Notes: Figure 2 reference category is men with 5 years of experience and 12
years of education.
                                                               43




Figure 3: Black and White Employment Rates for Men with less
               than 10 yrs Experience - 1973-89




                          years

                       White         Iack 1
