                    NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




           TAXES AND THE CHOICE OF ORGANIZATIONAL FORM




                     Jeffrey   K.   McKie-Mason
                         Roger H. Gordon




                     Working Paper No. 3781




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            July 1991




This paper is part of NEER's research program in Taxation. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                      NBER Working Paper #3781
                                                      July 1991



                 TAXES AND THE CHOICE OF ORGANIZATIONAL FORM



                                         ABSTRACT


        One of    the   most   basic   distortions   created   by the double
taxation of corporate income is the disincentive to incorporate.

In this paper, we investigate the extent to which the aggregate

allocation of assets and taxable income in the U.S. between

corporate vs. noncorporate forms of organization during the
period 1959-86 has responded to the size of the tax distortion

discouraging firms from incorporating.                In theory,   profitable
firms should shift out of the corporate sector when the tax

distortion to incorporating is larger, and conversely for firms

with tax losses.          Our empirical results provide strong support

for these theoretical forecasts, and hold consistently across a

wide variety of specifications and measures of the tax variables.

Measured effects are small, however, throwing doubt on the

econonic importance of tax-induced changes in organizational

form.




Jeffrey K. MacKie-Mason                               Roger H. Gordon
Hoover Institution                                    Department of Economics
Stanford University                                   University of Michigan
Stanford, CA 94305                                    Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER                                              and NEER
                       Taxes and the Choice of Organizational Form
                                     Jeffrey K. MacKie—Meson
                                                aod
                                          Roger H. Gordon


    One of the most basic distortioos created by the double tsxatioo of corporate income
is the disincentive to incorporate. However obvious this distortion may be, most papers
investigating the distortions created by the corporate tax have taken as exogenous a firm's
choice whether    or not to incorporate, assuming for example that         some industries are in-
herently corporate while others are inherently noncorporate, A variety of nontax factors,
described below, can certainly influence a firm's choice of organizational form, causing
some to favor incorporating and others not. Hut are these nontax factors so dominant
that taxes do not in practice influence a firm's choice of organizational form? As Cravelle
and Kotlikoff (1989,1990) emphasize, tax—induced changes in firms choices of organiza-
tional form in principle can create large excess burdens. The size of these distortions in
practice depends on the extent to whichfirms respond to these tax incentives.
    In this paper, we calculate how the tax distortion discouragingfirmsfrom incorporating
has varied over time, then estimate the extent to which the allocation of assets and taxable
income between corporate vs. noncorporate forms of organizationhas slufted in response
to this time—varying tax distortion. We do this using aggregate data, by industry, in the
U.S. during the period 1959—86.

   In theory, taxes should induce profitable firms to shift out of the corporate sector when
the tax distortion to incorporating increases,and conversely for firms with tax losses. Our
empirical results provide strong support for these theoretical forecasts, and bold consis-
tently across a wide variety of specificationsand measures of the tax variables. We also

     We are grateful to Laura Kalambokidis, Linda Burilovich, Sharon Parmott, David Eaton Tracy
Iludson, Steve Pincus, Bill Boyle from the IRS, and especially Jane MacKie-Mason fur assistance in
creating the data set for this paper. We have had helpful discussions with Jane Gravclle, Joel Slemrnd
and Mark Wolfson. Financial support for the data collection was provided by the Office of Tas Policy
Research and the Raekham Graduate School at the University of Michigan. The paper was written while
MacKie-Mason was a National Fellow at the hoover Institution,
found that sonic    non—tax—rate policy   changes caused shifts in the predicted directions
between various forms.
   Tue measured effects are small, however, throwing doubt on the economic importance
of tax—induced  changes in organizational form. For instance, cutting the tax ratc on
noncorporate incomo by .10 is forecasted to cause no morc than one—half of one percent
of total assets to shift out of corporate form.' The effect is larger for the location of
taxable gains and losses, with the same tax change leading to a shift of approximately
5% of galns and losses toward the more favored forms of organization. Overall, nontax
determinants of organizationalform appear to dominate, though further research will he
needed to determine wluch factors are most important.
   In the first section of the paper we examine theoretically how the tax law distorts a
firm's choice of organizational form. Not only do tax rates differ by organizational form,
but a variety of other tax provisions can also affect a firm's choice. We also discuss some
non—tax factors that are believedto affect the choice of organizational form.
   In the second section, we present the results of our empirical analysis. In particular,
we examine the movement of economic activity across organizational forms in the U.S.
as tax rates and other tax rules have changed during the period 1959—1986. Our two

primary measures of economic resources and activity are book assets and taxable income.
We emphasizethat it is important to distinguish between firms with positive income and
firms with losses; this distinction is important because many of the incentives are opposite
for gain and loss firms.

 1. Theoretical Framework


 .1.1 Model of   a Firm's Choice of Organizational Form

 We begin with     a simple model that determines the equilibrium allocation of resources
 across different organizational forms as a function of tax rates and nun—tax factors. Fur
 now we leave "other factors" largely unspecified; we return to them in section 1.3. For
     As shown below, to yield the large escess burden simulated by Graselle and KutlikoT (199, 1990)
 requires asset shifts that are nearly30 times as large.
 simplicity, we allow for only two classes of ownership: one that is taxed at both the
 corporate and personal level ("corporate") and another that is taxed only at the personal
 level ("partnership"). The double—taxation of corporate income has been the focus of
 studies of dividend payout behavior and corporate debt/equity decisions; we examine its
 role   in the determination of ownership structure.
     When should a firm choose to incorporate? Assume that a firm, if it does not in-
corporate, would earn economic income before taxes of I, and taxable income Ii.. In a
noncorporate firm, this income is subject to tax only at the personal level. Denote the
personal tax rate on this income by r,,..2 The firm's net—of—tax income is therefore ITnIa.
   Lf the firm incorporates, its economic income, again before
                                                                  taxes, can he expressed                  by
I+g, where g captures any non-tax factors that make the corporateform ofownership more
attractive(g can be negative, and will vary by firm). For simplicity, let thc' corporation's
taxable income equal 1 + g, implying that the same definition of taxable income is used
for corporate and noncorporate firms, and that the tax law correctly nicasures the extra
income, g, generated by incorporation.3 This income is subject to tax first at the corporate
level, at rate   i-Shareholdersin the corporation then face personal income taxes on the
income left after corporate taxes4 — dividend income is taxed at
                                                                       ordinary rates while
capital gains are taxed at lower rates. The specific tax rates, of course, vary by investor.
However, as shown for example in Gordon and Bradford (1980), when a firm's equity is
tradod freely in the financial markets, without constraints, then the
                                                                      implicit personal tax
rates affecting firm behavior can be expressed as a weighted
                                                              average the tax rates faced
                                                                      of
  2 For a
          sole proprietorship,this tax rate simply equals the iriarginal tax rate of the sok
firms with several owners, r,, will equal a                                                  proprietor. For
                                            weighted average of the tax rates of each of the ownera

     Taxable income of a firm that incorporates may change by a different amount than the
economic income. For example, the relative tax treatment of such items as interest               change in its
                                                                                       income, capital gains,
fringe benefits, tax losses, and tax preferences, compared with ordinary incon,e, all differ
noncorporate firms, If the amounts of these categories are fixed, lien these differences for     corporate vs.
                                                                                             can be captured
simply through an adjustment in the effective tax rate. If behavior changes in response to these           tax
differences, however, then extra terms would appear in equation (1) below, reflecting both the tax and
nontax implications of these changes in behavior. Theseextra terms are all second-order
should be small relative to the terms we focus on.                                             effects, and so

    The analysis woild be different in its particulars for a        or partially integratedsystem such as
exists for exaniple in the United Kingdom, but the qualitativefully
                                                               result that there are differential taxes across
organizationalforms still holds.


                                                      3
                                       r
by each individual investor, Let represent the implicit personsl tax rate per
                                                                                  dollar of
income to equity, taking as giventhe division of this income between dividends vs. capital
gains.5 The firm's income net of all taxes is therefore 1± g —(Ii + g)(Ye + (1 r0)75).
                                                                              —        The
net cost from incorporating therefore equals

                 COST     = —g(i   -       —(1 — r0)r0)    Ixfre     (I —        —   r0).              (1)

    In general,this expression (and each tersu) can he of either sign. Theory tells us little
about the sign or size of p — all we can say is that the greater the nontax advantage of
the corporate form of ownership, the more likely the firm will incorporate. In addition,
(re      — re)ro   a0) and Ia can both be of either sign.6 Each of the parameters in this
                                                                             arid others to
expression can differ by firm, leading some firms to prefer to incorporate
remain noneorporate.
   Given the availabledata, we are not in a position to examine differences in the choicea
of organizational form made by individual firms with different characteristics. Instead,
we have data only on the time series for the aggregate division of firms between corpo-
 rate vs. noncorporate forms of organization. - In general, the outcome in any year can
 be expressed as a function of tlse joint distribution of each of the variables entering the
 expression.
    We will focus specifically on the effects of changes in the second term in equation (1).
 This term implies that increases in the taxes on corporate equity will encourage firms
 with taxable profits to disineorporateand firms with tax losses to incorporate. Likewise,
 it implies that an increase in the personal tax rates on nonc.orporatefirms encourages
                                                                              with taxable
 disincorporation of firms earniog tax losses, while encouraging partnerships
 profits to incorporate. We test these predictions in our empirical work.
     Given the continuing puzzle concerning why firms pay dividends, we do not attempt to model this
 choice explicitly.

  6     cao be negative for a variety of reasons. First, even if its cx ante value were positive, its cx poot
 value could be negative. Seeood, for multiperiod invcstmcnta, expected taxable income could be negative
 in some yoaro aod positive in others. Third,ceen if the real income to equity were positive, this expression
 equals the real income to the firm roieus the nominal income to debt. Finally, even
                                                                                            I
                                                                                       if were positive, &
 could be negative due to the effects of accelerateddepreciation etc.


                                                      4
   Equation (1) also implies that if firms have losses during some periods and profits
during other periods, then they shouldchange organizationalform at the transition point.
Similarly, if part of a firm generates negative taxable income while the rest of the firm
earns profits, then the firm should try to sell off whichever part is not being taxed at the
appropriate tax rate, so that each part can choose the more advantageousorganizational
form. Tax shelters often seem designed to take best advantage of these incentives.
                                                                  of the theory. To begin
     In subsequent work, we will explore other testable implications

with, changes in the variabilityof tax rates across investors,holding their average value
constant (as for example occurred in 1080 with the reduction in the number of brackets)
has predictable effects on the distribution of firms across organizational forms. Similarly,
changes in the distribution of values of I, should affect the observed distribution across
organizational forms, holding tax rates constant. Since theory forecasts that corporate
debt/equity ratios depend on basically the same poorly measured tax expression, r, +
(1
     —
         r)T — r, one alternative test would be to examine the dcgree to which debt/equity
ratios and the chosen pattern of organizational forms movetogether over time in the way
forecast by the theory. Finally, the theory forecasts that noncorporate investors with
Y > Y + (1 —        r)r
                     will ownfirms generatingtax losses, and conversely, forecasts which
are testable using panel data sets of individual tax returns,

1.2 Tax Effects Other Than Tax Rates

The above discussion focused primarily on differences in tax rates affecting different or-
ganizational forms. However, there are a multitude of other tax provisions that differ by
organizational form. We summarize some of these provisions,7 even though we are in           a
position to estimate the effects of only a few of them in the empirical work.
   Rules Governing Election. A business must satisfy some restrictionsin order to avoid
corporate taxes. Often, for example, firms that arc legally organized as partnerships are
required by the IRS to pay corporate taxes. In general, a firm will be taxed as a cor-
poration unless it fails two of the following criteria: (1) continuity of life; (2) centralized
 7 For
    ,
       a    richer d,scuss,oa see Scimoles ao,J Wolfson (1s87,lssS,lssl).


                                                       5
management; (3) essy transferability of ownership shares; (4) limited liability.2
   A firm that is deemed to be a corporation under the criteria above can still avoid
the corporate—level tax if it qualifies for S corporation status. The main criteria for S
corporation eligibility are: (1) no more than 35 shareholders;(2) no corporate shareholders;
(3) not pert of an affiliated group; (4) only one class of stock; (5) and not a domestic
international sales corporation (DISC). The ruies governing eligibility for S corporation
status have changed frequently since S corporations were created in 1957; we will be
examining the effects of a number of these rule changes in section 2.
   Pensions and Fringe Benefits, Opportunities for tax—deferred savingsand fringe benefit
deductibility have varied across organizationalforms and over time. For example,partners
an sole proprietors (unincorporatedfirms with one owner and unlimitedliability) can use
individual—oriented qualified savings plans such as Keogh accounts. Corporation pension
funds have different rules on deduction limits and other characteristics. On the other
hand, more fringe benefits provided to employees are deductible for corporations than for
partnerships and sole proprietorships(including, until 1986, health insurancepremiums). S
corporations have faced corporate tax treatment of fringes during some years, and peronai
tax treatment during others.
   Loss Offsets and At—Risk Rules. One significant advantage fur partnerships and sole

proprietorships is the ability to offset business losses against ether sources of porsonal
income when figuring tax liability. A C corporation can offset losses only against its
own past or future profits—losses can offset profits in any of the prior three years, or be
carried forward without interest to offset future profits. The number of years before loss
 carryforwsrdsexpire has changed over time .              TIse   importance of tax losses has also varied

      For murh of the lS8Os it was possible to form a master limitedpartnership (MLPI that had most of tl,c
 characteristicsof a rorporation, iocluding limited liabilityfor the partoers and psblirly—tradedownership
 shares, yet was tased as a partnership. Howeverthe U.S. 1987 tax law instituted rules that require nearly
 all master limited partnershi be taxed as corporations, except for the oil, gas and real estatefirms. See
 Gentry (7991) for tests of tax effects using MLP data.

     Since 1977 five states have legislated limited liability companies," which hare the limited liability of
 a corporation hot pay no corporate-leveltax, yet also avoid most of the restrictions on S corporations.
 'rhe IRS took  ii years to apprnse partnership taxation for the first of these; we do sot yet have any data
 on their prevalence.


                                                      6
over time. Before 1983 S corporation losses faced a third set of rules; since 1983 they are
treated the same as C corporations.
    In 1976 "at—risk" rules were applied to partnerships, restricting loss deductions to
the amount for which an investor is personally at risk. These rules were a response to
the growing use of schemes that leveraged limited partner investments us order to sell
large lax losses to high tax rate investors who could immediatelydeduct them during the
early years of a partnership while deferring taxes on gains until years later (when they
were taxed at the usually lower tax rate of the at—risk investor). These schemes were
particularly prevalent for real estate and leasing deals that took advantage of depreciation
and interest deduction rules. At—risk rules were applied to S corporation shareholders
beginning in 1978.
   Passive and Foreign Income. Before 1982 firms earning passive or foreign—source in-
come were not allowed to register as S corporations With the U.S. 1986 Tax Reform Act
passive losses accruing to partners and S corporation shareholders could be offset only
against other sources of passive income and not against ordinary income. Beginning in
1972 a C corporation couldreceive favored tax treatment on export business if it qualified
as a   Domestic International Sales Corporation (DISC). S corporations have never been
allowed to obtain DISC treatment.
   Reorganization Consequences. There are at least three ways in which economic re-
sources can move from one form to another: through a reorganization of an existing firm,
through creation of new firms, or in the case of a change from C to S corporation statussim-
ply through a declaration to the IRS without legal reorganization. The tax consequencesof
these avenues differ. For example,when a C corporation wants to convert to a partnership
or sole proprietorship, it faces recapture provisionsfor the recovery of certain tax benefits.
but not if it elects S corporation status. Recapture is not an issue for a newly—formed firm,
Thus the mobility of resources will depend on the extent to which an industry is growing,
as well as on the amount of previous tax benefits subject to recapture. Since the provisions
that can lead to recapture (investment tax credits, research and developmentcredits, and
accelerated depreciation) have changed several times over the past three decades, the tax
barriers to mobility across forms have changed as well.

                                              7
   Capital Gains Provisions. In general, capital gains are taxed more favorably at the
personal than at the corporate level, creating an incentive not to incorporate for firms
earning substantial income in tlse form of capital gains. However, under the General
Utilities doctrine C corporationscoold separately incorporate an asset before it was sold
and tlsen distribote tise liquidation proceeds directly to slsarelsolders without incurring
capital gains tax at the corporate level. This provision was repealed in 1986.
    When the capital gains tax rate is low enough, relative to the ordinary tax rate, tisen
firms may have an incentive to churn assets. When an asset is sold, capital gains taxes
must be paid on the book profits, but the asset can then be depreciated based on the
new book value. The lower the relative value of the capital gains tax rate, tlse more likely
tlsis transaction is to be profitable. Cisurningcan occur for firms as a whole, through ac-

quisitions and deacquisitions,or can occur for particular assets, e.g. buildings, airplanes,
                                                                                   — since
computers, etc. The opportunities for profitable churning have varied over time
1986,they have basicallydisappeared. Since"churned" assets would normally generate tax
losses, profitable corporationswould have had the incentive to shift ownership of "churn-
able" assets to high—tax—bracketnoneorporateinvestors during periods when churningwas

profitable.
    A related provision (Section 1374) was enacted in 1986 that provides slsarply different
incentives to new firms and existing C corporations that are considering the choice of S

corporation status. Under Section 1374 finns that convert to S status must pay tax at
the top corporate rate on any "built—in gains" realized durissg the 10 years following a
conversion. This was designed to prevent firms from switching to S status       just before
liquidation to avoid corporate—levelcapital gains taxation.
    Alternative MinimumTax. C corporations face an alternative minimum tax (AMT)
when taxable income is low due to substantial tax preferenceitems, but for many years tins
 AMT has not been binding on more than a few firms. Pass—through organizational forms
 were not subject to the corporate AMT. In 1986 a much stronger AMT was legislated. S
 corporations are not subject to this tax, which will be especiallyimportant for firms witls
 substantial tax deferrals and accounting practices that lead to large book income relative
 to taxable income because tlse AMT includes 50% of that difference in tlse alternative tax

                                             8
base. However, a new personal—level alternative minimum tax was also instituted in 1986
and will be especiallyimportant for tax shelter investors with substantial passive losses.
    Summary. It should be clear from this review that there are numerous tax rule dif-
ferences that are not easily captured in the formulation of equation (1) but that should
affectthe allocation of economic resources across organizational forms. In our empirical
analysis we exploit the fact that a number of these provisions have changed during our
sample period, providing us a limited opportunity to test for their effects,

1.3 Norm—Tar Factors

The two main explanations commonly given for a non—tax advantage, g, to the corporate
form of organization are first that corporations face limited liability and second that they
can trade their shares publicly. How important and convincingare these explanations?
    Limited Liability. In principle, corporate shareholders have limited liability, whereas
partners and unincorporated sole proprietors have unlimited liability. However, these
are only the "default" rules, defining the allocation of liabilities that are not otherwise
allocated by explicit contracts — through recontracting, these rules can often be undone.
For example, it is very common that the shareholders of small corperations must pledge
personal assets if they wish to obtain external bank financing. Partnerships, on the other
hand, can write liability limits into contracts with lenders, suppliers, customers and so
forth.
   The legal difference in the default provisions concerningliability for corporate vs. non-
corporate firms is therefore important ouly to the degree to which explicit recontracting
imposes transactions costs — in some cases, these costs will be large enough that the less
favorable   rule is left in place.   Differences in these provisions are therefore more important
when contracting costs are larger.
   Even when contracting costs prevent differences in default liability provisions from
being undone by explicit contract provisions,it is still not clear whether making limited
liability the default provision for corporationsfavoes the corporateform oforganization. To
the extent that equity holders are better informedthan debt holders concerningthe future
prospects for the firm, then limited liability exacerbates problems created by asymmetric

                                                   9
information when firms try to borrow. Conversely if existing shareholders have private
information about the firm's potential liabilities (or future prospects) not available to new
shareholders,then limited liability can lessen the lemons problem when shares are sold to
new shareholders.
   Another complicationis that some firms are taxed only at the personal level, yet still
have limited liability. One clear example would be subchapter S corporations, Another is
limited partnerships. In a limited partnership only the general partner—who may own no
more than 1% of the equity capital—needbear unlimited liability, while the limited part-
ners are liable only to the extent of their investment, the same as corporate shareholders.
In fact, the general partner can even be a corporation, which bears general liability but
only to the limit of the corporation's wealth, with no further recourse to the corporation's
shareholders.1°
    Public Trading of Shares. Corporations are also claimed to have an advantage due
to their ability to trade their shares publicly. It is widely agreed that publicly—traded
firms have access to lower—cost equity capital. In addition, publicly—traded shares may
provide an important instrument for the amelioration of principal—agent problems between
managers and owners. This secondpoint bearssome discussion. In principle, a manager's
compensationshould be tied to his contribution to the value of the firm. Given that this
contribution is not normally observabledirectly, firms in practice try to tie the manager's
compensationto the firm's share value, via share—purchase pension plans, stock Options,
etc., as documented for example in Murphy (1986). The share value used in determining
compensationshould be based on an objective and external measure of value that is not
subject to manipulation. A stock market should produce such an objective valuation, but
presumably an outside accounting firm could also do a reasonable job. In principle, this
outside valuation is needed only once for each manager, when the manager leaves the firm,
as for example occurs for a sole proprietor when he sells his business. For a business of any
 15 It
       may be possible largely to undo the limited liability distinction through this vehicle, but there
are hidden information and moral hazard costs because the limited partners are not allowed to directly
participate in omnagement without losing partnershiptax treatment. Some moral examines
                                                                                 hazard costs of limited
partnerships are considered in WolIson (1985a, 1985b); MacKie—Mason (1987)                 some hidden
information costs. See also Felhingharnand W01f500 (1985).


                                                  10
size, however,in which many of the top managers will have their pay tied              to share values,
these departures occur regularly. Obtaining careful outside valuationsin each case would
be very costly, making it valuable to have such a valuation continually available through
the firm's share price in the stock market. At least large firms should therefore find the
option to have their shares publicly traded to be of great value. It. is certainly the case
that large firms are much more likely to incorporate than small firms.
   In some cases, noncorporate firms have also been able to trade their ownership shares
publicly. For example, during much of the 1980's shares in master limited partnerships
could be traded publicly.
   For our empirical work, the roles of limited liability and public share trading are too
unsettled in the theory for us to formally incorporate these effects. However, most of our
empiricaltestsare based on time—seriesvariation in the tax costsfor different organizational
forms. It seems plausible that the value of limited liability and public share trading have
not covaried systematically with time—series variation in tax costs Thus, we may have a
valid ceteris paribas experiment.

2. Empirical Analysis
In this section, we estimate the degree to which various aggregate measures of the allo-
cation of resources and economic activity across organizational forms lees responded as
expected to changes in tax incentives. We rely on U.S. tax return data made public by
the IRS. Individual business tax returns are not available,so we are not able to estimate
microeconomicmodels of discrete choice among the different organizational types.

2.1 Overview and Data

We use data covering the period 1959—1986. The data were collected from numerous IRS
publications and data tapes, and were carefully clseckcd for accuracy. We leave measures
for about a dozen income statement and balance sheet items as reported to the IRS for
C corporations, S corporations,partnerships and sole proprietorships. We have data for 7
industry aggregates that correspond to the SIC 1—digit aggregates."
   No balancesheet information is collected for sole proprietorships. We had to remove the entire Industry

                                                   11
   For net income, losses and some other variables we have separate data for firms that
reported positive net income and firms with losses. Unfortnnately, the IRS does not report
asset data separately for profit and loss firms for all organizational forms, The distinction
between gain and loss firms is qnite important. As discnssed in section 1, firms have an
incentive to allocate taxable galns and losses across organizational forms to obtaln the
most favorable tax treatment. Thus aggregate net income viill be a poor indicator of the
allocation of economic resources and activity across organizational forms. For example,
suppose that when assets yield losses they are best located in partnership form, and then
moved to corporate form when they yield galns. Then we would see low or negative net
income in the partnership sector, but    it would be incorrect to infer that the partnership
sector represents a low (or negative!) fraction of economic resources or economic activity.12
We therefore examine net income (or deficit) separately for gain and loss firms.
  We present somedescriptivestatistics for our dataset in table 1. C corporations control
a dominant fraction of business assets in the U.S,'3 hut report                receiving roughly only
two—thirds of business income   (both positive income and tax losses). In particular, C
corporations controlled an asset baseover 18 times larger than partnerships, yet reported
on averageless than three times as much in losses. Partnershipa and S corporations seem to
have been biased towardsloss activities; e.g., the mean partnership share of totallosses was
more than two times as large as the partnership share of gains. The standard deviations
of each form of organization's share of the annual totals, calculated over 1959—1986, are
also listed in table 1. These changes over tinie have been quite modest, with the largest
variation occuring for firma reporting tax losses.
     How nmcl, movementshould we have seen across organizational formsduring our sam-

ple period due to tax changes? We focus on estimating the effects of changesin the average

1—Agricoltore, Forestrysad Fishing—from all of oar data, leaving us only 7ef the 8 standard SIC iadostry
aggregates,because some necessary farm informationwas net reported by the IRS daring the 1980s.
12   In fact, reported net ineeme frem all partnerships was negative from 1981 threoghi 1986.
13  Sale prapriatarshiw are net required ta file balance sl,eetn, and tlias we are forced to eaclode them
from ealcolationo based an asset data. If we assame that sole proprietorshipsearn the same mean rate of
returnee assets as do partnershijw then soie proprietorshipswouldhave 15%of total assets in the economy
and the corporate share would fall to 80%. This is al,oost surely an acereotiniate for sole praprietorohips.


                                                   12
value each year of the relative tax treatment of corporate vs. noncerporate income,as mea-
sured by r0 +(1—         — r5.14
                                 Any estimateof these relative tax rateswill inevitably have
error. We deal with this by constructing four different series under differesit assumptions.
Our results are    very robust to the chuice uf tax        pric. seres and instruments (described
below).
    Our series were constructed as follows. TI Ise measure of the corporate tax rate,
defined to equal the ratio of tax payments to taxable income, should take into account
the progressivityof the corporate tax rate structure, as well as the asymmetric loss offset
provisions.15In the results reported below, we used two crude measures: the highest

statutorymarginal rate in a given year, and ti.e realized averagetax rate in the IRS data
(income tax liability I taxable income).'6 17
    For the personal tax rate on ordinary income (r,,), we need a representative tax rate
for those potentially investing in noncorporate husisiesses. These are generally upper tax
bracket individuals. One approach to approximate this tax rate is to look at the represen-
tative tax rate on municipal bonds, another asset purchased primarily by those in upper
tax brackets. We use an estimate of this implicit tax rate calculated by Kochin and Parks
(1988) and Potcrba (1989) by comparing the yields on Treasury and municipal bonds. We
also construct a r5 series using the highest statutory marginal personal tax rate in each
year.
    As seen ,n equation (1), the net csrporate tas rate e,+(1 —r,)r. playsan additissal role to the estent
that   is nonzero. Given our diflicolty in coming up with a convincing story that nenras factors should
he inportant, we fnc,,sed en the d,ffcrenc'w in the tas treatmentef business income
icdcpendent role of Ta + (1 — r4c5 in some of the ccsults.
                                                                                    I.  Wed0 teat for an


    As shown in Altsholer and Ao,.rbe.ch (1990) the tas code's asymmetrictreatrncnt of tax losses can
have a significant effect on the effective tas ratc faciog a fir,n.

     In an earlier version of the paper we also oscd an effective marginal tax rate calcutmated by Anerbach
(1983). Althoogh this mea.sores unprovcs on the statotory rate by adjostisg for accelerated depreciation
and investmenttax credits, it does ,,nt incorporatethe salue of asymmetric loss treatment. Our average
realized rate approximately accounts for all such provisions. Further, the Aucrbacl, series ends in 1982.
For tl,cse reasons we only report results from using fnur tax price serim, not six. llnwever, the results
usisg tIme Anerbach series strongly cnnflrmcd our stlicr results and thus empl.acizc the r&ustncss of the
analysis.
17 'IIi's latter definition makes use of the
                                             aggrcgatc data on corporate taxable income, creating an en-
dngene,ty problem when these same data are used in constructing the dcpendcntvariable. We eliminate
army bias in the estimation through use of instru,ncntal variables. In any cam', the pcnhlrm is mud, less
i,ipnrtaiit when looking at industry rather than aggrcgsm e data.


                                                    13
  To estimate the personal tax rate on equity income we assume that the fraction d of
nominal income accruing to equity holders takes the form of dividends, and that capital
gains are always realized long—term. Then Te = dr0 + (I — d)yar,, where -y measures the
fraction of long—term gains that are tsxable. and a is an adjustment to make the capital
gains tax rate "accrual equivalent" to capture the benefits from deferring accruing tax
liabilities until the asset is sold plus the benefits from the capital gains tax exemption
on assets still held at death. Following Feldstein, Dicks—Mireaux, and Poterba (1983), we
assume that a = O.25,' Weestimatedby taking the ratio of corporate dividend payments
to after—tax corporate profits as reported in the National Income and Product Accounts.
We use the statutory time—seriesfor the capital gains exclusion,            -y.

   With two different measures of both          r and r (the latter are used to construct two
correspondingmeasures of re) we have a total of four differenttime—series measures of the
relative tax price on corporate assets. The series are shown in figure 1. The maindifference
between them is in the level, but we are interested more in how the tax incentives have
changed over time. We always include a time trend (and time squared) in our regressions;
after removing these trends from the tax price series all six are positively s.nd substantially
correlated.   In any case, we estimate all of our          regressions four times, once with each
series, and used instruments to eliminate any bias due to measurementerrors, to check the
robustness of our results.'9
    Figure 1 also reveals a smshstantial amount of time-series variation in the tax incentives
for different organizational forms. It is a truism in the U.S. enspirieal public finance
literature that one cannot estimate regressions using the corporate tax rate because it has
changed so little in the post—war era. However, the tax price incentive for allocation of
                      opti,aal trading strategies soggests that the effects of thc tax trestment of capital
 15 Recent researchon
gains may be far more complicated that what can b-s captored with an estimated vs that is constant ever
time. See Gordon and Machie—Masoo(Issi) for fortherdiscussion.
 15 Our instrumentalvariables
                                procedureworks as follows. Let the different onderlying data series we use
for constructingcorporate tas rates be called (CI, C2), and use (PI,P2) for the personal tax rate series.
Then we have one tax price variable, called TPI, constructed using (Cs,Pl), and another, TP4 using
(C2, P2) (and likewise for TP2 and TP2). We assume that the sources of measurement error in the series
(C2, P2) are independent of the errors in (Cl, P1). Then, TP4 is correlatedwith TPI because they are
both measuring the same true tax price, but 7'P4 is uncorrelatedwith the measurement error in TPI,
making it a valid instru,neut. This procedure provides us with four tax variables, each of which servesas
a valid instrument for one of the others.

                                                    14
resources across organizationalforms depends on the personal tax rates on ordinary and

equity income as well, causing the incentive to vary substantially over time.

2.2 Tar Price Regressions

In order to test the covariation between tax incentives and ownership structure we esti-
mated linear regressionsfor a measure of the allocation of economic resources or activity
on   a constant, a time trend,     time squared and one of the four tax price measures. Our
first results are given in table 2, for the fraction of total assets held by C corporations,
for the sample of all returns. We report only the tax price coefficient from 12 different
specifications,suppressing the constant and time trend coefficients. Each row reports re-
gressionsusing one of the four measuresof the tax price; each column represents a different
estimation method.
     The results are very clear and consistent. Regardlessof the measureof the tax price, the
use of instruments or the inclusion  of a lagged dependent variable, there is a negative and
in every case highly statistically precise relation betweenthe tax price and the fraction of
assets hcld by C corporations. The mean t—ratiosfor the three different methods (columns)
are 4.15, 4.05, and 3542a The higher is the tax disadvantageof C corporate ownership,
the lower is the fraction of assets held by corporations."
   The effects are not large, however. Based on the mean of the IV estimates, —0.0502,
                           r
reducing i- (or ralsing + (1—        r)r)
                                      by .10 would lead to only a one—halfof one percent-
age point decrease in the fraction of assets held by C corporations. To roughly account
for adjustment lags we also estimated the model with a lagged dependent variable (this
specification would arise from a Koyclc adjustment lag process). Based on the mean of
the tax price and lagged dependeut variable coefficients the long run decrease in thc C
corporation asset share still would be only 0.55 percentage points.
20
    Obviously the uean t-ratios reportedcannot be used for strict hypothesis testing. The detailed results
are available upon request.

 21 Wc
        undertook another test for the robustness of tl,ese estimates.The dependent variable as specified
has a limited ,stge, since the fraction is bounded by definition between zero and one. We re--estimated
the equations using the log—odds ratin (ln(y)/(1 — ln(y))) which, rangeson the real line, with essentially
the same results for all four tas prices, using both OhS and IV.


                                                   15
   Our theory tells us that tax rate changes shouldhave opposite effectsoo profitable and
unprofitablefirms. Unfortunately,asset data are not separately available for gain and loss
firms. We do have separate data on taxable income (loss) for gain (loss) firms, however.
Table 3 presents our results for gain and loss firms, aggregated across industries.22 We
report only the tax price coefficient from eight different regressions. Once again the results
are clear and consistent. Regardless of the tax price explanatory variable, the fraction of
tax losses reported by C corporations significantly increases as the relative corporate tax
rate increases. As predicted, gains are shifted in the opposite direction as the corporate
tax rate increases. All of the t—ratios are very high.
    The magnitude of income and loss shifting reported in table 3 is higher than that
estimated for assets in table 2. For example, at the mean for deficit firms, reducing r,, by
.10 would lead to a short—ron shift of losses by about fi.2 percentagepoints. For gain firms
tise correspondingshift of income would be about —5.5 percentage points.
    The results are reinforced when we estimate the gain/loss regressionson disaggregated
industries, reported in table 4. We report the mean results from four different tax price
regressions for each of seven industries, split by loss and gain firms.23 The patternof shift-
ing is strong and consistentacross nearly ail industries. The results are strongest for loss
firms, however. Wlsen the relativetax on corporationsrises taxable losses shift significantly
toward C corporations in every industry except Services. Taxable gains are shifted away
from C corporations in five industries (although with high statistical significance in only

one); the slsift is close to zero in Transportation, and is significantly positive for Finan-
cial and Real Estate, which is one of the only unexpected results in all of our analyses.24

Although the effects arc mostly consistent and for losses quite statisticaily significant, the
magnitudes are not very large.
 22 For this and all further
                             asalyses is the paper we report only results frem instrumental variables
estimators.

 23
    For example, the coefficient and t-ratio reported for deficit mining firms (O.g54,2.25) are the means
from four regressions, each using a different one of our four tax price measures, appropriately instrumented.

 24
     We have no strong explanationfor this one anomalous result. However, given tl,e peculiarities in the
rules determining taxable income for banks, and the many tax arbitrage schemes revolving around real
estate, we are not too surprised that our simple theory is not entirely adequate in this sector.


                                                    16
    We noted in section 2 that we might be able to control for some of the non—tax in
fiueoces on choice of organizational form by comparing C and S corporations, since both
are corporations and share many similar characteristics (including limited liability). We
estimated gains and losses reported by C corporations as a share of total gains and losses
for C and S corporations, and report the results in table 5. Both gains and losses suove
significantly between C and S corporations, in the direction predicted. Since the distinc-
tion between C and    S  corporations inure directly focuses on tax rules than other factors
tisese results provide strong support for our overall conclusions.
   We undertook several further analyses to verify the robustness of our resislts. For
example, we estimated our regressionsusing the number of returns filed (rather than the
magnitude of assets, gainsand losses) as our dependent variable. The tax price effects held
strongly among loss firmsfor movements between C corporationsand other firms, and also
for movements between     C   and   S   corporations; the estimates were insignificantly different
from zero for gain firms. Also, as in table 2, we re-estimated all of the regressions with a
lagged dependent variable, without any systematic or important effect on the results. We
tried including GNP as a regressor but that had no significantimpact on the results.
    We also tested our restriction that the coefficients on the corporate and personal tax
costs are the same (except for sign). In particular, we re-estimated the regressionsin table
4 entering the two tax variable components separately and performed a Wald test for the
null hypothesis. For loss firms, the difference between the coefficients on the corporate and
personal tax costs was insignificant on averageacross all of the regressions, for all industries
except Mining. For gain firms, however, the difference was significanton average for all
industries except Mining and Construction. This suggests that non-tax factors, g, mny be
more important at the margin for gain firms (see equation (1)). However, there was no
systematic pattern to tIme differences between the tax variable coefficients, and tIme general
conclusions about the effects of taxes on organizational form were supported.
    Altogether we have found very strong evidence that both assets and annual gains and
losses are shifted across organizationalforms in response to changes in the relative tax costs
nnposed on those forms. It seems safe to conjecture that the evidence for asset shifting
would be even stronger if we could distinguish between time assets of gain and loss firms,

                                                  17
since the incentives go in opposition directions for those groups. The magnitudes of the
effects are measured very consistentlyacross a wide variety of models using differentdefini-
tions of the tax price, both OLS and IV estimation, aggregate and industry—disaggregated
data, and when subjected to several other robustness checks.

2.3 Magnitude of the      Effects

Tax effccta on the allocation of activity across organizational forms appear to be very
statistically significant. However, the magnitudes seem rather small: a 0.10 reduction in
the corporate tax rate anneara to shift only 0,5 percent of assets towards C corporations;
the same larga tax     rednction only shifts about 5%        of gains and loaaes     across forms. Are
those shifts economically significant?
    Ideally, vie would like to use onr results to estimate tbe marginal excess burden from
double corporate taxation. Tbis excess burden would arise due to firma with g > 0 choosing
not to incorporate, and conversaly for firma with g <0, due to tax factors. Aggregate data
are insufficient,however, to estimate tlda excess burden. For example,even if g were always
equal to zero so that there can be no exceas burden from changes in organizational form,
firma would atill sort themselves among partnership and corporate forms of ownership
an as to minindse collectively their tax obligations.25 in general, we conjecture that in
equilibriumthere are two personal tax rate cutoffs, withs very profitable/lowg firms owned
as partnerships by low—tax—rate investors,and high loss/low g firma ownedas partnerships
by highs—tax—rate investors. The ingher the typical values of g, the further these test rate
cutoffs would he from the point at which       =         r
                                                      (1 — rc)re. The tax rate cutoffs will
also vary in complicatedways with ehangea in the wealth distribution, in the distribution
of firm profitability,and in the tax rate schedules.

   Cravehle and Ketlikoff (1990) (hereafter CX) have simulated the exceaa burden from

                                                                   r
corporate taxation in a muals aimnpier setting in which and the taxable rate of return
to capital are the same for all firma and r0 is the same for all investors, but in which
25
    This sitaaties ws,,id be directlyaaalsgeus te the Miller (1977) nmedel ef equilibrium corporatefinancisi
structure.


                                                    18
partnership and corporationsproducegoods which are imperfect substitutes in demand.26
They report an excess burden of more than 100% of the revenucs raised. These estimates,
however, are based on totally implausibleforecastsof the fraction          of firms that are initially
corporate and the sensitivityof the composition of firms across organizational forms to tax
factors.
   To show this, we have replicated the model simulations iss CR (1990) in order to deter-
mine how much shifting of assets must occur between corporations and noncorporations
to generate the high excess burdens they report. CR esnphasize the case in which they
assume unitary substitution elasticitiesin production and a demand substitntion elastic-
ity of 30 between goods produced by corporations and noncorporationswithin the same
industry; the excess borden in this case is 109% of the tax revenuccollected. However, in
this case, thc corporate share of total assets starts at the implausibly low figure of 36%,
then jumps to 99% if the corporate tax is removed. Even when the demand snbstitution
elasticity is only 10, and tlsc excess burden is "only" about 40% of revcnncs, the corporate
share of assets is predicted by their model to junsp to 73% if the corporate tax is removed.
The Statistics of Income data show, in contrast, that on average 93.8% of assets had been
corporate during the period 1959—86, whileour estimates forecast that tile corporate share
would increaso by 2.5% if a 45% corporate tax rate were set to zero. In any case, our
measured tax price series varies substantially during our time per od as seen in Figure 1
yet the maximum and minimum corporate shares of total assets differ by less than 7 per-
centage points over 1959—86, compared to the massive slufts the CR model would predict
with that much tax price variation.


2.4 Other Tar Factors

In section 1.2 we discussed a number of other           tax rules that can affect the incentive to
locate assets in particular organizationalforms, but that are difficult to summarize in a
measure of the tax rate incentive, In this section we report the results of our efforts to
 26
    They hsse a closely related model in Gl< (1989) in which demand for corporate and noncorporste
goods is identical but firm production functionsdiffer. The escess burdc,results arc quite similar in the
two papers.


                                                   19
determine whether some non—tax--rate changes in tax rules had significant effects on the
allocation of economic resources and activities across organizational forms,
    We have developed       a chronology of significant tax policy           changes hetween 1958 and
1986 that we helie'e may have affected the choice   of organizational form without directly
affecting one of our tax rate variables.27 From a long list of changes (in nearly every year)
we have selected 4 years in whichthe changesseem to have a strong and clear impact on the
directionof the tax incentives, and a 5th year in which the changes were clearly important
but had effects in two directions making it difficult to predict cx ente the magnitude or
directionof the effects. We describe these policy changes in table 6. Most of the changes
concern rules for S cerf a rations, so we previde orsr prediction of the changes in the fraction
of activity in C corpere"ienc relative to S corporations, and in the fraction of S corporate
activity te all pass—thr -gb organizations.28 Because S corporations were first permitted
in 1957, we study the effect of these rule changes only for the period 1965—1986 to avoid
the problems of the "start-up" transition towards S corporations.29
    Most of the changes were liberalizations of the restrictions on S cerporatinns, so we
expect a shift of resources and activity away from C and toward S corporations. The
'-banges in 1983 beth liberalized and further restricted S corporations, so we expect the
effects to be ambiguous.2°
    IFs tested for the effects of these policy changes cc tie- allocation of assets and incnme
 a extending our tax price regressions reported abee               1)   a basic model was to use three
27 We   are gratef,d to Linda Burilovich for her eseellent assistanc' in r reparing this chronology.

    Mast of the chaeges should be self—explanatory, or were explained in section 1-2 of the paper. One
esceptino is the debt reelaasiflcstion relaxationfor S corporationsin 1973. When corporations—C or 5—
harrow substantial sums from their shareholders, there is a risk that the IRS will deem those loans to be
the taxable equivalent of non—votingequityshares,thereby rulingthe "interest" payments to be dieideods
aod ineligible for the interest deduction. SinceS corporations were allowed to have only one class of stock,
debt reclassification could make a corporation ineligible for S atatus. Since the interest payments were
taxable to the shareholders at the same tax rates as pass—through equity earnings, the IRS essentially
stopped debt reelassitieatinns fur S corps in 1973, making S status more viable for many firms.
 29
    Graphical analysis of the data suggested that the startup transition ran from about 1957—1964. Our
time-pected dummyestimates are quite sensitive to the presence of this secular trend in the early years.

    Tl,e various changes we study all have the flavor of raising or lowering barriers to entry, all else
constant. Thus, the predictedeffects are the same for b0th gain and loss firms, when S corporationrules
are hherahised, 100cc activity of beth sorts should moee to S corporateform.



                                                    20
stage least squares to estimate a system of tax price regressions across the seven industry
disaggregates, allowing nil of the coefficients to vary hy industry as in the regressions
reported in table 4. We added dummy variables as intercept sbifts for the policy changes;
to obtain sufficient degrees of freedom we restricted the policy dummy coefficients to be
tbe same across all 7 industry equations. Since the pohcy changes were permanent, the
dummies were coded to be one for all years subsequent to the initial year, and zero for all
years before. Thus each coefficient estimate represents the average permanent change in
the dependent variable following the policy change.
   The results are reported in table 7. The dependent variables are first, the fractions of
C corporate assets, income and losses relative to S corporations;and second, the fractions
for S corporation relative to partnerships and sole proprietorships. In each table we report
the tax policy dummy variableestimates for the fraction of assets (all returns), the fraction
of net income (returns with positive net income) and the fraction of losses (returns with

losses).3'
   The results are clear and consistent across specifications.The policy ehangcs in 1969,
1982 and to a lesser extent 1976 had the predicted effects on the allocationofasscts, income
and deficits between C and     corporations, with strong statistical significance. The debt
                                 S

reclassificationrelaxationfor S corporationsin 1973 seems to have had no discernibleeffect.
The 1983mix of changesshifted taxable gains towards S corporations,but had no effect on
assets or lusses. It is not dear why only the allocation of gains should have been affected;
if anytbing, we expected the allocation of        deficits to   be more affected by the unlimited
flow—through loss carryover granted to S corporations.
    Thc results for S corporationsversus partnerships and sole proprietorships are similar,
but somewhat weaker. Both 1969 and 1982 showthe predicted effect with strong statistical
significance. No clear pattern is dc'nonstrated for citlser 1973 or 1976; the two statistically
significant estimates for 1973 have the predicted sign, but the cvidence for 1976 tends
weakly against the prediction. The 1983 mix of policies seemed to have zero net effects.
 '  For brevity we reportonly the results using ane of tise four tas pricemeasures (TP4); the resultswere
essentiallythe same for each tax price variable.


                                                   21
   The allocation of assets, gains, and losses across organizational forms responded as
predicted to these important changes in the rules. However, all of the estimated effects
were   rather small.

2.4 The US. 1986 Tax Reform Act
The U.S. 1986 Tax Reform Act probably contained the most important changes in both
tax rate and other tax incentives for the choice of organizational form during our entire
sample period. Unfortunately,corporate income tax data for 1987 and 1988 have not been
released by the IRS as of this writing, and we are thus unable to do a thorough analysis
of inspact of this law. None of tise results reported thus far in the paper reflect any data
after 1986. However, we have been able to obtain some information that suggests large
shifts across organizationalforms after 1986.32
   The most obvious change is that the personal tax rate was cut by more than the
corporate rate, and in fact the top personal marginal tax rate was lower than the corporate
rate for the first time in the modern era. This will raise the relative tax price on the C
corporate form and shouldhaveinduced profitable assets to movetowards pass—through
forms. Another important change was tlse repeal of the General Utilities doctrine for
corporations, which was an important vehicle for avoiding a double capital gains tax on
asset sales. The tough now alternative minimum tax on C corporationsshould also have
shifted activity. On the other hand, passive loss restrictioos and the higher floors on
allowable personal deductions for medical and other expenses are unfavorable to pass—

through organizations.
   One observation possible with data currently available is that there was a lsuge surge
in the number of corporationsfiling to obtain S status. During the first six months of 1987
there were about 375,000 filings, compared to an averageaix—month rate of about 150,000
during 1983—1986. The filing rate has continued to be higher than beforefor each half year
through 1988.
   Another striking fact concerns the aggregate net income reported by S corporations
and partnerships. From 1981 to 1986 this net income averaged —$2.2 billion. In 1987
32 For   a more co,optete   discussien, see Gordon and MacKie—Mason(1901).


                                                   22
net income jumped to positive $32 billion. This is consistent with the elimination of any
investors with personal tax rates exceeding the effective tax rate on corporate income —
with   a relatively higher corporate tax, income should be shifted towards pass—through
organizations and losses should move towards C corporations.

3. Conclusion
Our basichypothesisis simple: taxes should induce profitable firms to shift out of the
corporate sector when the tax distortion to incorporating is larger, and conversely for
firms with tax losses. We presented a model showing how the choice of organizational
form depends on the relative tax treatment of corporate and noncorporatefirms. We also
identifieda number of tax policy features that are important for the choice oforganizational
form but whichcouldnot, be summarizedin an observabletax price measure, and discussed
non-tax factors that may affect the choice of organizational form.
   Our empiricalevidence is quite strong and consistent: assets, taxable gains and taxable
losses all shift across organizationalforms in response to changes in tax rate and other tax
policy incentives. We tested a wide variety of specifications using different measures of
the tax incentives, different   forms   of the dependent variable, and   different econometric

methods, and throughout obtained highly statistically significantestimates that support
the basic hypothesis. We also found that some of the major non-tax-rate policy changes
that we identified caused                    in the predicted directions between C and S
                            significant shifts
corporations, and between S corporations, partnerships and proprietorships. Some of the
policy changes seemed to have no effect, but none that we tested had consistentlysignificant
effects that contradicted our predictions.
    All measured effects are small,however, throwing doubt on the economic importance of
tax-induced changes in organizationalform. It appears that transactionscosts and non-tax
factors affecting the choice of organizational form arc dominant,




                                                 23
                                       References

Altshuler, R. and A. 3. Auerbacii (1990) "The Significance of Tax Law Asymmetries: An
   Empirical Investigation," Quarterly Journal of Economics, CV, 61—86.

Auerbach, A. 3. (1983) "Corporate Taxation in the United States," Brookiag Papers on
  Economic Activiiy, 2, 451—514.

Feldstein, M. S., L. Dicks—Mireaux, and 3. Poterba (1983) "The Effective Tax Rate and
   the Pretax Rate of Return," Journal of Public Economics, 21, 129—58.

Fellingham, .1. and M. A. Wolfson (1985) "Taxes and Risk Sharing," Accounting Review,
   LX,   10—17.


Gentry, W. (1991) "Taxes, Financial Decisions and Organizational Form: Evidence from
   Publicly Traded Partnerships," WorkingPaper, Department of Economics,Duke Uni
   versity.

Gordon, R. H. and D. F. Bradford (1980) "Taxation and the Stock Market Valuation
  of Capital Gains and Dividends: Theory and Empirical Results," Journal of Public

   Economics,

Gordon, R. H. and 3. K. MacKie—Mason (1991) "Effects of the Tax Reform Act of 1986
  on Corporate Financial Policy and Organizational Form," in Do Taxes Mattcrf: The
   Impact of the Tax Reform Act of 1986, ed. Siemrod, 3.. Cambridge,MA: MIT Prcss.

Gravelle, 3. C. and L. 3. Kotlikoff(1989) "The Incidence and Efficiency Costs of Corporate
   Taxation When Corporate and Noncorporate Firms Produce the Same Good," Journal
   of Political Economy, 97, 749—81.
Gravelle, .1. C. and L. 3. Kotlikoff (1990) "Corporate Tax Incidence and Inefficiency When
   Corporate and Noncorporate Goods are Close Substitutes," Working Paper, Depart
   mont of Economics, Boston University.

Kochin, L. A. and R. W. Parks (1988) "Was the Tax—Exempt Bond Market Inefficient or
  Were Future Expected Tax Rates Negative?," Journal of Finance, 43, 913—932.

                                           24
MacKie—Mason,   J. (1987)   "Long—Term Contracts and Sequential Economic Decisions,"
   Univ. of MichiganWorkingPaper.

Miller, M. (1977) "Debt aiid Taxes," Journal of Finance, 32, 261—75.

Murphy, K. 3. (1986) "Incentives, Learning and Compensation: A Theoretical and Em-
  pirical Investigationof ManagerialLabor Contracts," Rand Journal of Economics, 17,
   59—76.


Poterba, 3. M. (1989) "Tax Reform and the Market for Tax—Exempt Debt," NBER Work-
   ing PaperNo. 2900.

Scholes, M. S. and M. A. Wolfson (1987) "Taxes and Organization Theory," Working
   Paper, Stanford Graduate School of Business.
Scholes,M. S. and M. A. Wolfson (1988) "The Effects of Changes in Tax Laws on Corporate
   Reorganization Activity," Working Paper, Stanford Graduate School of Business.

Schoics, M. and M. Wolfson (1991) Taxes and Business Strategy: A Global Planning Ap-
   proach. EnglewoodCliffs, NJ: Prentice—Hall.

Wolfson, M. A. (1985a) "Empirical Evidence of Incentive Problems and Their Mitigation
  in Oil and Gas Tax Shelter Programs," in Principals and Agcni: The Structure of
   Business, ed. 3. Pratt and Ri Zcckhauser, Canibridge, MA: Harvard Business School.

Wolfson, M. A. (1985b) "Tax, Incentiveand Risk-SharingIssuesin the Allocationof Prop-
  erty Rights: The General Lease-or-Buy Problem," Journal of Bu.iiness, 58, 159—172.




                                          25
                          Figure 1
 Estimated Tax Cost of Corporate Form




1959     1964      1969          1974   1979   1984
                            Year
      TP1 —4--- TP2 —— TP3 —s--- TP4
See text for tax price definitions.
      Table 1: Assets, Income and Losses By Organizabonal Form
                               1959-1986

                                                            Mean              Std. Dev.
Assets, all returns

Total Assets                                              8050.6                 27442

% C corporation                                              93.8%                   2.1%
% S corporation                                                11%                   0.2%
% partnership                                                  5.1%                  2.0%

Income, firms with net income

Total Income                                                405.4                    84.0

% C corporation                                              66.9%                    3.6%
% S corporation                                               2.1%                    0.8%
% partnership                                                10.1%                    1.9%
% sole proprietorship                                        20.8%                    3.4%

Loss, firms with loss

Total Loss                                                    86.1                   65.9

% C corporation                                              57.5%                    7.8%
% S corporation                                               4.5%                    0.9%
% partnership                                                23.5%                  10.0%
% sole proprietorship                                        14.5%                   3.8%

Su,oe IRS Slathbco of roomepubhcations.
f4oIe: Toldoore I,, b5oos of 1982 dolforo. PorcorUo goc the rr,000 or,d olondord dodolioo kr oocf,fooo'ochore
   ofthetof  000r th.e;e,                                            c
                              the C corporaIio chore of totel ossete hod 93.8% reoon ord 2.1% ctei,darddeviotton.
                                                                 Table 2

Estimated Tax Price Effects on the Fraction of Assets Held By C Corporations

              All firms (aggregated) except agriculture, forestry, fishing


                                                                                             IV, Lagged
Tax price                           OLS                                IV              Dependent Variable

TP1: stat/stat                    -00312                            -00678                            -0.0553
                                   (297)                             (4.17)                            (4.15)

TP2: soifstat                     -0.0268                          -0,0523                           -0.0433
                                   (3.74)                           (3.63)                            (3.14)

TP3: stat/bond                    -0.0427                          -0.0498                           -0.0394
                                   (4.84)                           (4.54)                            (3.40)

TP4: soi/bond                     -0.0292                          -0.0308                           -0.0215
                                    (5.06)                          (3.89)                             (3.47)


Means                             -0.0325                          -0.0502                            -0.0399
                                   (4.15)                            (4.05)                            (3.54)
Notes:
 t. t-rattoobased on White's boteroekedeotio-eons'etentstandard errors are in r.erantheees. N/eons are the erithrnetie
   means cithe eoelrsderrtasorbt-rettes in the column above.


                       ' 'b
 2. Tea pdcaveoialdesere bterrhTadby the source used to obtain the roergirreltoo rete for corporattoneliodtedueto
   (respectively). 'star statutory:'eel ecereeetea rate basedon 501 data )rederei booms ted ret pre-tee
   breams): 'bore '- bond              personal tearate from Kochmn end Fobs (tetiff) end Poterbe (toss). Ore
   other corbanetmo omiebteeworse constant, ohms freed end time squared.

 3. bach reported coetthdentis the too prbe ccetibbent fran adifferent regrssdun(t 2 reresaiens eve
  reported in ttOs tabs).

 4. lot rrrgrcsoiorro basedrrn 27 ebseroetons, t ttta-tSalt (partnershipesset date 'a oneodleble tort 900).
                                                   Table 3

    Estimated Tax Price Effects on the Fraction of Gains and Losses
                       Reported by C Corporations
       All firms (aggregated) except agriculture, forestry, fishing


Tax price                                          Deficit Firms                                      Gain Firms

TP1: stat/stat                                          1.00                                                -0.721
                                                      (6.37)                                                (3.09)

TP2: sol/stat                                         0.646                                                 -0.560
                                                      (7.30)                                                 (3.60)

TP3: stat/bond                                        0.957                                                 -0.548
                                                      (8.05)                                                 (4.73)

TP4: sd/bond                                          0.589                                                 -0.355
                                                      (7.52)                                                 (3.36)

Means                                                 0.799                                                 -0.546
                                                      (7.31)                                                 (3.70)
Notes
 1. t-qatos basedci Wbae heerododastc-consbaerflstasdarderrors areio parentheses. Moarrs are the
  arithmeticmeans of the coefficientsand t-rstios In theoolomn above.

 2. See note 2, table2, forvariable definitions.
 3. Eachreportedcoeftiolent 5 the tax price coeffioierrtfrom a ditlerentregression   18 regressions   are
   reported te this table).

 4. Alt regressions basedon 28observations,1959-1986,Each regression estimated with instrsetontal variables.
                                                          Table 4

               Estimated Tax Price Effects on Fraction of Gains and Losses
                              Reported by C Corporations
                                        By Industry


Industry                                                  Deficit Firms                                         Gain Firms

Mining                                                          0.854                                                     -1.531
                                                                (2.25)                                                     (3.99)

Construction                                                    0.599                                                     -0.130
                                                                (346)                                                      (1.08)

Manufacturing                                                   0478                                                      -0060
                                                                (6.26)                                                     (1.88)

Transportation                                                  0.848                                                       0.014
                                                                (2.94)                                                    (0.328)

W&R Trade                                                       0.371                                                     -0.261
                                                                (3.10)                                                     (1.67)

Financial & Real Estate                                         0.737                                                      0.204
                                                                (2.21)                                                     (2.27)

Services                                                        0.727                                                     -0.171
                                                                (1.39)                                                     (1.62)

Aggregate                                                       0.799                                                     -0.546
  (from Table 5)                                                (7.31)                                                     (3.70)
Notes:
 r.   t-ro bed          Whites heterosked      occetsistertt standard errors are in parentheses.

 2.   See note 2, teble2,forverieble definitions.

 3, Each     noty In the toble is the meerr fromfoor regressions using the four differenttax price variables
      (84 regren.sorns are surnmmerized in this table).

 4. All regronalons   based os2B obserootions, t958-t986. 84 regressionsestimated        WI          rrerbll variables.
                                                    Table 5

Estimated Tax Effects on the Allocation of Assets, Income and Losses
                      Between C and S Corporations
     All firms (aggregated) except agriculture, forestry and fishing


Tax Price                                           Losses                            Gains

TP1: stat/stat                                          0.361                           -0.0953
                                                        (5.94)                           (2.03)

TP3: sol/stat                                           0.244                           -0.0825
                                                        (5.59)                           (2.65)

TP4: stat/bond                                          0.291                              -0.1
                                                        (4.54)                            (2.44)

TP6: soi/bond                                           0.165                             -0.079
                                                        (4.83)                            (2.13)

Means                                                   0.265                            -0.0893
                                                        (5.23)                             (2.31)

Notes:
 1.   t-re         w!itos heteroskodestio-coeisterO stends,d orom ore ri peronthoses.               Mearrs   arearithmeti
  meansof the coefficreritearid f-ratios ia the columnabove.

 2.   See note 2. table 2 forvariable detintions.

 3. Each    reported cocifrolerit te the1ev price coefficientfrom a dflererrt regression (12 regressions are
      reported in this tabte)

 4. Jl regressions basedon 26 obsomationis, 1959-1986, Each regression was estimated with instrumentatcarla
                              Table 6

                      Major Non-Rate Tax Policy Changes

                                                                Expected Effect on:
                                                                 C/              sd
Year   Changes                                                 (C + SC)     (SC + P + SP)

1966 Reduced risk of reclassification of S corp debt as           -               +
     stock when debt is held proportionallyby owners

1969 S corps allowed to use Keogh-likequalifiedpension            -               +
     plans, putting them on parity with partnershipsand
       sole proprietorships

1973 Debt reclassificationrestrictionon S corps almost            -               +
     completely relaxed

1976 At-risk rules implemented,primarily for partnerships         +

1982 (a) NewS corps cannot own subsidiaries; (b) limit            -                   +
     on S corp shareholdersraised to 20; (c) limit removed
     on S corporation foreign Income; (d) limit removed
     on S corporation passive income; (e) C corporation loss
       carryforward extendedfrom 7 to 15 years

1983 (a) S corps restored to pension plan parity with C
     corps; (b) S corp shareholderlimit raisedto 35;
     (c) S corps granted unlimited flow-throughloss
     carryovers; (d) S corps restrictedon fringe
       deductions by shareholder-employees
                                                             Table 7

      Estimated Non-Rate Tax Policy Changes on Fraction of Assets and Income


Model                                                 1969        1973          1976              1982              1983

                                                             C Corporations   versus     S   Corporations


         firms)
Assets(a/I                                   -0.00795           0.0024        0.00594         -0.00721          -0.0014
                                                (4.21)           (1.26)        (4.18)            (2.71)          (0.623)

Income (gain firms)                            -0.0172         0.00532        0.00966          -0.0159          -0.0155
                                                 (3.32)          (1.02)        (2.47)            (2.17)            (2.52)


Deficit (loss firms)                           -0.0201          0.0183     -0.00509            -0.0313           0.0106
                                                 (2.70)          (2.43)       (0,909)            (2.98)            (1.20)



                                          S Corporations versus Partnerships and Sole Proprietorship

Assets (al/firms)                               0.0604        -0.00707        -0.0166           0.0579          0.00218
                                                  (3.36)        (0.390)        (1.23)            (2.29)          (0.102)

Income (gainfirms)                              0.0392        -0.00648        -0.0157           0.0621          0.00361
                                                  (3.88)        (0.635)         (2.06)           (4.36)          (0.301)


Deficit (lossfirms)                          -0.00131           -0.0383    -0.00508             0.0440          0.00343
                                                (0.039)          (1.31)       (0.264)           (0.895)        (0.0834)



Notes:
 1. t.ralios basedon White'sheteroskodas8c-consisterrt standarderrors are w porenthonos.

  2. See note 2, table2, for variable deitrritions.

  3. Eachrow reportsjustthe c efterierris on the taxpcticy change dummy vsnsblo,tore sirrglo regression (6 regressions
   are reportedin this Ibid. The tax poseusedas an explanatory varieblo was TP4

                   bsssd on 154 observations for seven industriesover 1965-1980. Modvls weree6rrrstndusing 3SLS, with
  4. All regressions
   equalityrestrictionson the tax policy change damnmiesacross the equations. TPI won usedo.s We rrstrumsontfor TIM.
