NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES

FEAR OF FLYING? ECONOMIC ANALYSES OF AIRLINE SAFETY

Nancy L. Rose

Working Paper No. 3784

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEACH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1991

This paper is part of NBER's research program in Industrial
Organization. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper 13784
July 1991

FEAR OF FLYING? ECONOMIC ANALYSES OF AIRLINE SAFETY

ABSTRACT
The safety of the commercial airline industry has attracted
considerable public attention and debate since economic

deregulation of the industry in 1978. These concerns have
energized economic research on three aspects of airline safety.

First, has the level of airline safety declined since

deregulation? Research on this topic investigates whether
heightened public concerns about air safety derive from objective

increases in accident risks. Second. what accounts for
differences in safety performance across carriers? This
literature analyzes heterogeneity in carriers' safety records as
a means of learning about factors that influence safety

performance. Third, how do markets respond to airline accidents?
This work explores the effectiveness of market incentives in

constraining the safety provision of firms. This paper describes
our progress in answering each of these queries.

Nancy L. Rose
M.I.T.
Sloan School of

Management
50 Memorial Drive
Room E52 -434

Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER

The safety of the coninerciaL airline industry has been of

Long-standing interest to policy-makers and the general public.

This issue attracted particuLar attention in the wake of airLine
deregulation, amid growing concerns that the historical
superiority of U.S. jet carriers' safety records may have been
inextricabLy linked to economic regulation of the industry by the

CiviL Aeronautics Board. After all, economists argued that the
suppression of price coepetition led airLines to focus on service
conpetition, and pubLic perceptions of service quaLity suggest

sitstantiaL reductions in at Least some dimensions. Perhaps Less
observable dimensions of product quality, such as safety, have

experienced equivalent or greater declines. If this were the
case, traditionaL measures of welfare gains from deregulation
could be greatly exaggerated.

These worries have energized economic research on a broad

range of issues relating to airline safety. Three questions have
attracted the most attention from economists. First, has airline
safety declined since deregulation? Research on this topic
investigates whether heightened pubLic concerns about air safety

derive from objective increases in accident risks. Second, what
accotrts for differences in safety performance across carriers?
This literature analyzes heterogeneity in carriers' safety records
as a means of Learning about factors that influence safety

performance. It extends the before-and-after deregulation
research by examining through what Links, if any, we might expect

economic regulation to affect aggregate safety. Third, how do
markets respond to airline accidents? This work explores the
effectiveness of market incentives in constraining the safety

provision of firms. If consuners and insurance conpanies penalize

airlines with worse safety records, carriers may be disinclined to
reduce safety investment, even if regulatory changes wouLd permit
them to do so.

I describe below our progress in answering these

queries.

1. Has airLine safety decLined since derequLatign?
Aggregate statistics on U.S. airline safety provide
reassurance for travellers concerned that deregulation increased

the risks of air travel. VirtuaLLy all measures of accident or
fatality risk suggest that the Long-term trend toward increased
airline safety has continued since economic dereguLation of the

airline industry in 1978. This is illustrated in figure 1, which
plots the raster of aircraft accidents per miLLion departures for
Large U.S. scheduled air carriers over the period 1955_1990.1

Both totaL and fataL accidents per miLlion departures declined
substantiaLly, aLthough there is considerable variation in
accident rates from year to year.

There is littLe evidence that improvements in airline

safety have slowed appreciably since dereguLation. Observed
accident rates since 1978 conform closely to those predicted by a
trend estimated over the 1255-1977 data, as illustrated in figure

2. More formalLy, regression analysis of the Log of accident
rates on a time trend indicates that the coefficients on either a
deregulation dumvy variabLe or a variabLe measuring time since

1 Referred to as "Part 121" carriers, these are carriers that
operate aircraft with capacity in excess of 60 seats. these carriers
currently operate primarily jet aircraft fleets.
2

deregulation are insignificantly different from zero.2 Figure 2
does, however, suggest some scope for caution. Accident rates
over the Last four years (1987-1990) Lie sLightLy above trend.

There is not enough data to determine whether this reflects normal
variation in observed accident rates over short time horizons or
en elevation of the true underlying risk, nor is it obvious that
effects that do not materialize until ten years after deregulation
should be attributed to regulatory changes rather than to some

other cause. NevertheLess, these data may suggest continued
scrutiny of aggregate safety performance over the next few years.
Passenger fatality rates aLso exhibit continued
lirprovement after deregulation. For exairpLe, Barnett and Higgins

(1989) calculate that fatality risks for passengers on U.S.

domestic jet airLine flights declined from an average of 1 in 2.5
million fLights over 1971-78 to 1 in 7.4 million flights over

1979-86. They argue, however, that the decLine in risk wouLd have
been even greater, but for the entry of new jet carriers post-

1978. As evidence, they separate the U.S. carriers into
"established carriers" (trunk and local service airLines existing
as of 1978) and new entrants (a group of 19 "Jet children" of

deregulation, most now out of business). For 1979-86, fatality
risk for passengers on established carriers averaged 1 per 1L8
million flights. In contrast, the group of entrants Barnett and
Higgins anelyze had an aggregate fatality risk of 1 per 870,000

2 Rose

(1989) presents results for 1955-1986 data; my updates
based on the 1955-1990 data yield simiLarLy insignificant resuLts.

This conclusion is reinforced by an analysis of the time fixed
effects (1958-1986) from the model of airLine specific accident
counts in Rose (1990).
3

fJ.ightsl this does not inpty that the planes of the entrant

carriers were continually dropping out of the sky, however only
3 of the 19 cerriers had çjy domestic passenger fataLities during
the 7 year period, and these had just one fatal accident each.

The high risk arises from the fact that the entrants carried

relatively few passengers. The robustness of this conclusion and
the safety records of entrants wilL be discussed further when we
anaLyze differences in safety performance across carriers.

Analyses of the causes of airline accident rates can shed

additional light on the effects of dereguLation. If deregulation
induced carriers to cut maintenance activities, for exanple, one
might expect to observe more accidents due to equipment failure.
Accidents due to p1 Lot error should increase if airlines

conpromised safety by hiring Less experienced pilots, reducing
training, or working pilots harder. If increased congestion,
combined with the reductions in air traffic control (Alt) staff
after the 1981 controLlers strike, degraded the air traffic
control system, accidents resulting from ATC errors or

interference by other aircraft should become more comon.
To test whether deregulation has had these effects, Oster

and 2cm (1989) analyze National Transportation Safety Board
(NTSB) Accident Briefs for scheduled domestic passenger service

accidents over the 1971 through 1985 period. For each accident,
they select as the "primary cause" the event or action that
initiated the sequence of events culminating in the accident.3

Because their criterion differs from that used by the )1188,

their distribution of accidents by cause differs from the NTSB
distribution. Broadly similar conclusions are reached by Morrison
arid Winston (1988), who analyze the distribution of fatal accidents
4

These causes are then grouped into categories that might be
sensitive to deregulation-induced changes, such

Equipment

Failure,

as Pilot Error,

Air Traffic Control Error, and Other Aircraft

(General Aviation), and

categories

that are tnlikely to be

Influenced by deregulation, including Weather, Seatbelt Not
Fastened, and

deregulated

Other.

Between the regulated (1970-78) and

(1979-85) periods,

departures for trunk and

local

total

accidents per

million

service carriers declined by 54%.

Accident rates due to equippent failure, pilot error, ATC error,

and

other

aircraft declined by this amowit

or

more, topped by a

71% reduction in accidents initiated by equipment

failures.

This

suggests a relative decrease in accidents due to causes under a
carrier's control after deregulation.
Further

evidence on the changes in maintenance practices

and their effects on safety since deregulation is provided by
Kennet's (1990) study of jet engine maintenance histories. ICennet
analyzes cooplete aircraft engine

histories

for 42 Pratt and

Whitney jet engines, operated by 7 different airlines. He finds
that the length of time between maintenance shop visits has
increased since deregulation, but that deregulation has had no

effect on the probability of an engine shutdown. This may reflect

a drive toward more efficient maintenance policies and practices
in the wake of deregulation. The result that engine shutdown
probabilities have been unaffected suggests that these maintenance
changes have not coapromised air safety, consistent with Oster and
Zorn's report of substantial relative declines in accidents

using HTSB causes.
5

initiated by equipnent faiLure.

Indirect effects of dereguLation on travellers' safety
There are a nuther of indirect

channels through which

dereguLation may have influenced safety. First, the shift from
jet airline to comm.iter airLine service in many small

conmrities

may have increased risks for passengers on these routes. Second,
increased

reliance on hub-and-spoke networks may have increased

the average nuther of stops or plane changes passengers mist make.
Since accident risks are roughly proportional to the nuter of
take-offs, this wouLd tend to increase passengers' risks per

(origin-destination).
conpetition and

flip

Third, the introduction of price

service

irprovements may

induce travellers to

substitute air travel for auto travel.. Since the risk of a
highway accident substantially exceeds that for air travel over
even moderate distances, this substitution would enhance
travellers' safety.

Substitution of comuter service: By eliminating explicit
cross-subsidization and easing entry and exit restrictions,
airLine deregulation may have encouraged established jet carriers

to abandon uneconomic service to small cooninities. While

most of

these coanrities retain air service, it now typically is provided
by coirniter carriers. Because comuter airlines have higher
accident rates than jet airlines, risks to traveLlers in these

comminities nay have increased. For exançle, over 1979-1985,
passenger fatalities were .38 per million passengers enplaned on

trunk

airlines,

comnuter

but 1.27 per miLlion passengers enplaned on

airlines-- more than

three times greater for cooniters

(Oster and Zorn, 1989).

6

These siopte cciiparisons may substantiaLly overstate the

change in risk, however (Oster and Zorn, 1989). First1 the
Largest conmiter airLines are nuch safer than the smalLer
cainiters, and these are the ones that typicaLLy have replaced jet

carriers. The top 20 connuters, for instance, had passenger
fataLities of .67 per mit Lion enplanements, roughLy half the risk

for coirniters overall.4 Second, service substantially Inproved on

the routes where coemuters replaced jets1 with fewer intermediate
stops and more weekLy departures.

In a

sanple of 60 city-pair

markets where conm.iters replaced jets between 1978 and 1986, the

average nuSer of intermediate stops fell by half (from .59 to
.30; see Oster and Zorn, 1989). Re-scaling the fataLity risk to
reflect total risk per passenger trip on these routes yields a
risk of .60 per million trips for jet carriers (.38 fataLities per
million enptaneinents times 1.59 average take-offs) coirpared to a

risk of .87 for the Large conniters (.67 fatalities per million

enplanements times 1.30 average take-offs). White the comiuter
risks are higher, the differences are Less stark than irrplied by
the initiaL conparison.
Finally, the average weekLy departures in these 60 markets

more than doubLed after coniuters took over service (from 2.88 to

6.29). The increased frequency of service appears to be
associated with increased ridership, at Least part of which

reflects a switch from cars to planes for some travellers. Oster

there have been no studies that Look at conniter safety under
codesharing arrangements with major carriers(see Borenstein, 1991,
for a discussion of codesharing). Given the increased scrutiny that
codesharing inposes upon the conimiters, it is Likely that their
safety record is even better than inptied by size atone.

7

and Zorn (1989) estimate the auto fatality rates in these markets
to Lie between 1.9 and 2.3 per

miLlion

passenger trips. Since

this is substantialLy greater than the risk for the Larger
conn.iter airlines, the modal switch enhances overaLL safety for
these travellers.

Increases in the average ntater of stops per trip: The
second potentiaL

indirect effect of deregulation,

increases in the nuther

of

stops or pLane changes

possible
passengers

mist

make en route to their finaL destination, has not been weLLdocunented.

While

the development of hub-and-spoke networks may

substitute one-stop or one-change service for nonstop service in

outLying markets, it is likely to increase nonstop service

availability for passengers traveLLing to and from the hub. The
net iripact on averege stops carwiot be predicted

priori.

Some evidence on this effect is provided by Borenstein
(1991). He finds an increase in the nuther of passenger trips
that involve a change of pLane, from 27.3% of trips in 1978 to
32.8% in 1990.

If

all remaining passengers flew nonstop, the

average nuther of flights per trip wouLd have increased by 4.3%

over this period (from 1.273 to 1.328). While this increases air

traveL risks, the overall inpact is not substantial. The average
totaL (fatal and nonfatal) accident rate per miLLion

declined

flights

by 54% between the 10 years prior to dereguLation and the

10 years after deregulation. Adjisting

for a 4% increase in

average flights per trip reduces the effective decLine to 52%.
In fact,

direct (no

change of plane) service includes both

nonstop and one- (or rm4ti-) stop flights. Because there have
been no studies of the change in the average nuther of stops for

8

these passengers, we cannot determine

average departures

per

trip.

the overall change in

Based on the results for the change

of plane statistics, however, failure to account for this seess

to alter the basic

irulikely

conclusion.

Shifting traffic from highways to air: The Lower average

fares

and the widespread

adoption of discount fares and

sophisticated price discrimination schemes that resulted from

deregulation substantially increased air travel. Between 1975 and
1985, domestic passenger enplanements for the largest U.S.

csrriers grew at a rate of 6.6% per year and domestic revenue
passenger-miles (RPM5) grew at 7.5%

increase

per year

Some of

this

represents new travel, that is, trips that otherwise

would not have taken place. Some of the increase represents a
shift from other modes of travel, such as automobile, rail, or
bus.

It is difficult to determine the precise extent to which
travellers have shifted from automobile travel to air travel as a

result of airLine deregulation. Using annual aggregate data on
passenger car miles travelled and a dumiy variable for airline
deregulation, McKenzie and Warner (1988) estimate a decline of

nearly 4%

in

passenger car miles as a result of airline

deregulation, or an average reduction of 43

billion car

miles

arnially during the 1979-85 period. They conclude that this
reójction in auto miles corresponds to roughly 1700 fewer auto

fatalities per year. If the average auto occtancy rate for
intercity traffic is 2.0, a shift of 43

billion car

miles to air

travel would isply an increase of 86 billion passenger miles for

airlines. The nirter of air fatalities associated with this

9

amount of air travel averages about 41. A shift of this magnitude
tram highway to air would have an enormous

more than 1650 per

year.

net savings

in Livest

Is this a credible estimate?

Airline RPM5 increased by roughly 70 biLlion between 1975
and 1980, or 140 bilLion between 1975 and 1985. If the estimated

shift

in highway traveL is correct1 the bulk of the increase in

air RPIIs

comes from dispLaced auto trips. This seems irplausibLy

Large. IinforttnateLy, we do not have better estimates of the true

magnitude of the modaL

shift.

Even

if the effect is only one-

fifth as Large as McKenzie and Warner estimate, however, more than
300 Lives would be saved each year by the shift to air travel-more than the total U.S. airline passenger fatalities in any of
the Last 10 years.

a.

What accounts for differences in accident rates across

carriers?
Against the backdrop of substantial declines in aggregate
accident rates over time Lie wide variations in accident rates

across individual carriers within any time period. Figures 3 and
4 illustrate this in histograms of total accident rates per

million departures for a saaLe of major airlines over the 1971-75
and 1981-85 periods, respectively.5 The wide variation in
individual accident rates is not

discrete and

infrequent

entirely surprisinr

nature of accidents, one

given the

additional

These plots are based on data for a saxiple of 35 large
airlines, as reported in Rose (1990). The 1981-85 pLot omits World
Airlines, which had two accidents and an accident rate of more than
51 per million departures. The next highest accident rate was 12.5
per million departures.
10

accident In a five year period

can

increase

generate an enormous

in a typical airline's accident rate per

million departures.

This raises the question: do these statistics refLect expected
random

fluctuations arorid a coanon mean

systematic

accident rate or more

differences in behavior and sUbsequent safety

performance across airlines?

Economists have concentrated their efforts to model

differences

in carriers' safety records In

impact of airLines' financial

three areas: the

condition on their safety

performance, variations in safety performance between entrants and
established carriers, and the determinants of higher accident
rates for conuuter carriers relative to jet airlines.

Financial inpacts on airline safety
The potentiaL impact of financial pressures on airlines'
safety performance has provoked a Long-standing debate in policy
circles and attracted particular attention since deregulation.
The arginent that competition has reduced profit

margins arid

forced carriers to "cut corners" on safety has been one

of the key

weapons in the arsenal of re-regulation advocates. A variety of
economic models can generate predictions consistent with a
financial link to safety, including

models of reputation

titer aspitnetric information, liquidity

behavior,

formation

constraints on investment

and firm decision-making near bankruptcy. None of these

models implies that such a link coast exist, however, Leaving the
resolution of this debate to empirical

tests.

Early studies, typically based on short time series

for

small cross sections of carriers (or industry aggregate time
series regressions), detected no significant relationship between

11

financial variables such as profitability and airline accident

rates. For exanple, Golbe (1986), who Looked at cross-sections of
11 domestic trtnks over the 1963-66 and 1967-70 periods, found an
insignificant positive relation between profitability and accident

rates. These studies share a coainen shortcoming, however: the
infrequent nature of airline accidents combined with their small
sanEte sizes may Limit the power of their statistical tests.

Analyses of more extensive data sets and alternative
safety measures find evidence that Lower profit margins are
associated with worse safety performance, at Least for some groups

of carriers. Rose (1990) expLored the determinants of airline
safety performance for a panel of 35 part 121 u.s. carriers over

1957-1956. In the fulL sançle, higher operating profits were
associated with Lower accident rates in the foLlowing year. A 5
percentage point increase in the operating margin (e.g. from 5% to
10%) ispties about a 5% reduction in the total accident rate and
more than a 15% reduction in the fatal accident rate, other things

equaL. This result for total accidents is replicated by Evans
(1989) in a study of accident rates for nearly 100 carriers over
1970-57.

These average effects may themselves mask inportant

differences across carriers in the sensitivity of safety

performance to profitability changes. Rose's data suggest that
profitability effects may be strongest for the smaller and mid-

size carriers in the sarple, and may not be inportant for the very

largest carriers studied. This pattern is particularly clear in
the anaLysis of airline incidents, in which higher profits are
associated with Lower reported incidents for smaLL and mid-size

12

carriers, but higher incident rates for the very Largest carriers.
A 5 percentage point increase in the operating margin iirçLies

about a 20% reduction

carriers in

in reported incidents for the smallest

the sanple and a 10% - 12% reduction for mid-size

carriers.
The strength of the profitabiLity-safety Link for the
small and mid-size carriers may indicate greater flexibility in

these finns' safety investment choices. A nuiter of factors could
make the safety investment Levels of Large finns Less variable:
pthlic infonnation about underlying safety Levels may be better
for the largest airLines (reducing information asyniaetries), large

airlines may have better access to capitaL markets or "deeper
pockets" for internal financing, and FAA regulators may more

closeLy scrutinize these carriers. This heterogeneity also may
help to explain why the earlier studies, which tended to focus
only en the very Largest (trunk) carriers, failed to detect a link
between profitability and safety performance.

A significant remaining gap in our analysis of
infLuences, on

effects

financial

safety Is an understanding of the profitability

for the very srnaL lest air carriers in the industry:

corniter carriers. While recent studies include a im.ich broader
range of carriers than had previousLy, been studied, they continue

to be Limited to "jet" (Part 121) carriers due to the Lack of
reliable financial data for convmJter (Part 135) carriers.

Anecdotal evidence suggests that conn.iters nay be quite sensitive
to financial pressures, arid the

smaller

argunents raised above for the

jet' carriers would seem to apply even more strongly to

connuters. Decisive conclusions about this seent of the

13

industry paist await further data and study, however.

New entrant safety performance and the rote of experience
A major concern after deregulation was the safety

performance of new entrants into the airline industry. Barnett
and Higgins' (1989) conclusion that entrant carriers were
sttstantially more risky than established carriers in terms of
passenger fatalities heightens this concern. The elTpirical

evidence on this issue is somewhat mixed, however. The relative
riskiness of entrants appears sensitive to the measures of safety
performance ectployed in the study, and also may depend on the

definition of entrant carriers and identities of the firms
incLuded in the saspLe.

The

for new

most thoroughly studied measure of safety performance

entrants is total accidents per million aircraft

departures. VirtualLy all analyses using this measure of safety
indicate that entrants do not perform significantly worse than
established carriers (e.g., Kanafani and Keeler, 1989; oster and
Zorn, 1989; and Evans, 1989). Kanafani arid Keeler (1989), for
exanple, find that identifying a carrier as an entrant does not
add significant explanatory power to a regression model of total
accident rates over 1982-85, perhaps in part because of the
enormous variability in accident rates across the 25 entrants in
their sariple. Evans (1989) argues that entrants appear to have
lower accident rates

equal.

than established carriers, other things

His analysis of 105 carriers over 1971-198? suggests that

post-deregulation entrants have accident rates that are roughly

14

half those of established carriers1 other things equal.6 This
result is not sensitive to whether the entrants are defined as

coeptetely new airlines or include carriers that previously

provided intrastate or charter service. Evans argues that this
result uay reflect more Intense regulatory scrutiny of airlines
newly certified in interstate service.
The general conclusion that entrant safety performance
does not significantly differ from that of established carriers

holds across a wide variety of safety measures, aster and Zorn
(1989) find no significant differences between trunks and "other
jet carriers" for five of six aggregate safety measures over 1979-

85, including passenger fatalities and passenger injuries per
million enplanements, and total accidents, serious injury
accidents, and minor accidents per million aircraft departures.
Their group of Ilothersil corresponds to the broadest definition of

entrants used in the literature. Kanafani and KeeLer (1989)
report no Significant difference in FAA inspection ratings for new

entrants under the National Air Transportation Inspection program
and some evidence that new entrants have lower near mid air
collision reporting rates than do established carriers (though the
latter may reflect differences in reporting incidence rather than

differences in occurrence rates).
The dominant exceptions to this sanguine view of new

6 The relative accident rate for entrants in Evans's study
should be calculated as expftlEW - DEREG), where NEW is a d',nny
variable for new entrants (estimated at about -1.3) and DEREG is a
dinny variable for established carriers post-1978 (estimated at about
-.50). This calculation yields the value .44, inplying that entrant
accident rates are 44% of established carrier accident rates, other

things equal. Mote that this is not the calcuLation apparently
reported by Evans.
15

entrants are based on analyses of fatal accident rates. In
addition to the Barnett and Higgins (1989) analysis discussed
earlier, aster and Zorn (1989) report that entrants (their "other
Jet carriers") had a substantially higher aggregate rate of fatal

accidents per million departures over 1979-85 C.90 v. .22 for

trunk and Local service carriers). As noted earlier, this poor
aggregate performance masks substantial heterogeneity across

carriers, with most entrants massed at zero fatalities and a few
extreme outliers pulling up the aggregate fatality rate.

UnfortunateLy, there have been no carrier specific
analyses of fatal accident rates to discern the sensitivity of the

conclusions to this heterogeneity or to the definition of entrant

airlines. For exanple, World Airlines, which had two accidents
and a fatal accident rate of 51 per million departures over 198185, is incLuded as an entrant in studies of entrant fatality risk.

While the airline was new to scheduled interstate service, it had

been operating charter service prior to deregulation. Should
World be grouped either with People Express, which entered airline
service de novo after deregulation, or with Pacific Southwest

Airlines, which had provided California intrastate service since

1948? In most studies, "entrants" are defined to include all of
these types of carriers.

To understand which firmo can be meaningfully grouped
together, we rm'st first understand the possible underlying causes

of the entrant results. This is difficult to do with either
aggregate analyses or siaple dtnny variable regressions of carrier
differences.

Unfortunately, few studies have atteeçted to move

beyond these approaches. oster and Zorn (1989) report that

16

antrants as a group have a higher total accident rate attributable

to pilot error (.60 per million departures, coaçared to .16 for
trisiks). This might be consistent with entrants' pilots being on
average less experienced or less well-trained, either overall or

relative to their new positions. Rose (1990) provides evidence of
some general

learning-by-doing effects on safety performance.

For

total accident rates, airline operating experience has at most a
weak negative effect, which vanishes in specifications that

control for a carrier's average accident rate. For both fatal
accidents and total incidents, however, experience exerts a

strong, statistically significant negative effect: more
experienced airlines have fewer fatal

accidents and

fewer

incidents, other things equaL Although these estimates are not
based solely on entrant performance, the results are broadly
consistent with studies that find no significant entrant effect
for total accident rates, but worse entrant performance on fatal
accidents.

better

Additional investigation is required to develop a

tmderstanding of other sources of the apparent differences

in safety performance between entrants and

established

carriers.

Cocmuter carriers
Coovm.iter airlines, as a group, have substantially higher

accident and fatality rates than do jet carriers. The
irplications of this observation depend critically upon the source
of these differences. For exapple, if coen.iter airlines invest
Less in safety, other things equal, then more rigorous FAA
regulation of their safety practices would tend to inprove their

17

safety records.7 Such regulation wilL have LittLe effect if the
disparities arise from inherent differences in equipment
reliability (e.g., smaller, propeller aircraft are more prone to
failure, even when optimalLy equipped and maintained) or airport
facilities (e.g., coan.iters are more likely to serve airports that

Lack advanced navigational aids or offer more hazardous operating
conditions).

SimiLarLy, if most of the performance differences

are attributable to route rather than carrier conditions, then
substituting one type of carrier for another on a given route is
unlikely to have nuch inçact on safety.

Discerning the relative inçortance of carrier and route
conditions on conn.iter safety records would be difficult titer any

circunstances. This task is further iaçeded by the dearth of
reliable, detailed firm Level data for this segment of the

industry. Nevertheless, there is suggestive evidence that carrier
investment has a substantial iripact on safety performance in this

sector. First, cocmtiters that were part of the Allegheny (USAir)
corn.iter system had an overaLl safety record that matched the jet

carrier safety record over the 197080 period, despite
substantially higher accident rates for the conn.jter industry as a

whole (Meyer and Oster, 1987). This is unlikeLy to be soLely
attributable to differences in the routes and equipment of these
firms.

Second, in 19Th

the

FAA substantiaLLy tightened cocnJter

safety reguLations, increasing pilot qualification, crew training,

and maintenance requirements (particularly for larger coeniter

Whether this is socially optimal depends on whether conin.jters
currently Lnderprovide safety.
18

aircraft), and

lists
iuipect

specifying

for the first time

minittun equipnent

for conm.iter flights. This appears to have had a

dramatic

on aggregate conruter safety. The connter passenger

fatality rate per million

enpLanements decLined by more than half

between 1970-78 and 1979-85, with the bulk of the decline
occurring in
and weather

accidents caused by equippent failure, pilot error,

(the latter presunably influenced by both enhanced

pilot certification arC

training requirements and equipnent

rules

governing instrunent flight rule operations; see Oster and Zorn,
1989). Since coinnuter regulations remain less stringent than
those for jet carriers, additional iiiprovements in safety are

likely to be possible-- although whether these wouLd be welfare
enhancing remains unknown.

3. How do markets respond to airline accidents?
For air travellers, safety is an ilrportant aspect of

product quality. Unlike other characteristics of product quality,
such

as schedule convenience, crowding, and on-board service,

consuners have difficulty observing
they

air carrier safety leveLs when

make their travel decisions. As in

consuners

other markets where

camot observe or evaluate product characteristics,

there is reason to suspect that the market may stçply less safety
than consuners would demand if fully infonned. Concern with

potential

market

regutaticns

failure has led to a coaplex web of goverrnent

that specify miniim.is safety input and

standards for air carriers.
manufacturers' reputations may

performance

Airlines' and aircraft

provide

an alternative (or

ccaplementary) mechanism for insuring adequate safety provision.

19

If these are effective checks on behavior, we should observe

market penalties for firms

that

deviate from their established

reputations. This notion has given rise to a substantial
economics literature that evaluates market responses to air
carrier accidents.

We can analyze market responses to airline accidents from

two perspectives. First, does the market penalize aircraft types
invoLved in an accident: what is the effect of an accident on the
profits
that

of

the aircraft's

manufacturer, the profits of airlines

operate a substantial nuther of that aircraft type, and the

traffic patterns of passengers who previously flew on that

aircraft

type? Questions of this sort will be most appropriate

when flaws in

the

aircraft itself are suspected to have

contributed to a particuLar accident. Second, does the market
penalize airlines that are involved in accidents: how does an
accident affect an airLine's profits and traffic flows, and the

profits and traffic flows of its coapetitors? These questions
will be most appropriate when an airline's actions or inaction are
suspected

to have contributed to the accident.

in this literature, profit effects typically are measured
using an event study methodology, which measures the change in the

equity

share price of a firm following an accident. This yields

an estimate of the expected change in the present discounted value

of future profits resulting from the accident. Traffic responses
have been analyzed both by examining changes in "before and after"
market shares and by measuring the deviation from predicted demand

using econometric models of airline demand functions. The saaples
are restricted to fatal accidents, and most studies exclude cargo

20

and crew only (re-positioning) flights. These criteria select the
worse end mare highly pttlicized

accidents

for analysis.

Aircraft reagflior,

Studies

DC-1O

of aircraft reputation effects have focused on

two

crashes: the American Airlines Chicago crash on May 25,

1979, which is

the worst domestic U.S. airLine accident (273

fatalities), and the

United Airlines Sioux City c!ash on JuLy 19,

1989 (Barnett and LoFaso, 1983; ChaLk, 1986; Karets, 1989;
Barnett, Menighetti, and Prete, 1990). Both of these accidents
raised concerns about potential DC-10 manufacturing or design

probleme. One study (ChaLk, 1987) aLso examines accident effects
on aircraft manufacturers' profits across a broader saripte of

"suspect" crashes.8 What do these anaLyses reveal?
The 1979 DC-iD crash provides some evidence of a market

penalty for aircraft manufacturers. McDonnell Douglas, the
manufacturer of the DC-10, lost roughLy 10 percent of its equity
market vaLue, or approximately $100 mit lion, in the first four

days after the accident.9 The firm's shares declined by an
additional 10

peróent when the FM announced its unprecedented

decertification of the DC-lO, an action that grounded the

entire

DC-iD fleet indefinitely. These market value declines are
sttstantially

larger than any

direct

costs inposed by the

8
Chance and Ferris (1987) find no effect on the manufacturer
for a saiiple of 46 accidents over the 1962-1985 period. Their sairpLe

is

not, however, stratified by Likely cause of the accident.

The accident occurred after the market close on Friday, May
25, of Memorial Day weekend. The share price response therefore is

measured from the Friday close to the Tuesday cLoae. See ChaLk
(1986).
21

accident, and wouLd be consistent with Lower expected sates of
McDonnell Douglas aircraft as a result of the accident.1°

These deaL ines
other

accidents,

McDonneLl

are not representative of responses to

however. In contrast to the 1979 experience,

DougLas appears to have been uraffected by the 1989

Sioux City accident. Despite earLy reports that the design of the

DC-la hydrauLic system was a major factor in the crash, returns on
McDonnell DougLas stock were comensurate with market returns over
the days following the accident.11 Chalk's (1987) evidence on
manufacturer Losses for a sauple of 19 accidents to which aircraft
failures contributed suggests modest profit Losses, but these
estimates may be strongLy affected by the inclusion of the 1979

DC-iD crash in the sarple. Chalk finds an average share price
decLine of roughLy 4% over the five business days following an
accident, corresponding to an average Loss of $21 miLLion in

market value. His data indicate no statistically significant
share price effects for accidents involving Boeing or Lockheed
aircraft, however, and the estimated average McDonnell DougLas

10 As new information suggested that icrproper maintenance
practices were the Likely cause of the accident, at Least part of the
initial share price declines were reversed. The exact estimates of
the net effect on McDonnell Douglas appear highly dependent on the

time period over which stock returns are evaluated. Chalk (1986)
reports statisticaLLy significant net declines of 14 to 22 percent
KareLs' (1989) attenpts to
through various dates in July 1979.
reproduce these results yieLded estimates of +1 through -21 percent
net returns, all statisticaLLy insignificant.
The accident occurred after the market cLosed on July 19;
July 20 therefore is the first post-crash return day. McDonnell
Douglas shares Lost nearly 7% on July 19, probably due to its
announcement on that day of unexpectedly large second quarter losses.

On July 20, McDonnell Douglas shares decLined 0.9%, cospared to a
0.7% for the market as a whole. McDonnell Douglas share prices rose
over the next week.
22

decline is likely to be quite skewed by the massive declines
associated with the 1979 crash.

Profit decLines for aircraft manufacturers do not appear
to result from passenger avoidance of aircraft involved in fataL

accidents. Barnett and Lofaso's (1983) study of DC-ID market
shares 6 months before and 6 months alter the 1979 crash revealed
no systematic changes in traveLLers' behavior on a sasrçLe of 18

routes.'2 En a study of travel agency ticketing data, Barnett,
l4enighetti, and Prete (199G) find evidence of very short-term DC-

10 avoidance lot towing the 1989 Sioux City crash. In their sampLe
of 14 routes, I in 3 passengers who booked traveL within the first
2 weeks after the crash avoided choosing DC-iD fLights, relative

to pre-crash behavior. This behavior quickLy dissipated, however,
with booking shares returning to within 10% of pre-crash Levels by
8 weeks after the crash.13 P1oreover, despite the deveLopment of
sophisticated pricing and inventory management systems by 1989,

airLines did not appear to tower prices on DC-iD fLights in
response to initial traffic declines.
Finally, there is some evidence that the 1979 DC-10 crash

adversely affected airlines that owned substantiaL nunbers of
these aircraft1 aLthough there have been no general studies of

this effect. Karets (1989) finds share price declines for both

12 WhiLe Barnett and Lofaso control for sie airLine route
It is
characteristics, they do not have data on average fares.
possible that airlines with DC-lU service towered fares to retain
market shares. The study of the 1989 DC-lU crash suggests that this
expLanation is unlikely to account for their result.
13 The study did not examine booking patterns beyond 8 weeks
post-crash.

23

American Airlines (the operator invoLved in the crash) and a

portfoLio of other airLines operating DC-lOs in the aftermath of
the 1979 accident. The first response to the crash was a 2%
decline in share values, aLthough this could not be statisticaLLy

distinguished from zero. The decertification arrouncement Led to
a 5.3% decline for American and a 2.9% decline for the other DC-1O
airLines. A portfolio of non-DC-1O airLines was unaffected.

How should we interpret these studies? It seems premature
to cite these as confirmation of a "reputation effect," at Least
in the

sense that "market forces can conpel producers to invest in

safety, even if consijeers

are ignorant of all the

technicaL

details of the product" (ChaLk, 1986))' The strongest evidence
of market responses is associated with the 1979 American Airlines
DC-1O crash; evidence of market responses to other accidents is

weak to non-existent. In 1979, however, the market may have been
responding more to specific FAA interventions than to general
reputation effects.

FAA airworthiness directives can require

airlines and manufacturers to invest substantiaL amounts in
inspections and repairs, repLacements, or re-designs of aircraft

ccmponents. The FAA's 1979 decision to revoke the DC-iD's
certificate grounded the existing fLeet of DC-lOs indefinitely
(inducing direct losses for DC-iD operators) and raised the
possibility that McDorvieLL DougLas would be required to make

extensive modifications as a prerequisite to setting any

14 One should rementer that while air passengers may not be
weLL informed about technical characteristics, theyare only indirect

consuners of aircraft services. The direct customers of aircraft
manufacturers are airlines, which tend to be highLy knowledgeable and
sophisticated buyers.
24

additionaL aircraft
market

(and re-certifying the existing fleet). While

reputation effects and direct FAA interventions

both may

induce manufacturers to invest in aircraft safety, the policy

inpLications of these two mechanisas are quite different. The
existing eirpiricaL evidence does not decisiveLy indicate which
mechanism is more ilTçortant.

Airline reoutation
A nuther of studies have investigated markat responses to

accidents at the airline level: does an accident reduce the
airline's expected profitabiLity? Two of the more interesting and
careful of these anaLyses are Borenstein and Zirmnerman's (1988)

study, which couples an investigation of profit effects with
traffic responses. and Mitchell and Maloney's (1989) study, which
pairs an examination of profit effects for different classes of
accidents with a study of insurance premia changes.

Both find

evidence of modest profitability decLines in response to fataL
accidents.

Borenstein and Zinnerman anaLyze responses to 74 fataL

accidents over 1962-85. For the 62 accidents that occurred while
passengers were on board the aircraft, they find an average
decline in equity value of roughLy 1.3% on the first trading day
following the accident, and 1.5% over the first two days following

the accident. This translates into an average $12 million Loss in
1990 dollars.15 MitcheLl and Maloney divide their saaLe of 56
accidents over 1964-87 into 34 "piLot error" crashes and 22

"carrier not at fault" crashes. For the pilot error sançle, they

All dollar values reported in this section have been
escaLated to 1990 doLLars using the 17!.

25

find a one day decline of roughly 1.6% and a two-thy decline of
roughly 2.3%.ubo

This

corresponds to an average Loss in equity

value of $22 to $31 million in 1990 dollars.

Because airlines

typicalLy carry quite coeplete hull (aircraft) and Liability

insurance, most of the equity decline appears to arise from
prospective Losses, rather than actual cash outlays resulting from

the

current accident. Two possible sources of prospective Losses

are increased insurance premia and reduced demand due to

reputation effects. Mitchell and MaLoney estimate that the
additional liabiLity insurance cost over a five year period
following an at-fault accident is roughly 90 percent of the one

year premiin pre-crash. The total present discounted value of
insurance increases average about $10 miLLion in 1990 dollars.'7
This accounts for one-third to one-half of their estimated decline
in equity value.
Borenstein and Zirmierman

investigate

the inact of

accidents on demand for an airLine's services. They find
virtuatly no effect of an accident on demand during the reguLated
period of their saripLe (1960-77). After deregulation, there may
be a short-term demand response to an accident. In their sarrçle

16 The point estimate declines for the carrier not at fault
sasple are about half as Large and are quite irecisely estimated.
This may suggest, as Mitchell and MaLoney conclude, that the market
does not penalize airlines for accidents not caused by pilot error.
From a different perspective, however, a pooling test across the two
sauples would not reject the hypothesis that both sets of results are
drawn from the same distribution.

Their results for huLL insurance increases are quite
sensitive to the specification of the model. An estimate of hull.

insurance increases is included in the total doLLar value of
insurance increases, howaver.

26

of 13 accidents over 1978-85, estimates of the total loss in
demand

over

a four-month period average 10% to 15% of one-month's

traffic volune, although these estimates are at best of marginal

statistical significance. Consistent with the irplications of the
DC-b traffic response studies, this decline is quite short-Lived:

the effect appears to be experienced

most of

in

the first two

months following a crash.

It is difficult to interpret these

resuLts. The demand

changes during the deregulation era, white relatively

small and

short-term, isply large revenue losses. For the sanple of 13
accidents, the average iuiplied revenue toss is over $100 million

in 1990 dollars.18 This suggests considerable market penalties

for airlines involved in fatal accidents. The strength of this

conclusion is, however, limited by a nuter of factors. First,
these results are based on a relatively small sanple and are

estimated very inpreciseLy. Second, the estimated revenue tosses
substantially exceed the estimated declines in equity value, and
the difference is unlikely to be accounted for by cost reductions
associated with serving fewer passengers in the very short-term.

Third, revenue tosses appear to be uncorrelated with the change in

equity value in this sample. Finally, there is reLatively little

evidence

that accidents have a significant effect on the demand or

profits of an airline's competitors. Over the entire deregulation
period, Borenstein and Zimmerman's point estimate of the demand
change

for other airlines following an accident is negative, but

very smalL and imprecisely

estimated. The 8 largest accidents

18The trcertainty around this estimate is, however, enormous.
27

(IOU or more fatalities) may have induced a small (1%) one-month
increase in demand for other airlines, but the stock price of

these airlines was unaffected. This suggests that most passengers
who would have flown an airline recently involved in an accident
instead choose not to fLy, which may npt be entirely plausible.
Further investigation, using the additional years of post-

deregulation data now available, appears necessary to address
these concerns and resolve the question of demand effects.

WhUe the Literature suggests the possibility of some
market penalties for airlines that experience passenger
fataLities, these methodologies may be inherently incapable of

providing definitive tests of the strength of eircraft or airline
reputation effects.

AirLine accidents, while newsworthy, may not

be very informative, The expected (or optimaL) level of airline
safety is unlikeLy to involve zero accident risk. Given this, the
occurrence of an accident may not cause consuiiers to revise their

safety expectations for a firm. If an accident does not lead
constrers to revise their priors about an aircraft's or airline's
safety, consuners should not penalize the firm invoLved in the

accident. Minimal consuner responses to an accident therefore may
be consistent with both highly efficient reputation mechanisms
(e.g., where firms that deviate from expected safety levels would
be severeLy punished and therefore are deterred from ever

"cheating") and ineffective reputation mechanisms (e.g.1 where
consi.rers are unaware of the aircraft type used on particular

flights1 have difficulty assessing safety records and so are slow
to update their priors in response to accidents, or are slow to
respond to differences in perceived accident risks across aircraft

28

or airLines). The existing analyses do not enabLe us to
distinguish these two extremes.

ConcLusion
Economists have Learned a substantial amount about airline
safety1 even though many questions remain unanswered.

In fact,

one might wonder about the motivation I or devoting so riuch energy

to studying such a Low risk activity. Airline safety anaLyses
appear to have garnered a disproportionate share of major journal
pages in recent years, relative to more economically significant

risks. White our professional fascination may be inspired in part
by the amount of time we spend in the air, we are not aLone in

this interest. Airline accidents attract far more public
attention than most other sources of fatality risk, incLuding such

popular concerns as cancer, homicide, and AIDS. A recent analysis
of New York Times front page coverage, reproduced in table 1,

revealed

that "The Times had more page-one stories about the

dangers of flying than about any of ... five other [prominent]
threats

to Life, and on a per-death basis, it had orders of

magnitude more" (Barnett, 1990). This nationaL preoccupation with
airline safety may provide the uLtimate explanation for the high
safety standards maintained by U.S. carriers and the i,muense
irrprovements in air safety over time.

29

RE FERENCES

Sarnett, Arnold, "Air Safety: End of the Golden Age," Chance:
New Directions for Statistics and Ccanltins, 1990,

, 8-

12.

Barnett, Arnold, and Mary Higgins, "Airline Safety: The Last
Management Science, January 1989, 35, 1-21.
Decade,"

Barnett, Arnold, and Anthony 4. Lofaso, "After the Crash: The
Passenger Response to the DC-la Disaster," Management

Science, Noveiter 1983, , 1225-1236.
Barnett, Arnold, John Menighetti, and Matthew Prete, "The Public
Response to the Sioux City DC-b Crash," mimeo, 1990.
Borenstein, Severin, "The Evolution of U.S.Airline Competition,"
mimeo, 1991
Borenstein, Severin, and Martin Zimmerman, "Market Incentives for
Safe Commercial Airline Operation," American Economic
Review, Decanter 1988, 78, 913-935.

Chalk, Andrew, "Market Forces and Aircraft Safety: The Case of
the DC-b," Economic Inquiry, January 1986, , 4360.
Chalk, Andrew, "Market Forces and Commercial Aircraft Safety,"
JournaL of IndustriaL Economics, Septenter 1987, , 6181.

Chance, Don H., and Stephen P. Ferris, "The Effect of Aviation
Disasters on the Air Transport industry: A Financial
Market Perspective," Journal of Transport Economics and
Policy, May 1937, 21, 151-165.

Evans, William N., "DereguLation and AirLine Safety: Evidence
from Count Data Models," mimeo, Jtne, 1989.
Golbe, Devra L., "Safety and Profits in the Airline Industry,"
Journal of industrial Economics, March 1986, 34, 305-318.
Kanafani, A. and Theodore E. KeeLer, "New Entrants and Safety:
Some Statistical Evidence on the Effects of Airline
Deregulation." in Leon Moses and Ian Savage, eds.,
Transportation Safety In an Age of Deregulation. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1989.

Karels, Gordon V., "Market Forces and Aircraft Safety: An
Extension," Economic Inauiry, April 1989, 27, 345-354.
Kennet, 0. Mark, "Airline Deregulation and Aircraft Engine
Maintenance: An Empirical Policy Analysis," inimeo, Fall
1990.

30

McKenzie, Richard 8., and John 1. Warner, "The Inpact of Airline
Deregulation on Highway Safety," mimeo, April 1988.
Meyer, John R., and CLinton V. Oster, Jr., Deregulation and the
Future of Intercity Passenger Travel. Caitridge: MIT
Press, 1987.
Mltchetl, Mark 1., and Michael T. Maloney, "Crisis in the Cockpit?
The Role of Market Forces in Promoting Air Travel Safety,"
Journal of Law and Economics, October 1989, , 329-356.
Morrison, Steven A., and Clifford Winston, "Air Safety,
Deregulation, and Public PoLicy," The Brookings

Review,

Winter 1988, 6, 10-15.
Oster,

Clinton V. Jr. and C. K. Zorn, "Airline Deregulation:
It Still Safe to Fly?." In Leon Moses and Ian Savage,
eds., Transportation Safety in an Age of Deregulation.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989.

Is

Rose, Nancy L. "Profitability and Product Quality: Economic
Determinants of Airline Safety Performance," Journal of
Political Economy, October 1990, 98, 944-964.

Rose, Nancy L. "Financial Influences on Airline Safety." In
Leon Moses and Ian Savage, eds., Transportation Safety In
an Age of Deregulation. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1989.

31

Table I

Front Page StorIes for Six Sources

New York TImes, 10/1/88

of

MortaLIty Risk,

- 9/30189
Stories per

1 • 000

Risk Source
deaths

Nurber of Strjes

Cancer

7

.02

Suicide

1

.03

4

AutomobiLes

.08

Homicide

35

1.7

AIDS

35

2.3

CommerciaL Jets

51

138.2

Source: Barnett (1990), Table 4.

32

2.3

35

35
51

Hanicide

AILS

Cxntercjal Jets

Barrett (1990), Table 4.

1.7

4

Autcntiles

138.2

.08

.03

3.

.02

Stories ner 11000 U.S. deaths

Suicide

Swrce:

- 9/30/89

Risk,

7

Ntrter of Stories

10/1/88

Scurs of ?trtality

Carter

Risk Scnrce

New York Times,

Front Page Stories for 6

Thble 1

C-

ci

U'

25

o

Aggregate

6b

totrato

A latrute

Yew

1

Accident Rates

7b

Figure

I—

a

4.i

I-i
01

--I
Li
U

C
ci

44

01

a

ci

C-

C
a
.4
.4

C
a
aci

C.

,&4

C.

a
01

0-

5-

10-

15

20

25

55

I

I

65

I

70

Year

2

75

80

Actual v. Predicted Accident Rates

60

Figure

C
C.
It-

C-,

-H
.tJ

ItC
C
C

C
Ci

CC.

0I

C..

I

i

I

2

3

3

I I I
I
I
15
4 5
10
accident9
ñ1lion
total
per
departure9
Distribution of Carrier Accident Pates, 1971—75

0-

fl.

.15-

.2 -

Figure

2b

0•
NJ

U'
do
(0 to

(N

-t

C
4—

II II
—
Lii
I-

FI

C
Lii
b

fraction of carrier9

m
C (21

rt

U),
CD
F-iD

.03 a.

I-0

z1t2

aI-cD
-, I

flrb
-c
rt2'- '
mc.
I-a- -.

C —.
0
F-)
U)

F—

C

