                    NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




                        GROWTH IN CITIES




                        Edward L. Glaeser

                         Hedi D. Kallal

                       Jose A. Scheinkinan

                         Andrei Shleifer




                     Working Paper No. 3787




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            July 1991




We are grateful to the National Science, Sloan, and Bradley
Foundations for financial support; to Robert Barro, Gary Becker,
Carol Heim, Vernon Henderson, Lawrence Katz, Robert Lucas,
Sherwin Rosen, Julio Roternberg, T.W. Schultz, and George Tolley
for helpful comments; and to Christopher Kim for research
assistance. This paper is part of NBER's research program in
Growth. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                         NBER Working Paper #3787
                                         July 1991


                          GROWTH IN CITIES



                             ABSTRACT

     Recent theories of economic growth, including Romer (1986),
Porter (1989) and Jacobs (1969), have stressed the role of

technological spillovers in generating growth. Because such
knowledge spillovers are particularly effective in cities, where

communication between people is more extensive, data on the
growth of industries in different cities allows us to test some

of these theories. Using a new data set on the growth of large
industries in 170 U.S. cities between 1956 and 1987, we find that

local competition and urban variety, but not regional

specialization, encourage employment growth in industries. The
evidence suggests that important knowledge spillovers might be
between, rather than within industries, consistent with the
theories of Jacobs (1969).


Edward L. Glaeser                       Hedi D. Kallal
Department of Economics                 Department of Economics
University of Chicago                   University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street                     1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637                       Chicago, IL 60637
Jose A. Scheinkman                      Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics                 Department of Economics
University of Chicago                   Harvard University
1126 E. 59th Street                     Littauer Center 315
Chicago, IL 60637                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        and NBER
                                              2
 1.   INTRODUCTION

      Some historians have argued that most innovations are made in cities (Jacobs,

 1969; Bairoch, 1988). The cramming of individuals, occupations, and industries into
 close quarters provides an environment in which ideas flow quickly from person to

 person. Jacobs (1969, 1984) argues that these interactions between people in cities
 greatly facilitate technological advance.

      Such a dynamic view of cities fits nicely with the recent work on economic

growth, which views externalities (and particularly externalities associated with

knowledge spillovers) as the 'engine of growth' (Romer 1986, Lucas 1988). If
geographical proximity facilitates transmission of ideas, then we should expect

knowledge spillovers to be particularly important in cities. After all, intellectual

breakthroughs must cross hallways and streets more easily than oceans and continents.
This paper uses a new data set on American cities and industries to test the new

growth theories. Because these theories are most compelling in the context of city
growth, our focus on cities gives them the benefit of the doubt.
      We focus on three theories. The Marshall-Arrow-Romer (MAR) externality

concerns knowledge spillovers between firms in an industry. Arrow (1962) is an early
formalization; Romer (1986) is a recent and influential statement. Applied to cities

by Marshall (1890), this view says that the concentration of an industry in a city helps

knowledge spillovers between firms, and therefore the growth of that industry and of
that city. A good example would be computer chips in Silicon Valley (Arthur 1990).

Through spying, imitation, and rapid inter-firm movement of highly skilled labor, ideas
are quickly disseminated among neighboring firms. The MAR theory also predicts,
like Schumpeter (1942), that local monopoly is better for growth than local
competition, because local monopoly restricts the flow of ideas to others and so
                                            3

allows externalities to be internalized by the innovator. When externalities are

internalized, innovation and growth speed up.
     Porter (1990), like MAR, argues that knowledge spillovers in specialized
geographically-concentrated industries stimulate growth. He insists, however, that

local competition, as opposed to local monopoly, fosters the pursuit and rapid
adoption of innovation. He gives examples of Italian ceramics and gold jeweliy
industries, in which hundreds of firms are located together and fiercely compete to
innovate since the alternative to innovation is demise. Porter's externalities are

maximized in cities with geographically specialized, competitive industries.
     Jacobs (1969), unlike MAR and Porter, believes that the most important

knowledge transfers come from outside the core industry. As a result, variety and

diversity of geographically proximate industries rather than geographical specialization
promote innovation and growth. One example is the brassiere industry, which grew
out of dressmakers' innovations, rather than the lingerie industry. Jacobs also favors

local competition because, like Porter, she believes it speeds up the adoption of

technology.
     These theories of dynamic externalities are extremely appealing because they try
to explain simultaneously how cities form and why they grow. MAR's and Porter's

theories, in particular, predict that industries should specialize geographically -- to
absorb the knowledge spilling over between firms. In addition, they predict that
regionally specialized industries should grow faster because neighboring firms can

learn from each other much better than geographically isolated firms. In contrast,
Jacobs' theory predicts that industries located in areas that are highly industrially

diversified should grow faster. Despite their differences, all these theories have
implications for growth rates of industries in different cities. In this respect, they are
                                              4

 different from the more standard location and urbanization externality theories that

 address the formation and specialization of cities (Henderson 1986), but not city
 growth.                           -

      We examine the predictions of the various theories of knowledge spillovers and

 growth using a new data set on geographic concentration and competition of
 industries in 170 of the largest United States cities. We ask which industries in which
 cities have grown fastest between 1956 and 1987 and why? All three theories of

 dynamic externalities focus on knowledge spillovers but differ in where they believe
 the source of externalities is and what makes the capture of these externalities most

 effective. The theories are not always mutually exclusive but rather offer different
views of what is most important. By testing empirically in which cities industries grow

faster, as a function of geographic specialization and competition, we can learn which,
if any, externalities are important for growth.

     Our results can be briefly summarized. Our findings are based on a cross-
section of city-industries (e.g., New York apparel and textiles, Philadelphia apparel

and textiles, Philadelphia electrical equipment), where knowledge spillovers should be
easier to find than by looking at whole cities. In a cross-section of city-industries, we

find that, as measured by employment, industries grow slower in cities where they are

more heavily overrepresented. For example, the primary metals industry grew rapidly
in Savannah, Georgia, where it was not heavily represented in 1956, and declined in
Fresno, California, where it was heavily overrepresented. These results do not favor
the local within-industry externality theory of MAR and Porter, according to which

industries should grow faster precisely in places where they are overrepresented.
     We also find that industries grow faster in cities where firms in those industries

are smaller than the national average size of firms in that industry. If we take the
                                             5

view that spreading the same employment over more firms increases local competition

between these firms and therefore the spread of knowledge, this result supports
Porter's and Jacob's view that local competition promotes growth. One could also
take the view that smaller firms grow faster, which however is not strictly compatible
with the MAR model or with other evidence. Finally, city-industries grow faster when
the rest of the city is less specialized. This result supports Jacobs' view that city
diversity promotes growth as knowledge spills over industries. The evidence is thus

negative on MAR, mixed on Porter and consistent with Jacobs.

     If MAR externalities are not important, why are so many cities specialized in a

few industries? There are many other externalities that explain regional specialization
and city formation but that do not specifically focus on knowledge spillovers and

growth. For example, Marshall (1890) has argued that firms in the same industry
often locate next to each other to share various inputs, including specialized labor.

Many other "localization" externalities are discussed by Lichtenberg (1960), Henderson

(1986, 1988), Arthur (1990), and Rotemberg and Saloner (1990), among others.

Henderson (1986) in particular presents empirical evidence indicating that output per
 manhour is higher in firms that have other firms from the same industry located

 nearby. Static localization externalities can thus easily account for city specialization,

 but not for growth.
      Finally, there is also some work explaining why firms might want to locate in

 places where local demand is high, what Henderson (1986) calls "urbanization"
 externalities. These models tend to predict that firms in different industries should

 locate next to each other, which suggests that they cannot be the complete story of

 cities. Lichtenberg (1960), Murphy, Shleifer and Vishny (1989) and Krugman
 (1991a,b) all present models of such externalities. Like localization externalities,
                                             6

urbanization externalities explain patterns of industry location rather than of growth.

We present some evidence strongly pointing to the importance of urbanization

externalities.

     The next section of the paper goes through the prediction of different views of

externalities and city growth. Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 presents results

for growth of city-industries. Section 5 deals with localization and urbanization

externalities. Section 6 concludes.


2. THEORIES OF DYNAMIC EXTERNALITIES
     The models of city growth we consider stress the role of dynamic externalities,

and more specifically knowledge spillovers, for city growth. According to these
models, cities grow because people in cities interact with other people, either in their

own or in other sectors, and learn from them. Because they pick up this knowledge

without paying for it, these knowledge spillovers are externalities. The frequency of

interaction with other people is ensured by their proximity in a city. Because this

proximity makes externalities particularly large in a city, all the models predict that

cities grow faster than rural areas where externalities are less important because

people interact less.

     The theories of city growth that we present differ along two dimensions. First,

they differ in whether knowledge spillovers come from within the industry or from

other industries. Second, they differ in their predictions of how local competition

affects the impact of these knowledge spillovers on growth.

     The MAR theory of spillovers focuses on spillovers within industry. Knowledge

accumulated by one firm tends to help other firms' technologies, without appropriate

compensation. In Silicon valley, microchip manufacturers learn from each other

because people talk and gossip, products can be reverse engineered, and employees
                                            7
move between firms. In New York, fashion designers move between firms and take
their knowledge with them. The same was true of the Bangladeshi shirt industry in
the 1980s, where hundreds of firms were founded by people who were initially

employed by       Joint venture with a Korean firm. Physical proximity facilitates this

free information transmission. In this case, industries that are regionally specialized
and benefit most from the within industry transmission of knowledge should grow

faster. Cities that have such industries should grow faster as well.

     In MAR models of externalities, innovators realize that some of their ideas will
be imitated or improved upon by their neighbors without compensation. This lack of
property rights to ideas causes innovators to slow down their investment in

externality-generating activities, such as R&D. If innovators had monopoly on their

ideas, or at least if they had fewer neighbors who imitated them immediately, the
pace of innovation and growth would rise. The MAR models tend to imply that
whereas local competition is bad for growth, local concentration is good for growth
because innovators internalize the externalities (see Romer 1990).

     The effect of local competition is the primary difference between MAR and

Porter's models. In Porter's model, local competition accelerates imitation and

improvement of the innovator's ideas. Although such competition reduces the returns
to the innovator, it also increases pressure to innovate: firms that don't advance

technologically are bankrupted by their innovating competitors. Porter believes that
the second effect is by far the more important. Ruthless competition between local

competitors leads to rapid adoption of the innovations of others and to improvement

upon them, and so generates industry growth. In contrast, local monopolies lead a
quieter life as their managers consume perquisites rather than risk innovation. Porter

gives striking examples of Italian ceramics and gold jewelry industries, the German
                                                8
 print making industry and many others which grew through rampant imitation of new
 technologies and improvement upon them. All these industries are highly
 geographically concentrated--presumably to facilitate the flow of ideas and imitation.
         Because MAR and Porter agree that the most important technological

 externalities are within industry, they also agree that regional specialization is good for
 growth both of the specialized industries and of the cities they are in. However,

 MAR would argue that local monopoly is good because it allows internalization of
 externalities. In contrast, Porter would argue that local competition is good because it
 fosters imitation and innovation. In our empirical work, we will look at the effects of
 both specialization and local competition on the growth of industries in cities.

         The third theory that stresses knowledge spillovers is that of Jacobs (1969).
 Jacobs' idea is that the crucial externality in cities is cross-fertilization of ideas across

different lines of work. New York grain and cotton merchants saw the need for
national and international financial transactions and so the financial services industry
was born. A San Francisco food processor invented equipment leasing when he had

trouble finding financing for his own capital; the industry was not invented by the

bankers. In a more systematic account, Rosenberg (1962) discusses the spread of
machine tools across industries, and describes how an idea is transmitted from one

industry to another. Scherer (1982) presents systematic evidence indicating that
around 70 percent of inventions in a given industry are used outside that industry.

Much evidence thus suggests that knowledge spills over across industries. Because
cities bring together people from different walks of life, they foster transmission of
ideas.

     In Jacobs' theory, industrial variety rather than specialization is conducive to
growth, because in diversified cities there is more interchange of different ideas. She
                                             9

contrasts Manchester, a specialized textile city that eventually declined, with broadly

diversified Birmingham, which eventually flourished. Bairoch supports Jacobs by

arguing that ". . the diversity of urban activities quite naturally encourages attempts
               .




to apply or adopt in one sector (or in one specific problem area) technological
solutions adopted in another sector' (1988, p. 336).
     In the debate between local monopoly and competition, Jacobs comes squarely

on the side of competition. She writes: "Monopolies gratuitously harm cities and
suppress what their economies are capable of achieving . . . extortionate prices,

harmful though they most certainly are, are the least of disadvantages of monopolies,

for monopolies forestall alternate methods, products and services" (1984, p. 227).
Like Porter, Jacobs favors local competition because it stimulates innovation.

     Figure 1 summarizes the three theories we described. The empty square is the
model that would say that the ideas conducive to growth come from outside the

industry, but monopoly is best able to take advantage of them. The model does not
seem very plausible, and so we leave the square empty. Our next task is to put some
empirical structure on this theoretical outline.


3. THE DATA

     Construction of the Data Set
     Our data set was constructed from the 1956 and 1987 editions of County
Business Patterns (CBP), produced by the Bureau of the Census. The year 1956 was

chosen because it was the first year with comprehensive data; 1987 was the last year
available. 1956 data was assembled by hand from hard copy; 1987 data are available

on computer tapes.
     The data set contains the information on employment, payroll, and number of
                                            10

establishments2 by 2-digit industry for every county in the United States. We

obtained wages by dividing payroll by employment. Since our focus is on cities rather

than counties, we aggregate data across counties into metropolitan area units as

described below. When counties are aggregated, the wage number is total payroll in

a city divided by total employment. Since we run cross-section regressions, we keep

all variables nominal.

     Cities were constructed from a list of top 170 Standard Metropolitan Areas

(SMAs) in 1956 America contained in County Business Patterns Book (CBP). In

some cases, an SMA contains several counties; in others (only in New England)

several SMAs split a single county. The problem is to decide which counties should

be included in a given city, since it would be impractical to include all counties in a

SMA. We included in each city the largest counties that cover the SMA until their

combined payroll added up to at least 80 percent of the total payroll of the SMA jn

both 1956 and ]987. This procedure makes sure that if substantial growth of

employment occurred in counties in a SMA that were small or non-existent in 1956,

these counties are included in the city. The multi-county unit arrived at using this

procedure is the city we focus on.4


    2We use the 1956 Census definition of an establishment, which is an actual firm
rather than a plant. In later years, the Census redefined the establishment to be a
plant. For our purposes, a firm is what's appropriate, so the 1956 definition is good.

     3lncluding all the counties that are part of the SMA would be extremely time
consuming because to find out which industries in a SMA are the largest--a procedure
we use to construct the data—we would have to add up by hand employment in all the
 potentially largest industries over all the counties. Adding extra counties also
significantly worsens missing data problems discussed below. To simplify the first
problem, and to avoid the second, we have restricted the subset of counties included
in the city.

    4This procedure for constructing a city might introduce errors for larger cities,
which cover numerous counties. To test whether this problem is responsible for our
results, we repeated the analysis for the smallest 75 percent of the cities in the
                                            11

     For each city constructed through aggregating counties, we use data on the six

largest 2-digit industries, where size is measured by 1956 payroll. We only use six

industries because we are interested in regionally specialized industries, but also hand

collection limits how many industries we can take.

     In some cases where an industry in a county has only a few establishments, CBP

for confidentiality reasons does not reveal exact information on employment in that

county-industry. Instead, they typically present the range in which the employment in
a given industry in a given county lies, such as 0 to 20 or 5,000 to 10,000. In a few

cases where the employment in a given county-industry is below 50 CBP presents no

employment number at all. To construct our sample, we had to address this problem

of missing variables, which is particularly severe when a city contains several counties

only one of which has missing data.

     We addressed this problem as follows. If exact data were missing for some

county-industry in 1956, we simply omitted that industry from the sample and

replaced it by the next largest industry in that city for which complete data were

available for all counties. The missing data problem was not significant in 1956,

however, since we are selecting the largest city-industries as of 1956.

     If exact data were missing for some county-industry in 1987, we estimated the

employment in that county-industry at the midpoint of the range provided by County
Business Patterns. For example, if CBP reported the employment in county-industry

to be between 0 and 20, we used 10; if the report was between 5,000 and 10,000, we

used 7,500. In a multi-county city, we then added these estimates to precise

employment numbers for the counties for which they were available. In the few



sample. The results were very similar to the ones reported below. For this reason,
we use the whole sample in the results reported in this paper.
                                            12

county-industries with employment under 50 where CBP did not even provide a range,

we used 25 as the employment number. This procedure enabled us to compute

employment for all but 4 of the 1706 = 1020 city-industries. The reason we had to

drop 4 city-industries is that "ordnance and accessories,' an industry that occurred 4

times in our sample in 1956, was discontinued as a qualified industry by 1987. Of the

1016 city-industries in this sample, employment in 833 was provided exactly, and

employment in the other 183 was estimated as described above.

     Although CBP presents ranges of employment by county-industry, it does not
provide any information on payroll in the cases where exact employment numbers are

omitted. As a result, we cannot estimate wages for these observations. Consequently,

the wage regressions we present below are estimated on 834 city-industries for which

we have exact data on employment and payroll.


     Description of the Data

     Since we are using a new data set, it may be helpful to present a simple

description of the data. This is done in Table 1. The first panel of the Table

describes the five smallest and the five largest cities in our sample as of 1956, their

employment in 1956 and 1987, and the six largest industries in each of them. Note

first that the largest city-New York—has employment of over 4 million, while the

smallest—Laredo, Texas—has only 7,500 employees. Clearly our procedure of looking

at SMAS gets us down to fairly small places. The panel also shows a great variety of

top industries across cities, although wholesale durables and non-durables are big in

many of them.

     Panel B describes the ten largest city-industries in our sample. New York City

apparel is the largest city-industry in the U.S. in 1956 with over 350,000 employees.

Transportation equipment in Detroit, which is of course autos, is the third largest.

New York City appears six and Chicago two times on this list.
                                             13

     Panel C describes the most common city-industries in the sample. Wholesale

trade in durables is the most common: it appears in 146 cities. A few other service

categories appear as well, but the predominant type of most common sector is

manufacturing. In particular, non-electrical machinery, primary metals, fabricated

metals, transportation equipment, and electric equipment all appear quite often. The
typical stories of externalities apply to many of these industries. In most of our

analysis, we have pooled manufacturing and services, although we discuss below what

happens when wholesale trade is removed from the sample, as well as how services

are different from manufacturing.

     Panel D lists the 5 fastest growing and 5 fastest declining city-industries in terms

of employment. The panel gives three impressions. First, rapidly declining city-

industries were more regionally concentrated than the rapidly growing ones. Second,

industries grew faster in diversified cities than in specialized ones. Third, fast-

growing city-industries were more competitive, as measured by establishments per

employee, than shrinking city-industries. All of these three impressions turn Out to
                                         -
be our general empirical findings.
     The panel also shows that the fastest growing city-industries tended to be in the

south, west and south-west, whereas the slowest growing city-industries were often in

the east and the midwest. This finding points to some basic economic forces at work,

such as capital moving to low wage areas. A cynic might say that temperature

determined city growth, or that we are only observing the decline of U.S. manufac-

turing. These objections are not valid, since we will be comparing how fast the same

industry grows in different Cities. We will also control for location in the south.

     More importantly, the decline in certain industries (notably steel, but possibly

autos as well) may be related to the theories discussed in this paper. Both steel and
                                            14

auto production were regionally concentrated (autos in Michigan and steel in

Pennsylvania). Both industries had only moderate levels of competition. In both

industries, innovation was arguably lacking, particularly in areas where these industries

were concentrated.

     The steel industry, according to Reutter (1988), has missed opportunities which

were exploited by their competitors in less sterile environments. Big steel lost market

share not only to foreign competitors, but to American mini-mills located in

non-traditional areas such as Roanoke, Virginia, or Florida. Use of concrete in

construction also badly hurt steel. The first major use of concrete took place in a

Hempstead, Long Island shopping complex, far away from the traditional steel mills.

Both concrete and shopping malls were major post-war innovations coming not from

the established building material centers (such as Pennsylvania) but from smaller,

more diversified areas. The steel industry may have declined not just because of

foreign competition or some exogenous decline in manufacturing, but, in part, due to

forces stressed by Porter and Jacobs. Our statistical work suggests that this stoiy of

steel is a rule rather than an exception.


4. RESULTS ON THE GROWTH OF INDUSTRIES ACROSS CITIES

     If externalities are important for growth then the clearest way to find these

effects is by looking at the growth of the same sectors in different cities, and checking

in which cities these sectors grow faster. The unit of observation is then an industry

in a city, and we look at the growth rates of these industries as a function of our

measures of knowledge spillovers.5 The sample includes 1016 observations on the


    5We have also performed the analysis using cities as a unit of observation. These
regressions have not produced any statistically significant coefficients on our measures
of externalities, although these measures tend to be much cruder for cities than they
are for city-industries.
                                             15

top six 2-digit 1956 industries in 170 cities. Table 2 describes the variables. Since we

do not have measures of output, employment growth is our best measure of industry

growth.6 The mean of this variable is zero, indicating that in an average city-industry

in our sample employment did not grow. The standard deviation of this number, 1,

indicates the enormous dispersion of growth records. This dispersion may reflect the

decline of some mining and manufacturing industries and the growth of services.

     Our measure of specialization of an industry in a city is the fraction of the city's

employment that this industry represents in that city, relative to the share of the

whole industry in national employment:

                       industry
                       .        empl't
                                    ,
                                       in city/total empl't in city
(1) specialization     industry empl t in U.S./total empl t in U.S.

This variable measures how specialized a city is in an industry relative to what one

would expect if employment in that industry was scattered randomly across the U.S.

The variable corrects for situations where a city-industry is large only because the city

is large. Because we are looking at the largest industries and because of regional

specialization, the mean of this variable is 3.37. In our cities, top industries are

overrepresented relative to what one would expect if they were randomly scattered

over the United States. Interestingly, the maximum of this variable is 182.35 for

anthracite mining in the Wilkes-Barre and Hazleton SMA. The prediction of both

MAR and Porter is that high specialization of an industry in a city should speed up

growth of that industry in that city.

     Our measure of local competition of an industry in a city is the number of firms

per worker in this industry in this city relative to the number of firms per worker in

this industry in the United States:


   6Labor-saving innovations or any growth that mainly affects capital will not he
adequately represented by this measure.
                                             16

                — firms in city-industry/workers in city-industry
(2) competition — firms in U.S. industry/workers in U.S. industry

A value greater than 1 means that this industry has more firms relative to     its size in

this city than it does in the U.S. One interpretation of the value greater than I is

that the industry in the city in locally more competitive than it is elsewhere in the
U.S. Alternatively, a value of the competition variable greater than I can mean that
firms in that industry in that city are just smaller than they are on average in the
United States. It is very hard to distinguish smaller firms from more competitive
firms using our data. Unfortunately, we do not have data on output of individual
firms, and so cannot construct concentration ratios. Since we are looking at industries

with large employment in their respective cities, we expect the mean of this
competition variable to be below 1; in fact it is .75. Interpreting Porter liberally, a

higher value of this measure of competition should be associated with faster growth.

     Finally, to address Jacobs' theory we need a measure of variety of industries in
the city outside the industry in question. The measure we use is what fraction of the
city's employment the largest five industries other than the industry in question
account for in 1956. The mean of this ratio is .35: cities are not well-diversified. The

lower this ratio, the more diverse the city is, the faster should the industry in question

grow according to Jacobs.
     Table 3 presents our results for employment growth across city-industries, with
1016 observations. We include the 1956 log of wage and log of employment in city

industry, a dummy variable indicating a southern city, and the national employment

growth in that industry as controls in the regressions. City-industries with high initial
wages might grow slower because the firms pursue cheaper labor elsewhere. High
observed initial employment reduces employment growth because of either
measurement error or more serious economic factors. The MAR view is somewhat
                                            17

incompatible with the presence of real (as opposed to measurement induced) mean

reversion, but since we are not correcting for potential measurement problems we do

not use such mean reversion as evidence against the MAR externalities. We also

include national employment change in the industiy to correct for demand shifts.

This correction is particularly important for traditional manufacturing industries, many

of which have declined in the post-war United States.

     The control variables tend to have the expected signs. High initial employment

in an industry in a city leads to slower growth of that industry's employment.

Employment in an industry in a city grows faster when employment in that industry in

the whole country grows faster. Interestingly, the coefficient on national industry

employment growth is above 1. Factors shifting employment in national industries

seem to be more influential in urban than in rural areas. Southern cities also grew

significantly more than cities outside the south. Somewhat surprisingly, initial wages

in a city-industry are uncorrelated with subsequent employment growth.

     The results on externalities reveal several interesting findings. Equation (1)

shows that industries that are more heavily concentrated in the city than they are in

the U.S. as a whole grow slower. The effect is statistically significant, but qualitatively

small. As we raise the measure of specialization by one standard deviation (9.02),

cumulative growth of employment over 30 years slows by twelve percent total, which

is about one ninth of a standard deviation. This result is the opposite of the predic-

tion of MAR model. We not only fail to find positive evidence in favor of MAR, but

the data point in the opposite direction: geographic specialization reduces growth.

     In equation (2), the coefficient on the competition variable is positive and very

significant. More firms per worker in a city-industry relative to the national average

leads to higher growth of that city-industry, consistent with Porter's and Jacobs'
                                             18

hypothesis. Going from as many to twice as many firms per worker as the national

average (2.5 standard deviations) raises growth of employment in city industry by 59
percent over 30 years, which is almost two thirds of a standard deviation. Of course,
another interpretation of this finding is that smaller firms grow faster. However,
recent evidence (Davis and Haltiwanger 1990) indicates that in fact smaller firms do
not grow faster once one takes account of the fact that they have a higher probability
of death than larger firms. We should also mention that the 'small firms grow faster'
model is inconsistent with the MAR view that monopolies that internalize externalities

are good for growth. So even though the positive evidence in favor of competition is
somewhat ambiguous, the negative evidence on MAR is more clear cut.

     Equation (3) shows that industries in cities where other large industries are
relatively small grow faster. As we reduce the share of city employment taken up by
the five largest industries other than the one in question by .1 (a standard deviation),

cumulative employment growth in the city-industry over 30 years falls by 9 percent
(one tenth of a standard deviation). This result suggests that not having dominant

industries as neighbors, or alternatively having a greater variety of neighbors, helps
own growth. This finding is consistent with the importance of knowledge spillovers
from outside the industry stressed by Jacobs.

     Equation (4) in Table 3 uses all measures of externalities simultaneously. The

results remain statistically significant. They confirm our finding that industry
overrepresentation hurts its growth. The fact that the coefficient is of the wrong sign
relative to what MAR predicts, and is statistically significant, is evidence against the

importance of permanent within-industry knowledge spillovers for growth.
Competition within the city-industry continues to exert a positive influence on the

growth of its employment, and the coefficient hardly changes from equation (2). The
                                            19

result that concentration of other industries in the city hurts the growth of an

industry's employment continues to be strong. The overall results are not favorable to
MAR, mixed on Porter, and favorable to Jacobs.

     We have checked the robustness of these results in a number of ways. First, our
results might be driven by the mining industries, which exhibit extraordinary regional

specialization, and have declined sharply in postwar years in part because prices fell

and in part because mineral stocks were depleted. We have run the regressions in

Table 3 without the mining industries, and the results are similar in terms of sign

patterns and statistical significance.

     Second, one could argue that knowledge spillovers are more important in

manufacturingthan in services because technological progress is more rapid in

manufacturing. Without subscribing to this objection, we tested it empirically by

splitting the industries into manufacturing and non-manufacturing. Our results hold

qualitatively for both subsamples. All coefficients on the externality variables remain

significant in the non-manufacturing regression, and all but the coefficient on urban

variety variable are significant for manufacturing.   If anything, the results appear to be
stronger for non-manufacturing.

     Third, on the suggestion of Professor Henderson, we have divided manufacturing

industries into ubiquitous (fabricated metals, non-metallic metals, non-electrical

machinery etc) and more specialized (electrical equipment, transport equipment,
primary metals, pulp and paper, textiles and apparel, leather products, etc.).
                                                                                              4
According to Professor Henderson, externalities should be more pronounced in more
specialized manufacturing industries. We have run our regressions using the two

manufacturing subsamples separately. The negative effect of our specialization
measure on industry growth is stronger and more statistically significant for ubiquitous
                                             20

 manufacturing, but the effect remains negative, though insignificant, for more
 specialized manufacturing as well. There is certainly no evidence that the coefficient
 is positive, as MAR would suggest.

     Although we have measured industry growth using employment growth, a better
measure would be productivity growth. As we do not observe output, we can only
measure productivity by wages, which for a variety of reasons are very imperfect.

First, productivity increases might not accrue to labor, especially as migration occurs;
in the long run identical workers must be indifferent between cities. Second, declining
industries might fire their less able and experienced workers first--creating an artificial

rise in wages. Third, certain technological innovations (e.g., the assembly line) might
make it easier to hire less expensive workers. Fourth, rent-sharing might also be a
factor, especially in those industries (steel, coal, autos) with heavy union involvement.
A further problem with the wage data is that we have no estimates of wages for

counties without precisely reported employment numbers. The restriction of the
sample to 834 observations could induce a sample selection bias. Given these

objections, our results on wage growth should be interpreted as at best secondary to

employment growth results.
     Table 4 presents the findings in the same format as Table 3. High initial wages

in city-industry reduce wage growth, but high initial employment in a city-industry

helped wage growth, although as we saw before it hurt employment growth. This
result might reflect a selection effect: high employment leads to employment cuts

which for reasons of seniority affect least well-paid workers most, leading to an

increase in the average wage of those who remain employed.

     Equation (1) shows that city-industry specialization has no effect on wage growth,
which does not support the MAR view, although the coefficient no longer has the
                                            21

wrong sign. When other measures of externalities are added in equation (4), the
coefficient is insignificant and has the wrong sign. City-industry competition reduces

wage growth (the coefficient is significant), which is inconsistent with the view that

competition contributes to productivity growth that accrues to the workers. We do

not think that the latter position can be ascribed to Porter. Finally, diversity in a city

helps wage growth of the industry, consistent with Jacobs' view that productivity

growth is helped by diversity.
     None of the evidence we have presented supports the importance of within-

industry knowledge spillovers for growth. If such spillovers are particularly
pronounced at geographical proximity, the evidence is detrimental to the theories of

MAR and Porter that focus on these spillovers. We end this discussion with a word

of caution, however. We are looking at large mature cities that are not growing very

fast and are in many cases declining--making ours a very special sample. Within-

industry knowledge spillovers may not matter for such mature industries, while being

much more important at the early stages of an industry. For example, these spillovers

might be very important when a new industry is born and organizes itself in one

location, but unimportant as this industry matures and geographical proximity

becomes less important for the transmission of knowledge. Our data, unfortunately,

cannot address this industry life-cycle model. At the least, however, we are rejecting

the strong version of the MAR theory, that predicts that within-industry knowledge

spillovers lead to permanent self-sustaining growth in cities.


5. STATIC EXTERNAL ECONOMIES: LOCALIZATION AND URBANIZATION

     Localization

     The evidence we have presented suggests that diversity, and not specialization,
                                            22

contributes to growth. This result raises an important problem: if geographical

specialization does not contribute to growth, why is it so prevalent? In this section,
we address this problem. We also look for the evidence of urbanization externalities:

those that make different industries locate next to each other to form a city.
     There are several reasons for regional specialization that are not dynamic

externalities that contribute to growth. Most obviously, natural resource or transport

advantages often favor a particular location, and those apply equally to all firms in
the industry. For example, the oil industry at the turn of the century was located in
Ohio, near the discovered oil. Bairoch (1988) reports that during the Industrial
Revolution most new cities located near the supplies of energy. One could also argue
that the auto industry located in the Midwest in part to economize on transport costs.
     But, in addition to these natural reasons for specialization, there are several
static externalities that contribute to specialization but not to growth. Perhaps most

important is the idea of saving on moving inputs, suggested by Marshall (1890). A
whole industry might locate near the place of common suppliers to both reduce the
cost of getting supplies and to have a closer flow of information to suppliers. In

addition, many firms producing specialized products that are subject to wildly
fluctuating firm demand but more stable industry demand would locate together. By

doing so, they enable specialized labor to move easily between firms without moving
between cities, as in the previously mentioned case of New York fashion industry.

More generally, when firms share any input that is not costlessly mobile, it pays them
to locate together near that input and so save on moving this input (see Lichtenberg
1960 and Henderson 1986, 1988). More recently, Rotemberg and Saloner (1990)
argued that firms locate together to commit to compete for labor and not pay
monopsony wages. This effective commitment enables firms to attract labor in the
                                            23

first place. There are clearly many reasons for regional specialization other than

knowledge spillovers.
     Our findings are consistent with the importance of localization externalities as
long as the location of firms next to each other to take advantage of these
externalities is finished when our sample begins. In this case, there is no reason that

regionally specialized industries should grow faster. If, in contrast, we observed young
industries, where entry of firms to take advantage of localization externalities was still

taking place, we would still expect employment in regionally specialized industries to
grow faster as entry takes place. Our results would then reject the importance of
localization externalities, just as they reject MAR-Porter models.- Since we are

focusing on the largest city-industries, however, the assumption that they are mature
seems reasonable. Our findings do not reject the localization externalities playing a

role in determining regional specialization.

     Urbanization
     Although cities are usually specialized in a few lines of work, they also typically

pursue many other activities outside the main lines. Many of these activities are

entirely unrelated to each other. This suggests another type of externality operating
in a city. Firms locate in a city because local demand is high there, and so they can
sell some of their output without incurring transport costs. This is obviously most

important for high fixed cost industries. Lichtenberg (1960) argues that this
externality explains why the insurance industry once located in New York City.

Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny (1990) discuss such pecuniary externalities; Krugman
(1991a,b) models city formation based on local demand. Henderson (1986) refers to

these effects as urbanization externalities and presents empirical evidence suggesting
that they are not important for productivity.
                                            24

     These models imply that when an industry grows, it raises local payrolls and

therefore local demand, and so helps the growth of other possibly unrelated industries

in that city which adjust to higher demand. As a result, growth rates of different

industries in a city are positively correlated. This argument is most compelling for

local services, which probably grow when city exports grow.

     The argument against urbanization externalities is crowding. When an industry

in a city grows, it raises wages and rents and so makes it more expensive for other

industries to expand in that city. Conversely, when an industry in a city shrinks, it

frees up land and labor and so makes growth of other industries more attractive.

Urbanization externalities and crowding have the opposite implications for the data.

     Our data enable us to test these predictions, as is done in Table 5. The

dependent variable in the regression is employment growth in the city outside the four

largest industries, and the key independent variable is employment growth in these

four largest industries. The evidence indicates very strongly that small industries grow

when large industries do. A 1 percent increase in the four industry employment

growth leads to a .5 percent increase in employment growth outside these industries.

We replicated this result for several combinations of dependent and independent

variables. The evidence consistently points in favor of aggregate demand spillovers

and against crowding. Of course, another possible interpretation of this finding is that

there are some city effects that attract all industries to some cities, but recall that we

at least control for the 1956 wage level in our sample. Overall, the results support

the role of urbanization externalities in city growth, consistent with theoretical work of

Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny (1989) and Krugman (1991a,b).


6.   CONCLUSION
     The results presented in this paper allow some tentative conclusions. We have
                                            25

shown that at the city-industry level, specialization hurts, competition helps and city

diversity helps employment growth. Our best interpretation of this evidence is that

inter-industry knowledge spillovers are less important for growth than spillovers across

industries, particularly in the case of fairly mature cities. The Jacobs-Rosenberg-
Bairoch model, in which knowledge transmission takes the form of adoption of an

innovation by additional sectors seems to be the most consistent with the evidence.

     An important objection to these results that we have mentioned already is that

we are looking at a particular period in the United States history in which traditional

manufacturing industries have faired poorly because of import competition and at

particular very mature cities. Our results may then not be applicable for more

dynamic time periods or places. On this theory, MAR externalities matter the most

when industries grow. We cannot address this objection with our data.

     The evidence suggests that cross-fertilization of ideas across industries speeds up

growth. The growth of cities is one manifestation of this phenomenon, but there may

be others. The results would imply, for example, that open societies, with substantial

labor mobility across industries, will exhibit greater spread of ideas and growth.

Similarly, the cross-fertilization perspective argues in favor of such labor flows as

immigration and migration across areas. If Jane Jacobs is right, the research on

growth should change its focus from looking inside industries to looking at the spread

of ideas across sectors.

      Although we interpret many of our findings as pointing to cross-fertilization of

ideas across industries, our evidence on this point is indirect. Another view consistent

with many of our findings is that externalities are not particularly important, and that

the standard neoclassical forces drive most of city and industry growth. For example,

we have found that employment grows slower where it is already high, and that wages
                                           26

grow slower where they are already high. Competition for scarce space and labor
may play as large or even larger role in the growth of cities as do the externalities.
In focusing on increasing returns and externalities, it is important to remember that

they often are not strong enough to overcome the more conventional competitive

forces.
                                         27
                                     References

Arrow, Kenneth J. (1962), The Economic Implications of Learning by Doing,'
    Review of Economic Studies 29: 155-173.

Arthur, W. Brian (1989), "Silicon Valley Locational Clusters: When Do Increasing

    Returns Imply Monopoly?" Working Paper, Santa Fe Institute.
Bairoch, Paul (1988), Cities and Economic Development, Chicago: University of

    Chicago Press.
Davis, Steve J. and John Haltiwanger (1990), "Gross Job Creation, Gross Job

    Destruction, and Employment Reallocation," Mimeo, University of Chicago.
Diamond, Charles A. and Curtis J. Simon (1990), "Industrial Specialization and the

    Returns to Labor," Journal of Labor Economics 8: 175-201.

Henderson, J. Vernon (1986), "Efficiency of Resource Usage and City Size," Journal
     of Urban Economics 19: 47-70.

Henderson, J. Vernon (1988), Urban Development: Theory. Fact, and Illusion,
     New York: Oxford.

Jacobs, Jane (1969), The Economy of Cities, New York: Vintage Books.
Jacobs, Jane (1984), Cities and the Wealth of Nations, New York: Vintage Books.
Krugman, Paul (1991a), "Increasing Returns and Economic Geography," Journal of

     Political Economy, June.

Krugman, Paul (1991b), 'Cities in Space: Three Simple Models,' Mimeo, MIT.
Lichtenberg, Robert M. (1960), One Tenth of a Nation, Cambridge: Harvard

     University Press.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1988), "On the Mechanics of Economic Development,"
     Journal of Monetary Economics 22: 3-42.

Marshall, Alfred (1890), Principles of Economics, London: Macmillan.
                                          28

 Murphy, Kevin M., Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny (1989), "industrialization

     and the Big Push," Journal of Political Economy 97: 1003-1026.

Porter, Michael E. (1990), The Competitive Advantage of Nations, New York: Free
     Press.

Reutter, Mark (1988), Sparrows Point: Making Steel: The Rise and Ruin of

     American Industrial Might, New York: Simon & Schuster.

Romer, Paul M. (1986), "Increasing Returns and Long Run Growth.' Journal of
     Political Economy 94: 1002-1037.

Romer, Paul M. (1990), "Endogenous Technological Change", Journal of Political
     Economy 98: 71-101.

Rosenberg, Nathan (1963), 'Technological Change in the Machine Tool Industiy,

     1840-1910," Journal of Economic History 23.

Rotemberg, Julio, and Garth Saloner (1990), "Competition and Human Capital

     Accumulation: a Theory of Interregional Specialization and Trade", MIT Mimeo.

Scherer, F.M. (1982), Interindustiy Technology Flows in the United States, Research

    Ehy 11: 227-245.

Schumpeter, Joseph A. (1942), Capitalism. Socialism, and Democracy, New York:

    Harper.
                                    Table 1

                            Description of the Data
Panel A                    Five largest cities in 1956

City           1956 Employment       1987 Employment          Six Largest Industries

New York,      4,065,062             5,449,561                          Apparel,
New York                                                       Business Services,
                                                                        Printing,
                                                       Special Trade Contractors,
                                                     Wholesale Trade (Durable),
                                                  Wholesale Trade (Non-durable).

Chicago,       1,919,757             2,778,180                     Metal Products,
Illinois                                                                     Food,
                                                               Electric Equipment,
                                                           Non-electric Machinery,
                                                                          Printing,
                                                         Wholesale Trade (Durable).

Los Angeles,   1,710,325             3,546,393                  Electric Equipment,
California                                                Fabricated Metal Products,
                                                           Non-electric Machinery,
                                                          Special Trade Contracters,
                                                         Transportation Equipment,
                                                         Wholesale Trade (Durable).

Philadelphia, 1,085,524               1,287,820                            Apparel,
Pennsylvania                                                    Electric Equipment,
                                                          Fabricated Metal Products,
                                                                              Food,
                                                           Non-electric Machinery,
                                                         Wholesale Trade (Durable).

 Detroit,      1,063,284              1,567,641           Fabricated Metal Products,
 Michigan                                                  Non-electric Machinery,
                                                          Primary Metal Industries,
                                                          Special Trade Contractors,
                                                         Transportation Equipment,
                                                         Wholesale Trade (Durable).
                           Table 1 (continued)

Panel A(continued)      Five smallest cities in 1956

City          1956 Employment      1987 Employment           Six Largest Industries
Laredo,       7, 458               25,397                               Apparel,
Texas                                                             Apparel Stores,
                                                                   Auto Dealers,
                                                           General Merchandise,
                                                             Transport Services,
                                                       Wholesale Trade (Durable).
San Angelo,   12,188               29,720                          Auto Dealers,
California                                                     Communications,
                                                             General Contractors,
                                                            General Merchandise,
                                                    Special Trade Contractors,
                                               Wholesale Trade (Non-durable).

Ogden,        13,958               40,715                           Auto Dealers,
Utah                                                           Communications,
                                                             General Contractors,
                                                            General Merchandise,
                                                        Special Trade Contractors,
                                                       Wholesale Trade (Durable).
Fort Smith,   19,089               55,057                           Auto Dealers,
Arkansas                                                                   Food,
                                                                 Food Stores,
                                                    Special Trade Contractors,
                                                  Wholesale Trade (Durable),
                                               Wholesale Trade (Non-durable).
Sioux Falls, 19,096                59,398                       Auto Dealers,
South Dakota                                                           Food,
                                                                  Insurance,
                                                                   Trucking,
                                                  Wholesale Trade (Durable),
                                               Wholesale Trade (Non-durable).
                                    Table 1 (continued)
Panel B                     Ten largest city-industries
City                                           Industry      Employment
New York , New York                               23               366,928

New York, New York                                50               241,754

Detroit, Michigan                                 37               233,761

Los Angeles, California                           37               228,619

New York, New York                                51               157,833

New York, New York                                27               151,905

New York, New York                                73               143,043

Chicago, Illinois                                 36               125,425

Chicago, Illinois                                 35               121,847

New York, New York                                17               114,267
Panel C                              Most common city-industries
Industry                                        Number of appearances in sample

Wholesale Trade (Durable)                                  146

Food and kindred products                                   78

Non-electric Machinery                                      76

Special trade contractors                                   70

Transportation equipment                                    60

Wholesale trade (Non-durable)                               59

Automotive dealers & service stations                       55

Fabricated metal products                                   48

Primary metal industries                                    46

Electrical machinery                                        38
 Panel D                  Five fastest growing city-industries
 City-industry                       Growth      Diversity                Concentration
 Albuquerque, New Mexico,               3.325        0.217        1.500           1.090
 Business Services

 San Jose, California,                  2.765        0.290        0.835           2.582
 Electric Machinery

 San Jose, California,                  2.407        0.310        1.008           0.883
 Wholesale Trade (Durable)

 San Jose, California,                  2.403        0.311       0.930            0.876
 Transportation Equipment
 Atlantic City, New Jersey             2.345        0.373        0.418           11.221
 Hotels
 Panel D                 Five slowest growing city-industries
City-industry                       Growth      Diversity Competition Concentration
Scranton, Pennsylvania                -5.417        0.387        0.931          113.139
Anthracite Coal Mining

Manchester, New Hampshire             -5.161        0.331        0.272           19.559
Leather Products

Wikes-Barre-Hazleton, PA              -5.078        0.466        0.279          21.193
Tobacco Products

Hamilton-Middletown, Ohio             -4.813        0.513        0.326           4.271
Primary Metal Industries
Gadsden, Alabama,                     -4.714        0.406        0.185           4.876
Textile Mills


Growth=Log(employment in l987/employment in 1956), Diversity=City's other top
five industries' share of 1956 total city employment,
                                                      Competition=Establjsments per
employee relative to establishments per employee in the U.S. industry,
ConcentrationCityindustry's share of city employment relative to U.S. industry's
share of U.S. employment in 1956.
                                       Table 2

                        Variable Means and Standard Deviations


Variable                                            Mean         St. Dev.    # of Obs.


Log(employment in 1987/                            0.00236          1.004        1016
employment in 1956)
in the city-industry

Log(U.S. employment in 1987/                         0.308          0,459        1016
U.S. employment in 1956) in the
industry outside the city
                                                     1.063          0.244         1016
Wage in the city-industry
in 1956 in thousands of dollars
per quarter
Employment in the                                    0.0097        0.0228         1016
city-industry in 1956
(in millions)
                                                      3.367         9.019         1016
City-industry's share of city employment
relative to U.S. industrys share of U.S.
employment in 1956

Establishments per employee in the city-              0.752         0.416         1016
industry relative to establishments per
employee in the U.S. industry

City's other top five industries                      0.351         0.100         1016
share of 1956 total city employment


Log(wage in 1987/wage in 1956)                        1.649         0.208          833
 in the city-industry


 Log(US. wage in 1987/U.S                             1.645          0.144         833
 wage in 1956) in the industry
 outside the city
 Wage in the city in 1987                             4.600          0.663          833
                                  Table 2 (continued)

                      Variable Means and Standard Deviations


Variable                                                Mean    St. Dev.   # of Obs.

Log(employment in 1987/                                 0.980     0.424         170
employment in 1956) in the city

Wage in the city in 1956                                0.864    0.114          170



Employment                                              0.118    0.298          170
in the city in 1956


Employment growth                                   -0.0312      0.648          170
in the four biggest
industries
                                         Table 3

              City-industry employment growth between 1956 and 1987

Dependent Variable              Log(employment in 1987/employment in 1956)
                                        in the city-industry

                                              (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)

Constant                                   -0.423         -0.932         -0.181        -0.513
                                         (-3.280)       (-7.214)       (-1.141)       (-3.373)

Log (U.S. employment in 1987/               1.140          1.209          1.237          1.148
U.S. employment in 1956) in the          (19.282)       (23.024)       (22.552)       (20.418)
industry outside the city
Wage in the city-industry in 1956         0.0137          0.0226        0.0379           0.027
                                          (0.126)        (0.217)        (0.347)        (0.259)

Employment in the city-industry            -2.898         -3.280          -3.91         -4.080
in 1956 — in millions                    (-2.636)       (-3.109)       (-3.458)       (-3.803)

Dummy variable indicating                   0.426          0.416         0.370          0.378
presence in the South                     (7.528)        (7.678)        (6.366)        (6.849)

City-industry's share of city            -0.0128                   .              .   -0.00799
employment relative to industry's        (-4.349)             (.)            (.)       (-2.805)
share of U.S. employment in 1956

Establishments per employee in the          .              0.587                  .      0.561
city-industry relative to establishments  (.)           (10.330)             (.)       (9.824)
per employee in the U.S. industry in 1956

City's other top five industries share              .              .     -0.894          -0.913
of total city employment in 1956               (.)            (.)      (-3.458)        (-3.725)

Adjusted R2                                0.3916         0.4394        0.3874          0.4502

Number of observations                       1016           1016           1016           1016


 T-statistics of parameter estimates are listed in parentheses beneath these estimates.
                                        Table 4

                   City-industry wage growth between 1956 and 1987

Variable                                           Log(wage in 1987/wage in 1956)
                                                         in the city-industry

                                             (1)           (2)          (3)             (4)

Constant                                 0.332           0.379        0.398          0.440
                                        (5.090)        (5.886)      (5.767)        (6.477)

Log(U.S. wage in 1987/U.S                 0.961          0.975        0.959          0.973
wage in 1956) in the industry          (22.400)       (23.214)     (22.457)       (23.210)
outside the city

Wage in the city-industry                -0.270         -0.270       -0.266         -0.267
in 1956                                (-9.835)      (-10.080)     (-9.733)       (-9.973)
Employment in the                         1.025          1.111        0.849          0.938
city-industry in 1956 —                 (3.794)        (4.179)      (3.075)        (3.461)
in millions

Dummy variable indicating                0.0175        0.0161       0.0094        0.00853
presence in the South                   (1.353)        (1.271)      (0.713)       (0.660)

City-industry's share of city          0.00053               .            .     -0.000233
employment relative to industry's      (0.739)             (.)          (.)        (-0.326)
share of U.S employment in 1956

Establishments per employee in the             .      -0.0850             .       -0.0845
city-industry relative to establishments     (.)      (-6.164)          (.)       (-6.057)
per employee in the U.S. industry in 1956

City's other top five industries'              .             .       -0.172         -0.161
share of 1956 city employment                (.)           (.)     (-2.870)       (-2.732)

Adjusted R2                             0.3832         0.4099       0.3889         0.4139
Number of observations                      833           833          833            833


T-statistics of parameter estimates are listed in parentheses beneath these estimates.
                                       Table 5

           Employment growth of small industries between 1956 and 1987

Variable                         Log(employment in 1987/employment in 1956)
                                 in the city outside the four biggest industries



Constant                                           1.410
                                                 (7.380)


1956 Employment                                 -0.196
outside the four biggest                      (-2.361)
industries


1956 Wage                                        -0.455
outside the four biggest                      (-2.010)
industries


Employment growth                                0.458
in the four biggest                           (13.739)
industries


Adjusted R2                                      0.5910

Number of observations                              170


 T-statistics of parameter estimates are listed in parentheses beneath these estimates.
