NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES

PERVASIVE SHORTAGES UNDER SOCIALISM

Andrei Shleifer
Robert Vishny

Working Paper No. 3791

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1991

We are grateful to Abram Bergson, Maxim Boycko, Larry Katz, and
Larry Summers for helpful discussions and to Bradley and Sloan
Foundations for financial support. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3791
July 1991

PERVASIVE SHORTAGES UNDER SOCIALISM

ABSTRACT
We present a new theory of pervasive shortages under
socialism, based on the assumption that the planners are selfinterested.

Because the planners -- meaning bureaucrats in the

ministries and managers of firms --

cannot

keep the official

profits that firms earn, it is in their interest to create
shortages of output and to collect bribes from the rationed
consumers.

Unlike official profits, bribes are not turned over

to the state, and so shortages enable the key decision makers who
collect them to profit personally.

The theory suggests that an

increase in the official price of a good might reduce output.
The theory also suggests that market socialism is bound to fail
even without computational complexities facing the planners,

Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 315
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER

Robert Vishny
Graduate School
of Business
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER

2
1. Introduction.

Shortage

of

goods is the single most pervasive phenomenon in socialist countries.

Consumer goods ranging from necessities, such as food, to luxuries, such as cars and
gold, as
well as many intermediate inputs, are typically in short
supply. Kornai (1979) and Weitzman
(1984) argue that shortages as opposed to excess supply
capitalism. In this paper, we offer a new explanation
Standard explanations

of

shortages

of

of goods

distinguish socialism from

of shortages under socialism.

goods under socialism are not completely

persuasive2. The classical explanation (Lange 1936) argues that shortages result from the
temporary difficulties in calculating equilibrium prices, which occur because convergence to
equilibrium takes time.

It is hard to take

this story seriously. In the Soviet Union, shortages

of some goods, such as automobiles, have lasted for decades, without any price increases.

The

planners simply do not raise prices to assure convergence to the market clearing equilibrium.
Second,
down prices

it is often argued that distributional considerations lead socialist plannersto keep

of

some goods such as food (Weitzman 1977).

considerations may explain shortages

Although distributional

of somegoods, such as food and housing, they are hardly

a general explanation. Why, for example,has the Soviet Union
always experienced a shortage

of such luxuries

as cars and owner occupied apartments? The government has long been
trying

to extract the excess savings from the rich, and raising prices
natural way

of doing this. It does not appear, then,

A third influential explanation

of shortages,

of luxuries

would have been

a

that fairness is the real issue.
offered by Komai (1979), is that firms

2For an excellent overview of standard explanations, as well as an
ingenious new theory, see
Rolemberg (1990).

3
demanding inputs face soft budget constraints and so always want to get anything they possibly

can at any price. In Kornai's model, it is not so much that goods are underpriced. but that the
income

o the buyers is

effectively infinite.

This model may be appropriate for some

intermediate goods. But households face hard budget constraints, and therefore the systematic
shortages of many consumer goods remain a puzzle. Moreover, we claim below that the notion
that the socialist firm always wants to expand output is incorrect. Our explanation

of shortages

applies to consumer luxuries and necessities, as well as to intermediate goods.

We argue that the reason for pervasive shortages is self-interested behaviorby ministry
bureaucrats who set the plan prices and output. These bureaucrats intentionally plan shortages

in order to encourage bribes from rationed consumers.
could earn profits, but most

or the

of these profits

ministries. The key feature

prices and output

of firms

If markets cleared,

firms in an industry

would accrue to the state treasury, not to the firms

of socialism is that the decision makers

who determine the

do not, to a first approximation, keep any of these profits. When,

in contrast, there is a shortage

of a good, the potential

customers try to obtain this good by

offering bribes and favors to the bureaucrats in the ministry (and to the managers
These bribes tend to be much larger than the share

of firms).

of official profits that the bureaucrats

and

the managers are allowed to keep. And because these bribes are not official transactions, none
of them go to the treasury. As a result, the industry is better off creating a shortage of the
goods and collecting the bribes than making official profits it cannot keep. We show that, for

a variety of regulatory schemes, socialist firms will always produce a level of output entailing
a shortage at official prices.
Our paper is an application

of the

general principles

of rent-seeking,

introduced by

4
Tultock (1967), Krueger (1974), Posrier (1975),and Bhagwati (1982). The literature on central
planning has long recognized that price distortions can lead to Tuilock-like welfare losses as
people waste time queueing for the goods (Stahl and Alexeev

l985)

This literature has taken

underpricing as exogenous, however. The idea of our paper is that underpricing and shortages
are the result of the rational choice of the key decision makers, who collect the rents that result
from shortages. Although we focus on shortages in socialist countries, thepoint that bureaucrats
create artificial barriers to private transactions in orderto collect bribes is more general. Many
laws and regulations in less developed and even developed countries have the same effect.

It

seemed useful to us to bringout the implications of this general principle for the most
pervasive
feature

of socialism:

the shortage

of goods.

The next section of the paper discusses the objectives
our explanation

of pervasive

of a socialist industry and presents

shortages. Section 3 discusses somespecific types of restrictions

that the center might impose on the socialist industry to control bribery and raise output. We
show how difficult it is to avoid shortages. Section 4 concludes with some general implications

of this theory for socialist and market economies, and

paricularly for market socialism.

2. The objective function of a socialist industry.
To describe its objective function, we must first define what we mean by

'a socialist

industry.' We define a socialist industry as the combination of the firms in the industry and the
ministry that supervises them. We assume that this industry has some demand curve and some
cost curve. The objective function of this industry is the objective function of the bureaucrats

5

in the ministry and the managers of firms. Importantly, we assume that the bureaucrats and the
managers collude to pursue their common objective function. As a result, we do not focus on
the potential conflicts between the bureaucrats and the managers.

Our view is that the

of the firm have the

same broad objective --

bureaucrats in the ministry and the managers
namely to enrich themselves at the expense

how to divide the surplus. One example

of their customers -- and they bargain
of this

is

efficiently on

that the ministry gives the orders and the

firmsjust follow them as best they can.
Given this view

of a socialist industry,it is not important whether it consists of just one

or of several firms. Even

if thereare several

firms, the bureaucrats in the ministry will enforce

collusion between them, and they will act as a monopolist. In particular, the bureaucrats will

not allow these firms to compete for bribes. This assumption is quite natural: the ministry has
a great deal of control over prices and outputs of the firms it supervises, and it is in the long run
interest

of the

managers

of the

firms as well to make sure that the monopoly allocation is

sustained, In short, we are assuming that the industry consists
expresses the combined interest

of the bureaucrats

of one decision

maker, who

and the managers. and whom we shall call

'the industry."
What is the objective function of this industry'? Typically, the industry does not keep any

of the profits it earns from

selling its output at official prices, since the tax rate by the central

authorities is close to 100 percent. The argument made to justify the expropriation

is that the state owns the firms and
some

of the

so is entitled to the profits. Even

profits, virtually none

of them

if the

of profits

industry can keep

accrue to the managers and to the ministry

bureaucrats. Official profits are of no value to the decision-makers. Such taxation of profits

6
implies, in particular, that the industry has no interest in charging an official price equal to the
monopoly price and supplying the monopoly output. Nor does the industry have any interest
in producing

a competitive output at a competitive price,

since the profits on the inframarginal

units again accrue to the state. A socialist industry gets no or virtually no benefits from earning
legal profits.

The only way that the industry can get anything for itselfis by having a shortage of the
good it produces and then collecting the rents from the quantity-constrained buyers in the form

of bribes.

When there is a shortage, buyers' valuation

of the good

exceeds the official price,

and so they are willing to stand in line, lobby the firm and the ministry, and most importantly
pay bribes to get the good. Of course, to the extent they lobby and stand in line, the buyers do

not benefit the industry. But to the extent that the shortage brings in bribes, the
industry
benefits from a shortage. The advantage

of bribes

over profits is

of course that bribes are

hidden and therefore are not turned over to the treasury. As long as the tax rate on official
profits is high enough that the managers and the bureaucrats would prefer to collect the bribes
even despite all the waste associated with queueing and lobbying, they would try to create a
shortage. The industry's objective, briefly stated, is to maximize the bribes.

If we denote the inverse demand curve of the industry by D(Q) and the official price by
P, the objective

function of the industry is given by

(1) D(Q)*Q - P*Q
This objective function, for an arbitrary P and Q, is given by the rectangle in Figure I. We are
assuming that the true price the industry charges the buyers is D(Q)
the marginal buyer -- and that this price consists

of two parts.

—

the reservationprice of

The first is the official price P.

d

7
and the second is the bribe D(Q) - P. The rents that this industry collects are the productof the
bribe per unit of output times the output.
l'here is a simple way to think of this objective function. The first term, D(Q)*Q
simply the revenue that any industry would collect

if the

market cleared

j

at the output Q, which

we will denote by R(Q). However, the cost to a socialist industry is very different from the cost
to a private industry. The real cost function does not even enter the objective function (1). As
Kornai has pointed out, the socialist industry does not care at all about the cost of its inputs,
since these inputs are effectively paid for by the state. With a close to 100 percent profits tax,

the official cost of the inputs only trivially affects the fortunes of the bureaucrats and the
managers in the industry. Instead, the official revenues of the firm, P*Q, are the cost to the
managers and the bureaucrats5, The higher the official price for its output, the lower are the
bribes that the industry can collect per unit

of output,and so the higher the effectivecost of this

output. This is the key assumption that drives our view

of shortage: the

official revenues are

a drain to the bureaucrats and managers; they are just like the production cost or an excise tax
to a private firm. Once this point is recognized, the objective function of the
industry given by
(1) is just the revenue minus the cost.
In writing down this objective function, we are making several specific assumptions.

First, we are assuming that bribes are collected efficiently. Customers don't stand in line or

3We make the assumption that the true costs do not enter the objective function for realism.
We could easily assume that these costs iTi fact enter the objective function because some or all
of the costshave to be paid in bribes, or because the industry faces someprofitability constraints
(as we assume below). These assumptions will change the exact solution to the industry's
problem. However, the result that the industry will try to crcatc a shortage is preserved under
alt these altemative assumptions.

8
inefficiently lobby the producers, they just pay the bribe D(Q) - P. This assumption is obviously
unrealistic, since we observe queues, lobbying and other inefficient behavior as well as bribes

in socialist countries. We do not need such a strong assumption, however. We need to assume
that the tax rate on official profits is high enough that the industry tries to collect bribes rather
than official profits.

Even

if there are

equilibrium, the objective function will

some restrictions on bribery that lead to queues in

be similarto (I), and we will still get the result that the

industry wants to create a shortage.
Second, we are assuming that there is no price discrimination in bribes. Every customer
who wants the good pays D(Q)

P.

If price discrimination in bribes

customer would pay his reservation price in the form

of bribes,

were perfect, every

and there would be no shortage

at the official price, But as long as price discrimination is not perfect, there will be a shortage.
In section 3, we present an example in which the industry imperfectly price discriminates
between buyers by setting high bribes but allowing some queues as well.
Third, as we already mentioned, the ministry precludes bribe competition between
producers, so in equilibrium bribes are chosen monopolistically.

If bribes were chosen

competitively, producers would cut bribes competitively until they reached 0. Unlike market
economies, however, where price competition is intense, socialist economies have a natural
collusion device, namely the ministries.

Once the objective function (1) is granted, our main point follows immediately. The
industry maximizes the value

of the bribes,

and this value is zero

if markets clear.

The only

-way this industry can get anything to itself-- meaning to its bureaucrats and managers is by
having a combination

of the quantity and the official price that creates a shortage. Only if there

9

is a shortage
consequence

will the value

of bribes

be positive. Shortage is thus not just the coincident

of the difficulty of socialist calculation;

true objectives
Figure

it

is the most generic consequence of the

of socialist industries.
2

illustrates what an unrestrained socialist industry would like to do.

Differentiating (1) with respect to Q holding the official price constant, we obtain the first order
condition for the industry for the case where the official price is given exogenously:

(2) R'(Q)

= P.

If the industry takes the priceas exogenous, it will set the marginal revenue equal to the official
price.

This result

is immediately obvious

once it is recognized that the official price is the

marginal cost of the socialist industry. Equation (2) explains the indifference curves

of the

socialist industry presented in Figure 2. These indifference curves peak our at their intersection
with the marginal revenue curve, and decline on both sides of it. Figure 2 illustrates that if the
industry could pick both its price and the quantity it produces, it would set the price equal to
zero (to minimize what it perceives to be its marginal cost), and set the outputat the point where
the marginal revenue from producing more is equal to zero. Again, this result is obvious once
it

is realized that the official price is the marginal cost of the industry.
More generally, Figure 2 illustrates that starting from any market clearing price/output

combination, the industry always wants to cut both its official price and its output. The industry
wants to cut its price because lower official prices for a given output simply raise the market
clearing bribes. And the industry wants to cut its output at a given price for precisely the same
reason that monopoly wants to cut output from the competitive level at a given marginal cost:
marginal revenue curve is to the left of the demand curve. By cutting output from the market

? .9,i,9iJ

()

10
clearing level, the socialist industry increases the value of the rents it collects. This socialist
industry always wants to move southwest from the market clearing position, i.e. to create a
shortage. If the plan imposed irons the center is so tight as to force the industry to be on the

demand curve, the market would clear and no bribes would be collected. But if the socialist
industry has any discretion whatsoever to renegotiate the plan so as to move southwest from a

point on the demand curve, it would do so and thereby create a shortage. This is the central
proposition

of this paper.

This result casts doubt on Kornai's (1979) argument that because socialist firms do not
pay for their inputs, they have an incentive to expand ad infinitum. Perhaps they have an
incentive to get all the jtptij they can lay their hands on, since they don't pay for them and
maybe can sell them. But

jp

expansion is not costless to socialist firms, because it limits

their ability to collect bribes. As these firms expand, marginal revenue falls and

it falls below

at some point

the true marginal cost to these firms, which is the official price. Since socialist

firms have a well-defined objective of maximizing the value of bribes, they have the incentive
to restrict output to the level wltere the marginal revenue equals to the marginal cost they face;
and this output certainly is not infinite.

The message of this section, then,

is

that a socialist industry has a very strong incentive

to create a shortage. So long as it has some discretion over its price and output, it will do so.
Of course, we do not really believe that the socialist industry will get its maximum bribes and
charge

a zero official price.

The central authorities will then run an enormous deficit as well

as face enormous pressure from consumers to interfere in some ways. In the next section, we
will discuss some plausible forms of such interference and their implications,

Il
3. Restrictions on the industry.

This section does not describe the optimal regulatory scheme for the central planners.
The optimal regulatory scheme would probably let the industry keep enough of its profits that
it chooses

to collect profits on the official market ratherthan in the form of bribes. We are also

reluctant to pursue the optimal regulatory framework because we do not believe that this is the
true objective

of the

central planners. As we have argued, bureaucrats in the ministries and

hIgberj share in the bribes collected by the industry.

As a result, to a significant extent they

are captured' by the industry and so have no incentive to eliminate the bribes (Stigler 1972).
Nonetheless, it is plausible to think that central authorities are under some political pressure
from the consumers, especially the consumers

of intermediate

goods, to limit the shortages

They are probably also under budgetary pressure to collect someofficial profits. In these cases,
they might try to impose some constraints on the industry. In this section, we examine two
interesting types of constraints: price setting by the center and minimum profit requirements.

Price setting by the center
What happens when the center sets the price for the industry is clear from equation (2),
and is illustrated in Figure 3. The industry sets output at the point where the marginal revenue
is equal to the official price. Because output

at this point is below demand, there is a shortage

and the industry collects positive bribes. In this case, the industry would want the price to be
set at as low a level as possible, since the bribes are maximized at the zero (or even negative)
price. But even

at higher prices, there are

shortages. The center could set the price equal to

the marginal revenue at the competitive output level. In this case, the industry would produce

a-

C-

vs

%4,)

U,

12

the efficient output level, the effective price (including the bribe) would be equal to thc markct
clearing price, but the official price would be below that level.
What happens when central authorities raise prices to reduce shortages? In this modei,
the effect

of raising

prices is

jgce rather than to raise output, since a higher marginal

revenue corresponds to a lower output. The reason is that the official price of output is the
marginal cost to the socialist industry. Raising official prices is just like raising the marginal
cost, and so leads to a reduction in output. Because higher official prices lead to losses of bribes
on the marginal units, it pays the industry to cut its output. An official price increase thus has
the perverse effect

of reducing

supply as the industry struggles to keep up the value

bribes, A price increase does not solve the problem

of the

of shortages.

Of course, the center could address this problem by imposing both the price and the
minimum quota that the industry must sell.

If this quota is high enough to put the industry on

its demand curve, there is no way it can collect bribes (unless it can destroy output -- which
sometimeshappensin the USSR). If, however, there is a shortage at the official quota output,
the industry can collectsomebribes.

It can try to collecta bribe from each consumer, equal

to

the difference between the marginal valuation at the quota output and the official price at that
output. Altematively, the industry can try to price discriminate between consumers, collecting
bribes from those with high value

of time, and leaving those with low value of time standing in

tine. tn this case, we wilt observe both bribes and queues in equilibrium. The analysis of the
various price discrimination devices that the industry can employ is beyond the scope
paper.

However, it is worth noting that

if the industry must

obviously wilt not fall in response to a price increase.

of this

meet an output quota, output

13

Minimum profit constraints
Central authontses might

try to limit bribery by imposing a minimum profit constraint

on the industry, but letting it choose the price and the output, We have already shown that,

if

left to its own devices,

the industry would charge

It would consequently

run a large loss on the official account, which, with a soft budget

a zero official price and collect huge bribes.

constraint,it does not care about. One way that the central authorities can raise prices indirectly
is to harden the budget constraint.
Suppose the center demands from the industry an official account profit of at least A:

(3)p*QC(Q)>

A,

where C(Q) denotes the official cost of producing the output Q. The minimum required profit
could be zero, but it also could be positive or negative.

If we substitute
(4) D(Q)*Q

(3) into (1), the objective of the industry becomes to maximize

- C(Q) - A.

Taking the first order condition, we find that at the maximum level of bribes, it must be that:
(5) R'(Q)

= C'(Q),

i.e., the marginal revenue

is equal to the marginalofficial cost. The
industry subject to a

constraint always chooses monopoly outputregardless
4).

It then chooses the lowest price for which

of the level of the constraint

profit

(see Figure

its official profits are exactly equal to the amount

that it has to earn The effective price to the consumers is the monopoly price, but it is
split
between the official price that assures the industry the required level of
profits and the bribe.

Hardeningthe budget constraintin this model raises official prices and reduces shortages.
The reason for lower shortages, however, is not a higher output but a higher price: the output

.0

3

-o

14
stays the same at the monopoly level.

A harder budget constraint only redistributes profits

between the industry and the treasury; it does not affect output.

if the central authorities want

a high output, they should set a low official price and let the firm run large losses on the official
account. This sometimes happens in socialist countries.

4. Conclusion.
We have presented a model of shortages in socialist economies intentionally created by
an industry -- meaning bureaucrats in the ministry and managers of firms -- trying to collect
rents in the form

of bribeswhen they cannot keep the official profits. This theory suggests that

because public ownership

of firms and the resulting

expropriation

of official profits is endemic

to socialist economies, so will be the shortages. In contrast, because firms and their profits are

owned privately under capitalism, capitalist producers would always wish to collect official"
profits by charging higher "official prices. At a given price, a capitalist producers would want

to sell more, leading to what Weitzman (1984) calls excess supply" of goods. Our model thus
accordswell with the central distinction between capitalism and socialism stressed by Kornai and
Weitzman: "excess supply

of goods under capitalism

and excess demand under socialism.

The issueof who keeps the profits is germane to publicly held firmsin market economies
as well. It is often said that public monopolies underpricc output and so create shortages.

In

many countries with public phone companies, such as l3razil and France, it takes a long time to
get a phone line, and a bribe helps to get it faster. Since public monopolies and their managers

cannot keep a large share of the profits they generate, it is not surprising that they create a
situation so conducive to the collection

of bribes and

favors more generally.

15

The major theme of our analysis

is

that the planners socialist economies are self-

interested. This assumption contrasts sharply with the one usually made in the debate on market
socialism.

Since Barone (1898), both opponents and advocates

of market socialism

have

assumed a benevolent central planner. As a result, the market socialism literature has focused
on the complexity of the computational task facing this benevolent planner

(eg.,

Lange 1936).

If, contrary to the assumption of this literature, central planners are self-interested, then the
possibility of efficient resource allocation under market socialism is in much greater doubt. For,

as we have

shown,

it is in the interest of such planners to cut output and to create price

distortions. In direct contrast to Lange's (1936) claim that monopolistic output restrictions are

the likely productof market economies, we have shown that such restrictions are likely to

Lake

place under socialism. Even without computational complexities, socialism with self-interested
planners will not result in efficient resource allocation.
How big the inefficiencies are depends largely on how the rectangles resulting from
shortages are allocated.

If the rectangles are fully collected

assumed in this paper, then welfare losses will

as bribes, as we have generally

be small, If,

however, these rectangles are

largely wasted in queues and other inefficient rent-seeking, then the welfare losses from
shortages will

be much higher.

The time spentin queues will largely be taken out

of work.

Moreover, when procuring goods takes time, people might have a very low incentive to work
rather than look for goods, which

ofcourse

leads to lower output.

If a follow-up paper (Shleifer

and Vishny 1991), we arguethat the general equilibrium effects of inefficient rent-seeking, such
as queueing, may be much larger than even the Tullock rectangles would suggest.

16
Bibliography.
Barone, Enrico, "The Ministry

of Production in a Socialist State,"

(1967, orig. pubi. 1898), in

Colleclivist Economic Planning, F.A. von Hayek, ed., New York: Augustus Kelley.
Bhagwati, Jagdish N., 'Directly Unproductive, Profit-Seeking (DUP) Activities,' Journal

of

Political Economy 90 (1982), 988-1002.

Kornai,Janos, "Resource vs. Demand-constrained Systems,'Econometriep 47 (1979), 801-819.
Krueger, Anne, 'The Political Economy of the Rent-seeking Society," American Economic
Review 64, (1974), 291-303.
Lange, Oscar, 'On the Economic Theory

of Socialism,'

Review of Economic Studies 4 (1936),

53-71.
Posner, Richard A., 'The Social Costs of Monopoly and Regulation," Journal of Political
Economy 83, 807 -.
Rotemberg, Julio

Stahl, Dale

J.,

"Rationing in Centrally Planned Economies," MIT Mimeo, 1990.

0. and Michael Alexeev, "The Influence of Black Markets on a Queue-Rationed

Centrally Planned Economy," Journal

of Economic Theory

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny, "The Waste

35 (1985), 234-250.

of Time and Talent Under Socialism,'

Harvard University Mimeo, 1991.
Tullock, Gordon, 'The Welfare Cost of Tariffs, Monopoly and Theft," Western Economic
Journal 5 (1967), 224-232.
Weitzman, Martin L.,

'Is the Price System or Rationing More Effective in Getting a Commodity

to those who Need it Most?" (1977), Bell Journal of Econpmics 8, 517-524.
Weitzman, Martin L., The Share Economy, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1984.

