                   NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




        CORPORATE RESTRUCTURING AND INVESThIENT HORIZONS




                         Bronwyn H. Hall




                     Working Paper No. 3794




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            July 1991




Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                          NHER Working Paper 3794
                                          July 1991


          CORPOP.ATE RESTRUCTURING AND INVESTMENT HORIZONS


                              ABSTRAC?

    The recent wave of corporate restructuring in the United
States has been accused of shortening the investment horizons of

U.S. managers. This paper surveys the empirical and case study
evidence on restructuring and investment behavior and reaches the

following conclusions 1) A large fraction of the restructurings
were motivated by synergistic or other efficiency-enhancing reasons
and have little to do with investment horizons. 2) However, massive

shifts toward debt in the capital structure of manufacturing firms.

often induced by hostile takeover threats, are accompanied by

reduced investment of all kinds, particularly in a few industries

which are characterized by "stable' technology and cost-based
innovative strategies. 3) The evidence is consistent with

optimizing behavior on the part of firms faced with a lower

relative price of debt to equity and a higher overall cost of
capital during the nineteen-eighties, but there all still doubts

about whether the U.S. market for corporate control elicits the

correct level of long run investment. Thus the paper concludes

with a discussion of the evidence on cross-country differences in
the financing of investment and the market for corporate control

and suggestions for future research in this area.
                                          Bronwyn H. Hall
                                          Department of Economics
                                          Evans Hall 611
                                          University of California,
                                           Berkeley
                                          Berkeley, CA 94720
                                          and NBER
                                                              December 1990
                                                         revised April 1991




              CORPORATE RESTRUCTURING AND INVESTMENT HORIZONS

                               Bronvyn H. Hall




1. Introduction,

     How are these two topics related? Corporate restructuring, whether

financial or otherwise, has been accused of shortening the investment

horizons of U.S. managers in the recent past. Put simply, the argument is

that takeovers or the fear of takeovers force managers to pay attention to

short-term earnings at the expense of long-term investments, and that this

bias increased during the wave of restrucrurings in the 1980s. Those making

this argument often point to the Japanese or German experience during the

same period as examples of market economies which have not experienced

substantial restructuring, and yet have apparently invested at a much higher

rate than the United States.

     In spite of the prevalence and apparent plausibility of the view that

takeover threats induced by tha undervaluation or non-optimal utilization of

a firm's assets could lead to underinvestment in assets which have a longer

term payback period, it has proved difficult to find evidence that this is

the case in general. At the same time, restructurings do appear to have had

positive benefits in terms of short term productivity gains, profitability,

and "focus" (a movement away from diversification towards concentration on

the main line of business).1 This paper will probe the question in somewhat



1Cite to Porter (?).



                                      1
more detail, aurvcytng the available evident r te invastmont oonseo,uenors
of restruoturing cod oocparing the '3. S expei core to       that   in severe: other
or intties,
        I   begin by considering the nature of o rprtorerestruotutirg: whet is
it, and how is it done? I rake the term tr octet a whole rangs of
activities, most of thea large discrete rvocts        charges in control
(including ownership changes), changes it      financial   structure (tie balance
sheet), or changes in the major lfnes ef "usiness in which tie firm
operates, Many of these activities ocur a the sane time, since ti-ey ar
sometimes mote easily performed in trdem. For example, a change in
ownership may be accompanied by the s'-lltng off of lines of businea.; to
finance the purchase, or by the rerirr rent of equity and issuance of debt in
order       to restructure the balance sheet   In fact, because of the

transactions costs associated with the change of control of a public

company, it is rare to find this event not accompanied by some other large

discrete change in the firm's stroc';rc since the need for small

adjustments in the firm's structure will not induce a control charge) -

        However, these different motivations for restructuring have different
implications for investment horizons: feat of a control change and tOe

subsequent loss of job may cause managers to rave a shtrt-term focr, while

leveraging (changing the financial structurc ; say induce a decline it

investment simply because the cost of funds has riron, owing to the

reduction in free cash flow. A restructuring involving the divestiture of

old or the acquisition of new lines of business has no particular

implications for investment: it may incrrare, decrease, or redirect spending
on long-lived assets.2

    For this reason, this paper focuses on the first two types of

restructuring: chsnges in financial structure, whether or not they are

accompanied by ownership changes. I divide these restructurings into two

basic types: I) substantial increases in leverage, either (a) accompanied

by a changc in control (e.g., leveraged buyouts, a majority of which are

also management buyouts, or going private transactions), or (b) with no

change of control (a substantial increase in the debt-equity ratio)      2)

takeovers not accompanied by a change in the financial structure of the

acquiring firm, whether friendly or hostile.

     Defining what we mean by a shortened time horizon for investment is

somewhat trickier. Although is clear that the concept refers to the extent

to which longer term performance of the firm dominates over short term

considerations in the firm's decision making process, it is difficult to

make a mathematically precise definition which will satisfy all those who

have thought about the problem. Dne possible definition might make the time

horizon a simple function of the internal rate of return used by the firm in

evaluating projects. For example, f we ask over what horizon the firm

would be indifferent between $IDDD today and $1ODDD in the future, the answer

would be ID years if the requited rate of return were 2 percent per year

and 24 years if it were lD percent. Clearly these sets of numbers imply

quite different time frames over which the firm will look when evaluating

the payback of a particular investment and the weight which it will place on



2See Bhagat, Shleifer, and Vishny (l99D) and bichtenberg (l99D) for
evidence that acquisition and divestiture of lines of business during the
l9O5 was motivated to a great extent by the undoing of the conglomerate
wave of the iDa and 7Ds and was accompanied by productivity gains n the
core lines of business.
short tens       'less t'a five yeats) sic lnc'-           ten nnoaidetatiots.      '-V- the
othe'- hand this dci mit'         n nay   be tto ritid when ccnf ronted     witl the   way     in
whi -I. firma actually o ical budgeting b'                     because not a]   I usc t a
rn-fred     1kB Internal Data of Petutn aprr-nl. and because different rates
n' used for different rt'-'e'-ts.            I'n-tunatn]       I do ntt necessarily requite
a ttecise Cefinitren '-f the on-capt in order '-o examine the impli cation of
aborter time horn . t fn- inveatoant; it will be suffIcient to keep the
general relatoos i oetvaen sb'-r            hnti tons,   high discount rates and the
relative imp'-rt-i'-r- of neat-tart         as p' ned to fat-term fetters in mind

           is   !-- '-ow coo-ten posctiee t n       inn-in that POD invastosnt has a

longer   '-i-s   horizon   t.an ordinary ir;e       n-nt,4 but this does requite some
)ustificmnion in the light of what a' row about th0 relative depreoiation
ratea of the two kinds of capital. 'lbs tate of economic depreciation of
ordinary capital is commonly thought 'n be in the range of 10-15 percent,
while    that for R&D cap5tal      ia apParery somewhat higher (Bakes and
l'hookerman 1984 and       Hall   lgffb   find n-es 'f the order of 25 percent).
lila im lies that the time horimo— f                POt inveatment should actually be
•   tIer than Cot ordinary investment.
        I think the cxplanation for this — role lice in the intettemporal
nan-ta of the pt'-duction function for hr w]cdge capital: although it
an-eats that the returns to R&D           axpenditotee     deolne   rather quickly,   the
tn-etc expenditures are in fact tightly 1': cc             '
                                                                 those made several yaata


'Sec Baldwin      and Clark (this volume) for forthet discussion of capital
budgeting techniques end Poterba and Summcts ('iisv lose) for survey
evidence on firm daciaon makiog.
°See Jattcll, hahn. and Hart ln-5), Hall 'lOfia, 109Cc, end Huelhroek at
a  n-n-o   an of wkom use P41 as a proxy for long-teto investmer'-.



                                                4
earlier, and the true payhack period is much longer.5 This hypothesis is

supported by the evidence of apparently high adjustment costs and a slow

rate of change for R&D investment.6 In the absence of inrecnal evidence on

the actual planning horizons of managers, this paper will consider that the

behavior of R&D investment in particular, and investment in general, serve

as proxies for the changes in investment horizons of corporations.

     Before leaving the topic of investment horizons, I note thac one form

of long-term investment on the part of firms, investment in the education

and skills of its workers, is not explicitly considered here, Df course,

this type of investment is closely linked to investments in new technology

and innovation, but it is possible that changes in ownership and the

accompanying changes in employment which are documented here discourage

at least some firma from making investments in the human capital of their

workers.7 That is, a firm which expects to be taken over or which dosizes

under the threat of takeover may also fail to invest in its workers. My

reading of the evidence in the debate over the winners and losers in

corporate restructuring suggests that some of the private gains from this



      the production of capital from investment is additively separable, as
is usually assumed for ordinary investment, a high deprecation rate implies
a quick payback to investment, and vice versa. However, if the production
of knowledge capital from R&D investment is not additively separable, as
seems likely, it is possible to show that a depreciation rate which is
measured as high when a conventional perpetual inventory specification is
used j consistent with very slowly decaying rates of return to lagged R&D
expenditures.

6Bernstein and Hadiri (19   )   and Hall, Hausman, and Griliches (1986).

7See Rochan and Oatermsn (this volume) for a fuller discussion of the
differences between U.S., Japanese, and German corporate practices with
respect to job tenure and firs-specific and firm-level training. Surely
part of the national institutional difference here can be accounted for by
the relatively more active market in corporate control in the United States,
which would reduce the incentives for nvestmenc, at least at the management
level.
actr:ity may come at the expenae        of   employees of the firms involved;8 even
rhcre   who do   not 'iew empl'vees as    bev:ng    p'operty rights in U e firm may he
:or erned if there is a lots of gpialjy y3jnable human napital owing               to the

cransaction.




2. The   Evidence on agf.tructuring           Irveetm.
        There hae by now been quite a few studiee which document the results

of reatructurings which occorred during tho l970a and l9f0s. I focus my

attention on those which look at RAt invEarvent first. These studies are of

two types: large scale empirical atudica (Hall             1988a,   l990a, Lichtenberg

and   Siegel   l990a,   199db, and   Smith 1981),   and   case studies of a few large

firms undergoing restructuring or acquiaitrrn             (Miller 1990s,   1990h end

Fusfeld 1987).

        I begin with my study (Hall 1990a) which is the most comprehensive on

the subject although limited in some dimonsions because it relies solely on

pullic data. The study is based on a complete universe of publicly traded

manufacturing firms (about 2500) from 1976 to 1987.              I identified every exit

from this sample (about 1200) during the eleven year period and traced the

reason why the exit occurred. This icformation, together with changes in the

debt-equity ratio of surviving firms, is used to identify firms

experiencing the major restructuring events.

        In Table 1, I show the overall statistics or these events during the

pariod. The eleven year totals of the significance of these transactions

 (neas:red by employment) suggest that about 30 percent of all firma were

 involved, or 3 percent per year. About half of this is merger or



 8Ehagat, Shleifet, and Vshny (1990).
acquisition between two public companies; only 9-11 percent is of the

leveraging variety, but the importance of the latter type of transaction

increases markedly during the later half of the period. In 1987, two

percent of the employees in publicly traded manufacturing firms were

employed by a firm which went private through an 120 or experienced a

substantial increase in leverage during the year. In my l990a study, I used

the sample of restructurings summarized in this table to investigate the

simple correlation between corporate restructuring and changes in R&D

intensity.

     The major empirical findings of that paper were threefold: First, I

found that leveraged buyouts and other private acquisitions of publicly

traded manufacturing firms had taken place overwhelmingly in the sectors

where R&D investment and innovation have not been important, at least to the

industry as a whole. The industries and firms in question are those with

the steady cash flow necessary to service the debt, They are largely

smaller firms in the consumer nondurable industries (Food, Textiles, the

auto parts sector of the Motor Vehicle industry, the tire sector of the

Rubber and Plastics industry, and Miscellaneous Manufacturing) or those

which have been downsizing for some time under pressure from foreign

competition and reduced innovative opportunities (Textiles again, Fabricated

Metals, and Stone, Clay, and Class). Together these two groups of

industries accounted for over 80 percent of the LBOs and going private

transactions (as measured by employment),

    The total amount of research and development spending of the companies

involved in eleven years worth of LEO and other "going private" transactions

is 767 million dollars, a small fraction of the 40 billion dollar industrial

R&D budget in 1982. Even If this R&D were to be cut drastically, it would
lava little icpsot on total R&D spending. i fact, although this R&D
disappeared from my aggregate statistics since rOe fines went private (sod
cease to report tc the SEt) I rited evidence from Rapan (19891) sod
hichteobetg and Siegel (199Db) that most ci these fitms did out tedoce theit
spendiog gteatly as a tesult of the transaction in any case,
      My results concerning the nontechnology intensive charactar of LBOs
and "going private" transactions is now supported by several other studies,
which employ samples involving many of the same firms although using
different methodologies. These studies have also demonstrated increased

operating efficiencies and reduced inestment after the buyout. The primary

study of interest is that by Lichtenberg and Siegel (199Db), whioc relies on

a   different (confidential) source of data, the Census and Annual Surveys of
Manufacturing.    Using a much larger sample than other studies, they found

that LEts   have higher total factor productivity after the buyout then before

it and higher total factor productivity than other firms in their industry.

This was achieved by means of a substantial reduction in the nonproduction

worki roe (about 9 percent) while the ptoducticn wcrkforce declines very

slightly. The R&D of firms involved in b'xyouts was about 1 percent of sales,

while   that fot the average large firm in the sample was 3.5 percent of
sales. The difference in R&D intensities between the two groups of
firms   becomes slightly larger, but not significantly so, after the buyout.

        ScrI. Kaplan (1989a, 198Db) and Smith (1989) report studies of large

MBCs during the early 198Ds; their samples are a subset of the 120a analyzed

by Lichtenberg and Siegel. These studies contain very similar findings:

there are substantial increases in profitability and cash flow post-huyout,

some cots n capital expenditures, and much of the gain to pre-buyout

shsreh"lders can be identified with tax savings. Both report that R&D is



                                         8
largely immaterial (7 firms report it in the Smith sample, 10-20 in the

Kaplan sample); for these firms there are slight reductions after the

buyout9

     Turning to financial restructurings which do not involve changes in

control, the second finding in my 1990a study was that the most dramatic

results of restructuring were found in those transactions where a firm moves

to a substantially higher debt position; here the size of the average

decline in R&D intensity was about 0.8 percent of sales (from 3.4 percent to

2.6 percent) for the 1982 to 1987 period. These results are in contrast to

those for leveraged buyouts, since many of these firms were doing

significant amounts of R&D beforehand. The result was robust in the sense

that it appeared both in a conventional investment equation and in the pre-

and post-transaction differences in R&D intensity. To my knowledge, mine is

the only study, outside of a few case studies, to look specifically at large

financial restructurings which are not accompanied by a change of control.

     The third finding in my 1990a study was less clear: there was mixed

evidence as to whether acquisitions in the publicly traded manufacturing

were followed by reductions in R&D intensity. Firms which made large

acquisitions experienced permanent (at least over the horizon for which it

can be measured) declines in their R&D intensity relative to their

pre-acquisition R&D intensity; the mix of firms making acquisitions

also shifted toward firms with lower R&D intensities during the eighties, so

that the combined effect was substantially lower R&D intensities relative to



9The result cited is not actually in the Kaplan papers, which I reference
because they describe the data on which the result is based. It was
communicated to me privately by Steven Kaplan; it is measure of the
unimportance of R&D in the large-scale MB0 sample that he didn't even
mention it in the reported results.



                                      9
the industry as a whole for posraoquisition urns i' the latter part of the

period. Although the statistical evidence fer          decline was weak because

of the substantial heterugeneity in firm behuvi. r, the size of the effect

was large in economic rerme, amounting 5c acne half cf one percent decline

in R&D intensity for chose firms engaged i R&D (chat is, frco an cverall

mean   of 3.4   percent to 2.9 percenr) for c}. 1982 cc 1987 period. This

decline   turned out to be associsred wtrh the acquisiriors which were
accompanied or financed by increases i' leverage; char is they were a
manifestation of the sane correlation between increases in leverage and

falls   in R&D intensity described previcudly.
        Table 3 summarizes the evidence icon my earlicr   paper concerning R&D,

acquisitions, and increases in leverage and includes new results for

ordinary investment for comparison. These new results demonstrate clearly

that the negative association between leverage and investment is not

confined to R&D investment. This table shows the results of a conventional

investment equation, estimated in levels and in a modified first-differenced

form (to control for permanent differences across firms).1D The table


ID                .    .                  -
  Investment equatrons nmsed on an accerecetor model of cnvestment usually
include a measure of current output ma a proxy for expectations of future
demand. Those based on the Q theory of investment with adjustment costs
include the ratio of the market value of the firm's assets to the book value
as s proxy for expectations of the profitability of the firm's capital
stock. The potential existence of liquidity constraints (external finance
having a higher cost than internal) also suggests a role for current cash
flow or sales in the equation, beyond that due to demand fluctuations. The
equation which I estimated is an eclectic combination of these differing
(although not inconsistent) schools of thought. Tne dependent variable is
measured as a ratio both for theoretical reasons (linear homogeneity of the
production function and adjustment cost function) and econometric reasons
(potential hetersskedaaticiry of the disturbances in the equation) .   In the
first-differenced form of the equation, it is hypothesized that firms are
heterogeneous in investment rates in ways intrinsic to their technology and
unaccounted for by the model. For example, the R&D fnvestment rate in a
fast-moving electronics firm may be quite different in a permanent sense
from that of a firm in metal fabrication, If this fart is correlated with


                                         19
verifies the main findings described above: a large negative impact on both

kinds of investment from increases in leverage, and an insignificant

acquisition effect for R&D, once leverage changes are controlled for. What

is new is a slight hint of reductions in ordinary investment following an

acquisition which is not accounted for by the leverage variables; however

this effect is measured very imprecisely (note the large standard errors in

the investment equation), and seems to be somewhat sensitive to the

specification (compare the first-differenced results)

     The magnitude of the implied association between leverage and

investment in Table 3 can be interpreted in the following way: suppose a

financial restructuring occurs which increases the long-term debt of the

firm by the size of the capital stock (LB/K          1.0). In the year of this

event and the two years following, the total reduction in the

investment-capital ratio will be 0.05 (the sum of the three coefficients in

column 1 of Table 3) and in the R&D-capital ratio it will be 0,018. At the

mean levels of these variables (0.11 and 0.038 respectively) these are

enormous effects, implying reductions in the rate of investment of the order

of 50 percent. Note that the percentage reduction in both types of



variables in the regression (such as the market value-book value ratio), the
estimated coefficients of those variables will be biased. One possible
solution is to estimate the model

            —         +
                          it                       (where Oy. —

rather   than

     yit —       +
                     it + Eit
where i indexes firms and t indexes years of data on each firm. o. is the
"permanent" firm investment rate, y is the rate of investment for firm i
in year t, and            are the various independent variables.



                                            11
investment is rho sane (the elasticities arc tIc same, so there is no bias

toward rott:ng R&D rather than shorter-term irvestrent,

       Before   leaving this topic, I briefly sunnarize the results of other
researchers     concerning the aftermath of aoquisitions. Lirhtenberg and
Siegel (l990a) look at a very large sample of ownership changes at the
plant level, which include LBOs (abou' 13 peroent of the sarple) and
acquisitions, both hostile and friendly. Central Office employment is
reduced by If perrent after charge, produotion employment by only 5
percent, leading ro substanrial inoreasee in Total Parrot Productivity
post-change     as in the LW) sample alone.      Th important finding for present
purposes    is that P&D employment growth is sustained ir, the face of
substantial reductions in ron-productic etrlcyment.
       Healy, Palepu, and Ruback (1989) look at the 50 largest mergers for
1979 to 1983, and find that producti"ity improves, labor costs fall, and

investment and R&D rates are maintained; there are 33 R&D-performing firms

in   their sample. This work also documents the increase in leverage around
the time of the merger. but does not distcngnrsh. between hostile and
friendly acquisitions.
       Unlike   the previous studies, the interesting study by Bhsgst,

Shleifer,    and Vishny focuses on hostile takeovers, whether LBOs rt not,
They find that hostile takeovers ultimately end up allocating lines of
businesses to other firma in the industry, is other words, the raider is
acting as    a temporary broker who assists the movement of assets into a

higher-valued     use. The shareholder gains from such activities are
accounted    for by   the   following factors: 1) tax savings, although they

find   that previous results may be ar overestirare since the debt incurred
in these transartions tends to ho paid down quickly; 2) employment layoffs,

                                            12
particularly white collar: accounting for 11-26 perceot of the premium; 3)

in the oil: gas, and timber industries, cuts in investment seem to have

been an important source of gains: but they could not find evidence of

inveatment cuts in other industries.



3. Industrial Sectors.

      One way we might be able to learn sooething shout the interaction

between corporate restructurogs and long- term investment is by exsminstion

of the differences scross industries which use different technologies. That

is, industries in the manufacturing sector vary in the length of time it

tskes to develop s new product or process in wsys which are intrinsic to

their technology and we csn make use of this fact to develop insights into

the chsnges in investment strategies induced by corporate restructuring. In

this section of the paper I exsmine two questions: first, in which

industries did substantial LEO end leveraging activity occur, end second,

how do the investment regressions presented in Table 2 vary across

industries. To do this, I divide the renufacruring sector into four groups

of industries, guided by the Chandler (1991) triage into high, stable, and

low technology sectors ond en informal assessment of those industries which

are   likely to have long horizons for project development, end those which
can move more quickly.
      The industrial sectors are the following: 1) High technology consists

of Phermaceurirsis (excluding Soap, Toiletries, and Cosmetics), Computing

Equipment, Electrical Machinery, Electronics, Aircraft end Aerospace, end

Instruments. 2) Low technology is Food, Textiles, Lumber, Furniture, end

Paper, and Miscellaneous Manufacturing (which includes leather, toys,

musical instruments, etc.). The third end fourth groups consist of
Chandler s stable tech--elegy sector plea the ron-pharmaceutical component of
the Chemical   industry.   1 incude the latter in this group both because it
apcaart t elr'ng wit the Petroleum Refining industry, and because its R&D
spending patterns are closer to the stable technology than the high
technology   incuatries, Thus the final rwo groups of industries are 3)

Stable Long Horizon, which consists of Chemicals, Petroleun, Primary Metals,

fngines and Construction Equipment, Hon-electrical Machinery, and

Autrmcbilea (excluding rotor vehtcle parts); and L Stable Short Horizon,

which consists of Rubber and Plastics, Stone, Clay, and Class, Fabricated

Meals, Soap, Toiletries, and Ceecetirs, and Mtot "chicle Parts.

      In Table 3. I show the distribution of Levetoged Suyouts and large

leverage   increases by these sectors, Thu   temlts era very revealing:

First,   relative to the size of the industry firms with stable short horizon
or   low technology ace fat more likely no undergo an LEO than the others.

this may be partly due to the fact that these firms are also slightly

smaller than those in the ether sector 'except fec some young firma in the

high technology sector). However, this fact is very supportive of the idea

that leveraged buyeuts requite a low variance in cash flow and investment

strategies in order to be profitable.

       In addition to the 76 positively identIfied LEOs in my sample of firms,

there are 148 transactions in which a firm is taken private through means

which are net specifically identified in my seucces as leveraged buyouts.

These are generally smaller firms (they average 2800 employees pet firm, in

contrast to LSOa, which average 9600 employees per fine) and probably



115ee hall ,l491c) lot tore detail on data constnetton. The LEO sample
ccnsistc pnlt;tily uP these firms specifically identifieC by Kaplan (19BPs,
1989b) ne LeL: a"d Po'laen (3989) as leveraged buyouta.



                                        14
represent smaller transactions of the same type as an LEO. I show the

totals for these firms plus the LEOs (all going private transactions) in the

third panel of the table. They are clearly quite similar and only reinforce

the result: although only 36 percent of manufacturing employment is the

stable short horizon and low technology sectors, 83 percent of rhe

employment in firms which went private during the period is in rhese two

sectors. In addition, these firms are even less R&D-intensive than the LBDs

alone, For the U.S. manufacturing sector as a whole, R&D investment per

employee averages two thousand 1982 dollars; for rhe firms which were taken

private between 1977 and 1987, R&D investment per employee was five hundred

1982 dollars in the year or two before the transaction.

     The second fact of interest is that stable long horIzon firms are

more than rwice as likely as firms in the other rhree sectors to undergo

huge leverage increases, g, unlike the other sectors, the firms for which

this occurs are almost as R&D-intensive as the crher firms in the sector.

This fact suggests that the pressure to restrucrure is not uniform across

sectors but is concentrated on sectors where icvesrmant is necessarily

long-term owing to its size or complexity, and where the technology is not

rapidly changing (in fact, rhe well-known "smokestack" industries).

     Table 4 reinforces rhis view. It shows a simplified version of the

regressions presented in Table 2 for each of the four sectors and for the

manufacturing secrcr as a whole. The hypothesis that the coefficients are

rho same for all secrets is rejected at conventional levels of significance

(see the F-statistics shown in the table). A maser reason for rejection of

equality fur bcrh types of investment is the difference across sectors in




                                     15
lnvertnet 'rI-avior fllowing ircraaser in I n.--nge:" fires ir the tsb1e
techrr log; r c rs psrticulsr those n ng bcriron rnA,r tries.
exoerierc -    rger dec15 ties in 5 nvests ent t5an fi-ns it the hish or low
tachro r gv renters   The higher Ic ccl of fir err isl test-r'crirg a'-riviry it.
these re.' re is therefore rssociated 'J:t dcclinas Sn inves0ret wItch are
1r Icr ocr s-nol be predicted snlaly on the hens of the rantfaernting
c-no tot ae a w ole; in short, the psn-loverage inrestrant cuts seem to heve
ban psrriculsrly directed et the stable technolosy sector in general, cod
he long horiron segment in per onlar
       Or the other hann. t'-e o'erltnes in R&1 fa:l-nwing rrcreeses in 1eersge
sra nearly the same ptoporricnall-- and are lorra-nir '-I rs. sectors whore
R&D    is rslstively larger shsre of In--°otment, I no ry     -t that   pg'n


proxies   for long term investment Sr appears that overeir such investment is

nor taking quite as big a hit as total invesrmen. I' is vary important ro

remember, however, that the outstanding chsracteristir of R&D spending

perrerns within the firm is their sb gishness bo the fare of any kind of

ohsnge: note the coefficient of Ispoc? RgD expendit-res - w.oich is nearly

ore,    and explains ninety percert of the variance in R&D expenditures across

t'rss   all by itself. In view of this gonersl slowness to adjust, the
d' '-ltnes in R&D spending following ir noses in dah loom --cry large.



 Lgltboogh rhe regressions could just es we:: be measuring increases in
investmer' following decresses in 1mg tore debt, the results will in fact
be dorinated by the consequerces of increased debt, since eighty percent of
these urns experience an increase ir deb Sney given      year. I checked the
result by 'o' mating the regression wit0 dIfferent roefftcients allowed for
increases r-° decreases in long-term debt. ,.nd     d that the coefficients
were insignIficantly different frrr earh other, a; oh the ooefficien' for
investmont . o. nges fellowing increcses fn debt sbig ny Icrger in absolute
value.
4, Case Studies.                                    -




     The case study evidence, which consists of a few large transactions,

tends to support the findings of the large-scale empirical studies.3 Thete

are two major classes of transactions: the first is mergers between highiy

related latge firms, which are usually followed by no change or an increase

in R&D; the second consists of major increases in leverage or a leveraged

buyout induced by the threat of hostile takeover. These are generally

followed by cuts in R&D spending.

     In the first group are several transactions in the petro-chemical

industry:   1) CD. Searle was acquired by Monsanto in 1987, after which R&D

was supported at the previous level with more emphasis on basic research.

2) Celanese was taken over by Hoechst in 1987; this firm was more willing to

engage in long-term R&D. Although Hoechst is a foreign firm, the laboratory

in the United Stares remained fairly independent. 3) Stauffer Chemical was

taken over by Chesebrough-Ponds in 1985, This was followed by a hostile

takeover by Unilever in 1987; although the company was disbanded, the

previous level of R&D was apparently maintained in the remaining divisions.

4) Conoco was acquired by Dupont Chemical in 1982. After the scquisrion,

R&D for the parent firm increased in amount and as a percent of sales.

     Outside the perro-chemical indusrry,the other main acquisitions in this

group are the Ceneral Electric acquisition of RCA in 1987 (the main R&D

laboratory, the Sarnoff Laboratory was donated to SRI, alrhouh CE

maintained s contract with the laboratory) , and the Phillip Morris

acquisition of Ceneral Foods in 1985, which was followed by a rebuilding of



1My primery sources for this evidence are Miller (199Ca, 199Db) and Fusfeld
(1987) plus testimony at a July 1989 Hearing of the Srience, Research, and
Technology Subsommitree of House Committee on Scenre, Space, and Technology
on Corporate Restructuring and R&D,


                                      17
P&D. These .cquisitirns are characterized by t air highly related nature;
the   only accuisirion in this group which was followed by unambiguous
reductions inh&t a the moat "crelared of then the merger of Signal (the
electronicraer space industry) with Allied Chemioal in 1985, This merger
was follova? y the disbandment of a new venture group and cuts in corporate
level R&D :tcugh overall R&D may not have dropped.
       The a cond group of rransartions leveraging or LEO   as   a defense
against   a rstile takeover, is dominated by transactions in the Rubber

Tirc anb lt.ne, Clay, and Class industries: 1) Owens-Corning-Fihemglass

increased its leverage in 1950 as a defense against a hostile takeover

mttarp : this was followed by a reduction in R&D and a general shrinkage of

the firm. 5) USC Corporation increased its leverage in 1987, again as a

takeover defense, and shortened its R&D horizon from 5-6 years to 3 yesms.

3) Cwens-Illinois undsnent an LED in 1987 to avoid a hostile takeover; efter

the LBC, R&D was emphasized more. &) Coodyear Tire and Rubber Co. wes

threatened by James Cddsmith in 1987; it restructured by ds-diversifiration

and leverage and rcc',ced R&D.   5) Uniroyal Tire was threatened by Carl

lrahn in 1985- it responded by forming a joint venture with Coodrich to

develop tires, and cu' its own R&D spending as a result of this, but its R&D

Intensity was never hi1i. to begin with

       There are two perro-chemical companies in this second group: the first

is Phillips Petroleum, which leveraged in 198 as a defense against a

hostile   takeower attempt by Boone Pickens. The firm made substantial       cuts

 in R&D personnel, although nor out of line with the shrinkage of the rest of

 the firm. toort-tera payoffs were emphasized, although some analysts regard

 the former Jr"el of R&D as wasteful, and view the Phillips case as a good




                                       18
 example of the free cash flow theory at wotk.4 The second is Union

 Carbide, which restructured in 1985 to reast a takeover by GAF Corporation.

As part of the restructuring they sold an R&D facility; but moved the R&D

 into the divisions and did not reduce the intensity.

      Finally we reach the only two cases in the case study litetature which

seem to represent high technology being threatened by hostile takeovers:

Datapoint and the best-known, Polaroid Corporation. The hostile takeover of

Datapoint by Asher Edelman in 1985 appears to have been a technology

disaster; since the customers desetted the fitm owing to a lack of

confidence in the longtun viability of its technology. R&D and investment

were cut by almost fifty petcent, but this is one case where increases in

leverage were not the cause; the firm has also remained in the publicly

traded sector. Because the firm was shtinking, the R&D intensity did not

fall much, and in 1987 Datapoint paid it first dividend. It is not clear

whether to interpret this as a successful shrinkage of an unprofitable

technology company or a failure to invest where there were good

opportunities.

     In the case of Polaroid, aging technology and a high tate of R&D

expenditure with little apparent payoff made the firm vulnerable to hostile

takeover attempts. In 1986, leverage was increased as a defense, and R&D

intensity reduced slightly, although management claims that leverage was not

the reason for the reduction, It still is not clear whether the shift in

strategy has been successful.

     In reading over the descriptions of these restructurings (except for

Datapoint and Polaroid), one is struck by several facts: first, the



14cites? e.g.   ,   Jacobs.


                                     19
friardly cry r happened mainly bet-eon I i'ly related urns and were
aelcio'r I 11 wed by ruts in R&D invosroort. Second, the major roducrions in
P&D spendiro occurred when a firo war d-fcndirg against a hrstile taka'-ver
by iroreming its leverage. Third, the s.ajority of these evaorr rock place
in a few ind"snnias not those nornslly thought of as high teoi'nr logy.  In
fact, ihr lb n' a soars to be on what Chandler 'l99l calls 'stah.o
tachnoI.o" industries, and in particular, on tic cuhrct for whiol
teohnrlcgiral innovation is "process' oriented cr dirc tb toward cost
reduction rather than prodnrt development. This ia no" lbcly the area wi etc
one expects the strongest or -cI etition from foreign flb r vcth l'wer coss,
and one cannot help tI inking that the reason the p' s"rr tr restructure has
been dirroted towards these industries has soosthing to do with
over investment.
       When taken together with the atatistroal evidence of the previous
section,   the case study evidence is very suggestive. It appears that the

moat negative avert for investment is the defense of a hostile takeover,

which is usuali.v r"oompanied by a debt for equity swap. Takeovers as a

whole are frequenthy friendly, between firma in highly related

industries, and not followed by inveatmen" outs. The case study evidence is

also   consistent with the industrial srtor level results presented earlier:
the market for corporate control and the pro. sures for reduced investment
are centered on the stable technology sac t r, ' articularly on those

1'5Note that the oaae atudy evidence ignores a few industries, in particular
Food and Textiles, where substantial restruoturings lava occurred. ThIs is
because the focus of this evidence was the questr'n of R&D investment, and
little is done in those industries. What is in"rrratinl is the fact that
even when we focus on R&D-performing firms, the oas rtudias are do'sinated
by firms in medium or stable technology induatrieo ran "r than high
technology



                                       20
industries which are viewed as having "long horizon" technologies.

     It is clear that, at least for this sector, the raiders' view that the

previous investment strategies were misdirected and excessive was shared by

the capital markets (were this not true, the hostile bid would not have been

large enough to succeed in changing the firm's strategy). In this, they are

much like the l.BOs and M6Os documented by Kaplan (1989a, 1989b) and Smith

(1989), Unfortunately, unless one is s doctrinaire believer in efficient

markets, this evidence is not enough to persuade one that all the

investments foregone were unprofitable. "The path not taken" is difficult

to evaluate.

     The finding of reduced investment following leverage increases or

takeover threats is also consistent with two other pieces of evidence which

attempt to evaluate the frequently heard statement that the negative impact

of mergers and acquisitions extends to firms which ate not involved in them

(via a kind of demonstration effect).

     Ashmute (1990) studied the behavior of 37 potential targets (identified

by a financial analyst who published the candidates in Grimm's) relative to

a control group of firms who were not targets. He found that the targets

reduced their R&D and investment to sales ratios, and increased their debt

in the year following identification by Grimm's. The total effects were

shout 1.6 percent (s fall from 4 to 2.4 percent) in the R&D-sales tstio and

2.0 percent in the investment-sales ratio. It is not clear from his work

whether the larger increases in debt of the potential targets are a

combination of many firms with no change and a few with large changes from

resttuctucings.

     In a study which examines the effectiveness of shark repellents as a

test of Stein's (1988) model of managerial myopia, Muelbroek g al (1990)



                                        21
find fit's. decocese 1t&D intensity telani e t n1urtty ROt intensity
followirg .e passage of an aroitekeover .,d, ant 203 firms; If ncn-mfg)
This findin r& cots the tecrecirst prop ci cion that the cxi ster cc of
ptoteotion from takamver will ftee mate gets to make loog 'erm investments
alrhough    cugge ste that the redccf 'n in POP investment was patt of a
general p çfe of takeover defenses wnioh ma: include levetage iroreases
If it wm.        pirt   of an antitakeover strategy, we would expect to see no
change itL PIP i ohaviot undet t    null hypothesis. Unfortunately they do
rot ask w' ether the leverage       ne. firm increased or the same time so we
.annoP r11 wocncr thio reout it coreletely oonristnt with mine or




5. Discuss' r.
     The striking feature of the evidonce on mestruoturings during the
lPfOs is its oonsirtenoy, in sp5re of the obvious fa'"that every firm's
situation is "special" and thee we - apect substantial divergence in the
results from cccl, transaction. I hoC ic've it is now pornible to draw a few
simple concusis from the accuoruln'e" evidence. The first is that
changes in crnrcl rcur for a wide yen' - of rcasrns, and there it no
obvious asacciat4"n berwean the vest ma'oriny of them an" long-term
inveatmert strategies. At least in manufacturing, many of them appear to be
driven by synargies and relatedness between acq siring end acquired firma.
Whether hostile or friendly they are freenertly efficiency-enhancing at
least in the shots-term, in the sense that productivity increases, coats
fell and profItability rises following the trar:cctoon. They do not
ohoessaril lead to cuts in investment strategies of any kfnd, although they


                                         22
    may involve some needed redirection

         Particularly in the case of hostile
                                                  takeovers the evidence
                                                                             suggests
    mismanagement of assets, excessive
                                            diversification and
                                                                  possibly   an
   inability or unwillingness of the
                                         existing management to break impLicit or



                                                      .
   explicit contracts with labor
                                    or other stakeholders in the firm am the
   motivation rather than
                             managerial myopia              Of course,   for many
   acquisit05 especially friendly
                                        ones, the driving force is simply that
                                                                                       the
   sum is worth more than the
                                 parts. Here I would cite
                                                              my O results        on
  mergers (Hall l988a and 1990b),
                                     Lichtenberg and Siegel on
                                                                  oershjp changes,
  Bhagat, Shlejfer and Vishny
                                  on hostile takeovers and
                                                               many others.
       On the other hand, massive
                                     changes in financial structure
                                                                         Possibly
  induced by threats of takeover
                                    do appear to be
                                                      accompanied by reduced
   investment of all kinds; this
                                    is documented both in
                                                            my regressjo0 results
  and by several case studies.
                                   This fact also holds for
                                                              financial
 restructuring5 accompanied by control
                                            changes (such as L.BOm and
                                                                         MOs), but
 in this case the extreme
                             nature of the transaction
                                                          mitigates against it
 being used in industries where
                                   long-term investments in innovation are
 appropriate

      Although this relationship between
                                              increased debt levels and reduced
 investment exists for all
                             industries, it is Particularly
                                                               Strong in what
Chandler calls the "Stable
                              Technology sector and the Petro_chemical
 industry. In fact, the major hostil5
                                        takeover events in
                                                           manufacturing have
taken place Primarily in only a few industries: Petro.chemical
                                                                  Rubber, and
Stone, Clay, and Glass. The
                              cost-based nature of innovation
                                                               strategies in
these industries suggest that
                               increased foreign competition from lower cost
producers has been the driving force
                                      behind this wave and lends
                                                                  support to




                                       23
Jensen' a i  cash flow theory in' r roeaoio of tea' ruoturing,
                                                                      in many
                                     It d to- —cuity ration nrc'trted
    (Th.y race these large (note ses
                                                                  been
                                       ae' to this quesrirn has
eaoufatu C g firnr? One pcssb a ens
                                             or, work by Blair and Liten (19901:
we1isumoar' red by Blair (99(.drawiop                             and the
tax ircen.i'    (debt is a theper rcur"e of finar.ca than equity)
                         with re cash flow have always made it attractive
 aganoy crc ' associated
                                rarticulsrlv when invertors face better
 to aubstour' debt for equity.
                                                                  Financial
 inveatr'--opportanitiea "han nh firms whose shares they own.
                                    during the 198Cc made this substitution
  inn"'vati    c (e.g. junk bands
                                                         edventageous:C? however,
                              dot of 1981 made it tore
  easIer an the Tax Reforo
                                                                     did obey arise
                                      innovationo unexplained. Why
    at :O5' s "be. origin of these
                                       Blair st7wa that froe 1980 onward the
  Cur-0
         '-he eigrties and not before?
                                                     below the real cost
  net re"irr. en capital in manufacturing has fallen        above it for thirty
              by bond returns), after being eubs'entielly
   (measured
                                                cash within the manufacturing
                        is a clear signal that
   years prict. tic
                                                       than invested, and she
   sector should -    returned to shareholders rather
                                                                               in
                                                  for financicl restructuring
    arguea thot ic       to an increased pressure
                                   by forcing them to face the reel (externel)
    order to tie oc'.agrs' hands
                                                        (iorernel) cost.
                             than the artificially low
     cost of capita] rather
                                                                    which we
           Thin ergo—an" indies that the financial restructurings

                                                          there iS another fector:
              the   the petrole-wo refining industry,
                    case nf                                        R&D
    L6tn
    much of the inveonnent activity
                                    in this industry, particularly
                                                              of oil reserves
                              the exploraticn cod development to think of this
     investment, is related to activities. There is some reason                   we
     tether than ranufarturing                      of future world oil prices;of
                        driven by the expectations
     as a special case the s"cial return (at a  national  level)  to this type
     may believe that                                        necessarily for the
                                the private return, but not
      investment is higher than 0 he manufacturing sector.
      same reasons as the rest                                   (2990) fcc a
                                       end Schnles and Wolfeon
      "1See Sobippec and Snith '118prelative tax cetee on debt and equity in the
      discussion of the chenga. in and t(eic effect on leveraged buyont eotivity.
      IsBI and 1986 Tax Befcco Oo"o

                                               2'
  ohaerve and the investment reductions associated
                                                         with theo, ate hoth

  sysproms of an underlying cause: high real interest rates
                                                                   The onlprit is
  not the restructuting
                              g, but the shift in rela: iea pticee wI i.J. eee-!
  it.    Although we may find isolated cases of the
                                                       a parent eliminatIon of
 profitable investment strategies, for the most par those which have

 disappeated do not have a high enough expected
                                                      prufitability in the current
              .
 economic envrronjsent 13
          -




        This is a persuasive argument and
                                            many economists agree with its
 essential points (cites this volume?, Winter 1991), but      it raises

 intetesting questions and suggests further avenues for
                                                             research. First, why
 did the net return to capital in
                                    manufacturing start falling? Is it solely
 because of increased foreign competition? Or
                                                   has a failure to invest in the
 pesr driven it lower? Second, perhaps the increased
                                                           cost of capital alone
 can account for a shift toward restructuring end
                                                       away from investment in
 some industries, without appealing to a simultaneous      fell in the expected
 terorn to investment (or marginal product of capital).

        Taken together with the cost of capital
                                                  story, my findings that
restructuring pressures and reduced investment 5t8 concentrated
                                                                      in certaIn
industries, in particular those with stable technologies,
                                                               suggest rh0r
further research should be directed at the
                                              question of whether toe

cost of capital or expected return to investment in
                                                         these industries can
help explain why they have experienced greater
                                                   pressure. Blair ar,d Sohary
(1991) have begun research on this question, but their
                                                            results etc still
preliminary.


18The cost of capital is
                          addressed in more derail by several authors in this
volume (Molkiel, Fearer and Luhrman, - - .). Also
                                                  see McCauley end Zimmer
(1989) for a more derailed discussion of the impact
                                                      of the cost of capital
on long-term investments.


                                       25
     Before leaiil ca.s tnpi: 'ot Sc?" tt" t. engnaslse again a
question whiil the sisteng evidstc'e ices act a"swet ,,5 Froot, Fetold, and
S'rin this volume' highligot, a roict arsane" 'in the underi"vastnent
dbate is t t    asyratris   micros ticu between managers and shareholders
 reds tc nod' tinvestaent in ords" "'c       higher current earnings. This
argument is flasely linked to the hostile takeover de'nate: as I have argued
in Hall lcb' , if the ncrket is myopic in this way takeovers will be

induted which wcnld not      velue.oawiriring in a perfect infcaticn world,
ard in addition itvestr:ert may he reduced or redirected to prevent
taketvet". This can cc.ur "er :n til absen"e "f managerial yctia. and is
in fst the princi7al atgute.nt for a pulicy response to increases in hce"ile
takeover s'tivity.
       The difficulty    t empirical researchers who use publicly available
data   to investigate this hypothesis: is chat the "information gap" between

managers end sharehc data is surely only a. .ctge as the degree of

 undistlusad   mica::' ta,. that   is. t5 u   i'   nm mcnt   measures easily available

 to   us arc ptecisci at 'se for wntch. 'pan b" ncnt will be unable to conceal
 from investors redu luco tuat are :'ndmna,,kan "a increase current earnings.
 Therefore.., our con-ca a. c' mId be vi" r 'directions of investment toward
 shorter horirca s,-.nc mtl acs with so i: things at sk" mping on maintenance or
 canceling long "'at, 1 hD p"" acts. hut these are precisely the kind of
 behavior which ny be difficult f. t ut 5.5 teseartheta, to see, The
 implication of i is argus'ent is that while the failure to find
  substantial invec"nert and lIRE declines in general following cn':potate
  ra structuring activity end th° wall.dccumsnted positive announcenent effects
  fat both kinds of mnveatcant te.p., 'Joniridge 1988) may be teassuting,          it
  will be necessary to look mare clcsniywi"hin specific firms before

                                              26
definitively rejectfng this particular market myupia argument.



6. International Comoarisons.

       We   have leatned some important iacts about the effects and rocivat t
of resrructurings from the research reported here and elsewhere. The
results have more often been positive than negative for the firms involved,
and   have frequently confirmed the hypotheses of those who argue. that the

market      for corporate control is an important discplino device for managers
in the United States. However, the survey of the evidence in sections 2
through 4 of this paper baa had very little to say about the econoxyvide
effects of the recent wave of restructurings. That is, even if the
redirection of firm strategies and investment has been profitable for the
firms involved, we are still not sure whether there might be a better paeh
to    long term productivity gains.

        Thus, the discussion n the previous section does not imply that we

should      be sanguine about our current economic structure and its promotion ci
long- term investment; besides the obvious macco-economic problems which
have led to high interest rates and the inherent, subsidy of debtte lativete
equity in our tax sys ten., it is conceivable that the atmosphere of
insecurity which attends the market fur corporate control in thta cnuntey
has a more negative effect on long- term investment strategiea than has heen
found in the studIes to dote.
        In any came, even if we do not believe that the recent wave of
corporate restructuring has been rho          e of investment declines, t,e.rc
remains the question of whother out market system for corporate control is
capable of generating the correct level of long-term investment from the
poirt    of view of society as a wnole. 19 The existence cf an ac' [we market for
corporate     control        true well hefore 1981 ray already have created
                        which was

a climate whore such irvestacuts are diacouragcd ur nut valued.' This
argument      leads me to nvesriga te the experience of other loegc indusrial
oconomies

        In this section of rho paper, I look briefly at the organization of the
corker for corporate control in several other countries (Japan, Cerrany,
France, and the U K,) in order to evaluate alternative systems icr achievtng
t:,e   goal   of a profitable and productive industry Roughly speaking, chase
countries (including the United States) can he divided into wo groups: the
US, and the U.F. , where takeovers perform a major funcicu n the
allocation of corporate control: end Japan, Germany, and France, wherc

management discipline is not perceived as a major role of the stock marker

        A simple way to characterize the difference between the two systems

uses Hirschman'a (gfl)       exit/voice   dichotomy: in the U.S. and U.K.

shareholders who are dissatisfied with management's performance tend o sell

their shares, often to a higher bidder who may change the management team or

otherwise reorganize. That is, the shareholders "exit" when things dr'n't go

the way they want. In the Japan and German systems, and to a lesser extent.

the French, there are major shareholders (particularly banks and, in Japan,

other firms in long term relationships with the firm in questor) who tend



191n this connection, aee the recent paper by Foley and Lezoniok (1999),
which uses an endogenous growth model (a model where innovation sp1ls over
to other firms) together with market miapricing of innovative firms to show
that lower costs of takeover can lead to an equilibrium growth rate for
labor productivity which is lower than the one which would be assooiaed
with higher takeover coats.
      see the discussion in Hall (l990a), which cites Grilichea (1951),
Gookburn and Griliches (1987), Hall (1988b), Jarrell, hahn, and Mart
(1985),ond Woolridge (1988) for evidence that at least the stock market
appears to value R&D investments positively.


                                           28
to hold their shares for a long time, have seats on the aupervisory boards,

and use "voice' when they feel chat the management of the fira ia not

putsuing the right atrategy, ot when the fita ia in financial disttess.

    The evidence for thia diatinction ia in Edwards and Fischer (1991)

Edwards and Eisenbeis (1991), Franks and Mayer (1990), Kearer (1991), Mayer

and Alexander (1990), and Hoahi, Kashyap, and Scharfatein (1990). For

example, although the level of takeovers appeara to be almoar as high in

Germany and France as in the UK, the incidence of hostile takeovers (which

are generally more likely to be a form of management diacipline) is much

lower, as is the incidence of 1.aos.21 Franks and Mayer attribute this bcrh

to the fact that the regulations concerning the employment of msnsgemenr snd

others are stricter in Germany and to the fact that shareholders rights seem

to be somewhat less in both France and Germany.

     Franks and Mayer also cite substantial institutional differences

between the three countries, centering on the role of banks in Germany or

monitoring orgsnimsrions. Banks have significant shareholdings in other

corporations, also hsve voting rights associated with the bearer shares of

private investors, and they sit on the supervisory boards of

Akreinzesellschsfts (German corporations or AGs for short) .   This   role for

banks in the monitoring of firm behavior is paralleled in Japan, according

to several writers (Hodder 1955, Hoshi, Ksshyap, and Schsrfstsin 1990).

     The conclusion which Franks and Moyer draw from their study is thor the



21The U.K. has experienced the same explosive growth in LEG activity as the
United States, with the total annual value of transactions rising from less
than 100 million pounds before 1980 to 3.7 billion pounds in 1988. This
tremendous growth has been achieved with a somewhat lower use of debt than
in the United States. The timing of the increase raises interesting
questions shout the tax motivation story for bROs since the U.K. has nor
experienced changes in the tax low at the same time as the U.S.



                                      29
use of takeovers as a means of tranaferrit g crporate control may be costly.
both in the resources used et the time of takeover and in the scorrrerr
thinking which they claim it engenders     They also argue that cbrsea ir
owtership undermine the ability of firms to sustain a reputation for
1mg-term relationships." Alternative institutions for monitoring tie
investment strategies of firms may he preferred to the conrincove uc on
implied   by the takeover market because they are less costly with rerecr to

the development of long-tero relationships and investments.

     This conclusion is supported somewhat by the results in Fe' hi, Mae,

and Scharfsrein (19ff, 1990), who show that investment ct th f'rm loyal in

Japan is resprrs'vm to liquidity (crab flow) wlco the f5rr J a not ha e

longrun   banking relationship or does not belong to a t1ru,     but not

otherwise. They interpret this to mean that banks with large shareholdngs

in firms are capable of monitoring them more closely than onrsde investors

and that this mitigates the asymmetric information problem that crises when

firma seek external finance, They support this with a finding that firms in

keireraus ar with strong ties to a main bank invest and sell more than orer

firms when they are in a financially distressed stare.

     It is important to realfze that although Japan end Germany hcve in

common the absence of a strong market for corporate control, the nature of

the relationships between firms and their banks seem to be somewhat

different, Edwards and Fischer (1991) doc'erenr the apparent weakness of the

supervisory role which banks play for large German firma: although they

hold proxy rights for roughly half the shares in the 100 major AGe the

supervisory board typically meets only twice a year, and the banks have only

10-20 percent of the seats on the board, in addition, unlike Japan, barks

era not a major source of finance for firms;    Mayer (1990) reports the


                                      30
following shares of bank lending in the net financing of nonfinanoial

enterprises 1970-1985: UK 7g. Germany 121, US 24.2, France 37.3, and Japan

5Q422 There the German banks appear to be most important is in the lending

to and monitoring of small and medium-aired firma (Mayer and Alexander

1990) .    The moat important feature of the system may not be the actual

monitoring performed by the banks, but the institutional features (for

example, employee representatives have 50 percent of the seats on the

supervisory boards, removal of the supetvisory board requires approval of 75

percent of the shareholders, and managers are appointed for five year terms)

of the German system, which tend to make hostile takeovers difficult (and

very uncommon)

      It   would be quite interesting to repeat the Hoshi, Kashyap, and

Scharfstein teat of differences in liquidity constraints with data on German

firms; although the keiretau institution does not exist in Germany,

variation in the extent of bank'nvo1vement on the supenisory boards of

firms does (Edwards and Fischer 1991). 1 am unaware of any current research

of this kind, although there has been similar work on the U.S. and U.K. ara

which attempts to measure the importance of liquidry constraints for

investment at the firm level by olasaffying firma into financing regimes

based on their dividend and new share issue policies (Hall 1991 for the

U.S., Bond and Meghir 1990 for the U.K.). Although both sets of authors

have rejected investment models which do not incorporate liquidity

constraints with their data, this work is still too preliminary and fragile



22Mayer (1990), Table 12.1. I have reproduced some of these figures in
Table S of this paper, along with some of my own for U.S. and Japanese
manufacturing. Hat financing is shown as a proportion of capital
expenditures and stock building. The data are from the GEGO Financial
Statistics and have been adjusted to make them as coeparoble as possible.


                                        31
to be relied on.

      In spite of the well-dcoumentcd diffcrercre in ti,e role of books in

monitoringfirm behavior across differen" ne"Lnal institutional atrurtur
the moat etriking feature of these irtornational oomparison studies La toe
importance   of retained earnings as a   aouroe   of finanoe for invesment, and
the rolative unimportanoe of Thng'term bonds (exoept in the U.S. nere a

third of the debt ie honda). to Table 3, I have assembled sore nua'tera

(herb from my own data cod from those of other researchers) which desori're

"he marginal sources of finance in four countries for the nonfinanclal

oorprrate seotor as a whole, and for the approximately 100 largest

msn'faoturinq firra in eaoh o"urtry.

      My st"erp"" cn—o'te these numbers for Japan and the United States

revealed that no-'comparabiliry in a000unting methods across oountniee may

render this kind of comperison extremely difficult to perform. For example,

I am unable to determine gross debt and equity changes from the Japanese

data available to me, which does not identify a full statement of charge in

financial position In the U. S. data for most firms, the net sources and

uses of funds are not equal to rero, even approximately which meats there

are   some sources or uses overlooked in the data. Also in the United Statce,

a large fraction of net finsnce does not cove from any of the conventLonal

sources, bun roves from the net sale c invstoent and plant and equipment,

as well as fror the "other' category cf rho sources of funds, This fraction

has increased between the seventies and the eighties, another symptom of the

restructuring and divestitures which have taken place.

      Besides the importance of retained earnings in all countries, the

second feature which stands out in Table 5 is tha" for the non-financial

corporate sector as a whole, the pattern of financing In the U.S. looks more
like Japan than the U.K.: the United States and Japan rely far mete heavily

on debt then do the U.K. and Germany. If true, the faot that average

incremental financing prcportions do not reveal a dichotomy between the U.S.

and U.K. on the one hend, and Jepen and Germany on the other suggests that

the story is not a simple one: were it simply the case that U.S. firms

could not finance investment externally, we would expect the financing

proportions to differ, but in fact, the U.S. looks more like Japan, except

that a larger proportion comes from new equity rather than new debt.2 For

differences, we must lock to the uses of funds, rather then the sources.

Here i em hampered by the incompleteness of the Japanese date, although the

German date does suggest that fcc less of the money goes to finance

acquisitions then in the U.Kjhayer and Alexender 1990).

     To sum up, the international evidence in this section, although

incomplete, puts us back where we started: there is s strong feeling that

long- term investment strategies are difficult to implement in an environment

where managers fear losing their jobs or firms if they experience bad draws

for a couple of years, but little hard evidence, The primary evidence that

there is a better way is Japan, but it does not seem realistic to argue that

if shareholders rights were reduced in the United States without changing

anything else that this would have a significant effect ott investment

strategies. There are surely other reasons why Japan is different.




23         .         .            .
  Another place of evrdence on thrs question Is the payout ratio, the
fraction of rerodivdend operating income which is paid out as dividends
Hayer end Alexander report that this number averages 13 percent for large
German non-financial corporations and 31 percent for the U.K. In my U.S.
sample, the number is almost exactly the same as Germany's.


                                      33
7 fje; lications and Foture fgsearrt
     The evidence assembled bere tells us that if corporate restruc:'rIub
discourages investment,   it   dces so by iecreesirrp tbe cost cf fundr :c r,   fir
in order tc force eansgers to pay out cash, sod not by e ctsrpe f conuill
alone. That ts, to the extent we ace able to judge fror the observaile
investment   strategies, many restructurings in   the U. S. rornufarcrrng   so tcr

in the last ten years have had no impact on investment atrategioc while sore,

particularly in the stable technology sector, have ci early been induced by a

twin desire to use a cheaper source of finance (debt) ar,d reduce iresc.€rt

sectors which have become unprofitable ir' the face of high cepttsl cm

Such sn sction   i5 rrivstely   rstional in a world with high interest rres end o

subsidy of debt rel,llv to equity. The question remains, is ft roctsi1y

rsrionsl Are there politically acceptable (fessible) policies which would

inhibit such behavior?

     T do not believe that the evidenoe on investment horizons snd corporate

restruoturing implies or justifies speoifio strong policy reoommendstions.

The market for corporate control is an important msnagement discipli'k' d'v',ce

and the reduction of shareholder rights by antitskeover legislstion widen

the substitution of mn alternative supervisory mechanism would be likely m

allow firms to diverge even further from the private (or public)

value-ssxirizlng path. It does not seem believable thst managers, as r

are more likely to   inoorporste   the social welfare funotion in their cIsc-org

thsn ahsr1rolders. To put it another way, although it may be the case that

the Jap-nose or German system of oorporate governance results in longer

investment horirona, I do not think that halfway messurea or partial moves       in
that direction would be successful in producing suct o result, a-rd a whoisssle

installation of the entire bank monitoring end fnterlcrking corporate oyster


                                         34
in the United States is simply not feasible fot complex histoticel, legal end

political reasons, The one institutional change that might succeed is a

relsxetion of the testtictions on shateholdings by banks (see Edwatds and

Eisenbeis, this volume).

     On the othet hand, this paper (end othets) have pointed to two features

of the U.S. economy which seem to have increased the incentives to increase

leverage and reduce investment in the recent past: the implicit subsidy in

the corporate tax system towards debt finance, end the level of interest rates

(or the cost of capital) during the nineteen-eighties. I think thet both the

modern theory of corporate capital structure and the evidence here suggest

thet the tax effect will tilt the firm toward the use of more expensive

external finance for investment, end the interest rate effect will cut both

the level and the horizon of that investment. Policies which change these

orices, tether then institutional structures, ere mote likely to succeed in

lengthening investment horizons. It is not that institutional structures are

unimportant, but they etc extremely diffcuit to modify in ways whose results

ste predictable, end without incurring substantial transactions costs. In any

case, therm is evidence that the Japanese and Oerman systems of corporate

finance and governance are moving towards ones that look more like outs

(Kester 1991, Hoshi, Keshyap, end Scherfsten 1988, Hodder 1985), which

suggests that some sort of hybrid system is better, at least on evolutionary

grounds.

     There are several areas in which future research on this topic should he

conducted, end questions which should be probed more thoroughly. With the

existing date, it should be possible to refine the investigation of major

leveraging




                                      35
events, now that these have been dentiiU? as associated wi& the aajorit
of investment declines: first, the iden'ifiraticr of such everos and 1e
causes   (such as takeover threats) of    em   ould be greatly rnprcve
Second, the consequences of the red.zctions in fnvastnent or other
redirections ought to be examined over a lorger term than has beer d'ne o
date; we now should have evaileb] e over five years of data for
restruotorings during the 1984-1986 period.
       A second area of investigacion centers on the results in Tables    and 4
of this paper, which call for a more detailed industry-level investigation
of certain sectors which seem o have experienced °he most presa':rc. from
restructuring does the cost of capital approach xplain what ha-pe-.er ir
these se-tots? Are the surviving firms strorger and what has ]apted to
their investment strategies? To the extent posstble this reseerch should
also   address the "unobservable investment" question in more detail.

       Finally, I think the empirical evidence on international comparisons

has barely scratched the surface of the question to date. Neither tie

sources and uses of funds comparisons, which seem to suffer from aevere

measuretent difficulties nor the role of banks in monitoring firms (ortprra

the conclusions in Franks and Mayer 1990 with those in Edwards and Fisccec

1991 concerning the role of banks in Germany) seem to be completely

understood. With the exception of Noshi, Kashyap, and Scharfatein on Japac.

little has neen done to relate this work to investment strategies aoroas

companies at the level of the individual firm, Further work of this kind

would shed more light on the question of the optital form of corporate

governance systems.




                                         36
                                     TABLE I
                                                                              *
       CORPORATE RESTRUCTURING IN THE PUBLICLY TRAGE MANUFACTURING SECTOR



             Total                   Employment (l000s) in
           Employment     Public      Foreign    Private
Year         (l000s)               Acquisitions               L&Os   Leveraging
77          20917.        66.0          1.3       10.4         0.6        30.7

76          21169.       191.8        46.9        17.9         0.0        22.5

79          21999.       311.3         11.9       15.5         1.3        58.7

80          21284.       152.8         24.8       1.6         13.6       150.4

81          20880.       310.0         15.6      42.4         19.4       142.6

82          19806.       186.2         38.3      49.6         35.2       256.0

83           20138.      298.0         0.0        14.9        33.1        33.9
84          20034.       188.0          2.2      104.7        93.5        73.6
85           19279.      382,7       111.4        52.1       132.9        146,9
86           18526.      656.3       190.5        84.1       172.6        116,1,


87           17898.      179.9       201,4        63.9       226.2        113.5


Total                   2924.3        644.4      457.0       128.9       1144.9

Average size
  (l000s employees)        6,6          7.6        2.6         9.6          6.5

*
 The sample is    all
                   firms on Standard and Poor a Compustat Primary,
Secondary, Tertiary Industrial, and Over-the-Counter Files for 1976 through
1987 whose SIC code is between 2000 and 3999.
**
   Leveraging firms are those whose increase in long-term debt in any one
year was greater than 100% of the sum of their debt and equity at the
beginning of the year.
                                       TABLE 2

                                INVESTMENT REGRESSIONS

                                      1977-1987

                                  14200 Observations


                      Ordinary Investment                      R&D Investment


Dep. Var.              1/K                                   R/Y            t(R/K)
Dep. Var.,          .404 (.008)     -.424 (.008)       .937 (.003)       -.094 (.008)
(S/K)               .75 (.06)                      -   .08     (.02)
4(5/K)                               1,59 ( 15                            05 C 03 /
(V/K) -           3.80 (.13)                       1.04 (.03)
(V/K) -z         -1 56 (.14)                       -.80 (.03)
8(5/K)                               4.46 (.15)                           .934 (031)

                         Leverage Changes for All Firms

(8B/K)            -5.55 (.38)      -10.42 (.39)    -1.71 (.08)           -2,07 (.09)

(88/K) -s          -.29 (.39)       -7.63 (.44)        -.16 (.09)         -.39 (.10)
(85/K)               .90 (.36)       -.76 (.38)         .12 (.09)         -.06 (.10)


        Leverage Changes for Acquiring Firma Post-Acquisition           (Relative

                    -.33 (.36)      -1.86 (.38)        - .06    (.09)     -.12 (.09)
Intercept

(48/K)            -2.18 (1,02)       1,54 (1.09)        .18 (.24)         1.08 (.28)
(88/K)            -1.33 (1.07)       0.91 (1.14)       -.04 (.25)          .23 (.30)

(85/K)            -2.62 (1.33)       1.10 (1.45)        .05 (.32)          .36 (.35)
F-star (414200)
 for acq. effects       9.01             6.00                  0.40             4.42

Standard error          8.35             8.93                  1.99             1.98


See the next page for nores and a description of the variables,




                                          38
TABLE 2, continued.

All regressions include year dusssies. The dependent variahle is measured
in percent (100 times the investment to capital stock ratio)   The numbers
in poreotheses are the standard errors of the estimated coefficients.

Varjhj Definitions:

     I - - Capital expenditures for the firm during the year.
     R - - R&D expenditures for the firm during the year, set to zero if
            immaterial
     S - - Sales for the firm during the year.
     V -- Market value of the firm (debt plus equity). V/K is Tobin's Q.
     B - - Long term debt of the firm, adjusted for the effects of inflation
            as described in Hall (199Cc).

All ratio variables have been trimmed to remove obvious coding errors. The
cutoffs used are approximately +/- three times the interquartile range of
the data, which are the following numbers:

     Variable    Mm         Max

     I/K         .005       2.0
     R/K        none        1.0
     S/K         .3        10,0
     V/K         .1        10.0
     B/K         .005       5,0
     tB/K       -5.0        5.0




                                     39
                                           TABLE 3

            LEVERAGING EVENTS IN MANUFACTURING BY INDUSTRY TYPE
                                       l977"1987
                     Mign Tech*       Stable Tech             Low      Tech     Total
                                   Long Nor, Short Nor,
                                   All Prma in 1982
Number of Firms         677          408             298          587          1970

Employment (lOGOs)     6507         6130            1750      5419            19806

R&D Expenditures      22525        14886            2181      2482            42073
  (Millions 82$)
                                  Leveraged Buyouts
Nunber of Firms               5        13              22           36            76

Employment (lOGOs)       46.5         42.7           272.0        367,6         728.8

R&D Exrenditure          63.8         37.2           285,8         71.2         458.0
   (Millious 82$)
Peroent Industry           0.7         0.7            15.5          6.8           3,7
  Employment
Percent Industry R&D       0.3         0.2            13.1          2.9           1.1
                                                                  **
                        All Going Private          Transactions
Number of Firms           21        43                 44          116           224

Employment (lOGOs)        61.7       125.3           370.5        569.7        1127.2
R&D Expenditure           81.7        69.0           351.3         95.5         597.5
  (Millions 82$)
Percent Industry           1,4          2.0           21.2         10.5           5.7
  Employment
Percent Industry R&D       0.8          0.5           16.1          3.8           1.4
                                  ueverage    Increases
Number of Firms            34          48              25           70           177

Employment (l000s)       260.1        640.6           74.5        153,7        1128 9
R&D Expenditure      525.8           1283.8           43.0         52.6        1905 2
  (Millions 82$)
Percent Industry       4.0             10.5            4.3          2.8           5.7
  Employment
Percent Industry R&D   2.3              8.6            2.0          2.1           4,5
The notes to the table are on the following page.




                                              40
TABLE 3 (continued>

*
 The divrsion of the manufacturing sector into High, Stable, and Low Tech
sectots follows the definitions of Chandler (this volume>. Using my (Hall
1990a> toughly two-digit classification, the sectors ate the following:

High Tech:            Pharmaceuticals (except Soap and Toiletries>, Elec.
                      Equipment, Electronics, Computing Equipment,
                      Aircrafr end Aerospace, Instruments.

Stable (Long Hot.>: Chemicals, Petroleum, Primary Metals, Machinery,
                     Autos and Transport Equipment (except parts>, Engines.

Stable (Short Hor.>: Eubber and Plastics, Stone, Clay, snd Class,
                     Fabricated Metals, Soap and Toiletries, Motor Vehicle
                     Parts.

Low Tech:             Food, Textiles, Lumber end Wood Products, and Misc.
**                                         .
  These are leveraged buyouts plus approximatery ISO transactions where a
firm was taken private without being identified in the data sources
specifically as a leveraged transaction. These are generally smaller
firms.

   A leverage increase occurs when a firm increases its long-term debt in a
single year by an amount which is 100 percent or more of the beginning of
year sum of debt plus equity.




                                      41
                                                       TABLE 4

                         INVESTMENT REGRESSIONS BY INDUSTRIAL SECTOR

                                                      1977-1987
                                          *
                          hign    Tech             Stable Tech                     Low Tech         Total
                                                Long Nor, Short Hot,

Nunber of
  Observatiocs              3914                 3383               1582             4422          13501

                                              Var, . Ordinary
                                                                            ** —
                                                                     Investment
                                   Dsp.

(I/K)1                   .418(016)            .362(019)           .239(023)        .288( .017)   .354(009)
(S/K)1               1.083(217)               .133(165) .741(238)                  .103( .126)   .4O6(086)
(V/K)1                   1.78(18)             2.45(,26)           2,43(35)         l.42( 23)      2.l8(1l)
(B1-54)/K1           -2,82(49)            -5.15(66) -3.97(73)                  -O.77(,54)        -2 81(29)
Std, Err.                11,2                   8.2                8.5               9,2           9,5

                                              F(45l344l)           5,3
%!.I after 3 SD.
  increase in B -28(5)                         -42(5)             -36(7)             -7(5)        -27(3)

                                   Dep. Var. — Research and Development

(K/K) -l                 .927(.007)           .952(.007) .965(.007) .977(005)                    .953(003)
(S/K)1
                     -
                         .252(.064)       -
                                              .032(.032)      -   .0l9(.015)   -   .031(,O1l) -.lOO(018)
(V/K)1                   .033( .056)          .083(.054) .052(.023) .081(,021)                   .083( O25)
(B -1 B 4)/K -   I   -1.55( .14)          -.743(.116) -.207(044) -.184(045)                      -.904(058)
Std, Err.                  3,33                 1.60               0.55              0,81          2,0!.


                                              F(45,l344l)          10.36
%AR after 3 S.D.
  increase in 8 -24(2)                         -24(4)             -13(3)            -19(5)        -27(2)



      sectors are defined in the                  notes    to Table 3,

**Th variables are defined in the notes to Table 2.

   The last row in each panel of the table gives the percent reduction in
investment which is predicted to occur in the year following a three year
increase in the debt o capital ratio which is three standard deviations
away from the mean (A B/K approximately unity).




                                                         42
                                      TABLE 5

                          SOURCES OF INVESTMENT FINANCING

               United States       United Kingdom       Japan   West Germany

                Gross   Sources:   Non-Financial Corporate Sector

Period     *       70-85              70-85             70-85       70-85
Ret, earn.         56.9               72.0              33,7        55,2
New debt           41.2               25.0              62.1        24.0
New equity          0.8               4.9                3.5         2.1
Other              -8.8               -2.0               0,7        18.6

                    Sources: 2fljflanca Corporate Sector

Period             70-85              70-85             70-85       70-85
Ret, earn.         85.9              102.4              57.9        70.9
New debt           34,6                5,4              41.3         9.0
New equity          1.1               -3.3               4,6         0.6
Other             -21.5               -4.4              -3.8        19.4

                    Gross    Sources: kgest      1Q.Q

Period             82-87              82-88                         82-88
Ret, earn,         51.5               58.2                          89.6
New debt           30.2               27.5                          2.2
New equity         10.1               14.3                          8.2
Other               8.1               NA.                           NA.
                                                           **
                            Sources: 3ggt 100 Firms

Period             82-87              82-88             82-86       82-88
Ret, earn.         79.1              112.9              50,9        137.9
New debt            3.2               -1.6              19.0        -27.8
New equity          3.1              -11.3              30,0        -10.2
Other              14.6               NA.               NA.         NA.

Notes:

*The definitions of the variables and the sources of the data are given
in the Appendix. The variables definitions vary somewhat across different
countries because of different accounting conventions. All variables are
shown as percentages of the total in any given coluimn.
**
  In the U.S. and Japanese data, these are the (approximatey) 100 largest
manufacturing firms. For the U.K. and German data, these are the 100
largest nonfinancial corporations.




                                            43
                        ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS


Prepared for the Harvard Business School-Council on
Competitiveness Conference on Corporate Time Horizons and
Investment, December 17-18, 1990, Harvard Business School,
Boaton, Mass. This is a revised version of the December 1990
draft, Useful suggestions and comments from participants at the
Conference on Corporate Time Horizons and Investment, especially
Alan Blinder, Robert Eisenbeis, Carl Kester, Jay Lorsch, Robert
Gibbons, Andre Perold, Michael Porter, and Jerenrj Stein are
gratefully acknowledged. Michael Porter's careful reading of the
manuscript was particularly helpful. The Harvard Business
School, the Council on Competitiveness, and the National Science
Foundation supported some of the work surveyed here, for which I
am very grateful, I also want to thank the Ecole Nationale de la
Statistique at de I'Administration Economique - Centre de
Racherrhe de l'Econometrie et de la Statistique (ENSAE-CREST) for
their hospitality while the paper was being revised,
                                 REFERENCES


     Altshuler, Rosanne. 1989. "A Dynamic Analysis of the Research and
Experimentation Credit". National Tax Journal XLI: 453-466.

     Ando, Albert, and Alan J, Auerbach. 1985. "The Corporate Cost of
Capital in Japan and the U.S. A Comparison". NEER Working Paper No. 1762.

     Ando, Albert, and Alan J. Auerbach. 1990.    The Cost of Capital in
Japan; Recent Evidence and Further Results"    NBER Working Paper No. 3371.

     Ashmore, David. 1990, "Examining the Effects of Takeover Pressure on
Research and Development Intensity". Harvard University Senior Honors
Thesis.

     Bernanke, Ben S. and John '1. Campbell, 1988.   "Is There a Corporate
Debt Crisis?".       1 (1988); 83-125,

     Bernheim, N. Douglas and John N, Shoven. 1989. "Comparison of the
Cost of Capital in the U.S. and Japan: The Roles of Risk and Taxes'.
Northwestern University, Stanford University, and NEER, Photocopied.

     Bernstein, C, and N. I. Nadiri.

     Bhagat, S., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny. 1990. "Hostile Takeovers in
the 1980s; The Return to Corporate Specialization." Brooklnz Papers
Economic Activity 1990(1): 1.72.

     Blair, Margaret Meodenhall, 1989. "A Surprising Culprit Behind the
Rush to Leverage." Ibe Brookinrs Review (Winter 1989/90); 19-26.

     Blair, Margaret N. and Robert E. Litan. 1990. "Corporate Leverage and
Leveraged Buyouts in the Eighties". In Shoven, John B. and Joel Waldfogel
(eds.),       Tasea,, and Corporate Restructurint, Washington, D.C.; The
Brookings Institution.

     Bond, Stephen, and Costas Meghir. 1990. "Dynamic Investment Models
and the Firm's Financial Policy." London; Institute for Fiscal Studies
Working Paper No. W90/17.

     Brenner, Merrill S.  1990. "R&D Cutbacks Come Before--Not
After- -Acquisition". Research-Technoloz" fld,ggment.

     Cockburn, lain, and Zvi Griliches, 1987. "Industry Effects and
Appropriability Measures in the Stock Market's Valuation of R&D and
Patents." NBER Working Paper No. 2465,

     Donaldson, Gordon. 1990. "Voluntary Restructuring: The Case of
General Mills." Journal    Financial Economics, forthcoming.


                                       44
     Edwards. J.S.S. , and Klaus Fischer. 1991. "Banks, Finance and
investment in Wast Germany since 1970." London: CEPR Working Paper No. 497

     Eisenbeis and Edwards. this volume.

     Foley, Duncan, and William Laronick. 1990. "Corporate Takeovers aod
the Growth of Productivity. Earnard College, New York. Dept. of Economics
Working Paper No. 91-01.

     Franks, Julian and Cohn Mayer. 199G. "Capital Markets and Corporate
Control: A Study of France, Germany, and the UK". snic Thflcv 10:
189-232.

     Friend, :rwin and Harry N. P. Lang. 1988. "An Empirical Test of the
Impact of Management Self-interest on Corporate Capital Structure".
of Finance 43: 271-283,

      Froot, Kenneth, Andre F. Perold, and Jeremy C. Stein. 1991,
"Shareholder Trading Prsctices and Corporate Investment Horizons." This
volume,

     Fusfeld, Herbert I. 1987. "Corporate Restructuring - What Impact on
U.S. Industrial Research?", gg.g.gch tgn&gRgag XXX (July-Aug): 10-17,

     Cerrler, Mark, and R. Glenn Hubbard. 1990. "Taxation, Corporate
Capital Structure, and Financial Distress". jgj
43-71.
                                                               çonoy      4:



     Crabowski, Henry G. and Dennis C. Mueller. 1972. "Managerial and
Stockholder Welfare Models of Firm Expenditures". ,gflg
Statistics   54: 9-24.
                                                              gjçg gnj
     Craetz, Michael J. 1989. "The Tax Aspects of Leveraged Buyouts and
Other Corporate Financial Restructuring Transactions".            February
6, 1989: 721-726.

     Oriliches, Zvi. 1981. "Market Value, R&D and Patents,"      gjjjc
Letters 7(no.2): 183-187.

     Grossman, Sanford J. and Oliver D, Hart. 1979. "Takeover Bids, the
Free-Rider Problem, and the Theory of the Corporation". gfl ioian&'
Economics 8: 42-64.
                                                                       f
     Hsgerty, Kathleen, Aharon Ofer, and Daniel Siegel. 1989. "Managerial
Compensation and Incentives to Engage in Shortsighted Behavior",
Northwestern University. Photocopied.

     Hall, Bronwyn H. 1991. "Research and Development Investment at the
Firm Level: Does the Source of Financing Matter?" University of California
at Berkeley and ENSAE-CREST, Photocopied,




                                     45
     Hall, Bronwyn H.  l99Ca. "The Impact of Corporate Reatructuring on
Industrial Reaearch and Development." Brookinga Paoex.s   Economic Activity
1990(1): 85-133.

     Hall, Bronwyn H. 199Db. "Research and Development at the Firm Level:
Doea the Source of Financing Matter?". Berkeley, CA, Photocopied.

     Hall, Bronwyn H. 199Cc. "The Manufacturing Sector Master File:
1959-198?." HBER Working Paper Ho. 3366, Cambridge, Mass.

     Hail, Bronwyn H. 1988a. "The Effect of Takeover Activity on Corporate
Research and Development." In Alan J. Auerbach (ad.), Corporate Takeovers:
Causes     Consaouences, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

     Hall, Eronwyn H. 1988b. "The Value of Intangible Corporate Assets:
An Empirical Study of Tobin's Q." National Bureau of Economic Research and
the University of California at Berkeley. Photocopied.

     Hall, Bronwyn H., Fyi Criliohes, and Jerry A. Hausman, 198g. "Patents
and R&D: Tm There a Lag?," International Economic Review 2?: 265-283.

     Hataopouloa, George N., Paul R. Krugman, and James H. Poterba, 1989.
"Overconmu.'nption: The Challenge to U. S. Economic Policy". American
Business Conference Renort.

     Hayamhi, Fumio, and T. Inoue. 1989, "The Firm Crowth-Q Relation with
Multiple Capital Goods: Theory and Evidence from Panel Data on Japanese
Firms." NBER Working Paper Number 332g.

     Hemly, Paul M. , Krishna C. Palepu, and Richard S. Rubak. 199G. "Does
Corporate Performance Improve after Mergers?". NEER Working Paper No. 3348.

     Hirmchman, Albert D. ref.?

     Hodder, James E.  1985. "Corporate Capital Structure 6n the U.S. and
Japan: Financial Intermediation and Implications of Financial
Deregulation". Stanford University, Stanford, CA. Photocopied.

     Hoshi, Takeo, Anil Kamhyap, and David Scharfstein. 1989. "Bank
Monitoring and Investment: Evidence from the Changing Structure of Japanese
Corporate Banking Relationships". NEER: photocopied.

     Hoahi, Takeo, Anil Kambyap, and David Scharfstein. 199G. "The Role of
Banks in Reducing the Coats of Financial Distress in Japan". NBER Working
Paper No. 3435.

     Jarrell, Gregg A., Ken Lehn, and Wayne Mart. 1985. "Institutional
Ownership, Tender Offers, and Long-term Investments." Washington, D.C.:
Securities and Exchange Commission (Aptil).

     Jensen, Michael C. 1989. "Active Investors, LECa, and the
Privatizatfon of Bankruptcy". Journal ,f fnajed Qggate Finance 2: 35-44.

                                      46
     Jensen, Michs- C.  19,9. "Eclipse of the Public Corporation.
Harvard P'osiness iew (Sept-Cct 1989): 61-73.

     Kaplan, Steven N. 1989a. "Management Buyouts:        Evidence on Taxes as a
Source cf Value," Journal of FTnance 44: 611.632.

     Kplan Steven N. l9S9b, "Mansgemenc Buynurs: Evidence on
Pos"-Buycut C'perating Changer". University of Chicago Business Schrn3,
Pi'ctccoird.

     Kaplac Steven and Michael Weiabach. 1990. "The Success of
A"quisiticna. t'idence fros Diveatitures". NBER Working Paper No. 3A8.

        Knchan and Csteraan, this volume.

     Lehn, Kenneth. and Annette B, Pnulsen. 1989, "Free Cash Flow and
Stockholder Cams in Cuing Private Transactions", Jansi of Ejnanre XLIV
.,3):    771-787,
        Lichtenberg, Frark K, lS'"°.    "Industrial De-diversificatiun and ins
C:nsequencea for Prnductivi"v". NSER Working Panet Mo. 3231.

     Lichtenberg. Frank P , and Lonald Siegel. 1990b. "The Effects of
Leveraged Suyouts on Pmuducti-'ity and Related Aspects of Firm Behsvo—"
Journal of Financial Economics 26, in press.

     Lichtenberg, Frank K. , and Donald Siegel. lSSOa, "The Effect of
Ownership Changee on The Employment end Wages of Central-Office end Other
Personnel". Journal of Law and Economics XXXIII: 383-408.

     Lichtenbetg, Frank R. and Donald Siegel. 1989. "Using Linked Census
R&D-LRD Data to Analyze the Effect of R&D Investment on Totel Factor
Productivity Cruwth". Census          CBS 89-2.

     Lic'nter5erg, Frank R, and Donald Siegel. 1987. "Productivi"y and
Ownership Changes in Manufacturing Plants". ggg]igg         on
Activity '0971): 643-683,

     Long, VillIam F. and David J. Ravenscraft. 1989. "The Record of LBL
Performance". Ernokings Institution: photocopied.

        Malkiel, Burton. this volume.

     Mayer, Cohn, and Tan Alexander. 1990. "Banks and Securities Markets:
Corporate Financing in Cermany and the U K." London: CEPR Working Paper Mo.


     Mayer, Cohn, 1984. "Corporation Tax, Finance and the Cost of
Capital". IFS Workfng Paper Mo. 81.

        Mayer, Cohn. 1990, Financial Systems, Corporate Finance, and
Economic Development." In C. Hubbard led.), Information. Catital bAxet9,.,,
XXd jestment. Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press,
                                           47
     Mccauley, Robert N. and Steven A. Zimiset. 1989. "Explaining
Intetnational Diffetences in the Cost of Capital: The United States and
United Ringdom vetsus Japan and Cetmany". FRB of Nay York Research Papet
No. 8913.

     McConnell, J.  J, and C. J. Muscarella. 1985. "Corporate Capital
Expenditures and the   Market Value of the Firm". Journal o Financial
Economics 14: 399-422,
     Miller,   Robert. l99Ca. "Do Mergers and Acquisitions Mutt R&D?".
Research g4    flshnolz   Manatemenr, Mat-Apr. 1990.

     Millet, Robert, l990b. "Effect of Restructuring on Technology
Development". NAR Workshop on Financial and Managerial Impacts on Cotporate
Time Horizons presentation.
     Muelbroek, Lisa R. , Mark L. Mitchell, J, Hatold Mulherin, Jeffrey M.
Netter, and Annetre B. Poulsen. 1990. "Shatk Repellenrs and Managerial
Myopia". Journal      Political Economy (Octobet 1990).

     Pakes, Ariel, and Mark Schanketman. 1984. "The Rate of Obsolescence
of Parents, Research Cesrarion Lags, and the Private Rare of Rcrurn to
Research Resources." In Zvi Criliches (ed.), Q.,. Parents. and
Ptoductivirv, Chicago, Ill: University of Chicago Press.

     Scharfstein, David. 1988. "The Disciplinary Role of Takeovers".
Review of Economic Studies LV: 185-200.

     Schippet, Rarherine, and Abbie Smith. 1989. "Corporate Income Tax
Effects of Management Buyours". Journal gf     41d Economics (forthcoming).
     Scholes, Myron S. and Mark A. Wolfson. 1990. "The Effects of Changes
in Tax Laws on Corporate Reorganization Activity". Journal of Bnsiness 63:
Sl4l-Sl64.

     Smith, Abbie. 1990. "Corporate Ownership Structure and Perfotmance:
The Case of Management Euyouts". Journal of Financial Economics 2?:
143-164.

     Stein, Jeremy. 1988. "Takeover Threats and Managerial Myopia".
Joutnal of Political Economy 96: 61-80.

     Stein, Jeremy C. 1989. "Efficient Capital Markets, Inefficient
Fitms: A Model of Myopic Corporate Behavior". Quarterly Journal of
Economics CIV: 655-6?O.

     Williamson, Oliver B.  1988. "Corporate Finance and Corporate
Covetnance". Journal of Finance 43: 56?-591.

     Winter, Sidney C. 1991.   "
                                   ." Paper presented at the Erookings
Conference on Changes in Corpotate Capital Structure, Washington, D.C.
April, 1991.
                                       48
    Wolrod9c 3. Randall     1988,   8Coirpeciciva Decline and Cony-cc e
Reatrocroning: Is a Myopic Stock MacRat to blame?," Journal
         Finance 1(Spring): 2636




                                      49
