NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES

THE JOINT CONSUMPTION/ASSET DEMAND DECISION:
A CASE STUDY IN ROBUST ESTIMATION

Marjorie Flavin

Working Paper No. 3802

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge. MA 02138
August 1991

Comments welcome. The data utilized in this paper were made
available by the Inter-University Consortium for Political and
Social Research. The data were originally collected by the
Survey Research Center of the University of Michigan. Neither
the original source or collectors of the data nor the Consortium
bear any responsibility for the analyses or interpretations
presented here. Research support from the NSF is gratefully
acknowledged. This paper is part of NEER's research program in
Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3802
August 1991

THE JOINT CONSUMPTION/ASSET DEMAND DECISION:
A CASE STUDY IN ROBUST ESTIMATION

ABSTRACT
The paper uses a previously unexploited data set -- the
Michigan Survey of Consumer Finances -- to ask whether the
finding that consumption tracks current income more closely than
is consistent with the permanent income hypothesis can be

attributed solely or partially to borrowing constraints. Using
household data on income and asset stocks, the paper studies the
saving side of the consumption/saving decision, and thus provides
inferences on a comprehensive concept of consumption. To limit
the influence of outliers, the paper uses a robust instrumental
variables estimator, and argues that achieving robustness with
respect to leverage points is actually simpler, both conceptually
and computationally, in an instrumental variables context than in
the OLS context.
The results indicate that households do use asset stocks to
smooth their consumption, although this smoothing is far from
complete. However, there is no evidence that the excess
sensitivity of consumption to current income is caused by

borrowing constraints. Compared to the conventional results, the
robust instrumental variables estimates are more stable across
different subsamples, more consistent with the theoretical
specification of the model, and indicate that some of the most
striking findings in the conventional results were attributable
to a single, highly unusual observation.

Marjorie Flavin
Department of Economics
Rouss Hall
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22901
and NBER

The paper starts by posing a straightforward economic question ro a

previously unexploited data set on household asset holdings. When the data fail
to respond with an equally straightforward answer, the discussion embarks on a
methodological detour concerning the impact, interpretation, and treatment of

outliers. While the paper does eventually arrive at its intended destination in
the sense that the original economic question gets a coherent answer, to many
readers the detour

-

-

basically

instrumental variables context -

a case study in robust estimation in an

- will be the most interesting aspect of the

paper. On the methodological issues, the paper argues that the robust
instrumental variables estimator is an intuitively appealing method of dealing
with the outliers common in household data sets, that the estimator is easy to
implement computmtionslly, and that the use of robust methods can make a very big
difference to the economic conclusions drawn from the data.

In this case study, the economic application is the rational expectations

permanent income hypothesis (RE-PIH). In tests based on aggregate data, there
has emerged a high degree of consensus that consumption tracks current income
more closely than is consistent with the RE-PIH. It is of obvious interest to
determine whether the apparent "excess sensitivity" of consumption to current
income found in the aggregate data also characterizes consumption behavior in
micro data sets. If the finding is confirmed in data on households, it would
also be useful to know whether the excess sensitivity arises because some
households would like to smooth their consumption and are prevented from doing so
by borrowing constraints, or because households fail to smooth their consumption
even in the absence of borrowing constraints.

A number of authors, including Hall and Mishkin (1982), Altonji and

Siow (1987), Shapiro (1984), Zeldes (1989a), and Runkle (1991), have already

examined these questions with panel data. Considering the fact that these
authors ask closely related questiona, use similar econometric methodology, and
employ the same data set <the Panel Study of Income Dynamics), surprisingly
little agreement about the substantive issues emerges from these studies.1 For
consumption applications, the PSID data have two important limitations. First,
the only consumption data available in the survey are data on food consumption.
While

food consumption is a large fraction of total consumption for most

households, a priori considerations suggest that the intertemporal behavior of
food consumption may not be representative of other components of consumption.2
Second,

several of these authors have observed that the time series variation in

the food consumption data for a given household is much too large to plausibly be

attributed to revisions in the lifetime budget constraint or to movements in
rates of return and have concluded that most of the variation in the data
reflects some form of noise rather than the systematic consumption behavior
addressed by the model.3
This study seeks to avoid the two major limitations of the previous work.

'Using the PSID food consumption data, Shapiro (1984) concludes that the
RE-PIH is clearly rejected, Altonji and Siow (1987) find that the RE-PIll is
generally supported and that there is suggestive but inconclusive evidence of
borrowing constraints, Zeldes (1989a) finds that the RE-PIll is rejected and
that the rejection can be attributed to borrowing constraints, and Runkle
(1991) finds that the RE-Pill is strongly supported, with no evidence of
borrowing constraints.
2For example, it seems likely that food consumption is subject to a
larger degree of habit persistence and a smaller elasticity of intertemporsl
substitution than other types of consumption.

3Shapiro (1982, 1984) calculates that 95% of the variance of the year to
year change in measured food consumption is sttributsble to measurement error.
Similarly, of the variance of the change in food consumption not explained by
variation in real interest rates, Runkle (1991) estimates that 76% is due to
measurement error.

-3-

Instead of using the PSID data on food consumption, the data source is the Survey
of Consumer Finances, a three year panel which provides data on the income and a

comprehensive array of asseta -bonds, debt, and durable goods

--

savings accounts, checking accounts, stocks,

for

1600 households.

While the SCF does

not have a direct measure of consumption, inferences about the consumption of
nondurables and services can be drawn from the observable behavior of income and
asset stocks. Instead of explicitly constructing a consumption series from the
data on income and changes in asset stocks, the econometric specifications focus
on the saving side of the consumption decision.

In addition to avoiding the need

to construct an explicit consumption series, the focus on the saving side is more
informative in the sense that the total saving flows of the household can be

disaggregated by asset. Thus to the extent that the preliminary results indicate
that households manage their total asset holdings in order to smooth their

consumption in the face of fluctuations in income, one can also determine which
particular assets are used most extensively in this role. Note that the macro
implications of the results would be quite different depending on whether
households accomplish their consumption smoothing by building up durable goods
stocks, as opposed to using financial assets as the buffer.

Any household data set on consumption or asset holdings is likely to contain
a substantial amount of noise, whether the noise is interpreted as the effect of
preference shocks or as pure measurement error, and it is not claimed that the
SCF data set is inherently less noisy than the PSID food consumption data.

Instead, the paper uses a robust estimation approach designed to limit the
influence exerted by outlying observations on the estimates.

While most of the statistics literature on limited influence estimation
deals with robust versions of the OLS estimator, the application in this paper
requires a robust version of an instrumental variables estimator. Expanding on

-4-

an observation made by Krasker, Kuh, and Welsch (1983), the paper argues that
thete is a sense in which achieving robustness with respect to observations which
are outliers in X-spsce, ot leverage points, is actually simpler, both
conceptually and computationally, in an instrumental variables context than in

the OLS context. Using a simplified version of the empirical problem estimated
in the paper, the intuition for the robust instrumental variables estimator is
presented graphically.

The robust estimates of the model are most interesting when studied in
comparison with the conventional (non-robust) instrumental variables estimates.

The conventional results, which ate presented first, are highly unstable across
different subsamples, and, in addition, the pattern of the conventional estimates

is inconsistent with the theoretical specification of the model. The robust
results are much more stable across different subsamples, conform to the
theoretical specification, and indicate that some of the most striking findings
in the conventional results were attributable to a single, highly unusual
observation.

The empirical results indicate that households do use asset stocks to smooth
their consumption in the face of income fluctutations to some extent, although

this smoothing is far from complete. That is, 20% to 50% of a predictable
increase in current income is buffered by asset stocks, with the remainder

implicitly devoted to consumption of nondurables and services. Further, the
results do not provide any evidence that the excess sensirivity of consumption to
current income is caused by borrowing constraints.

-5-

Section 1:

The model

The optimization problem of the household consists of maximizing the

expected velue of lifetime utility, subject to several constraints: (1) the
lifetime budget constraint, (2) a non-negativity consttaint on consumption, and
(3) (potentially) a constraint on borrowing.4 The utility function is assumed to
be time-separable between consumption and leisure. The objective function is:
T
max

(1)

where

)U(cit.6t+)
denotes the expectation operator, conditional on information

available at time t
denotes household i's rate of time preference
ci t+r represents household i's consumption during period ti-v

is a preference shock, or shift variable in the utility function
denotes the one period utility function

U(c. ti'8i

T represents the number of periods (years) in the planning horizon.

The one period utility function is assumed to exhibit constant relative risk
aversion (CRRA):
(2)

U(ciO1) —

(

l-e

( ct

'I

/(l-o) je

it

where o is the coefficient of relative risk aversion. Because the CRRA utility
function has the property that the marginal utility of consumption is infinite at
zero consumption, it is not necessary to explicitly impose the non-negativity
constraint on consumption.

The lifetime budget constraint is represented by an equation for the

4The specification of the household's optimization problem follows fairly
closely the specification used by Zeldes (l989a).

evolution of non-human wealth over time and the terminal condition that wealth be
non-negative at end of the planning horizon:

(3)

Ait+1 —
Ai,T

where

Ai

÷ rlt)) + Yi,t -

ci

0
denotes non-human wealth of household i on January 1 of year t
denotes the shmre of non-human wealth held in msset j

in

year t

denotes the realized real return to asset j during year t
denotes real, after-tax labor income in year t.
Finally, households may face a constraint on the extent to which their
non-human wealth can go below zero:
(4)

A
i,t+r

xD..
1

As a special case of the borrowing constraint, one could specify that the lower
bound on non-human wealth be zero

— 0)

and prohibit net borrowing altogether.

More generally, though, the borrowing constraint imposes a limit (which may be
individual specific) on the extent to which families can borrow.

When the borrowing constraint (equation (4)) is not currently binding,
optimal consumption behavior is characterized using the Euler equation approach
developed by Hall [1978, 1982] and by Hansen and Singleton [1982, 1983]. For the
CREA utility function, the Euler equation is:

(5)

E{ (1 + ri t)cimt÷ie0it} —

(1 + Sj)cjmte

As stressed by Zeldes (1989a, 1989b), the fact that the borrowing constraint
is (or has some probability of being) binding in a future period should not cause

a violation of the first order condition between c and c t+l

As long as the

household is not up against the bortowing constraint during period t, it is
possible to reallocate consumption between periods t and t+l in order to satisfy

the marginal condition stated in equation (5).

In characterizing the distribution of the real rates of retutn and the
marginal utility of consumption, I use the assumptions auggested by Breeden
(1977). The conditional distributions of ln(l + rj

).

In c°1. arid e.

t+l'

are each asaumed to be normal. In general, ln cjmt+1 and 9 t+l will be
correlated. To economize on notation, I specify the distributional assumptions

concerning the sum, In c°+1 +

of ln c°+i and

instead of specifying the distributions

individually. That is, the distributions of ln(l + rj )

and ln cimt+i + e

t+l'

conditional on information available in period t, ere

given by:
(6)

1n(1+rj)_N(mv )
rj

ln c°1 + 8i,t+l —
and

N(mu Vu)

+ i,t÷l —

cov(ln[l + rj],1n

coVrju.
While econometric identification will require some restrictions on the
moments of the distributions of asset returns and the marginal utility of
consumption, the theoretical model does not require these moments to be constant

either across households or across time. For the theoretical discussion, think
of the moments (m

,

rj

V

,

au vu
,

,

and coy

) as having both household (i) and
rju

rj

time (t) subscripts, although these subscripts will be suppressed for notational
convenience.

Replacing the left hand aide of (5) with exP(mr + mu +(Vr + V)/2 + coV u1'
j

.j

taking logs, and rearranging, one obtains:
(7)

In cil - ln ci —

-l[(y+ "u"2 + covrju + o1E In(l + 4)

+

ln(l+oi)]

0(Rt8i

1-

Since the expected growth rate of consumption is not observable, it is

necessary to add to both sides of the equation the forecast error in predicting
in c.

.

t, t+l

(8)

Define
i,t+i —

in c+i - E

in cit+l

Given the distributionai assumptions made above, the random variable •

is

normally distributed with mean zero and is uncorrelated with information
available in period t. To sum up, the potentialiy testabie implication of the
optimal consumption modei when the borrowing constraint is not currentiy binding
can be expressed as:6

(9) in (cj +1/ci) —

Ql[(vr+

Vu)/2 + covru -

+ a4E in(l +

in(i+si)]

+ o1(E6i r+l -

0i,t

+ i,t+l

As Zeides (i989a) has pointed out, if a borrowing constraint ia currentiy
binding, the growth rate of consumption wili exceed the optimai, unconstrained
growth rate expressed on the Ri-iS

of

equation (9). That is, in a situation in

which the borrowing constraint is binding, the family wouid like to reallocate

some consumption from t+l toward t, but is unable to do so. Since c is
somewhat lower and c. t+l somewhat higher than the unconstrained optimal values,

the actual growth rate of consumption exceeds the optimal, unconstrained growth

rate when the borrowing constraint is currently binding. The presence of a
borrowing constraint creates a one-sided violation of the Euler equation; because
the household always has the option of saving more -

- reallocating

consumption

from t toward t+l, a borrowing constraint never forces the expected expected
growth rate of consumption to be lower than the unconstrained optimal growth
rate.

5Note that the Euler equation (9) should hold for all assets which the
family holds in nonzero amounts; the Euler equation for a given household
should hold simultaneously for two or more assets with different expected
returns provided the different assets have correspondingly different
covariance properties with the marginal utility of consumption.

-9-

Following Zeldes, the effects of a borrowing constraint are incorporated
into the empirical analysis by adding an additional disturbance

in (ci1/ci )

(10)

+

o4E

— -l{ + v)/2 + coy

r)

ln(l +

+

-

ln(l+ii)]

o(EtOt+1 9i,t
-

+

9i,t+l

+

The disturbance z takes on a value of zero for agents not currently
constrained and takes on positive values for agents for whom the borrowing

constraint is binding. In general z will be correlated with current income
and expected future income.

(Note that to simplify the notation, I have

suppressed the asset index j.)

At this point, one could impute consumption from the data on income and
changes in asset levels, and test the Euler equation on the basis of this imputed

consumption series. However, since the underlying data series consist of data on
savings flows, it seems natural to test the model's implications for the savings
side of the consumption/savings decision. Further, to the extent that we are
interested in knowing whether households-optimally smooth their consumption by
using asset stocks to buffer income fluctuations, it will be interesting to see
which assets in the portfolio

bank deposits, bonds, debt, or durable goods

-

are used to absorb income fluctuations. To obtain the implications for savings
flows, write the consumption growth rate as the sum of the first order Taylor
series approximation and the associated remainder term:
Ac

(11) lnc1-

t+l

0

1

c

t+l-c0

c1

2

c-c
t
0

2

c

where c0 is the point around which the linearization is taken, c41 is a point

which lies between c0 and c1, and c lies between c0 and c. Instead of
setting c0 —

giving:

ct

linearize the function Mn c+1 around the point c0 —

-10-

in c

in c1 -

(12)

Ac

—

t+l

t

c

- I

t+1

-v l

*
C
t+l

2

t

J

I

2

c -

-[—
t

C

t

t

To evaluate the likely magnitude of the remainder term, consider a household
whoae consumption hoth in t and in t+1 is within 90% to 110% of the household's
disposable income in period t. For such a household, the squared terms on the
RIIS

of

(12) would each be positive and smaller than 1%. Further, the deviations

of c+1 and c from

are likely to be positively correlated. Since the

remainder amounts to half of the difference between two small and positively
correlated terms, it seems sufficiently small to he safely ignored.
Using just the linear term of the approximation, then, the optimal

consumption model, with or without a binding borrowing constraint, is given by
(13)

Ac1

—

o[(v

+ vu)!2 + coy

+ oE ln(l
+ r
t

i,t

)

-

ln(l+Si)]

+ e1(E 6.
t i,c+l

-

6

i,t

+

)

.t,t-s-l

+ z.

i,t

To obtain the implications for savings flows, both aides of equation (13)
are subtracted from the growth rate of disposable income:

(14)

ASl

—

- o[vr + u12 + covru -

+ ______
where

S.

-

a

ln(l+&)]

-l (ED÷ 6i,t

-

aE ln(l

+ r)

—
-

'7i,t+l

-

denotes the total flow of saving of household i in year t.

Equation (14) is the flip side of consumption orthogonslity. For households
for whom the borrowing constraint is not currently binding (zi

the

growth

in income between periods t and t+l, to the extent that it was predictable in t,

should go entirely into saving under the permanent income hypothesis. In the
empirical work, total saving of household i, Si
changes in the various asset stocks during year t:

is defined as the sum of the

-11—

(15)
•

ASavings + tChecking + ABonds + AStocks
- Debt +
Debt 1 + Durables expenditure

Durable goods have some consumption sspects end some investment aspects; in

this psper durable goods are trested sa assets rather than as consumption. Thus
the complete array of assets modeled in the empirical work consiata of savings
accounts, checking accounts, bonds, stocks, durable goods, and debt.
An obvious testable implication of the model is the restriction that the

coefficient of the growth rate of income should equal unity. If this restriction
is rejected, the estimated coefficient of the income growth rate is easily
interpreted if the alternative model of saving arises from a crude "Keynesian"
consumption function:

c—K+fly

(16)

In terms of saving behavior, the Keynesian consumption function implies:

'

_______

(17)

t+1

— (1-fl)

which is conveniently nested in equation (14).

Section 2:

Emoirical soecification

The discussion of the model can be summarized in the following equation for
the change in savings flows:
(18)

—

- a•1[(v

+ 1 ______
where

+
-

vu)!2

-l

+

-

cov0

t9i,t4-1

-

ln(l+oi)]

i,t

— 1 under the null hypothesis and 1-y —

-

a4E

ln(l +

r)

—
-

'7i,t+l

fi. The

-

data for the study,

described in more detail in the next section, consist of observations on income
and assets for a panel of about 1600 households interviewed in 1967, 1968, and
1969. Because the specification addresses the saving, or the change in asset

-12-

levels between two points in time, the three year panel provides a pure
cross-section of the change in the savings flows between 1968 and 1969.
The fact that the data is a pure cross-section introduces several

considerations. First, the intercept tere in equation (18) in principle varies
both across households and across time. With only one observations per household
it is obviously not possible ro identify both the parameter of primary interest,
y,

and a separate intercept term for each family. If one considers the

households grouped according to the occupation of the primary earner, and assumes
that the rate of time preference as well as the moments of the distribution of
the marginal utility of consumption are constant across households within a given
occupation, then some heterogeneity in the intercept term across households may
be incorporated by estimating a set of occupation dummies instead of a single

intercept term. However, in preliminary empirical work, the inclusion of
occupation-specific intercept terms did not reveal significant variation in the
intercepts across occupations, and did not have a noticeable effect on the
estimates of -y.

In

the absence of evidence of significant variation in the

moments across occupations, the specification was then simplified by assuming a
common set of moments for all households.

Second in a single cross-section, the expectational revision term v.
i,

need not have mean zero. This feature of the sample is easily accommodated by
thinking of the households' expecrarional revision disturbances as the sum of an
aggregate shock and an idiosyncratic shock:
(19)

i,r+1 —

r+l + 9i,r+l

where the idiosyncratic shock, '

r4l'

has mean zero and is uncorrelared across

households. Third, the data do not provide rime series variation in the rare of
return. Taking the expected rare of return as constant across households, and

-13-

adding it to the constant tera, along with the aggtegate shock,
AS1 t÷l
(20)

With

—

t''i,t÷l

+

y

-

gives6:

° 5t8it+l 9i,t 9i,t+l
-l

-

-

-

the additional assuaptions, the intercept tetm
— -

- a[(v

i

v)/2

+ coy

-

ln(l+6) +

Eln(l

+

re)]

is constant across households. Note that unlike tests of the model based on
aggregate time series data, the specification does not impose the restriction
that the moments be time-invariant.

With a time series or panel data set, the obvious way to identify equation
(20) would be with the use of lagged variables. The hypothesis would then be
tested by asking whether predictable changes in income go entirely into saving,

with "predictable" being implicitly defined in terms of time series predictions.'
Instead of identifying the model by relying on time series predictions, the
paper uses data on explicit statements made by households concerning their income
expectations. More concretely, the 1967 survey asked the following questions:
"Will your family income for this year be higher or lower than last year?

If higher (lower), do you think it will be a lot higher (lower), or just a little

higher (lower)?" Allowable answers were: a lot higher, a little higher, same, a
little lower, or a lot lower.

"Thinking ahead about four years, would you say that your family income will

5The survey does contain information on the interest rates which
households received on their savings accounts, and on their expectations of
inflation, both of which exhibited considerable cross sectional variation.
While the interremporal substitution parameter is in principle identified with
the cross sectional variation in nominal asset returns and expectations of
inflation, preliminary estimates of equation (18) gave small and imprecise
estimates of the intertemporal substitution parameter, and, more importantly,
the inclusion or exclusion of the expected rate of return made no material
difference to the estimates of ' the parameter of primary interest.

'For a different but related problem, Deaton (1990) discusses an approach
which uses cross sectional sample moments for household data to make
inferences about the parameters of a time series process.

- 14 -

be much higher, a little higher, the same, or smaller than it is now?"
The use of the stated expectations variables offers two advantages. First,
the extent to which households smooth consumption in the face of predictable
income fluctutations can be estimated without requiring an assumption concerning
the way expectations are formed. Second, in forming their expectations of future
income, households undoubtedly have access to useful information not available to
the econometrician. Since this "private" information will be reflected in the
household's explicit statement of income expectations, the expectational
variables may be more strongly correlated with the household's income growth rate
and therefore provide more precise estimates.

For the moment, consider a sample for which the borrowing constraint is not

binding, so that z — 0 for each household in the subsample. The expectational
variables are obviously uncorrelated with the idiosyncratic part of the

expectational revision term, i,t+l However, assuming that the expectational
variables are uncorrelated with the term representing the expected change in the

preference shifter, t9

t÷l

-

9

is less obvious. Changes in family

composition will in general cause simultaneous changes in consumption and in
income; further, the changes in consumption and income associated with changes in
family size are likely to be forecastable, at least in part. For this reason, it
seems likely that the instrumental variables (stated expectations of future

income) would be correlated with the expected change in the preference shifter

for families experiencing a change in the family composition. To avoid this
correlation, any household which experienced a change in household composition
over the three year period was excluded from the sample, reducing the sample size

by about 20%. For households with stable family composition, it seems reasonable
to assume that the expected change in the preference shifter is uncorrelated with
the expectational variables used as instruments.

-15-

For samples in which the bnrtowing constraint is binding for some

households, the shadow price of the constraint, z may be positive. Since the
households subject to a binding constraint (zi

>

0)

are likely to be those

which expect poaitive growth rates of income, the expectstional variables will be
correlated with the disturbance for these observations.

The discussion suggests the following strategy for distinguishing between
the effects of borrowing constraints, on the one hand, and "Keynesian"
consumption behavior, on the other. Following Zeldes (l989a) and Runkle (1991),
the sample is split into two subsamples, one of which contains only households

for which the z term is assumed to be zero on the basis of the households'
observed asset holdings, and the other of which contains households for which
0.

In the unconstrained sample, the fact that z is identically zero

for all observations implies that the estimation of equation (20), using the

expectational variables as instruments, provides a consistent estimate of y. For

this subsample, the null hypothesis is embodied in the restriction —
the null hypothesis is rejected, 1-7 —

fi provides

1,

and, if

an estimate of the Keynesian

marginal propensity to consume under the alternative. Since we would expect, on
a priori grounds, the expectational variables to be positively correlated with

the shadow price of the constraint the model predicts that the presence of
binding borrowing constraints will result in a downward biased estimate of y for

the subssmple of households with low levels of assets. Thus testing the
restriction that the estimates of

are the same across the two subsamples

provides a test of the hypothesis that borrowing constraints are not binding,
even for households with low levels of assets.

-16-

Data

The data fot thia study ate from the Survey of Consumer Finances, conducted
by the Survey Research Center of the University of Michigan, for the yeara 1967,
1968, and 1969. In recent yeats. the Survey of Consumer Finances ham been a pure
cross-section survey; that is, a completely diffetent group of families is
sampled each year. However, of the roughly 3,000 households interviewed in 1967,

half were designated aa a panel and reinterviewed in 1968 and 1969. For each of
the three years, the survey ham data on total disposable income of the household,

and expenditure on certain componencs of consumption, such as housing, additions

and repaira, cars, and "other durable goods". For each of the major categories
of expenditure on durable goods, the survey also has data on any debt incurred

with the purchase of the durable good. In 1968 and 1969, the survey requested
information not only on the level of the respondent's holdings of various
financial assets (checking accounts, savings accounts, bonds, and stocks) but
also the change in the respondent's holdings of each of these assets over the
past year.

While a consumption series is not explicitly constructed, one can, of
course, use the results to make inferences about consumption behavior, since
nondurable consumption can be thought of as the equation which ham been dropped
from a singular system. In order to interpret the implications of the empirical
work for consumption, it is useful to note the categories of consumption

expediture which are included in the implicit consumption series. In particular,
payments for housing services are included in the implicit consumption series.
For households which own their home, the interest portion of the mortgage
payments would be reflected in the consumption measure but the principal payments

would not, since the dobt variable includes mortgage debt. Similarly, for

-17-

renters, the implicit consumption series would reflect rent payments.

Several aspects of the dsta are worrh noting:

disposable household income, is the sum of earned income, mixed
labor/capital income, capital income, and transfer paymencs, minus total
income tax. The data on capital income is based on flows of income from
capital such as dividends and interest payments and does not include
capital gains. Transfer payments include "help from relatives" as well
as unemployment compensation and welfare payments.

tSaving aChecking. and Bonds are based on responses to questions
of the form: "Thinking back to this time last year, has the amount in all
your family unit's savings accounts gone up or down? About how much has
it gone (up/down) since this time last year?"
aStocks reflects the household's cashflow into or out of stocks,

explicitly excluding unrealized capital gains. The respondent is first
asked whether the household purchased, sold, or both purchased and sold
stocks in the past year. If the household sold or purchased stocks (but
not both) the amount of the sale or purchase is recorded. If the
household both sold and purchased stocks, the respondent is asked:
"Disregarding changes in stock prices, 'on balance' did you put new money
into stocks or take money out during the last twelve months? About how
much was this?"
Durables ExPenditure is the sum of expenditure on additions and repairs,
expenditure on all cars purchased in year t (net of value of any cars
traded-in), and expenditure on other durable goods (net of any
trade-ins).

Debt is total debt remaining at the end of year t.

-18-

Section 3; conventional reaulta
Empirical resulta are preaented for four different samplea. The criteria
for inclusion in a given sample and the number of obaervations in the sample are
described below.

descriptive
label

sample
size

criterion for inclusion in sample

whole sample

774

Of the 1568 households in the panel, 371 experienced
a change in household composition during the three
year period. Because such a change in household
composition is likely to lead to correlation between
the preference shift part of the error term and the
instruments (stated expectations of future income),
these households were excluded, reducing the sample
size to 1,197 households. Deleting households whose
records contained missing observations for any of the
required variables further reduced the sample size to
774.

poor

424

subset of whole sample for which the sum of the
household's wealth in the form of checking accounts,
savings accounts, bonds, and stocks at the end of
year t was less than $1000 in 1968 dollars

rich

350

subset of whole sample for which the sum of the
household's wealth in the form of checking accounts,
savings accounts, bonds, and stocks at the end of
year t was greater than or equal to $1000 in 1968
dollars

77

subset of whole sample for which the household held
strictly positive levels of g.g of the following
assets; bank deposits (i.e., savings and/or checking
accounts), bonds, and stocks

truly wealthy

Equation (20) was estimated by instrumental variables using, in addition to

the expectational variables described earlier, lagged disposable income, '

as

an instrument. The two categorical variables on income expectations were each
expanded into sets of dummy variables, with one dummy variable for each response.

The results reported in Table 1 are anomalous in several respects. From the
discussion of the empirical specification, recall that for those samples which

Table 1

Instrumental variables estimates of 1

estimates

of:

see,

number of
observations

.583

174

.628

424

.27
(.26

.524

350

1.33

.383

77

sample

intercept

whole

sample

.032
(.029)

poor

(.044)

(.34

rich

.041
(.034)

-.023
(.049)

.034

truly

wealthy

'y

.53

(.24

.62

(.22

Note: Standard errors are in parentheses.

-19-

contain households with low levels of nonhuman wealth the disturbance term,
which reflects the shadow price of the borrowing constraint, is included in

the error term. Because households which expect their income to rise are more

likely than average to have a binding bortowing constraint (zi > 0), the
estimates of -y will be inconsistent for the these samples. Thus only the rich
and truly wealthy subsamples provide consistent estimates of -y.

While the slope coefficients for the whole sample and the poor subsample do
not provide consistent estimates of -y, they do provide a rough check on the

specification of the modal. If the expectation of income growth is positively

correlated with z ' and the z term enters the saving equation with a
negative sign, the presence of the borrowing constraint should cause the
estimates of y

to be downward biased in the poor subsample and in the whole

sample. Thus under the interpretation of the disturbance term developed above,
one would expect the estimate of -y for the rich subsample to exceed the estimate

for the poor subsample. The result that the estimate of -y for the poor is .62
and statistically significant, while the estimate of y for the rich is .27 and
statistically insignificant does not inspire confidence in the specification and
the assumptions about the disturbance term.
The estimate of -y

for

the truly rich is troubling for two reasons. First,

the point estimate exceeds unity, although not by a statistically significant
margin. Second, the estimate of -y from the truly wealthy subsample, 1.33,

differs dramatically from the estimate of .27 from the rich subsample, a finding
which again fails to support the premise that both of these subsamples should
provide consistent estimates of y.

Despite its anomalous results, Table 1 does contain the striking finding
that for the subsample designated as "truly wealthy", essentially all of the
anticipated growth in income goes directly into assets. For this subsample, it

-20-

seems natural to follow up the analysis by disaggregating the change in total
savings flows,

into the changes in savings flows associated with the

various assets. That is, for the truly wealthy sample, which consists of
households which hold strictly positive amounts of bank deposits (the sum of
savings accounts and checking accounts), bonds, and stocks, one could estimate
the system:

IA

ASjt+i/yi —

AS1/yit —

l

—

(21)

143

Debt

—

—

where

Debt

145

IA

w (Ay÷1/y) - ett+l

+

+ '3 'i,t+l"'i,t -

144 + 4

Dur

Sjt+i/Yjt —

-

+

+ Os1(lYit+i/Ys) -

-

(Savings÷1

—

Stocks1

—

tBonds1

-

Savings)

ei+1
Debt

e+1
Dur
e+1

+ (AChecking1 -

AChecking,)

tStocks

-

Bonds---

--

ADebt41 Debt
AS'+i — Durable expenditure1 - Durable expenditure

—

-

Table 2 presents the results of estimating system (21) for the truly wealthy
subsample, using the same instruments as before. Again, the results are both
striking and unsettling. One would expect that the assets used most extensively
to buffer income fluctuations would be liquid assets, debt, and durable goods.

While the results indicate that these households do. to some extent, use durable
goods stocks and debt to smooth their consumption, the results also state that

most of the consumption smoothing is accomplished by the purchase or sale of

stocks. The coefficient of the income growth rate is .759 for the stock
equation, with a standard error of .151. While the corresponding coefficients in

Table 2

of

Instrumental variables estimates
for disaggregated asset stocks
truly wealthy subsample

dependent
variable

Stt+l/Yjt

estimate of:
intercept

see.

.026

.030

(.031)

(.139)

.008

.759

(.033)

(.151)

-

-.009
(.003)
.004

(.014)

i,t+1/Y.i,t

.010

.260

.026

(.015)
-

.220

.111

(.065)

.029

.306

(.029)

(.130)

-

.240

.224

Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. Number of observations was 77.

-21-

the equations for debt and durables are plausible in magnitude, statistically
significant, and of the correct sign (-.220 for debt, and .306 for durables),
their role in the explanstion of consumption smoothing is upstaged by the

equation for stocks. Surprisingly, liquid assets and bonds play virtually no
role in buffering income fluctuations.
Scanning the data series on the magnitudes of stock sales or purchases

reveals that the majority of households who own stocks make no net transactions

in stocks in a given year. A plot of the dependent vatiable, AStock1/y,
against the growth rate of income, Ay1/y, resolves the contradiction between
the results of Table 2, which asserts that stocks are the primary vehicle for

consumption smoothing, and the observation that even among the subsample of
households which own stocks, few families actively buy and sell stocks in a

typical year. Figures la and lb reflect the following facts: 1) most of the
households had no net transactions in stocks, 2) for 76 out of the 77 households
the line which best fits the scatter is a horizontal one, -and 3) the entire

result that stocks are used extensively to smooth consumption is attributable to
a single observation.

According to the data plotted in Figure la, the outlier observation
experienced a quadrupling of his income between 1968 and 1969, and increased his

net purchases of stocks by an amount equal to over 400% of his 1968 income. To
determine whether the outlier was a legitimate, albeit highly unusual,

observation or the result of a coding error, the raw data on the observation
contained in the extract is compiled in the appendix. The data records
substantiate the huge growth in income by revealing that the head of household of
the observation (hereafter identified as household 676) was a student in an

advanced degree program in 1967, received a professional degree, possibly an
M.D., worked only part of the year in 1968, and was employed at the professional

Figure la

scatter plot for stocks
(fl

.4J

(n

.4J

CD

4

C

0
C

0
0
4

—1.0

.0

I

I

I

1.0

2.0

3.0

I

4.0

5.0

yt+1
yt

Figure lb

(enlarged scale version of Figure la
for observations other than #676)

plot for

scatter

stocks

+

+

4
I
—1.0

I

I

4

+

I,

iOL.III.f!4UI I
4

+4 +

++ +

4

0

I

4

I
1.0

-22-

level in the health field for all of 1969. with a dispoaable income of $22,573
(in 1969 dollars), the respondent stated that a net purchase of $20,000 of stocks
was made in 1969.
Based on the data on household 676's expenditures on durables, a car,

additions and repairs, and mortgage payments it is not possible thst the $22,573
income figure and the $20,000 figure for net stock purchases are both accurare.
Underreporting of the household's total income is likely, given that for the
student years, the respondent reported total income levels of $100 (1967) and

$4,400 (1968) for the support of a six person household. Further, the $5,500
house which the household owned and lived in in 1967 was rerained as a real
estate investment in 1968 and 1969 after the head of household received his

degree and bought a new residence. Presumably the first house was generating
rental income in 1968 and 1969, and this income flow does not seem to appear in
the recorded data on the family's capital income.

While there are clearly some discrepancies or omissions in the data on
household 676, the basic attribute which endowed the observation with so much
leverage on the empirical results -

- that

the household experienced a huge

increase in income and saved a large part of it in the form of stock purchases - -

appears to be legitimate. Even if the recorded data underrepresents the
household's income by $5,000 and if the $20,000 stock purchase number has been
"rounded up" by a comparable magnitude, the "corrected data", if available, would
have had a similar effect of the empirical results, in the sense that the
behavior of the single outlier would determine the results.

Household 676 appears to be an extremely unusual, but basically legitimate
observation. While the inordinate amount of influence exerted by household 676
could be crudely limited by removing the observation from the sample and
reestimating the specifications for the rear of the subsample, it seems likely

-23-

that the sample contains other influential observations. Rather than engage -in a
subjective process of eliminating unusual observations, the paper deals with
outliera by employing a robust instrumental variables estimation procedure.8

Section 4: Aooroach to robust estimation
While limited influence estimation has been an active area of research in
the statistics literature for the past twenty years, robust estimation techniques
have not been fully exploited in applied econometric work, despite the widespread
recognition that economic data sets, and particularly household data sets, are

very likely to contain influential observations, such as household 676. An
econometrician delving into the statistical literature on robust estimation is

deterred by two aspects of the literature. One barrier is a reflection of the
origins of robust estimation techniques in the statistics, rather than econo-

metrics, literature. While an array of limited influence analogs of OLS have
-been proposed, evaluated, and programmed, research on the theory and performance

of limited influence estimators suitable for simultaneous equations systems
(i.e., analogs of instrumental variables estimators) is less well developed.

Second, the limited influence literature is split into two major strands.
One strand develops estimation techniques which are efficient under failures of
the assumption that the disturbances are distributed normally, i.e., techniques

5Aisong several factors which could account for the opposing conclusions
reached by Runkle (1991) and Zeldes (1989), Runkle notes that he used more
stringent criterion for inclusion in the sample. That is, Runkle excluded
observations for which measured food consumption increased by more than 300%
or declined by more than 75% from one year to the next, whereas Zeldea did not
exclude observations with extreme values. Altonji and Siow (1987) exclude
observmtions for which food consumption increased by more than 400%, decreased
by more than 75%, as well as observations for which real wages or family
income increased by more than 500% or decreased by more than 80%.

-24-

which are robust to outliers in epsilon-space. A second strand develops
techniques which limit the influence of leverage points, or observations which
are outliers in X-space.

Modifying an estimator to make it robust with respect to outliers in
epsilon-space is strsightiorward, both conceptually and computationally.

However, in the general case in which influential data points may be outliers in
X-space, both the derivation and computational implementation of robust
estimators is much more complicated. That robustness with respect to outliers in
X-space is more difficult to achieve than robustness with respect to outliers in
epsilon-space is a direct consequence of the fact that, for each observation, x
is vector-valued, whereas epsilon is scalsr-vslued. While an outliet in
epsilon-space is easily identified as an observation for which the absolute value

of the residual is large, identifying and limiting the influence of outliers in
the vector of observations on the right hand side variables is nontrivial.9

Presumably econometricisns have been deterred from using robust estimation
techniques on the assumption that the instrumental variables version of a esti-

mator which is robust to outliers in X-space as well as outliers in epsilon-space
will be even more cumbersome than the corresponding OLS version. Surprisingly,
though, there is a sense in which achieving robustness with respect to outliers
in X-spsce, or leverage points, is much simpler, both conceptually and compurationally, in an instrumental variables context than in the OLS context.
To develop this point, this section first reviews the Huber [1973,1977]

9One might be tempted to identify outliers in X-spsce by calculating the
norm of the x vector as the "obvious" generalization of the absolute value of
the epsilon. However, by this method, the classification of an observation as
an outlier would not be invariant to the choice of units of the data.
Identification of outliers in a way which satisfies basic criteria of
reasonable estimators, such as invariance to the choice of units, is the
complicating factor in developing estimators robust with respect to outliers
in X-spsce.

-25-

estimator, basically a modification of OLS which limits the influence of outliers

in epsilon-space. Next, the assertion that the generalization of the framework
from an OLS to an instrumental variables context actually simplifies the
treatment of leverage points is developed. Based on this discussion, the section
describes a simple algorithm for computing instrumental variables estimates which

are robust to outliers in both X-space and epsilon-space. The section concludes
with some plots which provide the visual intuition for the estimator.

To establish notation, assume
—

(22)

x1fi

+

where x is s lxk vector of explanatory variables
fi

and

is

a kxl vector of parameters

is a disturbance from s symmetric distribution with scale parameter o.

Consider the class of estimators which can be written as the solution to a
minimization problem in which the objective function is a function of the
residuals:

(23) objective function —

minXp((y-

xfl)/a)

for some function p :

Defining r —
and

- xj3
3p (ri)

*(r.) —

Br1
the solution to the minimization problem will satisfy:
(24)

-

i_li xifi)/o)x1

D

DLS, of course, is the estimator which uses the quadratic objective function
2

(25)

p(—1) —

[_2] ,

which implies

(r.)

-26-

Outliers in epsilon-space
k%ile OLS is efficient when the errors are distributed normally, the
sensitivity to large residuals inherent in the quadratic specifiction of the

objective function leads to inefficiency when the disturbances are distributed
non-normally. Compared to OLS, the Huber estimator downweights observations with
large residuals by using as the *(r1) function:
(26)

(r.) —

[ mm

[ 1,

J

where the paraaeter c determines the bound such that observations with
residuals exceeding cc are downweighted. Thus the Huber estimator chooses the

estimate vector which satisfies:
n
(27)

c

mm
[

1,

r.
1

—

1

-

0

x.fl1

Jx. — 0
1.

0

From equation (27), the Huber estimator can be interpreted as a weighted
least squares estimator in which "well-behaved" observations with residuals

smaller in absolute value than cc receive a weight of unity and outliers, defined
cc
as observations with residuals larger than cc, receive a weight of r
i

Intuitively, the Huber estimator transforms the data by "moving" observations
with large residuals to the cc bound around the regression line.

Computationally, the Huber estimates are obtained by iterating on the weighted
version of the normal equations (equation (27)).

Outliers in X-space
While the Huber estimator provides a simple, and intuitively appealing,
method of reducing the sensitivity of the estimates to outliers in epsilon-space,
it does not provide protection against leverage points, or outliers in X-apace.
If the data actually conform to the assumptions of the parametric model, limiting

-27-

the influence of outliers in X-space is undesirable because the leverage exerted

by these outliers increeses the precision of the estimates. However, if we view
the parametric model not as a specification of "the truth", but instead as an
approximation designed to succinctly characterize the bulk of the data, the

disproportionate influence exerted by outliers in X-space is less desirable. For
example, if the true relationship ia nonlinear while the model that approximates
it is linear, one would like the estimates of the slope parameters to reflect the
linear relationship which best approximates the bulk of the observations. If the
true model is nonlinear, a single observation with an extreme value of x can
result in an estimated linear approximation which differs substantially from the
linear relationship which characterizes the bulk of the data.
In the present application, the specification of the parametric model

embodies the assumption that all of the data points are generated by the same

structure. Even for the subsample of households which have substantial asset
holdings, one would suspect that the data may be generated by more than one
structure, with some households' behavior consistent with the optimal consumption

model and other households failing to conform to the model. Even if the
possibility of heterogeneous behavior is not an important m priori consideration,
confrontation with the data (e.g. Figure la) can reveal the implausibility of the
single structure assumption. Given the data on stock accumulations vs. income
growth plotted in Figure Ia, the choice between conventional and robust
estimation techniques amounts to a choice between characterizing the behavior of
household 676 or characterizing the behavior of the other 76 households in the
sample.

Surprisingly, limiting the influence of outliers in X-space is simpler, both
conceptually and computationally, in an instrumental variables context than in an

OLS context. In OLS the vector of estimates is chosen to satisfy the normal

-28-

equations

0 —

(28)

where x —
and

Xii

(y1

xib)xji

ith row of X
— ith obsetvstion

fot j — 1 to k

on jth BBS variable.

Note that the contribution to this sum, and therefore the influence on the
estimstes, of observstion i is a function of the product eiXji. If the

observations on the x vsrisbles are well-balanced, highly influential
observations will arise only in the instance of outliers in epsilon-space and
therefore can be easily downweighted with the Huber estimator. However, if the
x's are not "bslsnced" in the sense that there are one or more observations which
contsin extreme values of the x veriable, such ss household 676, these
observations will be highly influential ones, even if the associated epsilon is

well-behaved. Since observations which act as leverage points can exert a large
degree of influence on the estimates without being "tagged" with a large

residual, the Huber estimstor will not identify and downweight them. In the OLS
case, achieving robustness with respect to outliers in X-spsce requires 1)
finding the appropriately defined norm for the k-element x-vector for esch
observation, 2) downweighting individusl observations which are outliers
according to this norm, sud 3) computing weighted least squares estimates on the

basis of the reweighted observations. Obtaining the sppropriste norm of the
x-vector for each observation is the burdensome step in the algorithm.

To think about the effect of outlying x-values in the instrumental vsrisbles
context, consider the instruaentsl variables analog of the normal equations:
n
(29)

0 —

(y. -xb)z..

for

— 1 to k

i—l

where

z. .

31

— ith

observation on the jth instrumental variable.

The influence of the ith observation on the estimates depends on the product

-29-

eiZji and not on Xjj.

While the x-values appear in the normal equations, and

obviously help to determine the estimatas, Krasker, Kuh, and Welsch (1983) point

out that in the instrumental variables context the x vector affects the
estimates only via its effect on the ith residual, not directly as in the OLS

case. Thus even if the data on the x-variablea contain gross outliers, as long
as the instruments are balanced the initial, nonrobust instrumental variables
estimates will result in large residuals being associated with the leverage point
observations. A Huber procedure in which observations with large residuals are
iteratively downweighted can then be used to limit the influence of the outlier
observations.

For this approach to work, one needs a specification in which the

instruments are well-balanced. In some cases, the instruments suggested by
theoretical considerations will be well-balanced just by the nature of the

variable. For example, in the model estimated in this paper, the natural choice
of instruments consists of expectations of the future, stated in qualitative
terms such as household income being expected to rise by "a lot" or "a little", a

variable which is obviously not contaminated with extreme value outliers. In
other applications with micro data sets, variables commonly used as instruments
include demographic data such as age, gender, household size, and education.
These demographic variables also are by nature well-balanced, at least in
comparison with economic variables such as income or wealth.

More generally, however, there is a sense in which the projection of the x
variables on the primitive instruments inherent in the instrumental variables
estimator tends to eliminate leverage points, even if both the observations on x
and the observations on the primitive instruments, considered separately, are not

balanced. To see this, note that the instrumonts can be thought of as fitted
values of the x variables from projections on the list of primitive instruments,

-30-

and that as a consequence of this projection, some of the observations with
extreme values of x wi1l nevertheless have non-extreme values of fitted x.
Suppose that the stucture generating X (the matrix of observations on the
PUS variables) and Z (the matrix of observations on 1 primitive instrumental
variables) is of the form:

X —

(30)

V

ti

+

S

wherelxk

(nxk) (nxl)(Zxk) (nxk)

z —
(nfl)

and i'

rj, and

V

+

(nfl)

V are mutually uncorrelated.

the number

Whether

r
(nfl)

of primitive instruments is equal to, or exceeds, the

number of right hand side variables, equation (29) can be written as:
(31)

0 -

where xji —

(y x.b)x
-

Z(Z'Z)1Z'x

Note that the x variables can be outliers either because they contain
extreme values of v or extreme values of A,.

For those outliers created because

of extreme values of w, the projection on the z's purges this component and

leaves a non-outlier value of x. Similarly, the primitive instruments may
contain observations with extreme values, but as long as the outliers reflect
large vj's rather than v's the fitted x's will be well-balanced.

It would be too strong a statement to say that the first stage projection in
the instrumental variables estimator guarantees that the fitted x's will be
devoid of leverage points. Nowever, to the extent that the outliers in both x
and z are the result of pure measurement error, uncorrelated across variables,

this mcasurement error will be purged in the projection. Further, the fitted x's
are obviously observable; in an application in which the x variables are
unbalanced, one can always check to see whether the outliers in the x variables
and in the -z variables were attributable to extreme values of v and therefore led

-31-

to extreme values in x.

The algorithm for robust instrumental variables estimates, described in more
detail below, obtains a first vector of residuals based on the initial,

non-robust instrumental variables estimates. A robust estimate of the standard
deviation of the residuals is calculated by scaling up the median absolute
residual. Using the estimated standard deviation of the residuals and a choice

of the parameter c, the Huber weights for each observation are computed. The
Huber-weighted observations are then used to compute a new sec of parameter

estimates and thus a new set of residuals and observations weights. Iteration
continues until the parameter estimates converge.

Algorithm for robust instrumental variables
1.

Form instruments and obtain initial, nonrobust, estimates and residuals:
b0 —

2.

(X'X)1X'y

Z(Z'Z)1Z'X

X —

r —

y

-

Xb0

Calculate estimate of scale parameter, a:
a — 1.483

medianllril)
This is a robust method of estimating the scale parameter. If the

residuals are normally distributed, a is a consistent estimate of the
standard deviation; however, if the residuals contain outliers, these
observations will not affect the estimate.
3.Compute observation weights based on residuals, a, and c.

w — min(l,
4.

Noting that 0 —

11w1(y.

-

x.b)x. —

-

xib)[Txi.

calculate

the square roots of the weights, J7. and transform the data by multiplying
each element in the ith row of y, X, and Z by 1T7

i—JZi

-32-

5. Form new IV estimates with the transformed data:
—

6.

bnew —

Form a new vector of residuals:
— y - Xb
r
Note that the residuals are calculated using the new
new
new
parameter estimates, but the untransformed data.

7. Go to step 2, and use the new vector of residuals to calculate a new
iteration of values of a, the weights, and the parameter estimates. Continue
until parameter estimates converge.

The key point exploited in the algorithm - - that as long as the instruments
are balanced, outliers in 3C-space will be iteratively downweighted by the
instrumental variables version of the Huber estimator - - is illustrated in

Figures 2 and 3. These figures plot the data for the instrumental variables
estimates of equation (20) for the truly wealthy subsample.

The empirical work in the paper estimates equations of the form of (20) with
8 instruments (in addition to the constant), 7 of which are dummy variables

constructed by expanding responses to the two categorical expectational variables
into sets of dummy variables. Figures 2 and 3 provide the visual intuition for
the robust instrumental variables estimator used in the empirical work, the only

simplification being the use of a single instrumental variable in place of the
complete set of 8 instrumental variables. The single instrument was the response
to the question, "Will your family income this year be higher or lower than last
year?". In the plots, the response "a lot lower" was assigned the value -2, "a
little lower" —

-1,

the same —

0,

"a little higher —

1, and "a lot higher" — 2.

Obviously the instrument is "well-balanced" in the sense required for the
estimator to limit the influence of outliers in X-spsce.
Having simplified the problem to one in which the model consists of a single

RNS variable with a single instrumental variable, the instrumental variables

Figure 2

nonrobust IV estimates

0

.29 (#676)

0
N

a

(0

a
o

(#676)

C,

oincorne

C

+ = saving

0
C

0
—

0
f73
fitted saving
fitted income

.61

Figure 3

initial robust
0 IV stirnates
.r.

.05 (#676)

C

o

o — income
4-

(#676)

.41

saving

0

.9].

.58

999
o

—3

-

fitted income
saving

4

.fitted

0.

—1

.67

.94
0

+ .37

0

3

-33-

estimate of the slope parametet can he obtained by taking the ratio of 1) the

estimated slope in the OLS regression of the dependent vsriahle (ASt/y l on the
instrument, to 2) the estimated slope in the OLS regression of the P115

variable

(Ay/yt1) on the instrument. Figure 2 contains plots of hoth the savings data
(AS/y1) against the instrument (represented by plus signs), and the income

data (Ay/y1) against the instrument (represented by circles). Also plotted in
Figure 2 are the fitted lines from the OLS regressions of the savings variable on
the instrument (estimated slope —
instrument (estimated slope —

.0709),

and of the income data on the

.0541).

Anticipating his graduation from medical school, household 676 appropriately
stated that he expected his income in the coming year to be "a lot higher"; hence
both the data on savings and income growth for this household show up at z — 2 as

gross outliers in the vertical dimension. As an outlier, household 676 is a
highly influential observation in both of the OLS regressions illustrated in
Figure 2, and therefore a highly influential observation in determining the
nonrobust instrumental variables estimate of -y of 1.31.

Note that although household 676 is a gross outlier in X-space, by the
choice of instruments, he is not an outlier in instrument-space. Thus while he
exerts a high degree of influence on the nonrobust instrumental variables
estimates, his extreme value of the x variable exerts its influence on the
estimates not directly, as it would in an OLS context, but indirectly through the

large residuals in the two projections. Since the influential effect of the
observation works through the creation of an outlier in epsilon-space, the Iluber
approach is able to identify and downweight the outlying observation.

Eased on the nonrobust IV estimates of equation (20), 5 observations had

residuals which exceed 2e in absolute value. The Iluber weights for these

- 34

-

2c
observations,

,

which will be used in the next iteration, are recorded on

Figure 2 next to the point representing the value of the observation's UIS

variable. Household 676 will receive a weight of .29 in the next iteration; four
other observations receive weights less than unity, but are not downweighted as
severely as observation 676.

The initial iteration of the robust estimates is plotted in a similar way in
Figure 3 (note change in vertical scale) .

Using the Huber weights generated by

the estimates plotted in Figure 2, Figure 3 plots the weighted observations and
the two OLS regressions computed on the basis of the weighted observations.
Since the downweighting of household 676, in particular, "moves" this observation
toward the scatter of the other observations, household 676 now exerts less

leverage on the estimates. With the slope of the income regression equal to
.015, and the slope of the saving equation equal to - .00003, the estimate of 1
-

is

.002 in the initial robust IV regression. Based on the residuals of this

regression, new weights for each observation are computed for the next iteration.
For the second iteration, the weight received by household 676 has fallen to .05.

Seven other observations are downweighted, receiving weights between .37 and
.999. Note that one iteration of the estimator results in a change in the
economic interpretation of the data from y — 1 (asset stocks provide complete
buffering of predictable fluctuations in income) to
buffering by asset stocks).

— 0 (essentially no

-35-

Section 5; Robust results
Robust instrumental variables estimates were computed using the complete set
of instruments and the algorithm described in the previous section.

Table 3a

reports the robust estimates of 1 for the four samples.

The anomalous results which plagued the conventional estimates are gone. An
embarrassing feature of the conventional results

-

- the

fact that the

inconsistency due to the nonzero value of the shadow price of the borrowing
constraint should create downward bias in the estimate of 1 for the poor
subsample, whereas the estimate of y for the poor exceeded the estimate of 1 for

the rich - -

has been

eliminated. While the point estimate of -r

for

the poor

(.22) is slightly larger than the corresponding estimate for the rich (.18), this

difference is not significant, either statistically or in terms of economic

magnitude. Since the estimate of 1 is consistent for the rich subsample and
inconsistent for the poor subsample if borrowing constraints are binding for some
of the households in the poor subsample, one could conduct a specification test
for the presence of binding borrowing constraints (strictly positive values of
the z.

by testing the equality of the estimates of 1 across the two

subsamples. Given the very similar estimates of 1 across the two subsamples, a
formal test is not required; the empirical results based on the sample split
between rich and poor households reveal no evidence of borrowing constraints.

For the truly wealthy subsample, the robust point estimate of

is .33,

compared to the point estimate of 1.33 from the conventional estimator. The
dramatic drop in the estimate of 1 is in large part a result of the severe
downweighting of household 676, which received a final weight of .06 in these
estimates. Table 3b records the distribution of the final weights assigned to
observations for the rich and the truly wealthy subsamples. While 40 out of the
350 observations in the rich subsample, and 10 out of the 77 observations in the

Table 3a

Robust instrumental variables estimates of -y

sample

estimates of:
intercept

whole
sample

.022

.23

(.010)

(.11)

.020

.22

poor

(.013)

(.12)

.026

.18

rich

(.015)

(.16)

truly
wealthy

.002

.33

(.025)

(.26)

s.e.e.

number of observations
total
downweighted

.206

774

96

.191

424

55

.230

350

40

.181

77

10

note: Standard errors are in parentheses.'2

Table 3b
Distribution of final weights for rich and truly wealthy subsamples

number of observations

weight
(or range)
1

.9 to 1

.8to.9
.7 to .8
.6 to .7

.Sto.6
.4 to .5
.3 to .4

.2to.3
.1 to .2

0 to .1

rich subsample

truly wealthy subsample

310
7
3
5
7
7
6
0
1
3
1

67
4
0
1
0
1
2
1
0
0
1

'2The standard errors were taken from the estimated covariance matrix:
— — -1— — — — -1
where a is the estimate of the standard
a (XX) XX(XX)
deviation of the disturbances based on the median absolute devation of the
untransformed residuals.

-36-

truly wealthy aubsample, were downweighted, household 676 was an outlier even

among outliers. That is, for these two subsamples, fewer than 3% of the
observations received final weights less than .40, and household 676 was the only
observation with a weight less than .10.

For the truly wealthy subsample and the rich subsample, Tables 4a and 4b
present the robust estimates of the savings equations for the disaggregated
assets. In this exercise, saving in the form of liquid assets, stocks, and bonds
has been aggregated into "financial assets", and the disaggregation is between
financial assets, debt, snd durable goods.'° According to Table 4a, which
pertains to the truly wealthy subsample, 30% of an anticipated increase in income
is saved in the form of financial assets, 6% in the form of purchsses of durable
goods, and another 20% is saved in the form of reductions in debt. Note that
compared to the earlier results for saving aggregated across these assets, the
diaaggregated results indicate that a larger fraction of predictable income

15For the truly wealthy subsample, it is possible to disaggregate
further, and calculate the robust instrumental variables estimates for
separate equations for liquid assets, stocks, and bonds. The robust results
for the disaggregated financial assets had the following attributes. First,
the estimate of the slope parameter, y, was zero for liquid assets and for
bonds, and was close to zero (.04) and statistically insignificant for stocks.
Second, for the disaggregated financial asset equations, the robust estimator
downweighted almost a third of the observations (18 for liquid assets, 24 for
stocks, and 26 for bonds). My interpretation of these results is that even
for households which hold strictly positive levels of liquid assets, stocks,
and bonds, in the presence of transactions costs a household which adjusts its
total holdings of financial assets will tend to lump the adjustment into one
or two of the disaggregated assets rather than adjust all three.
If, at a
high level of diaaggregation, the bulk of the observations for an individual
asset indicate no net transaction, the estimator may be downwcighting any (or
most) of the observations which reflect a nonzero transaction in the asset.
Because transactions costs imply a large number of observations with a zero
net transaction for highly diaaggregated assets, liquid assets, stocks and
bonds are aggregated into "financial assets" for the robust results.

Table 4p

Instrumental

variables estimates
for disaggregated asset stocks

of

truly wealthy subsample

dependent
variable

estimate of:
intercept

see.

.004

.291

(.016)

(.165)

ASi/Yi

-

.009

(.011)

.218

.114

13

.082

10

.166

7

(.047)

.019

.059

(.022)

(.194)

-

# of observations
downweighted

Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. Number of observations was 77.

Table 4b

of

Instrumental variables estimates
for disaggregated asset stocks
rich subsample

dependent
variable

estimate of:
intercept

s.e.c.

.006

.098

(.008)

(.071)

.009

.060

(.004)

(.043)

.015

(.009)

-

.018

# of observations
downweighted

.115

65

.060

84

.138

54

(.095)

Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. Number of observations was 350.

-37-

fluctuations goes into saving.'' For the rich subsample, the breakdown is 10%
of a predictable increase in income is saved in the form of financial assets, 6%
in the form of m reduction in debt, and durables are not used as a mechanism for
consumption smoothing.

The implsusibility of the assumption that all of the data are generated by a
single structure was ons motivation for the use of the robust estimation

approach. For the truly wealthy subsample, the estimator found observation 676
--

whose asset accumulation behavior seems to follow the optimal consumption

model with a vengeance -.

basically

inconsistent with the incomplete smoothing

behavior of the bulk of the observations. It is interesting to note that for all
of the samples, the robust estimates of y are uniformly lower than the

corresponding conventional estimates. One interpretation of this pattern is that
all of the samples contain a mixture of households, some of which display the
incomplete smoothing behavior which is summarized by the robust results, and
others of which conform more closely to the optimal consumption model.

Conclusions
The paper uses a previously unexploited data set -.
Finances - -

to

the

Survey of Consumer

ask whether the finding that consumption tracks current income

more closely than is consistent with the permanent income hypothesis can be
attributed partially or solely to the presence of borrowing constraints.

Previous empirical studies of this question using the PSID data on food

comparing the disaggregated results with the aggregated results,
note that in the final iteration the data are not identical in each of these
equations in the sense that a given observation may well receive different
weights in the different equations; an observation which is an outlier with
respect to sccumulation of financial assets may not be an outlier with respect
to durable purchases or with respect to total saving.

-38-

consumption are inconclusive for several reasons:

I) the intertemporal behavior

of food consumption may be unrepresentative of other components of consumption,

2) the data appear to be dominated by some form of noise, presumably the effects

of preference shocks or of measurement error, and 3) the studies reach
conflicting conclusions

Using the SCF data on the income and asset stocks of households, the paper
studies the saving side of the consumption/saving decision, and thus provides

inferences on a comprehensive concept of consumption. Because the SCF data, like
the PSID data, is apt to contain a substantial amount of noise, and, in addition,

because it is more realistic to regard the empirical specification as a highly
stylized approximation than as a complete and final description of the truth, the

paper uses a robust instrumental variables estimator in order to limit the
influence of outliers.

A comparison of the conventional and robust instrumental variables estimates
indicates that some of the most striking aspects of the conventional results are

driven by a single, extremely unusual observation. This highly influential data
point appears to be basically a legitimate observation rather than a keypunch

error. Further, unlike the conventional results, the pattern of the robust
estimates across different subsamples is consistent with the assumptions which
underlie the specification. One implication of those assumptions is the notion
that, to the extent that borrowing constraints play an important role in

determining the consumption of low-asset households, the estimated coefficient of
the growth rate of income will be biased downward for the sample of low-asset

households. Since the estimates of this parameter are essentially the same in
two subsamples split according to household asset-holding, the results do not

provide evidence of an important role for borrowing constraints. For the bulk of
the observations, the results indicate that households exhibit incomplete

-39-

smoothing of consumption, with 20% to 50% of predictable movements in income

being buffered by asset stocks. Finally, the estimated model summarizing the
behavior of the majority of households is not an adequate model for all
households; while a systematic treatment of the outlier observations is not
provided, it seems likely that at least some of the heterogeneity in the data
reflects the presence of households which conform more closely to the optimal
consumption model.

-40-

References

Altonji, Joseph C. , and Aloysius Siow, "Testing the Response of Consumption to

Income Changes with (Noisy) Panel Data", Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 102, Nay 1987.
Bernanke, Ben, "Permanent Income, Liquidity, and Expenditure on Automobiles:
Evidence from Panel Data," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1984.

Bewley, Truman, "The Permanent Income Hypothesis: A Theoretical Formulation,"
Journal of Economic Theory, 16, 1977.
Breeden, Douglas T. , Ph.D. dissertation, Graduate School of Business, Stanford
University. 1977.

"An Intertemporal Asset Pricing Model with Stochastic
Consumption and Investment Opportunities," Journal of Financial
Economics. vol. 7, pp. 265-296, 1979.

Breeden, Douglas T. ,

Deaton, Angus, "Saving and Income Smoothing in the Core d'Ivoire", working
paper, Princeton University, 1990.

"The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing Expectations
about Future Income," Journal of Political Economy, 89, October 1981
974-1009.

Flavin, Marjorie A. ,

Flavin, Marjorie A. , "The Excessive Sensitivity of Consumption to Current
Income - Liquidity Constraints or Myopia?", Canadian Journal of
Economics, Feb. 1985.

Friedman, Milton, A Theory of the Consumption Function, Princeton University
Press, Princeton, N.J., 1957.
Carber, Peter M. and Robert C. King, "Deep Structural Excavation? A Critique
of Euler Equation Methods," Technical Working Paper 31, NBER,
Nov. 1983.

"Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle - - Permanent
Income Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence," Journal of Political
Economy, 86, December, 1978, 971-987.

Hall, Robert E. ,

Hall, Robert E., "Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption," Journal of
Political Economy, 1988.
Hall, Robert E. and Frederic S. Mishkin, "The Sensitivity of Consumption to
Transitory Income: Estimates from Panel Data on Households."
Econometrica, 50, March 1982, 461-481.

-41-

Hampel, Frank R., Elvezio M. Ronchetti, Peter Rousseeuw, and Werner A. Stahel,
Robust Statistics: The Aooroach Based on Influence Functions, Wiley,
1986.

Hansen, Lars Peter and Kenneth J. Singleton, "Ceneralized Instrumental
Variables Estimation of Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models,"
Econometrics, 50, September 1982, 1269-1286.
Hansen, Lars Peter and Kenneth J. Singleton, "Stochastic Consumption, Risk
Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns," Journal of
Political Economy, April 1983, 249-266.

Hayashi, Fumio, "The Effect of Liquidity Constraints on Consumption: A
Cross-Sectional Analysis," quarterly Journal of Economics, 1985.
Hayashi, Fumio, "The Permanent Income Hypothesis: Estimation and Testing by
Instrumental Variables," Journal of Political Economy, 90, 1982,
895-916.

Hayashi, Fumio, "The Permanent Income Hypothesis and Consumption Durability:
Analysis Based on Japanese Panel Data," quarterly Journal of
Economics, 100, November 1985.

Huber, P.J., "Robust Regression: Asymptotics, Conjectures, and Monte Carlo",
Annals of Statistics, 1, 1973.
Huber, P.J., "Robust Methods of Estimation of Regression Coefficients", Math.
Ooerationsforschung Statist. Ser. Statist., 8, 1977.
Krssker, William S., Edwin Kuh, and Roy E. Welsch, "Estimation for Dirty Data
and Flawed Models", Handbook of Econometrics, Vol. 1, Criliches and
Intriligator, eds, North Holland, 1983.
Runkle, David E., "Liquidity Constraints and the Permanent Income Hypothesis:
Evidence from Panel Data," Journal of Monetary Economics, 27, February
1991.

Shapiro, Matthew D., "A Note on Tests of the Permanent Income Hypothesis in
Panel Data", unpublished, May 1982.
Shapiro, Matthew D., "The Permanent Income Hypothesis and the Real Interest
Rate: Some Evidence From Panel Data," Economic Letters, 14, 1984,
93-100.

Zeldes, Stephen, "Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical
Investigation," Journal of Political Economy, 97, April 1989(a).
Zeldes, Stephen, "Optimal Consumption with Stochastic Income: Deviations from
Certainty Equivalence," quarterly Journal of Economics, 104, May
1989(b).

-42-

Appendix
Raw data on household 676
question

1968

1967

1969

(Interviews were conducted in Jan - March of each year)

panel status

panel, same
respondent
as in 1967

panel, same
respondent
as in 1968

sex of head of household

male

male

male

age of head of household

30

31

32

2

2

2

4

4

4

how long married (years)

6

7

9

college,

education of head

bachelors

college,
advanced or

professional
degree

college,
advanced or
professional
degree

of adults 18 years or
# of children under 18
#

older

Are you (head) working now?

student

working now

working now

What kind of business?

inapp.

Covernment

Services

Medical,

Health and
Education
Services
occupation

student

professional
technical
and kindred
workers

professional
technical
and kindred
workers

weeks unemployed last year

none; inapp.

none, inapp.

21

earned income, family unit

0

3,600

27,000

mixed labor/capital income

0

0

0

total capital income

100

800

100

total transfer payments

0

0

0

total income

100

4,400

27,100

total income tax

0

94

4,527

-43-

1968

1967

question

1969

value of sny money, stocks, bonds, 0
property inherited since last yesr

0

present value or cost of house

17,000

5,500

125

monthly mortgsge psyments or rent
net equity in house

5,500

Do you own any real estste such as
a lot, summer home, apartment
building, or business property
(other than this place here)?
What is tha value of property?
Do you owe any money on the property?

0

2,000

7,000

15,000

0

total price of car bought in 66/67 1,500
amount borrowed if car bought
in 66/67

0

Did you trade in or sell a car
when you bought that one?

no

total value of the car stock

2,170

net outlay on all cars bought in
year preceding survey

1500

0

3,300

expenditures on additions and

460

0

2,400

repairs
0

amount borrowed on additions and
repairs
total outlay on all durables
(does not include cars)

115

255

3,250

amount spent on vacations

400

200

500

expenditures on hobbies
and recreation

25

If you plan to buy a car in the
coming year, how much do you
expect to spend?

3,000

amount you expect to spend
on durables

1,000

-44Question

1967

1968

1969

Thinking ahead to next year, do
expect you family income to be
higher or lower?

highar,

Thinking ahead about four years,
do you expect your family income
to be higher or lower?

much higher

Do you expect prices to go up,
down, or stay the same?

will go up

will go up

What do you expect the Inflation
rate to be?

2% or less

5%

a lot

total amount in checking

100

1000

size

0

0

Has the amount in savings account
gone up or down since last year?

no change

0

savings account net of CD's

0

0

value of CD's

0

0

total liquid assets (checking
accounts, savings accounts, CD's)

600

increase in liquid assets since
last year

0

value of stocks and shares

1,000

25,000

amount owed on stocks

0

0

amount of purchase (or sale)
of stocks

0

20,000

face value of bonds

500

0

how much more in bonds than
a year ago

0

0

4,000

4,000

of increase in checking acct

total remaining debt incurred
in all years (medical and dental
included)

0

Hote: Blanks in this table should not be interpreted as zeros. A blank
indicates that the question was not asked in that survey year or I did not
pull the variable in the extract.

