                  NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




           STABILIZATION AND LIBERALIZATION POLICIES
                 IN CENTRAL AND EASTERN EUROPE:
                   LESSONS FROM LATIN AMERICA




                       Sebastian Edwards




                    Working Paper No. 3816




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           August 1991




This paper is part of NBER's research program in International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                       NBER Working Paper 3816
                                       August 1991


      STABILIZATION AND LIBERALIZATION POLICIES IN CENTRAL
         AND EASTERN EUROPE: LESSONS FROM LATIN AMERICA

                            ABSTRACT

     This paper discusses some economic problems faced by the
Eastern European nations in light of recent Latin American
experiences. The paper first argues that in spite of some
important cultural, political and institutional differences,
there are indeed some similarities between Eastern European and
Latin American economic problems. The discussion concentrates on
four specific areas: (1) monetary overhang and repressed
inflation; (2) fiscal imbalances and inflationary pressures; (3)
deindexation and inflationary inertia; and (4) the use of the
exchange rate as a nominal anchor. It is argued that in Chile
the reliance on a price jump to solve the money overhang problem
of 1973 created high inflationary expectations, increasing the
degree of inertia of inflation. It is also pointed out that the
Latin American experience tells a serious cautionary tale
regarding the use of nominal exchange rate anchors. More often
than not these types of policies have resulted in overvaluation,
losses in international competitiveness and eventual external
sector crises. A comparison of the Chilean and Mexican
stabilization programs suggest that the use of exchange rate
anchors will be more effective (and more credible) if the fixing
of the exchange rate is accompanied by other policies geared at
breaking inertia. Among these policies the most important one is
the abandonment of wage rate indexation practices.


                                       Sebastian Edwards
                                       Anderson Graduate School
                                        of Management
                                       UCLA
                                       Los Angeles, CA 90024
                                       and NBER
I. Introduction

    In many ways 1989 and 1990 have been magical years, as we have seen the

end of the Cold War and the beginning of an exciting period of political and

economic reconstruction in Central and Eastern Europe, and an era that

promises great opportunities for the world economy) As they abandon the

doctrines and policies of Communism, the nations of Eastern Europe face the

immense challenge of implementing an efficient and effective transition to a

market-oriented economic regime. What makes the transitional issue particu-

larly difficult is that the peoples of the Eastern European nations have

placed their hopes of a dramatically rapid improvement in their standard of

living on the implementation of the market-oriented reforms. To the extent

that these reforms fail, or if the transition is perceived as being unduly

costly, disillusionment and frustration will settle in, generating serious

social and political Unrest with unpredictable consequences.

     In designing policy packages for the transition to free-markets, the

Eastern European countries face three main problems: First, how to stabilize

their economies, achieving internal and external macroeconomic balance;

second, how to implement the structural and market-oriented reforms in an

orderly and effective way; and third, how to proceed with the privatization

process. In dealing with these important questions the political leaders and

their technical advisers have had to confront two particularly pressing

issues related to the soeed of sepuencin of reforms. With respect to

stabilization policies, the most important controversies refer to:       (1) how

to solve the situation of monetary overhang - -   either   through a monetary



     1At the risk of oversimplifying and abusing geography I will refer to
the former communist nations plus the Soviet Union as Eastern European
countries.
                                      2




reform or an adjustment of the price level;   (2) whether the anti-inflation-

ary program should be based on an exchange rate or monetary anchor; and (3)

the extent to which the labor market should be reformed and deindexed.

     In terms of structural, market-oriented reforms, the key questions are

how fast and in what sequence the opening of the external sector and the

creation of a domestic financial market should take place. In this area the

issue of bankruptcy laws has also been hotly debated. Finally, with regard

to privatization the key discussions have centered on whether firms should

be sold or transferred to the public, or how fast this process should take

place, and on whether foreign investors should be allowed to participate in

the participation.2

     Reform packages have been rapidly implemented in Poland and Yugoslavia

since early 1990, and are now beginning to be implemented in Czechoslovakia.

The liberalization and stabilization programs in Poland and Yugoslavia

exhibit a number of striking similarities.3 Both countries, for instance,

freed prices, devalued abruptly, and decided to rely on a major price level

adjustment to solve the monetary overhang problem. The two countries

immediately declared (partial) convertibility of their currencies, and

subsequently fixed the nominal exchange rate in an attempt to provide an

anchor for the price system. While in Poland the fixed rate policy

continues to the time of this writing, in Yugoslavia a (substantial)

devaluation was implemented in the first week of 1991. Both countries

increased interest rates as a way to control aggregate demand, and announced

(but not quite implemented) tough bankruptcy laws. Additionally, they both


     20n controversies regarding the Eastern European reforms, see, for
example, Hinds (1990), Lipton and Sachs (1990) and Nordhaus (1990).

     3For an illuminating comparison see Covicelli and Rocha (1990).
                                     3




partially deindexed wages in an effort to reduce inflation inertia. Also,

in both nations there have been announcements of sweeping privatization that

have not yet materialized in any significant way.

     In spite of some clear successes, such as a reduction in inflation in

the second and third quarters of 1990, the (initial) elimination of the black

market premium and the generation of a trade surplus, both Poland and

Yugoslavia are currently facing some serious problem. Although inflation is

lower than in the first months of the programs it is, especially in Poland,

still significantly higher than expected. In Yugoslavia the republics have

challenged the central authority's austerity adjustment programs. Unemploy-

ment has climbed rapidly and industrial production has plummeted. In light

of these results, a number of observers ere asking themselves whether other

(former) socialist nations, and the USSR in particular, should follow similar

programs or if, on the contrary, they should implement alternative paths.

     Although strictly speaking the Eastern European experiments have no

direct precedents, there are some historical episodes that can shed some

light and provide important lessons on individual aspects of the free market

transformations. For instance the post-World War II European experience

with monetary overhang and monetary reforms offers potentially important

lessons on how to tackle a situation of major monetary disequilibrium cum

rationing. Also, the large number of stabilization attempts in Latin

America during the last four decades provide a wealth of lessons --   both

positive and negative -- on different aspects of anti-inflationary programs.

     From a historical and comparative perspective the largely successful

stabilization and liberalization experiences in Chile and Mexico in the last

15 years offer particularly important lessons for Eastern European leaders

and their advisors. In both of these countries inflation has been
                                      4




 significantly reduced, the external sector has been practically open to free

 trade, dynamic domestic financial markets have been created, vigorous

privatization programs have been enacted and an increasingly strong record

of growth has been established. In fact as can be seen from Figure 1, Chile,

Mexico (and Bolivia) have recently been able to (partially) conquer extreme

inflations.4 An important difference between the Chilean and Mexican experi-

ences is that while in Chile stabilization was very gradual, the reduction of

inflation to manageable levels was achieved quite rapidly in Mexico: while

in Chile it took 25 quarters to reduce inflation from its peak to below 5%

per quarter, in Mexico it only took 6 quarters to accomplish this task.5

     The purpose of this paper is to discuss some Latin American lessons on

stabilization that can be useful to better understand the policy options

available to the former socialist nations. Although the analysis focuses on

stabilization, I also make some reference to privatization and other market-

oriented policies. Throughout the discussion I mostly concentrate on the

case of Chile. The reasons for focusing on Chile are several: first in

1973 Chile faced initial conditions that in some respects, are as close to

those of Eastern Europe as they can possibly be; second, during the last 15

years Chile experimented with a series of alternative policies, providing a

fascinating laboratory of sorts; third, in contrast with many other Latin


     4The main difference between these three cases is that while in Mexico
and Chile stabilization has been accompanied by recovery and growth, Bolivia
has remained basically stagnant. Also, due to Bolivia's lower level of
development, lessons derived from its experience are less valuable for
Eastern Europe.

     5Notice, however, that this comparison is in a way unfair since the peak
quarterly rate of inflation was much higher in Chile than in Mexico. In
Chile this peak was achieved in the second quarter of 1974, where inflation
reached 98.3%, in Mexico the peak was in the second quarter of 1983 with a
rate of inflation of 23.4%.
                                      5




American episodes, Chile's policies in the 1970s and 1980s dealt with both

stabilization and liberalization (including a major privatization program);

and finally, Chile represents a successful transition from a highly

inflationary and tightly controlled economy into a market-oriented and

stable one. The degree of success of the Chilean experience is clearly

underscored by the fact that the newly elected democratic government of

President Patriclo Aylwin has decided to maintain in place the vast majority

of the economic reforms inipleuiented during the Pinochet regime.6

Politically, of course, the crucial difference between Chile and Eastern

Europe is that while Chile's reforms were undertaken by dictatorial rule,

the Eastern European programs are being carried out by (mostly) democratic

governments. This difference, in fact, should not be underestimated in

comparing the specific experiences in these two regions. Some of the

policies implemented in Chile may prove to be too unpopular to sustain in a

democratic regime.

     Another key difference between Chile and Eastern Europe is that in 1973

Chile had already in place a large number of fundamental market-oriented

institutions. In fact, in spite of the decades of government intervention

and controls, Chileans had basically lived under a controlled market system.

This, of course, means that the challenge faced by the Eastern European

nations is tremendous: creating market institutions from scratch is a task

of Herculean proportions that shouldn't be underestimated.

     The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in Section II, I deal

at an analytical level with four of the most important macroeconomic

problems faced by the former socialist economies embarked on stabilization


     'On the way the new democratic government has dealt with the Pinochet
economic legacy, see Edwards and Edwards (1991).
                                          6




programs;     (1) alternative ways of dealing with the monetary overhang and

rationing;     (2) fiscal equilibrium and the reduction of inflation;

(3) the use of fixed nominal exchange rates as an anchor in the anti-

inflationary policy; and (4) the role of indexation and labor markets in

the adjustment process. In Section III, I discuss some important Chilean

(and Mexican) lessons regarding these four important areas of the stabiliza-

tion programs. In this section 1 argue that there are some very important

stabilization lessons from Latin Asierica for Easter Europe. In Section IV I

provide the conclusions, including some remarks on structural reforms and

privatization policies.


II. Stabjlixation and Liberalization In Eastern       Europe:   Probleits.
     Controversies and Policies

     The initial conditions faced by reformers in Eastern Europe and the

USSR can best be described as chaotic and unsustainable.7 In almost every

country - -   including   those already embarked in adjustment programs - -   the
combination of a growing monetary overhang with declining labor productivity

has been translated into widespread rationing of consumer (and other) goods,

and seriously misaligned relative prices. This problem has been compounded

by the fact that increasingly large fiscal deficits have been monetized

putting additional pressure on the macroeconomy, generating an extremely

critical balance of payments condition and making the repressed inflation

particularly difficult to handle. Table 1 contains some basic data on the

performance of these economies in the second half of the 1980s. The fact

that in a number of these countries the observed rates of inflation were

rather low in 1989 is not a sign of financial stability but, on the


     7A serious problem in evaluating the initial conditions in the Eastern
European countries is that the data available are extremely poor.
                                     7




contrary, it is a reflection of the fact that the substantial accumulated

monetary increases have not been allowed to reflect themselves on price

increases. The result of this has been repressed inflation and an

aggravation of generalized scarcity and rationing.

     Stabilizing the economy is, without a doubt, a clear priority in any

reform program for the (former) Communist countries. Most authors have, in

fact, agreed on the urgency of stabilization and on the fact that in any

sequencing discussion, the implementation of an anti-inflationary program

should precede most other measures. There is much less agreement, however,

on b2 to implement such a stabilization program and on how to deal, among

other things, with money overhang, the fiscal disequilibrium, the exchange

rate and the labor market. In this section I analyze some of the most

important controversies surrounding stabilization in former (or disappear-

ing) socialist countries. In the next section I expand the discussion by

analyzing how the recent stabilization experiences in Chile and Mexico can

help better understand some of the problems faced by the Eastern European

policymakers.

     The implementation of stabilization programs is particularly difficult

because, contrary to most modern experiences with macroeconomic crises, the

USSR and Eastern European nations face both a stock and a fl macroeconomic

disequilibrium. The stock disequilibrium which has generated a monetary

overhang, has been the result of years of rapid money creation under

generalized price controls, and declining productivity. This has provoked a

situation where the actual (observed) income velocity is substantially below

desired velocity of money, and where queues, end rationing are an everyday

fact of life. The flow disequilibrium, on the other hand, has been the

result of large (and increasing) fiscal deficits, that have been monetized.
                                       8



     There is virtual consensus among different analysts that a necessary

early step in the reform process refers to eliminating the money overhang.

At the same time there seems to be e clear understanding that the elimina-

tion of the stock excess supply of money will IiQ eliminate the inflationary

pressures in the system. This will require, in addition, significant fiscal

adjustment that will greatly reduce, if not put a complete end to the fiscal

deficit and inflationary monetary finance.


11.1 Fliminatint the Monetary Disequilibrium: Price Adjustment or Monetary
      Reform?

     A situation of monetary overhang, or repressed inflation, results when

increases in the stock of money take place in an environment of generalized

price controls and rationing. In these circumstances not only does the

economy face disequilibrium relative prices, but in addition the actual real

stock of money (M/Py) exceeds the desired stock of money (M/Py)* --

where the usual notation has been used:

                 H     M*                                                    (1)


In these circumstances goods are rationed through queuing and/or a secondary

black market. Clearly, then, there are "virtual" prices that clear the

market for which there is no monetary disequilibrium. This, of course, does

not eliminate the fact that these countries face a serious situation of

repressed inflation.

     An obvious, but nonetheless important implication of (1) is that there

are four potential ways of solving a situation of monetary overhang: (1) a

reduction of nominal money balances H through some type of monetary

reform;    (2) a (supposedly) once-and-for-all increase in the domestic price

level P;    (3) an increase in domestic real output (y); and (4) a rise
                                        9




in the desired quantity of money (M/Py)*.8 The last two alternatives -- a

major increase in real output and a significant increase in the demand for

money       are impractical, and implausible; moreover, even if y and

(H/Py)* do increase, this will         happen with the speed required to solve

the overhang problem in the short run. This means that for all practical

purposes we are left with (a discreet) price adjustment or a monetary reform

as the two only practical ways to eliminate the money overhang. In both

options it is implicitly assumed that relative prices are allowed to adjust

rapidly and to regain equilibrium.

        Interestingly enough, while in the post World War II period most

European nations opted for the monetary reform route, at the present time

the Eastern European nations that have embarked on adjustment have chosen to

rely on the price level adjustment approach. As pointed out in Section I,

both Yugoslavia and Poland decided to handle the overhang by simultaneously

freeing the vast majority of prices, declaring (partial) exchange rate

convertibility and engineering a major nominal devaluation. Some authors

have criticized the use of this approach for solving the overhang in these

countries and suggested that the best path for the Soviet Union is to

undertake a significant and sweeping monetary reform.9

        8
      Naturally, a combination of these four mechanisms would also work.
See Lipton and Sachs for a theoretical analysis of some of the most
important aspects of monetary overhang.
        9
      In modern Latin America the recent Collor de Mello stabilization plan
in brazil constitutes the only experience with monetary reform. However,
partial reforms where a proportion of the public debt has been either
blocked or transformed into lower value titles have taken place in a number
of countries, including Argentina and Chile. When the first version of this
paper was written, the Soviet Union had not yet implemented the 100 and 50
ruble bill confiscation process. As is pointed out below, this must have
been the most clumsy monetary reform ever engineered. Dornbusch and Wolf
(1990) argued for a monetary reform in the Soviet Union.
                                     10



     Naturally, at the textbook level both of these alternatives are

perfectly equivalent. While the monetary reform operates via the numerator

of (M/Py), the price level adjustment does it through the denominator. In

more complicated economies, however, this equivalence does not hold. First,

there are marked differences with respect to the administrative requirements

for both policies. While a monetary reform requires a complicated and major

logistic operation, the adjustment via prices is (almost) automatic.1°

Additionally, when implementing a monetary reform it has to be decided

whether currency will be blocked, or confiscated. If blocked, for how long,

and if confiscated, how much, and in what fashion? All of these are, of

course difficult and time-consuming decisions. In fact, the most practically

difficult problem associated with the implementation of a monetary reform is

that the authorities have to have an approximate knowledge on the magnitude

of the overhang. Hiscalculations in this area can lead to serious losses in

credibility. The difficulty in estimating the approximate magnitude of the

overhang is particularly serious in the case of Eastern European countries,

where the historical data are not reliable, and where the structural and

institutional reforms will affect the demand for money in an unpredictable

way.12 This problem is neatly illustrated by the fact that there are several

divergent estimates on the extent of the monetary overhang in the Soviet


     10The degree of automaticity of the adjustment via the price level is
particularly clear when the exchange rate is allowed to float.  In both
Poland and Yugoslavia, however, the exchange rate was fixed after the
devaluation.  I deal with this issue later.
     11
       Dornbusch and Wolff (1990) argue that it is possible to compute the
(approximate) magnitude of the overhang by combining historical data on some
benchmark (normal) year and estimates of black market activities.
     12
       Dornbuach and Wolf (1990) discuss a simple way of computing the
approximate lEagnitude of the overhang.
                                      U


Union. While some authors argue that an elimination of the excess supply of

money in that nation will require the doubling, or even tripling of the price

level, others have pointed out that a 50% adjustment will probably be

enough.'3 A particularly serious problem occurs when the monetary reform is

not accompanied by a very rapid price liberalization. In this case, as in

the recent USSR attempt, the relaxation of repressed inflationary measures

will be extremely short-lived, with the phenomenon of monetary overhang

recurring quickly, and with even greater force.

    An additional problem related to a monetary reform Is that it may

greatly   affect the confidence in the domestic monetary system. To the

extent that the public fears additional future confiscations or blockades,

it will substitute away from domestic money and move towards real assets and

foreign bank deposits. To the extent that this is indeed the case, the

monetary reform per se would have generated additional macro-disequilibria,

and fueled inflation. A final serious problem confronted during monetary

reforms refer to the issue of fairness and distributive effects. The most

straightforward way of tackling this issue is by allowing each individual to

exchange up to a certain amount of old money (currency and deposits) into

new money. In this way the poorer segments will be relatively protected.

This was not done in the recent Soviet reform, generating serious (and

possibly irreversible) loss in the confidence of the monetary system.

     On the other hand, the price level adjustment alternative is not free

of problems. In particular, it is unlikely that the price level will only

experience the required corrective once-and-for-all        without having

additional perverse effects on the rate of inflation. In fact, to the


     13See, for example, the 0ctber/Noveinber 1990 issue of The International
Economy; see also Nordhaus (1990), and HcKinnon (1990).
                                       12




extent that there are (implicit or explicit) multiperiod contracts and

indexation, the major price level jump required to eliminate the overhang is

likely to set in motion serious inflationary pressures that will perpetuate

themselves for several periods.14 Moreover, to the extent that the initial

price level jump generates expectations of further large price changes,

desired velocity will increase and economic agents will try to anticipate

(expected) future inflation putting additional preasure into the system.

Dornbusch and Wolf (1990) have recently argued that attempts to solve the

monetary overhang through a price level adjustment can easily degenerate

into unstable situations that can even lead to a hyperinflation. The fact

that both in Poland and Yugoslavia, after the initial price level

adjustment, over 50% of deposits are still maintained in foreign currency

can be interpreted as a lack of confidence on the part of the public on the

future of the stabilization program.

     Recently some analysts, including the staff of the International

Monetary Fund, have argued that it is possible to link the elimination of

the money overhang to the privatization process. This would entail exchang-

ing the excess nominal money holdings for property titles to (some) of the

newly privatized firms.'5 These proposals, however, miss the point that the

elimination of the monetary overhang is a prerequisite for proceeding with

almost every step in the reform process. This means that the resolution of

the stock monetary disequilibrium has to take place very rapidly, and cannot

wait for the legal and administrative requirements for a successful

     14
       This will be the case even if there is partial indexation.
Naturally, the more generalized indexation is, the more serious this problem
will be.

     15hinds (1990) also discusses this possibility. He is, however, quite
critical about its applicability.
                                     13




privatization   to be implemented.

     In sum, then, at least in principle both basic methods for handling a

situation of monetary overhang entail some risks. While a monetary reform,

and especially one that errs on the estimated magnitude of the overhang, can

generate serious dislocations including a loss in the credibility of the

domestic monetary system, a price level adjustment can generate additional

inflationary forces that, at least in theory, can explode into a hyperinfla-

tion. In fact, according to Dornbusch and Wolf (1990), four of the

countries that opted for the price level adjustment in the post-World War II

period, ended up facing major hyperinflations. What is clear, however, is

that if the monetary reform route is chosen it is important not to use the

pretext of the reform itself for delaying the freeing of prices and, thus,

the correction of relative price distortions. Naturally, if prices are

freed within the context of a monetary reform, their adjustment will be

significantly less dramatic than if the program relies on price jumps only.

In Section III, I discuss in detail the Chilean experience with the use of

price level adjustments to solve its monetary overhang in late 1973. What

makes the Chilean experience particularly Important is that until the recent

stabilization attempts in Eastern Europe, it constituted the only episode of

monetary overhang elimination since the Second World War.


11.2 Fiscal Discivline and the End of Inflation

     The elimination of monetary overhang will     put an end to inflation

in Eastern Europe or the Soviet Union. Indeed, inflationary pressures will

only come to an end if the monetization of the fiscal deficit is eradicated.

This means that either fiscal deficits are reduced to levels compatible with

foreign financing or that they are plainly reduced to zero. Naturally, a

comprehensive approach to fiscal balance will require tackling the problem
                                          14




from both the revenue and expenditure side. This was indeed the plan in

Poland and Yugoslavia, where the stabilization programs contemplated tassLve

expenditure cuts - -    mostly   through the elimination of subsidies to state-

owned firms - -   and   an increase in revenues via the collection of dividends

from public enterprises and higher compliancy and efficiency in tax collec-

tion. In both cases the initial fiscal adjustment was substantial, allowing

a closing of the gap between revenues and outlays.16 In Yugoslavia,

however, maintaining fiscal discipline has been extremely difficult in light

of regional and political unrest.

     Many stabilization programs, including those undertaken to date in

Eastern Europe, rely on an increase in the efficiency in tax collection as

an important source for closing the fiscal gap. The main idea is that once

the initial measures (such as the freezing of the exchange rate) reduce

inflation there will be a reversed Olivera-Tanzi effect.17 Although there

is some merit in this belief, there is a serious risk of overestimating the

actual importance of this phenomenon. This will be especially so in cases

where the monetary overhang is handled through a price level adjustment, and

where due to the existence of indexation and medium term contracts,

inflation will remain high for some time.

     An efficient antidote to this problem, and one that has been tried in

some Latin American nations such as Chile, is to enact an indexed tax

system, where the corporate and other taxes are also subject to inflationary

correction. An additional positive aspect of indexing the tax system is


     16See, for instance, Rocha (1990) and Covicelli and Rocha (1990).

     17The Olivera-Tanzj effect refers to the reduction in the real value,
because of collection lags, of fiscal revenues during periods of increasing
inflation.
                                          15




that It will tend to add credibility to the stabilization program.

    The reduction, or elimination, of subsidies to public firms is another

important traditional channel through which the fiscal gap can be        closed.18

This measure, which has recently been undertaken in both Poland and Yugo-

slavia, often results in firms incurring severe losses, and in an increase

in their debt, some of which will eventually become bad debt. A potential

problem is how to handle these losses and low quality debt once the decision

to privatize is made. One possibility is to sell the firms, including the

bad debt, at a relatively low price. This reflects the fact that the

companies financial conditions are not fully healthy. This was, by and

large, the procedure used during the first round of Chilean stabilizations

in 1973-80 (see Edwards and Edwards, 1991). Although this may be the most

efficient way to proceed -     - &ince   it allows the privatization to proceed

quite quickly -   - it   is usually politically risky.

     Uhen public firms are sold at a low price the authorities are usually

bound to be accused of "giving away" the national patrimony. An alternative

procedure is to "clean" the firms to be privatized from bad debt before they

are offered to the public. A potential problem with this approach is that the

public enterprises bad debts are sometimes transferred to the Central Bank,

transforming a fiscal deficit into a quasi-fiscal deficit.19 If. indeed, as

part of the pre-privatization strategy the authorities decide to free public

firms of bad loans, a more effective procedure is to transfer them to a speci-

ally created institution or holding company that will only have losses. The


     181n fact, for years and years IMF stabilization programs have included
the elimination of subsidies as one of their most important components (see
Edwards (1989)).
     19
       This happened, for example, in Chile during the second round of
privatization in 1985-87. See, for example, Luders (1990).
                                       16




government then, will have to finance these losses from its general budget.

In this way the system greatly gains in transparency and efficiency.

11.3 Deindexine Labor and Other Markets

    A common   characteristic   of very high (as opposed to hyper) inflations

episodes is that the system acquires considerable inertia. This usually

happens through (implicit or explicit) indexation and the existence of

staggered contracts. The existence of these inertial forces (partially)

explains why, even in cases when the monetary overhang and the monetization

of the fiscal deficit are eliminated, inflation takes a long time to sub-

side. An important initial step, then, in stabilization programs is to

deindex the economy, trying to transform agents behavior from being

backward-looking to being forward-looking. A successful broad deindexation

process will affect not only wages, but also debt and other contracts.

However, maintaining a tax system that is resilient to inflation has been an

important component of successful programs. In both Poland and Yugoslavia

the deindexation of wages has been an important component of the initial

stabilization package.20

     The deindexation of the labor market would also play an important role

in providing much needed flexibility to the labor market during the adjust-

ment period that follows the freeing of prices and the implementation of

other reforms such as the opening up of international trade. In fact, it is

well-known that an important prerequisite for reducing the unemployment

costs of trade liberalization structural reforms is to eliminate most wage

rigidities including indexation. The reason for this is that in countries

with labor intensive exports, a trade liberalization will, under most


     20
       On a series of interesting case studies on attempts to deindex during
a stabilization program see Williamson (1985).
                                     17




circumstances, result in a reduction In the real wage rate in the short run.

Over the longer-run however, as investment in new equipment takes place,

wages will tend to increase until in the new equilibrium the new wages will

tend to exceed those prevailing before the reforms.21 If, however, the

real wage is not allowed to decline in the short run, a significant increase

in unemployment will take place. In that regard it is highly likely that if

wages had     been deindexed the increase in unemployment in Poland (from 0%

in 1989 to approximately 5.5% in September 1990), would have been even

larger.


11.4 An Exchange Rate Anchor?

     In both Poland and Yugoslavia, after the initial maxi-devaluation and

the establishment of partial convertibility, the nominal exchange rate was

fixed as a way to provide an anchor for the price system. Although exchange

rate based stabilizations have had a long history, they remain controvers-

ial. Many authors see a serious danger of real exchange rate overvaluation

associated with these policies. This could indeed be the case if after the

initial devaluation and the pegging of the nominal exchange rate, inflation

continues to go on at a pace significantly higher than world inflation. In

this case domestic goods would quickly lose international competitiveness

and a serious balance of payments situation could evolve.

     The most common cause for real exchange rate overvaluatton in exchange

rate based stabilization programs is that the pegging of the nominal

exchange rate is mainly     accompanied by the required correction in the

fundamental determinants of inflation such as   the   fiscal deficit and money




     21This statement is based on the plausible assumption that in the short
run capital is sector-specific. Only slowly through time can capital be
reallocated across sectors. On these issues see Edwards (1988).
                                      18




creation. However, even if the adequate fiscal and   monetary   policies are

put in place, there is still a serious risk of overvaluation if the economic

system exhibits some inertia. This possibility can be illustrated with the

following simple model of an economy with partial backward indexation based

on Edwards and Edwards (1991):

                —           + °"Nt                                             (2)
                    °1'Tt

             1'Tt —   Et   + 1't                                               (3)


             DN[(P/P)z] — SN((w/p))                                            (4)


                —
                    kP1                                                        (5)


    is the percentage rate of change of the domestic price level; Tt is

the percentage rate of change of the price of tradables expressed in

domestic currency; Nt is the rate of change of nontradable goods prices;

    is the rate of devaluation, and        is the rate of change of the

international price of tradables; DN and        are the demand and supply

functions for nontradable goods; V is the nominal wage rate, and          is

its rate of change in period t; and finally, Z is aggregate real

expenditure.22 Equation (2) states that the rate of change of the overall

price level is a weighted average of the rate of change of tradables and

nontradables inflation, with a and (1-a) being the weights. Equation

(3) links the domestic price of tradables to the world price via the nominal

exchange rate. Equation (4) is the equilibrium condition for the market for

nontradable goods. Demand depends negatively on relative prices and

positively on aggregate real expenditure. Supply of nontradables, on the

other hand, depends negatively on the product wage rate. Equation (5) is



     22Naturally, this simple representation assumes that the monetary
overhang situation has already been solved.
                                                     19




the rule of wage indexation and states that in every period nominal wages

are adjusted in a percentage k of past inflation. If, as was the case in

Chile, there is full backward indexation, k — 1,                      and W —
     Under the assumption that as part of the stabilization program the

nominal exchange rate is pegged (E —                      0),   and that aggregate expenditure

does not change (Z — 0).                  We obtain the following equation for domestic

inflation:

                  —   ii-.!Ll p       *   + (l-a)ck                                           (6)
              t                               t7+(
                              J
when q is the price demand elasticity for nontradables (that is,                        '? < 0)

and where c   is the supply elasticity of nontradables with respect to the

product wage ( < 0). This equation clearly captures the fact that under
these circumstances the domestic rate of inflation will exhibit inertial

behavior. The importance of this inertial force will not only depend on the

extent of indexation k but also on the parameter (l-a)c/(q+). In the

case where there is 100% backward indexation (k—i) the domestic rate of

inflation will eventually converge to the world rate of inflation of

tradables (Ph).
     Defining the real exchange rate (e) in the standard way:

                      EtP *
              e—
               t
                                  ,                                                           (7)
                        Pt
we find that its evolution through time will be given by:

                  -   c(l-a)                                                                  (8)
                                      (Pc-kP1).
     This means, then, that to the extent that the world rate of inflation

     falls short of lagged inflation multiplied by the coefficient of wage

indexation, the real exchange rate will be subject to an appreciation

process ( <       0). The higher is k, the higher will be the likelihood of
                                         20




a real appreciation, and eventually, of overvaluation.23

       During 1990 both the Polish and the Yugoslavian economies have

experienced important real exchange rate appreciations that have slowly, but

surely, reduced the degree of competitiveness of their exports. In Yugosla-

via this process resulted in the abandonment of the fixed rate in early

1991. In the case of Poland it is difficult, however, to know whether the

real exchange rate is approaching the dangerous area of overvaluation where

serious damage to the country's external sector is done.24 The reason for

this is that given the peculiarities of Central European trade in the past.

it is difficult to use historical series to make real exchange rate

comparisons. I return to this subject in Section III in light of the

Chilean and Mexican experience.

       The rationale for relying on exchange rate based stabilization programs

is based on two interrelated ideas: first, a fixed nominal exchange rate

imposes discinline on the monetary and fiscal authorities as well as on

manufactured goods producers, and second, a pegged nominal exchange rate

reduces the expectations of inflation. Some recent work on stabilization in

advanced nations has argued that the credible adoption of an exchange rate

System with limited flexibility such as the exchange rate mechanism of the

EMS,   will   by itself reduce inflation pressure through a change in inertial



     23An important feature of this model for understanding some of the
potential problems associated with the Polish Yugoslavian programs is that
to the extent that there are increases in aggregate demand (Z > 0) fueled
by increased transfers from abroad, the forces towards appreciation and,
eventually real overvaluation, would increase significantly. In fact, the
abandonment of the fixed nominal rate in Yugoslavia after one year was the
result of real appreciation fueled by a combination of inertia and increases
in aggregate expenditure.

     24After the revised version of this paper was finished the Zloty was
devalued. The Polish authorities argued that the reason for this
devaluation was the loss in competitiveness suffered by the country.
                                     21




forces.25 The key issue, of course, is whether the unilateral adoption of

a fixed rate is indeed credible. If this is not the case the public will

speculate against the fixed rate and the Central Bank making the

inflationary situation even more difficult.

     Whether a specific program based on a pegged exchange rate has

credibility is, to a large extent, an empirical issue that will vary from

country to country and across historical settings. However, it is still

possible to make some general comments on the subject. First, the degree of

credibility of the policy will largely depend on the perceived coherence of

the program. If the public sees that there is genuine progress on the

fiscal and monetary fronts, and that some agreements between unions and

firms are ertablished, the degree of credibility on the sustainability of

the fixed exchange rate will increase. Second, credibility will be much

greater if there are institutional constraints that will require the

government to maintain its commitment of a fixed rate, and thus of fiscal

discipline. This type of institutional constraint is present in countries

that join the EMS or (to a lesser extent) that have an independent Central

Bank, but not necessarily in nations that unilaterally decide to peg their

nominal exchange rate, such as Poland and Yugoslavia did in 1990. I'll

return to this issue in greater detail in my discussion of the Chilean and

Mexican experiences.

     Recently some authors have investigated some of the most important

consequences of stabilization programs based on pegging the nominal exchange
rate. In a comparative study of several Latin American episodes from the

1960s through the l980s, Kiguel and Leviatan (1990) found that most exchange

rate based anti-inflationary programs have been characterized by both an


     25
       On these issues see, for example, Ciavazzi and Ciovanini (1989).
                                     22




expansion of real activity in the initial months of the program and by a

nontrivial degree of real exchange rate appreciation. Calvo and Vegh (1990)

have developed an optimizing model of a small open economy to formally

compare the inflationary and real effects of exchange rate and monetary

based stabilization programs.26 In a setup with a cash in advance

constraint, currency substitution and capital mobility, they find that a

credible exchange rate based stabilization generates an output expansion

through the permanent reduction of domestic interest rates. However, if the

program lacks credibility the initial expansion of output is followed by an

important recession. They also argue that the less credible the program is,

the more significant will be the      effects   of the stabilization program.


III. Some Latin American Lessons for Eastern Europe: Money Qverhan.
      Exchange Rate Anchors and Deindexation

     Although Chile did not become a full blown socialist country under

President Salvador Allende, the initial conditions faced by the Chilean

free-market reformers (sometimes called the "Chicago boys") were in more

than one respect similar to those encountered in Central and Eastern Europe.

A significant repressed inflation had generated a major monetary "overhang",

whose elimination some experts estimated would have required a rise in

prices of approximately 500% by mid-1973.27 In part as a consequence of

this the economy was plagued by generalized scarcity, long queues and

rampant black markets. The fiscal deficit - -   which   was fully financed by

money creation -- reached 26% of CDP in 1973. Although "official" annual

inflation was 700% in September of 1973, all the available evidence



            is done from a different perspective, in Fischer (1986).

     27See Bardon (1973). Corbo and Solimano (1990) also find that in Chile
there was a significant monetary overhang at the end of the Allende period.
                                      23




indicates that the economy still faced a major "stock" disequilibrium. A

program of nationalization of domestic and foreign owned firms had resulted

in a two-fold increase in public sector value added between 1970 and 1973.

As in Poland, unemployment was virtually nonexistent, while labor

productivity was rapidly declining.

     The main goals of the Chilean economic team in 1973 were to defeat

inflation, reestablish external equilibrium and transform the economy from a

tightly centralized system into a market-oriented regime. Although the

political systems were very different, there are some remarkable similarit-

ies between Chile's market-oriented economic policies and those of Poland

and Yugoslavia. (See Table 2 for a synoptic comparison between Chile and

Poland's policies.) As in Poland and Yugoslavia, Chile eliminated the Vast

majority of price controls during the first week of the reforms -   - more   than

3,000 prices were immediately freed; prices of 39 "necessities", however,

remained under loose control for some time. A very large devaluation (over

90%) was used as a way of dealing with the monetary overhang and, as in

Poland, partial currency convertibility (for commercial transactions) was

rapidly established. An external sector trade reform that immediately

eliminated all import licenses, prohibitions and quotas, and that by 1979

had slashed import tariffs to a uniform 10% was rapidly enacted. As in

Poland the initial reaction to these policies was a dramatic increase in

nontraditional exports that had no precedent in history. For example, in

1974 the U.S. dollar value of non-mineral exports increased 200% with

respect to 1973.

      In Chile the fl macroeconomic disequilibrium was tackled by a

simultaneous reduction of government expenditures and an increase in

 revenues. This was achieved through a sweeping tax reform that, among other
                                         24




things, established a 20% value added tax. As a result of these measures,

by 1977 the fiscal     deficit had virtually   disappeared. The combination of   a
liberalized   financial sector, with scores of newly privatized banks and

insurance companies, and a restricted macroeconomic policy resulted in very

high interest rates.

     There are still more similarities. As in Yugoslavia and Poland, the

Chilean authorities implemented an exchange rate based stabilization,

where the fixing of the nominal exchange rate in a context of an economy

open to international competition was the cornerstone of the anti-inflat-

ionary    program. Also, as in   the recent Eastern European programs, in a

further    effort   to eliminate inflationary pressures, wage indexation was

greatly reduced and the labor market was reformed.

     In spite of all the efforts to rapidly eliminate inflation, Chile

experienced substantial inertia, with price increases crawling down quite

slowly. In fact, it took eight years to achieve single digit inflation: in

1981 the rate of inflation was 8.9%. Moreover, when this goal was finally

achieved, the years with domestic inflation above world inflation had

generated a massive overvaluation of the peso that greatly affected the eco-

noisy's degree of international competitiveness. Exports began to stagnate

while imports, especially of durable goods, boomed. Industrial production

fell and a sense that the policy package was losing sustainability began to

take over the economy.

     In the rest of this section I discuss in some detail some of the most

important specific Chilean lessons on stabilization. In doing this I

Concentrate on the four issues discussed in the preceding section:       (1) the

elimination of money overhang; (2) the fiscal deficit and the flow macro-

disequilibrium;       (3) the indexation of the labor market; and (4) the use
                                      25



of   the nominal exchange rate as an anchor. When   dealing   with this last

important issue I formally compare the   effects of   the Chilean and Mexican

exchange rate based stabilization programs.

111.1 Money Overhang and the   Initial   Stabilization Proram

      The economic policies of Dr. Salvador Allende during 1970-73 generated

a classical situation of repressed inflation.28 The combination of rapid

increases in the quantity of money coupled with stringent price controls

resulted in growing scarcity of goods, de facto rationing and a rapidly

growing black market. As a result of this disequilibrium in mid-1973 the

black market premium for foreign exchange surpassed 3000% (see Figure 2).

Former Unidad Popular Minister Sergio Bitar has described the situation as

follows:

      The black or parallel market emerged in Chile in 1972, and became
      increasingly important during 1973. Economic disequilibria grew
      more rapidly than the new control mechanisms . .. The excess of
      aggregate demand and ... monetary expansion increased during the
      first half of 1972. ... Relative price distortions also fueled the
      black market, . . . [especially] in the textile and construction
      sectors . . .                              (Bitar, 1979, pp. 196-97)
      Although during the last months of the Allende presidency the official

rate of inflation had reached 15% per month, at the time of the coup

(September 1973), there was still a substantial monetary overhang. Bardon

(1973), for example, estimated in August of 1973 that in order to eliminate

the overhang the price level had to increase (jump) between 400 and 560

percent. More recently, Corbo and Soltinano (1990) have estimated, on the

basis of demand for money regressions, that in the third quarter of 1973 the

magnitude of the monetary overhang was approximately equal to 50% of total



     28For an extraordinary insiders account of the economic policies of
Allende, see Sitar (1979). For a recent analysis of the conduct of
macroeconomic policy during this period see Dornbusch and Edwards (1989).
See also Larrain and Meller (1991).
                                       26



money demand. Table 3, which shows the evolution of the real quantity of

money in Chile in the 1965-78 period, clearly shows the dramatic increase in

M/Py experienced during the Allende years of 1971-73 and its precipitous

fall immediately following the coup.

    One of the most important priorities of the military economic team was

to eliminate the monetary overhang and black markets. Interestingly enough

at that time there was no whatsoever on the possibility of a monetary

reform; from the very beginning the decision was made to free almost all

prices and to let the jump in the price level take care of the overhang.

This was, in fact, done at the same time as a 90% devaluation was engineered

and (partial) convertibility for commercial transactions was established.

As a result of this policy, prices increased in October of 1973 by almost

90% (see Table 4).

     The strategy followed during the first weeks of military rule were

clearly stated by the "super" Minister Jorge Cauas in a 1974 speech:

     The generalized control of prices had created two serious problems
         Ill the proliferation of black markets, ... and ... various
     rationing mechanisms. ... (And 2), a totally arbitrary price
     structure. . . . The strategy used to correct these disequilibria
     consisted in creating a free price system.
                                    (Mendez, 1979, p. 92, emphasis added)

     The immediate effect of this measure was the overnight disappearance of

black markets and rationing, followed by a precipitous fall in the premium

in the parallel market for foreign exchange (Figure 2). As transactions

moved back into the "overground" economy, tax collection rapidly increased

providing a partial alleviation to the fiscal deficit, which in 1973 had

reached the extraordinarily high level of 23% of COP. All of this, of

course, bears a remarkable similarity to the recent Eastern European

episodes.
                                     27




    The freeing of prices and the devaluation of the nominal exchange rate

was rapidly supplemented with a battery of other measures. Subsidies to

public sector firms were eliminated, public employment was cut, wages in the

public sector were reduced in real terms, and a process of privatization,

that resulted in the transfer of 251 firms to the private sector in 1974

alone, was initiated.29 The process of trade liberalization and financial

reform were also started. During 1974 most quantitative restrictions on

imports, Including a 10,000 percent prior deposit, were eliminated, and art

initial round of tariff reduction took place.

     An important component of the early policies was the attempt to shift

the focus of wage setting from backward looking to forward looking. Formal

wage adjustments based on past inflation, which during the Unidad Popular

government had been applied with increasing frequency, were eliminated in

the rest of 1973, and were replaced by a bonus system that amounted to

granting two additional monthly salaries during late 1973. During 1974

there were four obligatory (economy-wide) wage adjustments for an accumula-

ted total of 264%. During the same period the accumulated rate of inflation

was 347%. In terms of exchange rate policy, after the initial devaluation a

crawling peg system aimed at maintaining the j1 exchange rate relatively

constant was enacted.3°

     As a result of the initial public sector measures the fiscal deficit

was reduced by more than one half in 1974. As can be seen from Table 5,

most of this fiscal adjustment came from a reduction in expenditure. In

spite of this progress, at the end of 1974 the fiscal deficit still stood at



     29
        Of these, 202 were actually returned to their owners and 49 were
sold. See Chapter 4 of Edwards and Edwards (1991) for details.

     30For details see Edwards and Edwards (1991).
                                       28




almost 11% of GD?.

      Although the strategy chosen by the military advisors to eliminate the

money overhang succeeded in achieving its objective, it did so at a large

cost. The combination of an enormously large price jump, a major devalua-

tion, and price freedom in a country with a 40-year tradition of price

controls, generated substantial expectations of further inflation in the

private sector. In a perceptive article, Ramos (1977) has argued that as

soon as firms had the possibility (for the first time in many years) to

freely set prices, they decided to anticiDate expected future cost increases

by raising prices by more than what fundamentals dictated. Additionally, in

late 1973 the state of uncertainty was such that no one was sure whether (or

when) the gcvernment would return to the decades-long tradition of fixing

prices. Not surprisingly, then, firms -- which at the time faced very

little foreign competition, since the trade sector had not yet been opened

--   decided to face this uncertainty by over-adjusting their prices.
       These expectations of high and rapid inflation were validated during

the first quarter of 1974 when the government mandated a wage adjustment of

60% and implemented a devaluation with respect to the U.S. dollar of 41%.

The accumulated rate of inflation during that quarter was 47%,3 From

that point onwards, Chilean inflation exhibited a significant degree of

inertia that was mainly determined by expectations, and their validation

through both exchange rate devaluations and money creation.32 There is


       31See Ramos (1977).

     321t is interesting to note that computations of the steady state rate
of inflation justifiable by the fiscal deficit was significantly lower in
every one of the initial years than the actual inflation. In 1974, for
example, the justified rate of inflation was between 200-250% while actual
inflation exceeded 370%. The difference between these two figures can
(partially) be explained by inertial forces. In 1978 the government decided
to dramatically face expectations through the adoption of an exchange rate
                                     29



little doubt that the unleashing of these substantial and chaotic expecta-

tions of inflation in the aftermath of the price jump of October 1973 were

largely responsible for the extraordinarily long time it took for the

Chilean inflation rate to subside. This slow speed of stabilization is

particularly puzzling once it is recognized that for all practical purposes

by 1977 the fiscal deficit problem had been completely solved. It is not

possible to know what would have happened if a monetary reform - - accompan-

ied, or shortly followed by the freeing of prices -   - would   have been

implemented in 1973. One can only speculate that in this case inflationary

expectations would have been lower, and that possibly the transition to

lower more stable inflation would have been more rapid.

111.2 Tax Reform. The Fiscal Deficit and Inflation

     In early 1975 a sweeping tax reform was implemented in Chile. The

principal features of this reform include the replacement of a cascade sales

tax with a flat rate value added tax at a 20% rate; a full indexation of the

tax system; an elimination of the remaining tax exemptions and subsidies; a

unification of the corporation and non-corporation income taxes into a flat

business tax; and the integration of the personal and business income tax-

es.33 As may be seen in Table 5 the combination of increased tax revenues

and reduced government expenditure rapidly affected the fiscal deficit.

     The fiscal reform of 1975 was part of a broader stabilization program

aimed at final1y defeating inflation". This program was based largely on

traditional uionetarist views regarding inflation in closed economies and




based stabilization that culminated with the fixing of the peso to the U.S.
dollar in June of 1979. The most important characteristics of this program
are analyzed in subsection 111.2 below.

      335ee Edwards and Edwards (1991) for greater details on the reform.
                                         30



considered that money creation to finance the fiscal deficit was the basic

and most fundamental cause of inflation, Consequently, this stabilization

program did not consider using the exchange rate as an anti-inflationary

tool. In fact it -was decided to maintain a crawling peg exchange rate

system that consisted of periodically adjusting the nominal exchange rate at

approximately the same   rate   as lagged inflation,

     in June of 1976, as a means to break inflationary expectations, the

government revalued the peso by 10% with respect to the U.S. dollar.

Following this revaluation the process of mini-devaluations, where the

nominal exchange rate (relative to the U.S. dollar) was adjusted at

approximately the same rate as past inflation, was resumed. In March 1977,

in order to further break expectations, the nominal exchange rate was again

revalued by 10%. Once again, this appreciation was followed by periodic

devaluations that tried to compensate firms for the loss of Competitiveness

generated by the tariff reduction process, Although in 1976 and 1977 some

progress was made in the battle against inflation, by late 1977 inflation

was still very high in absolute levels -- 87%.

     The revaluation of the peso of 1976 and 1977 marked the first steps

toward a major Change in the Chilean stabilization strategy and in the

authorities' concept of the role of macroeconomic policy. In late 1977,

with the rate of inflation standing at a yearly level of 84% the government

authorities argued that given the increasing open character of the Chilean

economy, traditional anti-inflationary programs based on closed economy

premises were becoming clearly ineffective. It was then pointed out that a

drastic change in the orientation of the stabilization policy was required

to make further progress against inflation. In early 1978 Chilean stabiliz-

ation efforts moved from being a fiscal'based to exchange rate-based. I
                                       31



discuss   some important aspects of this   policy,   including its credibility, in

subsection 111.4.


111.3 Labor Markets and Indexation

     In the labor markets front the government early-on tried to incorporate

some corrective forces.34 The automatic wage adjustment due in October

1973 was postponed until January of 1974. During that year an effort to

provide forward-looking wage adjustment was instituted. This resulted in

mandated wage increases below the accumulated rate of inflation. As a

result of this, in 1976 real (average) wages were 16% below their 1970 level

and 30% below the peak year of 1971. Starting in July of 1977, however, a

one-hundred percent plus backward indexation mechanism was put into place.

This procedure required that all wages (private and public sector) be

revised four times a year according to accumulated past inflation. As

inflation was (slowly) declining during this period, this backward looking

procedure assured that wages would automatically increase in real terms.

Table 6 contains detailed information on the exact dates and magnitudes of

wage adjustments.

     Not only were wages fully indexed by 1976, but most other contracts

also included indexation clauses. Many transactions were denominated in

dollars, and with the exception of 30-day COs all financial transactions

were subject to inflation adjustment. There is little doubt that the rapid

reincorporation of 100 backward indexation to Chile's economic folklore can

partially account for the slow rate at which inflation was reduced.




     34A crucial element in labor market developments during this period is
the dismantling of the Chilean labor movement. For political reasons the
immense majority of union leaders were persecuted. Union activities were
reduced to mere symbolism.
                                     32




111.4 Anchorina the System Throvzh the Nominal Exchange Rate

     In February 1978 the administration of the exchange rate completely

took over as the most important anti-inflationary tool. At that time a

novel policy of preannouncing a declinine rate of devaluation for a fairly

long period of time (up to a year) was introduced as a way of further reduc-

ing the rate of inflation. This system, popularly known as the tablita,

deliberately set the starting declining rate of devaluation at a lower rate

than ongoing inflation. With the trade reform having virtually eliminated

the most important trade barriers, it was expected that this system of pre-

announced devaluations would have two important effects on inflation.

First, it was thought that it would channel inflationary expectations

downward. S2eond, and more important, it was expected that the system would

work in a way similar to a textbook-type fixed exchange rate regime,

imposing price discipline into the economy. It was, in fact, thought that

domestic inflation would rapidly converge to the level of world inflation

plus the rate of devaluation of the peso.

     In June 1979, with inflation standing at an annual rate of 34%, the

government put an end to the system of a preannounced declining rate of

devaluation and fixed the exchange rate at 39 pesos per dollar. It was

expected that this move to a fixed rate would reinforce and accelerate the

purchasing power parity type convergence of domestic to world inflation.

     When the tablita was adopted in early 1978, and again when the peso was

pegged to the dollar in June of 1979, it was decided      to alter the wage

indexation mechanism. Paradoxically then, while the authorities expected

price setters and other agents to form forward-looking expectations, they

maintained a crucial market linked to a rigidly mechanical backward indexa-

tion regime. This decision resulted in the maintenance of an important
                                     33




component of the inertial forces in the system.35

     111.4.1 Exchawe Rate Pegging and Reøl Exchanee Rate Overvaluation
     Contrary to what was expected by the architects of the open economy

stabilization plan, after the exchange rate was fixed in mid-1979, the

domestic rate of inflation did not rapidly converge to its world counter-

part. Table 7 contains data for 1978-83 on the behavior of the rate of

nominal devaluation with respect to the U.S. dollar, of two measures of U.S.

inflation, and of the Chilean rate of inflation. In fact, the use of the

exchange rate as a stabilization tool helped generate a steady real

appreciation, or real overvaluation, of the peso, which, among other things.

greatly hurt the degree of competitiveness of firms producing goods in the

tradable sector, including nontraditional exports.

     Figure 3 shows the evolution of Chile's (bilateral) real exchange rate

from 1963 through 1983. Three things stand out from this figure. First,

following the fixing of the nominal exchange rate in mid-1979. the RF.R

experienced a sustained real appreciation. Second, when the rate was pegged

(and even when the tablita was first adopted in 1978), the RER was relativ-

ely low (appreciated) with respect to its 1975-76 levels. This means that

there wasn't much of a cushion for the exchange rate to fall, without gen-

erating an overvaluation, during the transition to price stability. This,

in fact, contrasts with the Mexican experience where prior to embarking on

the exchange rate preannouncement program and the Solidarity Pact, the real



     35Besides the adoption of a fixed exchange rate regime, another
important development took place during 1979. Steps toward the
liberalization of capital flows were taken, when in June of that year
commercial banks were allowed to greatly increase their ratio of foreign
liabilities to equity. This relaxation of capital inflows resulted in
massive borrowing from abroad and paved the way to Chile's debt crisis. I
have argued in Edwards (1985) that the massive inflow of foreign capital was
one of the fundamental causes of real exchange rate overvaluation in Chile.
                                     34




exchange rate was undervalued.36 As a result of this, the subsequent real

exchange rate appreciation observed in Mexico has not resulted until this

time in a situation of real exchange rate overvaluation.

    The third interesting characteristic of Figure 3 is that there is a

clear structural break in the real exchange rate behavior in Chile.

Throughout 1974-84, in spite of broad fluctuations, the real exchange rate

was at all times significantly higher than at any time during the previous

10 years. Two main 'real" events that     greatly affected   the behavior of

fundamentals" are behind the major real depreciation that took place

between 1965-73 and 1979: First, there was a drastic liberalization of

international trade, which eliminated all quantitative restrictions and

reduced import tariffs from an average of more than 100% to a uniform 10%

level (Edwards and Cox-Edwards, 1987). Second, there was a steep, and

apparently permanent, deterioration of Chile's terms of trade; during 1975-

79 the average real price of Chile's main export, copper, was 41% below its

1965-73 average.

     An important aspect of exchange rate based programs refers to the need

to monitor RER movements in order to assess whether situations of overvalua-

tion are emerging. This, however, is not an easy task. As the fundamental

determinants of the equilibrium real exchange rate changes, as has been the

case in Poland and Yugoslavia, it becomes exceedingly difficult to know with

any degree of certainty whether the RER is moving closer to an overvaluation

situation. Under these circumstances it becomes extremely important to

monitor very closely developments in the external sector, in order to

capture early on any possible signs of overvaluation. In the cases of Chile


     36 the Mexican stabilization package see eristain and Trigueros
(1990). On a discussion of the evolution of the real exchange rate in
Mexico see Edwards (1990).
                                     35




and Argentina, in the late 1970s the abundance of foreign capital made the

evaluation of KER conditions even more difficult, since many of the superfi-

cial signs of overvaluation such as a loss in international reserves and a

black market premium were not present.37 This situation is indeed a

possible danger in Eastern Europe where temporary substantial increases in

capital inflows may provide a false sense of boom, hiding potentially

dangerous situations of overvaluation.

     The steady process of real overvaluation of the peso since the pegging

of the peso greatly hurt the performance of noncopper exports. In 1981 the

dollar value of nontraditional exports dropped by 15%, while traditional

noncopper exports declined by 16%. In fact, for those firms in the Corbo

and Sanchez (1985) study the overvaluation of the peso was one of the most

severe blows received throughout the first ten years of the experiment with

market-oriented policies.

     Although at this point it is too early to know whether the recent real

appreciations in Poland is moving this country into an overvaluation

situation, it is clear that this is a potentially      serious problem. The
economic history of Latin America has clearly shown that overvaluation, with

all its concomitant effects, including the imposition of controls, is one of

the most dangerous and serious economic problems.

     111.4.2 Exchanae Rate Anchors end Credibility: A Comparison Between
              Chile ppd Mexico

     One of the goals of adopting a preannounced rate of devaluation (which

could be zero), as in the recent cases of Poland and Yugoslavia in a

stabilization program is to alter the public's expectations. Indeed, if the



     371n principle, temporary increases in capital inflows will result in
real exchange rate overvaluation. See Edwards (1989) for a theoretical
model and some empirical evidence.
                                        36




adoption of a nominal exchange rate rule is credible and the private sector

believes that the predetermined nominal rate will impose (or assure) discip-

line, it will tend to alter its behavior. Ideally, in an economy suffering

from significant inertial forces a credible adoption of an exchange rate

rule will alter the process of expectations formation from being backward-

looking to being forward-looking. This means that, with other things given,

the implementation of a credible exchange rate based stabilization program

will reduce the degree of persistance built into the inflation process.

Contracts, under a credible exchange rate pegging will take into account the

change in the exchange rate regime, and this change in behavior will then be

reflected in the data on price changes.

        A potenlially fruitful line of attack for empirically analyzing the

degree of credibility of exchange rate based programs is to investigate if,

once the exchange rate rule is adopted, the degree of inertia of inflation

was indeed reduced. Formally this can be done by estimating an equation of

the following form:

                  —                                                           (9)
                      a0 + ai1 + a2(Dr l + bjXjtk + Ut,

where         is the rate of inflation in period t, D is a dummy variable

that takes the value of 1 during the period when the exchange rate based

program is in effect, and where the Xi's are other determinants of infla-

tion. In this equation the coefficient a1 captures the degree of inertia

of the inflationary process before the exchange rate based program and the

coefficient (a1 + a2) is our measure of persi3tence once the exchange rate

anchor is used. Under a credible program, then, we would expect the      2 to
be significantly negative. A zero value, or even worse a positive value of

a2, would suggest that the program lacked credibility and that it failed to

alter the public's expectations and perception of the system's dynamics.
                                          37




        A number of variations of equation (9) were estimated using quarterly

data for Chile. In these estimates two alternative dummy variables were

used:     the first one (Dl) took a value of one between the second quarter of

1978, when the program of preannouncing the rate of devaluation was first

implemented, and the first quarter of 1982. In the second case (D2) the

dummy variable took a value of one between the third quarter of 1979 and the

first quarter of 1982. That is, D2 covers only the period when the nominal

exchange was strictly fixed. With respect to the other determinants of

inflation (the          in equation (9)), current and lagged values of a number

of variables were considered including the rate of devaluation, the rate of

growth of domestic credit and the rate of growth of money. Although most

equations were estimated for the period comprised between the first quarter

of 1974 and the first quarter of 1982 •-       that   is, the last quarter of a

fixed exchange rate -- a number of other time periods were also considered.

        In every regression run the coefficient of Dw1 turned out to be

positive (although statistically not significantly different from zero),

indicating that the adoption of the exchange rate rule did not alter the

degree of inflationary inertia in the system. The following is an example

of the type of result obtained (t.statistics in parentheses):38

                   —    -0.031 + 0.754 wt-l + 0.24902w        1 +    0.123    0EV
                       (-0.869) (8.923)       (0.669)               (1.352)

                   + 0.076 0EV    1 -    0.133 CM + 0.266 CM 1                        (10)
                       (3.001)          (-0.990)        (2.255)

                                                                       — 0.965
                                                             Durbins h — 0.289
                                                                     D.W. — 1.910
                                                                  Period: 74Q1-82Q1



     38This equation was estimated using OLS. When instrumental variables
were used the results were very similar.
                                     38




where DEV is the rate of devaluation and where GM is the rate of growth

of Ml.
     In order to further test whether the adoption of the fixed exchange

rate in June of 1979 had an effect on the inflation process, a number of

tests on the structural stability of inflation equations of the type of (9)

were performed. If, indeed the shift from an accommodating adjustable

exchange rate regime to a rigidly predetermined one is credible, it would be

expected that the inflation equation would capture a chanee in reeime.

However, these stability tests were supportive of the dummy variable results

reported previously, and showed n structural break in the inflation equa-

tion. For example, in the case of equation (10) the Chi-square statistic

for structural stability had a value of x2(6) —   2.23,   indicating that

there is no evidence of a change in the inflationary regime in mid-1979.

     The above evidence, then, suggests that the adoption of a predetermined

exchange rate in Chile was not associated with a change in the nature of the

inflationary process that one expects from a credible policy.39 In parti-

cular, expectations and contract practices (e.g., indexation) do not seem to

have been affected in a significant way. This, of course, was particularly

true for the case of wage contracts which largely remained being backward

indexed to 100% of past inflation. As a consequence of this, the degree of

inflationary inertia remained basically unchaned after the adoption of the

exchange rate based program.

      Equations of the type of (9) were also estimated for Mexico. The

Mexican program differs from the Chilean case in a very important respect:



     39This, of course, does not mean that the fixing of the exchange rate
did not have some effect on inflation. Naturally, to the extent that
devaluation enters the inflation equation, a lower DEV will generate a
 lower .-.
                                       39




while in Chile the stabilization program was based solely on fiscal

restraint and a predetermined (and then fixed) nominal exchange rate, in the

case   of Mexico incomes policies became a central element of the anti-

inflationary package, supplementing the exchange rate rule and the fiscal

adjustment. Indeed in late 1987 with the establishment of the Facto de

Solidaridad, unions, entrepreneurs and the government worked Out a

politically and economically feasible plan for defeating inflation: price

and wage guidelines became important elements of this program.4°

       The key question, then, is whether a program which combines the use of

the exchange rate as an anchor with incomes policies is more credible -     - and

thus is able to alter the dynamics of inflation --    than a program that
relies exclusively on the exchange rate anchor.41 In order to investigate

this a number of equations based on (9) were estimated using quarterly data

for    Mexico for the period 1979-90. As in the Chilean regressions the dummy

variable   was defined for two alternative periods: D3 takes a value of one

between the second quarter of 1988 and the second quarter of 1990. while D4

takes a value of 1 from the first quarter of 1989 (when the Facto was first

renewed) and the second quarter of 1990.

        Contrary to the case of Chile, in every equation estimated for Mexico

the coefficient of            turned out to be significantly negative,

indicating that the adoption of the preannounced exchange rate system, and

the other policies in the Facto, were credible significantly changing the

dynamics of inflation. The following equation illustrates the type of

results obtained:



        40See Beristain and Trigueros (1990) for a useful description.

     41The implicit assumption is that in both cases the fiscal side has
been corrected. This was indeed the case both in Chile and Mexico.
                                         40



               —     0.002+     0.845w         -    0.197     D3if
                                                                     t-1
                                                                           +    0.077 IEV
                    (-0.417) (20.778)              (-4.222)                     (3.551)

               +    0.059 DEV t-1 + 0.046 CM + 0.059 CM 1
                    (2.233)          (1.476)           (1.852)                   —2
                                                                                 R — 0.964
                                                                     Durbin's h — 1.321
                                                                                D.W. — 1.621
                                                                      Period: 79Q1-90Q1

    The estimated autoregressive term for the Pacto period is equal to

0.648, only 75% of its value during the rest of the period. Although it is

not possible to make generalizations at this point, these contrasting

results between Chile and Mexico are quite suggestive, indicating that the

adoption of an exchange rate rule on its own need not alter the dynamics of

inflation, If it is not supplemented by a battery of accompanying income

policies that provide (politically acceptable) guidelines to prices and

wages.


IV. Concluin Remarks

     In this paper I have analyzed some of the most important stabilization

policy problems faced by the USSR and the Eastern European nations:

(a) how to deal with the monetary overhang;           (b) how to face the fiscal

deficit problems;    (c) the deindexation Issue; and (d) the question of

exchange rate anchors. With respect to each of these areas I have discussed

some lessons stemming from the Latin American experience with stabilization

and anti-inflationary policies. Although in doing this I have focused

mostly on the case of Chile -   -a   country whose initial economic conditions

somewhat resembled those encountered in Eastern Europe -                   -I   have also dealt

with the Mexican experience.

     The most important conclusions of this study can be summarized as

follows:
                                         41




       (1) The reliance on a major price level jump to eliminate the monetary

overhang in Chile in October of 1973 proved to be costly. Expectations of

inflation became high and chaotic, with firms and other agents adjusting

their prices in antiethation of expected further inflation. These expecta-

tions, plus the rapid full indexation of the economy, were translated into a

system with a high degree of inertia, and thus in an extremely long path

towards price stability.

       It is not possible to know what would have happened if an alternative

policy had been followed. One can only speculate that some type of monetary

reform - possibly one that would have based on combined currency blocking

-   - would   have resulted in a smoother and less traumatic transition.42

Under this alternative policy the monetary reform would have been immediate-

ly followed by a relaxation of (most) prices and a devaluation. The freeing

of prices would have allowed a correction in relative price distortions but

presumably would not have resulted in the type of traumatic jump in the

price level that was, in fact, observed. Also, after the monetary reform

the required discreet devaluation would have been smaller than what was

actually observed.

        (2) There is no doubt that fiscal adjustment is a crucial requirement

for achieving stability. An important component of this adjustment is to

create a tax system that is not vulnerable to inflation itself. The sophist-

icated inflation adjustment clauses introduced to the Chilean tax system in

late 1974 greatly helped that country to eliminate the public sector

imbalances. The creation of this type of system in Eastern Europe seems to be

an important element for achieving a stable macroeconomic environment.



     62Arguably the blocked funds could have been used to create some long
maturity instruments in the emerging financial market.
                                         42



     (3) In successful experiences the efforts to deindex the labor

market -   - delinking   wage increases from   inflation - have
                                                        -         been

maintained throughout the stabilization program. In Chile, the return to

full backward looking indexation in late 1976 added considerable inertia to

the inflationary process. Uhether a deindexation program will indeed be

feasible will depend on political consensus. Whether this type of policy is

politically possible in Eastern Europe is not yet clear.

     (4) The adoption of an exchange rate based stabilization program,

where the nominal exchange rate is either pegged, or its rate of change is

predetermined at a rate below ongoing inflation, carries a serious danger of

provoking a major overvaluation. This can even happen if the fiscal deficit

is fully under control as in the case of Chile. Some countries, such as

Mexico, have dealt with this problem by starting the stabilization program

at a point that is one of undervaluation as in Mexico in 1988.

     (5) The cEost important goal of the adoption of a predetermined nominal

exchange rate as part of a stabilization program is to alter the dynamics of

the inflationary process. More specifically, a credible adoption of an

exchange rate rule will reduce the degree of inertia in the system. An

empirical comparison between the Chilean and Mexican cases show that while

in the former the adoption of the exchange rate rule did not affect the

inertial forces built in the system, in Mexico the degree of persistence in

inflation was significantly reduced. The main difference in these two

experiences is that in Mexico the exchange rate rule was supplemented with

other incomes policies.
                        ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS


University of California. Los Angeles, The National bureau of
Economic Research, and Institute for Policy Reform. Comments
welcome. First draft: December, 1990; revised: February, 1991,
March, 1991, May, 1991 and August, 1991. This is a revised
version of a paper presented at the IRIS-IPR conference on
Eastern European Reform, Prague, March 24-26, 1991. A previous
version of this paper was presented at the American Economic
Association Annual Meetings, Washington, DC, December 27-30,
1990.  I am indebted to my discussants at the AEA meetings for
helpful comments. I am grateful to Geoff Carliner, Julius
Santaella and Chris Clague for their comments. Once again I am
indebted to Mike Savastano for helpful discussions. Support from
the Institute for Policy Reform is gratefully acknowledged.
                                        43



                                    REFERENCES



Banco Central de Chile, Boletin Merisual, 1984.

Bardcn, A., "Situacion Monetaria e Inflacin," Universidad de Chile, 1973.

Beristain, J., and I. Trigueros, "Mexico's Stabilization Program," in J.

   Williamson (ed.), Latin American Economic Adjustment, 1990.

Bitar, S., La Politica Economics de is linidad Popular. Siglo XXI, 1979.

Calvo, C. ,   and C. Vegh, "Credibility and the Dynamics   of Stabilization
    Policy: A Basic Framework," IMP, 1990.

Corbo, V., and IC Sanchez, "How Firms Adjusted to the Reforms in Chile,"

    World Bank, 1985.

_________      and A. Solimano, "Chile's Experience With Stabilization

    Revisited," World Bank, 1990.

Cortazar, R., and J. Marshall, "Indice de Precios al Consumidor en Chile,"

    ms. ,   CPEPLAN, Santiago, Chile, 1980.

 Covicelli, F. ,   and R. Rocha, "Stabilization Programs in Eastern Europe:

    Poland and Yugoslavia." World Bank, 1990.

 de Castro. S., "Exposin6n de la Hacienda Piiblica," Ministeriode Hacienda,

    Santiago de Chile, 1981.

 Dornbusch, IC, and S. Edwards, "Macroeconomic Populism in Latin     America,"
    NEER Working Paper #2986, 1989.

 _________      and H. Wolf, "Monetary Overhang and Reforms in the l940s," NBER

    Working Paper 3456, 1990.

 Edwards, S., "Stabilization with Liberalization: An Evaluation of Ten

    Years of Chile's Experiment With Free Market Policies       1973-83,"

    Economic Development pnd Cultural Change, 33 (Jan. 1985).
                                    44




_________ "Terms of Trade, Tariffs, and Labor Market Adjustment in
   Developing Countries," World Bank, 1988.

_________ Real Exchange Rates. Devaluation nd Adlustment, MIT Press,
   l989a.

_________   "The International Monetary Fund and the Developing Countries:

   A Critical Evaluation," in Carnegie-Rochester Public Policy Series,

   North-Holland Publishing Co., 1989b.

________ "Mexico    and Argentina Comments," in .3. Williamson (ed.), L.atth

   American Adjustment, HE, 1990.
Edwards, S.. and A.Cox-Edwards, Mpnetarism and Liberalization: The Chilean

   ExDeriment, Cambridge, MA: Ballinger, 1986; revised ed., University of

   Chicago Press, 1991.

Fischer, S., "Issues in Medium-Term Macroeconomic Adjustment," World Dank

   Research Observer, 1986.

Ciavazzi, F., and A. Giovanini, Limiting Exchange Rate Flexibility: The

   Euronean Monetary System, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989.

Hinds, M., "Issues in the Introduction of Market Forces in Eastern European

   Socialist Economies," World Bank, 1990.

Kiguel, M. and M. Liviatan, "The Business Cycle Associated With Exchange

   Rate Based Stabilizations," World Bank, 1990.

Larrain, F., and P. Meller, "Populism in Chile, 1970-1973," in R. Dorrtbusch

   and S. Edwards (ed.), The Macroeconomics of Ponulism in Latin America,

   University of Chicago Press, forthcoming, 1991.

Lipton, D.. and J. Sachs, "Creating a Market Economy in Eastern Europe:

   The Case of Poland," Brookipzs Paoers, 1990.

Luders, R., "The Privatization of the Chilean Economy," mimeo, UCLA, 1990.
                                           45



McKinnon, R., "Stabilizing the Ruble: The Problem of Internal Currency

   Convertibility," mimeo, Stanford University, 1990.

Hendez, J.C. .     Chilean   Economic Policy, Santiago, 1980.

Nordhaus, W.D., "Soviet Economic Reform: The Longest Road," Brookinas

   Paper,      1990.
Ramos, J., "La Economia de la Riperestaf1acin en Chile," Cuedernos de

   conomia, 1977.

Rocha, R., "Stabilization Programs in Yugoslavia," World Bank, 1990.
Williamson, J., Indexation and Inflation, lIE, 1989.

Yaiiez, J. ,    'Una Correccion del Indice de Prenios al Consumidor Dorcute el

   Periods 1971-73," in F. Contreras (ed.), Comentarios subre la Situacion

   Econpmice, Santiago: Universidad de Chile, 1978.
                                  TAELE 1

        Economic Conditions In The USSR And Eastern Europe In 1989



                                            Crowth In
                            Estimated       Industrial   Inflation
                            Real GDP          Output     Rate in
                            (1986—100)       in l989       1989

           Bulgaria             99.8            0.0%        11.4%

          Czechoslovakia       104.0            0.0%         1.8%

          Hungary              101.4           -3.6%        16.9%

          Poland                97.9           -4.2%       640.0%

          Rumania               99.5            n.a.         n.a.

          USSR                 105.5            0.0%         5.7%

          Yugoslavia            98.4           -1.0%      2795.0%



aEf     to adjust (as opposed to official) data.

Source: Directorate of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency (CIA),
        1990.
                                 TABLE 2

          Policies for Stabilization and Market-Oriented Reform:

     A Comparison Between Chile in the 1970s and Poland in the 1990s



                 Chile                                          Poland

A. Price and iage Rate Foljjes
     More than 3000 previously controlled       Most prices freed during
     prices were freed in October of 1973.      first week of January of
     Initially only 30 goods continue to        1990.
     have controlled prices.

    • From Oct. 1973 to July 1975 partial      • Limited and lagged wage
      and lagged wage indexation; between        indexat ion.
      July 1975 and Aug. 1981, full
      defacto indexation

B. Exchanee Rate Policy
    • Sept. 12, 1972 official devaluation of   • Jan. 1, 1990, official
      the peso of 85%. Number of exchange        devaluation of the Zloty by
      rates reduced from 13 to 3 and then        46%. Exchange rate unifica-
      to 1. Partial convertibility (cur-         tion. Partial convertibil-
      rent account only).                        ity (current account only)

    • A crawling peg system was followed       • Exchange rate is fixed to
      until Feb. 1978. From Feb. 1978 to         dollar as a way to provide
      June 1979 the rate of devaluation was      an anchor to the stabiliza-
      preannounced at a rate below ongoing       tion program.
      inflation. In June 1979 exchange
      rate was fixed to the dollar as a way
      to provide an anchor to the anti-
      inflation program.

C. Fiscal and Monetary Policies
    • In 1974 a fiscal reform that indexed     • Fiscal adjustment attempted,
      the tax system implemented a broad         mainly through reduction in
      VAT at a 20% rate and eliminated most      expenditures on subsidies.
      exonerations, was enacted. Broad           Target for 1990 calls for
      expenditure cuts. Fiscal deficit was       an adjustment of the fiscal
      reduced from 25% of CDP in 1973 to 2%      accounts of 5% of CDP.
      in 1975.

    • Significant tightening in monetary       • Control of net domestic
      control was attempted early on. How-       assets of Central Bank.
      ever, during 1974 reserves accumula-
      tion became an important source of       • Interest rates raised by
      money creation. Interest rates Were        more than 4 times to 35%
      freed and were very high until 1980.       per month.
Table 2 (cont.)

                  Chile                                         PQland

D. Trade Policy
    • Rapid elimination of quotas, licenses   •
                                                  Rapid elimination of quotas
      and prohibitions,                           and licenses.

    • Sweeping tariff reform that slashed     •   Reduction   of import tariffs.
      tariffs from approximately 100% in
      1973 to 20% in 1976 and 10% by 1979.

E. Privatization
    • Rapid process of privatization of       •   Plans drawn, little done
      banks and firms nationalized during         (yet).
      the Allende period. tanks privatiz-
      ed first. Foreigners participation
      limited in the privatization process.
      However, a flexible Ff1 statute was
      enacted.
                                 TABLE 3

                  The Evolution of Real Money in Chile:

                                 1965- 1978

                                 (percent)



                                    Ml        M3
                                   --
                          1965      7.9       11.1
                          1966      8.4       11.5
                          1967      8.1.      11.6
                          1968      7.9       10.6
                          1969      7.7       11.0
                          1970      8.1       11.4
                          1971     12.2       16.5
                          1972     13.1       16.9
                          1973     10.1       12.5
                          1974      5.1        6.3
                          1975      4.2        6.8
                          1976      4.0        8.0
                          1977      4.9       10.7
                          1978       6.0      15.9


Source: Ministerio de Hacienda y Credito Publico.
                                    TABLE 4

                               Inflation In Chile:

                                    1973-1978
                                                             *
                    (monthly percent increases in the CPI)


                      1973       1974     1975       1976        1921   1221

    January            10.3       14.1     13.9       10.5        5.9    1.8

    February            4.1       24.5     16.5       10.1        5.8    2.4

    March               6.2       14.2     21.2       13.5        6.1    2.9

    April              10.2       15.3     20.8       11.9        4.7    2.6

    May                19.4        8.7     16.0        9.8        3.8    2.1

    June               15.6       20.8     19.8       12.3        3.3    2.0

    July               15.3       11.5        9.3      8.9        3.9    2.5

    August              17.1      10.9        8.9      5.5        3.4    2.8

    September           16.9      12.8        9.2      7.6        3.7    2.9

    October             87.6      18.9        8.4      6.7        4.2    1.9

    November             5.7       9.7        8.2      3.8        2.2    1.3

     December           4.7        6.5        7.1      5.1        3.1    1.5

     Dec. to Dec.      508.1     375.9    340.7      174.3       63.5   30.3


*These data refer to official inflation. For a discussion of alternative
 measures of inflation in Chile see Edwards and Edwards (1991).

Source: National Bureau of Statistics.
                                    TABLE S

                  Fiscal Deficit and Inflation In Chile:

                                  1970-1983



                        Inflation       Coy.   Coy.
                          Rate %               Exvend. Deficit
                       (December-
                        December        QL     CDP      GD?

               1970        34.9         28.1   25.2      2.9
               1971        34.5         32.4   21.2     11.2
               1972       216.7         32.2   18.7     13.5
               1973       605.9         44.7   20.1     24.6
               1974       369.2         32.4    21.9    10.5
               1975       343.2         27.4    24.8     2.6
               1976       197.9         25.8    23.5     2.3
               1977        84.2         24.9    23.1     1.9
               1978        37.2         23.8    23.0       .9

               1979        38.0         23.1    24.7    -1.7
               1980        31.2         25.0    25.5     -.6
               1981         9.9         23.7    26.7    -3.0
               1982        20.7         29.0    26.7    -2.3
               1983        23.1         28.4    24.6     3.8


Sources: Column A is taken from Yanez (1978) for years 1970-72 and 1979-82
          as published in Banco Central De Chile, Boletin Mensual. (various
          issues); from Cortazar and Marshall (1980) for 1973-78. Columns B
          through D are taken from de Castro (1981).
                     TABLE 6

            Wage Indexation In Chile:

             1974-1980 (percentages)



      (1)             (2)               (3)
                                  End of Period
                  Accumulated    Mandated Nominal
   Period          Inflation       Wage Increase

10/1/73-1/1/74       107.7%             50•0%d
1/1/74-5/1/74         87.1              611b
5/1/75-7/1/74         31.3              34.5

7/1/75-10/1/74        39.5              24.1
10/1/75-12/1/74       30.4              35.2

12/1/75-3/1/75        41.4              33.1

3/1/75-7/1/75        103.2              71.0

7/1/75-9/1/75         19.0              24.0

9/1/75-12/1/75        28.1              28.0

12/1/75-3/1/76        30.2              32.0

 3/1/76-7/1/76        56.8              39.0

 7/1/76-9/1/76        14.8              26.0

 9/1/76-12/1/76       19.2              18.0

12/1/76-3/1/77        17.8              19.0

 3/1/77-7/1/77        19.2              18.0

 7/1/77-12/1/77       18.7              18.0

12/1/77-3/1/78         7.5               8.0

 3/1/78-7/1/78        10.0              10.0

 7/1/78-12/1/78       11.9              12.0
12/1/78-3/1/79         5.5               6.0
 3/1/79-7/1/79        10.8              11.0

 7/1/79-12/1/79       18.0              18.0

12/1/79-4/1/80         9.4               8.0

4/1/80-10/1/80        13.9              lle.Oc

10/1/80-8/1/81        14.3              14.Oc

 8/1/81-7/1/83        37.1               50c,e
 7/1/83-1/1/84        11.8              150c
Table 6 (cont.)

aCPOfldS to the official CPI.
bcorresponds to increase in minimum wage.
CNOt   binding   for workers subject to collective bargaining.
dgetween October 1973 and January 1974 two bonuses were paid. Their nominal
 value was equal to the April 1973 taxable salary.
eThe 23.4% loss in real income was partially offset by four bonuses of 30%,
 15%, 15%, and 15% of current wages paid in September, October, November,
 and December 1983.

Source: banco Central de Chile (1984) and A. Edwards (1985).
                                  TAELE 7

                          1978-1983 (percentage)



              Annualized Rate   Annualized     Annualized   Annualized
              Of Devaluation     U.S. WPI       U.S. CPI     Rate of
              With Respect To     Rate of        Rate of     Inflation
                U.S. Dollar     Inflation      Inflation      (CPI)

      1978         21.4             9.6            9.1         37.2

      1979         14.9            14.9           13.3         38.0
      1980          0              12.3           12.4         31.2

      1981          0               5.6            8.9          9.5

      1982         88.3             1.5            3.9         20.7
       1983        19.2             1.8            3.8         23.1


Sources: All data refer to December to December rates of change.
         Columns A and D are from Table 2-1.
          Columns B and C are from the IMF International Financial
          Statistics.
                       PRICES IN LATIN AMERICA, 1970—1990
                                                         (1970= 100)
           30
           28

           26

           24

           22

           20

           18

           16

           14
J0
           12

           10

            8

            6

            4

            2

            0
                1970       1972     1974   1976         197B   1980      1982   1984   1986   1988   199(J



                       +      Bol          0      Bra           A      Chi        x    Mex       V   I'r
)    Arg
               F/tIrLE 2

CHILE:      THE BLACK MARKET IN DOLLARS




 8    j.
 1.


 K




 K

 I

 p
 R

 E




 ii

           [r1T i[     IT{flTfTlI 1i1 I [1 ii Ijil Ui I        li_I if

       1964     1967    191    1973       1916   1919   1982       195
                   REAL EXHAN RATE


                               CHILE
    120
    110
P 100
    jo
i   eo
    70
    60
    50
P 40
    30
E 20
     10
      0
          1963 1965 1967 1969 1971 1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1953
                                  YEAR
