NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES

OPTIMAL INVESTMENT STRATEGIES FOR UNIVERSITY ENDOWMENT FUNDS

Robert C.

Merton

Working Paper No. 3820

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1991

Robert C. Merton is George Fisher Baker Professor of Business
Administration at Harvard University and a research associate of
the National Bureau of Economic Research. This paper is part of
NBER's research program in Financial Markets and Monetary
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper t382O
August 1991

OPTIMAL INVESTMENT STRATEGIES FOR UNIVERSITY ENDO1MENT FUNDS

ABSTRACT
A common approach to the management of endowment is to treat
it as if it were the only asset of the university. This approach
leads to prescriptions for optimal investment and expenditure
policies that are essentially the same across universities.
Indeed, the resulting optimal portfolio strategies are focused
almost exclusively on providing an efficient tradeoff between
risk and expected return, a generic objective that is just as
applicable to individuals and non-academic institutions as it is
to universities. In contrast, the model developed here provides
intertemporally optimal investment and expenditure rules for
endowment that take account of the university's overall

objectives and total resources. The explicit inclusion of other
university assets in addition to endowment leads to optimal
endowment portfolios that are not efficient in the sense of the

risk-return tradeoff. Moreover, two universities with similar
objectives and endowments can have very different optimal
portfolios and expenditure patterns if their non-endowment
sources of cash flow are different. The model also takes account
of the uncertainty surrounding the costs of the various
activities such as education, research, and knowledge storage
that define the purpose of the university. As a result, the
analysis reveals a perhaps somewhat latent role for endowment:
namely, hedging against unanticipated changes in those costs.

Robert C. Merton
Graduate School
of Business
Harvard University
Soldiers Field/Dillon 32
Boston, MA 02163
and NEER

Oplinwi Iiwc1mcn( S(nitcgics

2

OPTIMAL INVESTMENT STRATEGIES FOR UNIVERSITY ENDOWMENT FUNDS

Robert C. Merlon

1. Introduction
To examine the question of optimal investment strategies for university
endowment funds, one must, of course, address the issue of the objective

function by which optimality is to be measured. My impression is that
practicing money managers essentially side-step the issue by focusing on
generically efficient risk-return objective functions for investment which are
just as applicable to individuals or non-academic institutions as they are to

universities. Perhaps the most conon objective of this type is mean-variance
efficiency for the portfolio's allocations. Black (1976) provides a deeper
approach along those lines that takes account of tax and other institutional
factors including certain types of non-endowment assets held by institutions.
The Ford Foundation study of 1969 gave some early practical (if

ex-post.

somewhat untimely) guidance for investment allocations.
Much of the academic literature (which is not copious) seems to focus on
appropriate spending policy for endowment, taking as given that the objective
for endowment is to provide a perpetual level flow of expected real income
(cf. Eisner (1974), Ljtvack, Malkiel, and Quandt (1974), Nichols (1974). and

Tobin (1974)). Ennjs and Williamson (1976) present a history of spending
patterns by universities and a discussion of various spending rules adopted.
They also discuss the interaction between spending and investment policies.

Opdmal fwvlmca: Stiategic

3

Fama and Jensen (1985) discuss the role of non-profit institutions as

part of

a general analysis of organizational forms and investment objective functions,
but they do not address the functions of endowment in such institutions.
In contrast, Hansmann (1990) provides a focused and comprehensive review
of the various possible roles for a university's endowment.

Despite the broad

coverage of possibilities ranging from tax incentives to promoting intergenerational equity, he is unable to find compelling empirical evidence to

support

any particular combination of objectives. Indeed, he concludes that '..

.pre-

vailing endowment spending rules seem inconsistent with most of these objec-

tives (p.39). Hansmann goes on to assert (p.39-40):
"It appears, however, that surprisingly little thought has been devoted to
the purposes for which endowments are maintained and that, as a consequence, their rate of accumulation and the pattern of spending from their
income have been managed without much attention to the ultimate objectives
of the institutions that hold them.'

The course taken here to address this question is in the middle

range: It

does not attempt to specify in detail the objective function for the university, but it does derive optimal investment and expenditure policy for endowment
in a context which takes account of overall university objectives and the

availability of other sources of revenue besides endowment. In that respect.
it follows along lines similar to the discussion in Black (1976,26-8). In
addition, our model takes explicit account of the uncertainties

surrounding

the costs of university activities. As a result, the analysis reveals another
(perhaps somewhat latent) purpose for endowment: namely, hedging against

unanticipated changes in those costs. Formal trading rules for implementing
this hedging function are derived. However, the paper neither assesses which

Opümal Ir1vtmcat Sra1cgl

costs,

4

as an empirical matter, are more important to hedge nor does it examine

the feasibility of hedging those costs using available traded securities. The
interested reader should see Erinkman (1981,1990), Brovender (1974), Nordhaus
(1989), and Snyder (1988) where the various costs of universities are de-

scribed and modelled, both historically and prospectively.
Grinold, Hopkins, and Massy (1978) develop a budget-planning model which
also integrates endowment returns with other revenue and expense flows of the

university. However, their model differs significantly from the one presented
here, perhaps because their focus is on developing policy guidelines for
expenditures instead of optimal intertemporal management of endowment.

The mathematical model for optimal expenditures and investment is deve-

loped in Sections 2 and 3. It is based on a standard intertemporal consumption and portfolio-selection model. Hence, the formal structure of the
optimal demand functions is already widely studied in the literature. It is
the application of this model to the management of university endowment which

is new. For analytical simplicity and clarity, the model is formulated in
continuous time. However, it is evident from the work of Constantinides
(1989), Long (1974), and Merton (1977) that a discrete-time version of the

model would produce similar results. The reader who prefers to be exposed to
the basic insights provided by the model before going through the detailed
mathematical analysis should begin with the summary and conclusions discussion
in Section 4.

OpimaJ Invcamcnt Stzatcgk4

2. The Model

The functions or purposes of the university are assumed to be a collection
of activities or outputs such as education, training, research, and storage of

knowledge. We further assume that the intensities of those activities can be
quantified and there exists a preference ordering for ranking alternative

intertemporal programs. In particular, the criterion function for this
ranking can be written as:

max E0 {

I
0

TJ(Q1

Q,t)dt }

where Qj(t) denotes the quantity of activity j
time t. j —

1,... ,m;

concave in (Q1

the preference function U

Q_); and E

(1)

,

per

is

unit time undertaken at

assumed to be strictly

denotes the expectation operator,

conditional on knowing all relevant information as of time t. This preference ordering satisfies the classic von Neumann-Morgenstern axioms of choice,

exhibits positive risk aversion, and includes "survival (of the institution)
as a possible objective. The infinite time horizon structure in (1) implies
only that there need not be a definite date when the university will liqui-

date. As shown in Herton (1990a, 149-51, 609-11), U can reflect the
mortality characteristics of an uncertain liquidation date.
The intertemporally additive and independent preference structure in (1)
can be generalized to include non-additivity, habit-formation and other pathdependent effects on preferences, along the lines of Bergman (1985),

Constantinides (1990), Detemple and Zapatero (1989), Duffie and Epstein
(1989), Hindy and Huang (1989), Sundaresan (1989), and Svensson (1989).

OpthnaJ Itwctmco.t S1racgi

However, as shown

6

in

Merton (1990a, 207-9). those more-realistic preference

functions do not materially affect the optimal portfolio demand functions.
Moreover, just as Grossman and Laroque (1990) show for transactions costs in
consumption, so it can be shown here that imposing adjustment costs for
changing the levels of university activities does not alter the structure of

the portfolio demand functions. Hence, because the focus of the paper is on
optimal investment (rather than optimal expenditure) strategies, we assume no
adjustment costs for activities and retain the additive independent preference
specification to provide analytical simplicity.

Let S(t) denote the (net) cost to the university of providing one

unit of activity j at time t, j —

1

m. For example, if j —

1

denotes

the activity of having full-tuition-paying undergraduates, then S1 would be
the unit cost of providing the education minus the tuition received. If
j — 2

denotes the activity of having undergraduates who receive financial

aid, the unit cost S2 would equal S1 plus the financial aid given. In
general, all costs and receipts such as tuition that are directly linked to
the quantities of specific activities undertaken are put into the activity

costs or prices, (SJ). As will be described, fixed costs and sources of
positive cash flows to the university that do not depend directly on the

activity quantities are handled separately. As in Merton (1990a, 202, 699),
we assume that the dynamics for these costs are described by the stochastic
differential equations: for S

dS —

f(S,t)S1dt

(S1,...,S,,),

+

g(S,t)Sdq5,

j — 1

m

(2)

Opamsi Inv4mcnt S(nsIcpc

where

f1 is the instantaneous expected rate of growth in S. g3 is the

instantaneous standard deviation of the growth rate, and dq is a Wiener
process with the instantaneous correlation coefficient between dq and dq

given by u, i,j
Si — 0

1

m. f1 and g1 are such that dS1

which ensures that S,(t)

0 for

0. Especially since (S) has components

that depend on tuition, financial aid and other variables over which the
university has some control, one would expect that the dynamic path for those
costs would be at least partially endogenous and controllable by the university, even though competition among universities would limit the degree of

controllability. However, as specified, (2) is an exogenous process, not controlled by the university. Alternatively, it can be viewed as the "reduced-

form" process for S after optimization over non-portfolio choice variables.

The university is assumed to have N non-endowment sources of cash

flows which we denote by Y(t)dt for the kth source at time t.

Examples

of such sources are gifts, bequests, university business income, and public

and private-sector grants. It can also be used to capture transfer-pricing
for the use of buildings and other university-specific assets where Yk is
the rental rate and this rental fee appears as an offsetting charge in the

{SJ} for the appropriate university activities. The dynamics for these cash

flows are modeled by: for Y
dYk

where

and

8k

(Y1

P.k(Y,S,tYikdt +

8k(Y,S,t)'fkk

(3)

depend at most on the current levels of the cash flows and

the unit costs of university activities and dck is a Wiener process,

Opomal Iavcstmcnl Stratcpes

k —

N. Equation (3) can also be used to take account of fixed costs or

1

liabilities of the university such as faculty tenure cOnznitments, by letting

Y <

0

to reflect a cash outflow. However, the focus here is on assets only

and therefore, we assume that

which implies that Yk(t)

and 8, are such that dYk

0 for k - 0

0 for all t.

By inspection of (2) and (3), the dynamics for {Y.S) are jointly

Markov. A more realistic model would have lk

and

Q. For

current and historical values of Q

8k

depend

on both

example, if a university has

undertaken large amounts of research activities in the past, it may attract

more grants and gifts in the future. The university may also affect the
future expected cash flows from non-endowment sources by investing now in

building up those sources. Thus, the dynamic process for Y should be in
part controllable by the university. However, again for analytical simplici-

ty, the Y process is taken as exogenous, because that abstraction does not
significantly alter the optimal portfolio demand functions.

If for k —

1,... ,N,

Vk(t) denotes the capitalized value at time t

of the stream of future cash flows, Yk(r) for

t. and if K(t) denotes

the value of the endowment at time t, then the net worth or wealth of the

university, W(t) is given by
W(t) —

K(t)

+

Z!'

Vk(t)

(4)

A model for determining the Vk(t) from the posited cash flow dynamics in (3)
is developed in Section 3.

The endowment of the university is assumed to be invested in traded

9

Optimal lm'lmcn Sfratcgics

assets. There are n risky assets and a riskiess asset. If P3(t) denotes
the price of the jth risky asset at time t
the risky assets are given by, for j —

then the return dynamics for

1

dP aP3dt + uPdZ

(5)

where a3 is the instantaneous expected return on asset j; a3 is the
instantaneous standard deviation of the return; and dZ is a Wiener process.
The instantaneous correlation coefficients {Pij.n.Ctj) are defined by. for
j — 1

n,

dZdZ3 —

p3dt

dqdZJ —

flkjdt

de1d2 — (13dt

,

,
,

i

— 1

n

k

— 1

m

1 — 1

N

(5a)

For computational simplicity and to better isolate the special characteristics
of endowment management from general portfolio management, we simplify the
return dynamics specification and assume that {a3.crj.pj3) are constants over

time, i,j

1

n. As shown in Merton (l990a, Chs. 4, 5, and 6), this

assumption of a constant investment opportunity set implies that

{P(t +

r)/P3(t)},

j

1

n, for

> 0

are jointly lognormally distri-

buted, The rjskless asset earns the interest rate r which is also constant
over time. Optimal portfolio selection for general return dynamics would
follow along the lines of Merton (1990a, Chs. 5, 15, 16; l990b, Sec. 7).
To analyze the optimal intertemporal expenditure and portfolio-selection
problem for the university, we begin with a further simplified version of the

Opia&tI I,rvcstmcnt Stitcgic

o

model in which the university's entire net worth is endowment [i.e., 'fk(t) —

Vk(t)

0, k

1

K(t)].

N and W(t) —

The budget-equation dynamics for

W(t) is then given by,
dW

((

wj(t)(cj — r)

+ r)W -

" QkSk]dt + 1I' w(t)WrdZ

(6)

where w(t) — the fraction of the university's wealth allocated to risky
asset

j

at time t, j —

asset is thus 1 -

' w.

the fraction allocated to the riskiess

1

Trustees, donors, and the government are assumed

not to impose explicit limitations on investment policy for the endowment,

other than general considerations of prudence. In particular, borrowing and

short-selling are permitted and so the choice for {Wj) is unrestricted. We
further posit that spending out of endowment is not restricted, either with
respect to overall expenditure or with respect to the specific activities on

which it is spent. However, we do impose the feasibility restrictions that

total expenditure at time ,

1L QkSk,must be nonnegative and zero wealth is

an absorbing state (i.e., W(t) —

0

implies W(t + i)

0 for

> 0).

At each time t, the university chooses a quantity of activities
{Q1

Q) and a portfolio allocation of its wealth so as to maximize

lifetime utility of the university as specified in (1). Just as for the case
of multiple consumption goods analyzed in Breeden (1979), Fischer (1975), and
Merton (1990a, 205), so the solution for the optimal program here can be

decomposed into two parts. First, at each t, solve for the utility-maximizing quantities of individual activities,

expenditure constraint, C(t) —

{Q1

2" Qk(t)Sk(t).

Q,,j, subject to an overall

Second, solve for the optimal

ii

OpLimaJ Im'ttmcnf Straicpcs

level

of overall expenditures at time t

and the optimal portfolio allocation

of endowment.

The first part is essentially the static activity-choice problem under
uncertainty

max

subject to C(t) —

Z'

Q) are given by: for Sk(t)

Qrn•t)ISk =

Uk[Qi

with C(t) =

(7)

Qm,t)

QkSk(t). The first-order conditions for the optimal

activity bundle (Q1

(i.e., Uk

U[Qt

Qrnt]ISj

k,j — 1

Sk.

m

(8)

Qk*S where subscripts on U denote partial derivatives
aulaQk). It follows from (8) that the optimal quantities can be

written as

—

Qk[C(t),S(t),t],

k — 1

m.

Define the indirect utility function U by U(C(t).S(t),t]
U[Q1

Qrn•t]

By substituting U for U, we can rewrite (1) as:

max

E0{

I

U(C(t),S(t),t]dtl

(9)

where the "max' in (9) is over the intertemporal expenditure path (C(t)) and
portfolio allocations {w(t)}. Thus, the original optimization problem is
transformed into a single-expenditure choice problem with "state-dependent'
utility (where the "states" are the relative costs or prices of the various

2

Opàmai lm'c1mctU Srate8ic

activities). Once the optimal total expenditure rules, (C*(t)), are deter-

I

mined, the optimal expenditures on individual activities are determined by (8)

with C*(t) —

The solution of (9) follows by applying stochastic dynamic programming

as in Merton (1990a, Chs. 4, 5. and 6). Define the Bellman or derived-utility

function J by
J[W.S.tJ .naxE(1'U(C('r),S(i),'rdi}

V and S(t) — S.

conditional on U(t)

From Merton (1990a, 181, 202; 1990b,

555), 3 will satisfy:
o —

max

(Cv

(u(C,S,t)

+

+

subject to J(O.S,t) —

3

+ AC +

m1

J.f.S. +
3.

(

+
t

i.

i.

2

w4(tx.- r) +

3

WW1

3
1 1 iW w.Wg.S.o.q
3
j

3

J

ij

r)W

-

ci

w.w.a. .W2
3. 3
1)

1

+

2

1 1

(10)

3.

.g.S.g.S.u.
i.
1. j j ij

3.3

1 U(O,...,O.i]di. where subscripts on 3 denote

partial derivatives with respect to V. t, and S, i — 1

m and

• ptjuiaj. the instantaneous covariance between the return on security i

and j. A is a Kuhn-Tucker multiplier reflecting the non-negativity con-

straint on C and at the optimum, it will satisfy AC — 0.

The first-order

conditions derived from (10) are:
0

and

Uc[C*,S,t) + 1

—

Jw(W,S,t)

(ha)

Opthmal Invcsmcn Sralcgics

0

- r)

—

where C*

13

wjWa +

+

Z'

i —

C*(W.S,t) and w — wj*(W.S.t)

1.

(llb)

are the optimal expenditure and

portfolio rules expressed as functions of the state variables and subscripts

on U denote partial derivatives.
From (ha), the optimal expenditure rule is given by:
Uc(C*,S,t] —

Jw(w.S.t)

C

for

>

0
(12)

—

From (hlb), the

optimal portfolio

wW

where

max{O.Jw(W,S,t)

— A

b • Z1'

b

+

—

Uc(O,S,tJ}

allocation

Hkhkj ,

- r) ; hkL 8

i

—

1

can be

written

as:

n

(13)

a3gkSkkjv; Vjj is the ij-element of

the inverse of the instantaneous variance-covariance matrix of returns
A •

-J/J

(the reciprocal of absolute risk aversion of the derived-utility

function); and Hk 8

-J,/J,

k - 1

m. A and 11k depend on the indi-

vidual university's intertemporal preferences for expenditures and its current

net worth. However, b and h are determined entirely by the dynamic
structures for the asset price returns and the unit costs of the various

activities undertaken by universities. Hence, those parameters are the same
for all universities, independent of their preferences or endowment size.

To provide some economic intuition about the optimal allocation of
endowment in (13), consider as a frame of reference the 'standards intertemp-

oral portfolio selection problem with state-independent utility. U —

U(C(t).

Opima1 Invcsfmcnt Slnilcgics

tJ.

As shown

in

14

Merton (l990a, 131-6), given the posited return dynamics in

(5), all such investors will hold instantaneously mean-variance efficient

portfolios as their optimal portfolios. For au/ask • Uk •

l....,m.

Hence, in this case, (13) becomes wL*W —

0,

'1k

•

0,

k —

Abt, and wW/wW — bL/bj.

the same for all investors. This is the well-known result that the relative
holdings of risky assets are the same for all mean-variance efficient portfo-

lios. However, the state-dependent preferences for universities induced by
the uncertainty surrounding the relative costs of undertaking different
desired activities causes the more complex demand structure in (13).

To better understand this differential demand, wW -

Ab

—

IJ" Hkh,

it

is useful to examine the special case where, for each cost Sk, there exists
an asset whose instantaneous return is perfectly correlated with changes in

Sk. By renumbering securities if necessary, choose the convention that
— 1

in (5a), k —

l,...,m

(in

< n).

it follows that in this case. h —

As shown in Merton (1990a, 203-4).

gSIa,

for k —

m and hkj — 0

1

for k • j. Hence, we can rewrite (13) as:

wW — Ab

+

HgSIi

i — 1

(14)
i —m+ 1

Ab

in

n

By the strict concavity of U with respect to C, J is strictly concave in

U. Hence. J < 0 and H —

-J/J

is positively proportional to J.

Thus, relative to a 'norinaP investor with state-independent preferences

(i.e., H • 0, i —

1

m), but the same current level of absolute risk

aversion (i.e., -J/Jw), the university will optimally hold more of asset i

Opemal Iwvtmcns SftIICDà

if J > 0

Is

and less if J < 0, 1 —

If J > 0.

1,... ,m.

then, at least locally, the university's marginal utility

(or 'need") for wealth or endowment becomes larger if the cost of undertaking

activity i increases and it becomes smaller if this cost decreases. Because
the return on asset i is perfectly positively correlated with the cost of

activity i, a greater-than-expected increase in S1 will coincide with a

greater-than-expected return on asset i. By holding more of asset i than a
normal" investor, the university thus assures itself of a relatively larger

endowment in the event that S increases and the need for wealth becomes
more important. The university, of course, pays for this by accepting a rela-

tively smaller endowment in the event that S decreases and wealth is less

important. The behavioral description for J < 0

is just the reverse, be-

cause the need for endowment decreases if the cost of activity 1 increases.
To perhaps help in developing further insights, we use (12) to interpret
the differential demand component in (14) in terms of the indirect utility and

optimal expenditure functions. By differentiating (12), we have that for
C*(W,S,t) > 0

jww - Ucc

*StI

ÔC

*

kW

—

+
Ucc(C .S,t] —

Uck(C.S.t)
*

A—

Hk

_Uc(C*,S,t)/(Ucc[C*,S,t) )

-t

I ]+ Uck(c,S,t]/(T•1cc(c.S,tJ

(15)

Opamal Iavmcat Stra(ci

for

k —

l,m.

Because

< 0 and aC*/aW > 0 for C > 0, we see that

the sign of H is determined by the impact of a change in the cost of
activity k on two items: the optimal level of total current expenditure and
the marginal utility of expenditure. So, for example, if an increase in Sk
would cause both a decrease in optimal expenditure (8CC/aSk < 0) and an

increase in the marginal utility of expenditure (U >
> 0

0),

then from (15),

and the university will optimally hold more of asset k than the

corresponding investor with a mean-variance efficient portfolio.
Following (16) causes the university's optimal portfolio to be meanvariance inefficient and therefore, the return on the endowment will have
greater volatility than other feasible portfolios with the same expected

return. However, the value of the endowment or net worth of the university is
not the "end" objective. Instead, it is the "means" by which the ends of a
preferred expenditure policy can be implemented. Viewed in terms of the
volatility of the time path of expenditure (or more precisely, the marginal
utility of expenditure), the optimal strategy given in (14) is mean-variance

efficient [cf. Breeden (1979) and Merton (l990a, 487-8)). That is, because

aCfaW > 0, the additional increment in wealth that, by portfolio construction, occurs precisely when S increases will tend to offset the negative

impact on C

caused by that increase. There is thus a dampening of the

unanticipated fluctuations in expenditure over time. In sum, we see that in
addition to investing in assets to achieve an efficient risk-return tradeoff
in wealth, universities should optimally use their endowment to hedge against
unanticipated and unfavorable changes in the costs of the various activities

Op(imai Iwc..Uncn1

in

Stratcgic

17

wealth, universities should optimally use their endowment to hedge against

unanticipated and unfavorable changes in the costs of the various activities
that enter into their direct utility functions.

In closing this section, we note that the interpretation of the demand
functions in the general case of (13) follows along the same lines as for the

special case of perfect correlation leading to (14). As shown for the general
case in Merton (1990a, 501-2; 1990b, 558-9), the differential demands for
assets reflect attempts to create portfolios with the maximal feasible

correlations between their returns and unanticipated changes in the Sk. k —

1

m. These maximally-correlated portfolios perform the same hedging

function as assets 1

m in the limiting case of perfect correlation

analyzed in (14). Furthermore, if other state variables besides the various
activities' costs (e.g.. changes in the investment opportunity set) enter a
university's derived utility function, then a similar structure of differential asset demands to hedge against the unanticipated changes in these
variables will also obtain.

Opbm.J I,ricmcnt Sf M1cC

3. OptImal Endowment Management wfth Other Sources of Income

In

the previous section, we identified hedging of the costs of universi-

ty activities as a reason for optimally deviating from "efficient" portfolio
allocations when endowment is the only means for financing those activities.
In this section, we extend the analysis to allow other sources of cash flow to

support the activities. To simplify the analysis, we make two additional

and & in (3) are constants, which

assumptions: first, we posit that

implies that Yk(t)/Yk(O) is log-normally distributed, k — 1

N. Second,

we assume that for each k, there exists a traded security whose return is
instantaneously perfectly correlated with the unanticipated change in k.

k

—

1... .,N.

By renumbering if necessary, we use the convention that traded

security k is instantaneously perfectly correlated with

follows that (

—1

Hence, it

in (5a) and,
dek — dZk

,

k

1

N

(16)

.

These two assumptions permit us to derive a closed-form solution for the

capitalized values of the cash flows, {V(t)}, using contingent-claims
analysis. As will be shown, those valuation functions are independent of the
university's preferences or wealth level.

From (3), (5), and (16) with

and 8k

constant,

we have that the

cash flows can be written as a function of the traded asset prices as follows,

for k —

Yk(t)

—

Yk(O)exp _kt] ( Pk(t)/Pk(O))

(17)

19

OpiimJ IamcDf Stratcgi

(a - a 2/2) -

where ti

- 82/2)

and

— 8k/uk. That (17) obtains

can be checked by applying Ito's Lemma. We now derive the capitalized value
for 'tk following Merton (1990a, 415-9; 1990b, 562-3).

Let F I P, ti

for 0

t

be the solution to the partial differential equation,

T

0 —

1/2

a2 k2 F11 + rPkFI' -

rF

+ F2 +

(18)

subject to the boundary conditions

Fk(0,t] — 0

(19a)

Fk/(Pk)k bounded as k

(19b)

0

(l9c)

Fk(Pk,T)

where subscripts on Fk in (16) denote partial derivatives with respect to

its arguments k and t ; Y is given by (17); and Tk is the last date
at which the university receives the cash flows from source k •
It is a mathematical result that a solution exists to (18) —

is unique. Moreover, for ;

0, Fk

k

N.

1

(19) and that it

0 for all P and t

Consider a dynamic portfolio strategy in which F1k(P(t),t]P(t) is

allocated to traded asset k at time t and V(t) -

Flk(Pk(t),t]Pk(t)

is

allocated to the riskless asset, where V(t) is the value of the portfolio at

Opemal hwaacnt StruScgia

time t. Furthermore, let the portfolio distribute cash (by selling securities if necessary) according to the flow-rate rule

D2[P,,t) —

Yk(t)

(20)

as given by (17). Then the dynamics of the portfolio can be written as, for
Pk(t) —

P

and V(t) — V,

dV =

Fjk(Pk,t)dpk

Flk(Pk,t]P]r

+ ((V —

—

D2(Pk,t])dt

(21)

.

Since Fk satisfies (18). it is a twice continuously differentiable function
and therefore, by Ito's Lemma, we can write the dynamics for F" as

dFk —

I 1/2 u2 p2 F11 + F2] dt + F1dP

But, Fk satisfies (18) and hence, 1/2 k k

Substituting

(21)

rFk

-

rPF1k

-

into (22). we can rewrite (22) as

dFk — F1k dPk

From

—
F11k + F2k

(22)

+ I rF

-

rPkFlk

-

yj dt

(23)

and (23), we have that

dV_dFk —
—

I rV - rPkFlk

nV -

Fdt

-

D2

-

rFk + rPkFIk + Yj dt
(24)

21

Opem4J l,TVfl)Cflt StK1CtIcs

because D2

Y. By inspection, (24) is an ordinary differential equation

with solution

V(t) -

Fk[Pk(t),t)

— (V(O)

—

F(Pk(O),O))exp[rtj

(25)

Thus, if the initial investment in the portfolio is chosen so that
V(O) —

F(P(O),O),

then for all t and P(t), we have that

V(t)

(26)

Fk[Pk(t),t)

To ensure that the proposed portfolio strategy is feasible, we must show that
its value is always nonnegative for every possible sample path for the price

k
F'

and all t ,

0

0 for all k

and t.

We

t

T. Because Fk is the solution to (18) and Y1

and

t.

It

follows from (26) that V(t)

0,

0 for all P1,

have therefore constructed a feasible dynamic portfolio strategy in

traded asset k and the riskless asset that produces the stream of cash flows

Yk(t)dt for 0

t S Tk and has zero residual value (V(Tk) —

0) at T.

Because the derived strategy exactly replicates the stream of cash flows

it

generated by source k ,

flows Y(t) for t s Tk.

is economically equivalent to owning the cash
It follows that the capitalized value of these

cash flows satisfies

Vk(t) —F'[Pk(t),t]

(27)

OXimal I,wuimcal Stia1cgi

for k —

1,... ,N.

Note that by inspection of (18)-(l9), Fk, and hence Vk(t),

does not depend on either the university's preferences or its net worth. The

valuation for source k is thus the same for all universities.
Armed with (27), we now turn to the optimal policy for managing endow-

ment when the university has N non-endowment sources of cash flows. To
derive the optimal policy, note first that even if those non-endowment sources
cannot actually be sold by the university for legal, ethical, moral hazard, or
asyosnetric information reasons, the university can achieve the economic

equivalent of a sale by following the mirror-image" or reverse of the
replicating strategy. That is, by (short-selling or) taking a _Fkj(Pk(t),t]Pk

position in asset k and borrowing

I

Fk -

FIPk]

of the riskless asset at

each t, the portfolio will generate a positive amount of cash, F(Pk,t],
available for investment in other assets at time t.

The entire liability

generated by shorting this portfolio is exactly the negative cash flows,

(-Ydt), for t

T, because Vk(Tk) — Fk(Pk, Tk] — 0.

nut, since the univer-

sity receives Ykdt for t T from source k. this short-portfolio liability is entirely offset. Hence, to undertake this strategy beginning at time t
is the economic equivalent of selling cash flow source k for a price of
'4(t) —

Fk[P(t),t).

As discussed more generally in Merton [l990a, Sec. 14.5, especially

465-73, the optimal portfolio strategy will be as if all N non-endowment
assets were sold and the proceeds, together with endowment, invested in the n
risky traded assets and the riskless asset. This result obtains because it is
feasible to sell (in the economic sense) the non-endowment assets and because

23

OpemaJ Imcimcaf SnIcgi

all the economic benefits from those assets can be replicated by dynamic

trading strategies in the traded assets. Hence, there is neither an economic
advantage nor a disadvantage to retaining the non-endowment assets. It
follows that the optimal demand for the traded risky assets is given by (13)
and the demand for the riskless asset is given by

l_twj*)W(t).

(

where from

(4) and (27),

W(t) =

K(t) + E Fk[P(t),t)

(28)

.

Because, however, the university has not actually sold the non-endowment
assets, the optimal demands given by (13) and (28) include both implicit and

explicit holdings of the traded assets. That is, the university's ownership

of non-endowment cash flow source k at time t is equivalent to having an
additional net worth of Fk[Pk(t).t) (as reflected in (28)) and to having

F[Pk(t),t]Pk(t) invested in traded asset k and
-

Flk(Pk(t),t]Pk(t))

F

Fk[P(t),t]

invested in the riskless asset. Thus, ownership of source

k causes implicit investments in traded asset k and the riskiess asset.
Optimal explicit investment in each traded asset is the position actually
observed in the endowment portfolio and it is equal to the optimal demand
given by (13) and (28) minus the implicit investment in that asset resulting
from ownership of non-endowment assets. Let Dj*(t) denote the optimal

explicit investment in traded asset i by the university at time t.
follows from (13) that

It

24

OpoawJ lflVcSZfl,Cflf gratCgw3

D*(t)

Ab + E1mHh1
=

Ab

+

EI"

—

Hkhkj

1, N

F1[P(t),t)P(t).
,

i

—

N

+ 1

(29)

where W(t) used in the evaluation of A and H is given by (28).

If we

number the riskless asset by 'n+1, then explicit investment in the riskiess
asset can be written as

D,i*(t)

Il - fl*(t)jw(t) - LA F(P(t),t]
—

K(t)

—

E1nD*(t)

-

F1(P(t),t)P(t)l

.

(30)

By inspection of (29), it is apparent that in addition to the hedging of

activity costs, the existence of non-endowment sources of cash flow will cause
further differences between the observed holdings of assets in the optimal
endowment portfolio and the mean-variance-efficient portfolio of a "standard

investor. Similarly, from (30), the observed mix between risky assets and the
riskiess asset will differ from the true economic mix.

To explore further the effects of those non-endowment sources of cash
flows, we solve the optimal expenditure and portfolio-selection problem for a

specific utility function, U. However, in preparation for that analysis. we
first derive explicit formulas for the capitalized values of those sources

when Yk(t) is given by (17). As already noted, there exists a unique
solution to (18) and (19). Hence, it is sufficient to simply find a solution.
As can be verified by direct substitution into (18), the value of cash flow

source k is given by. for k—l

N,

Optimii lm'lmcnI Stratcçc

k

F (Pk(t).t] —

where 13k.

are

Y(O)exp(_dt](l

—

exp(_Ok(Tk

-

t)J)[Pk(t)/Pk(O))

(31)

'8k

as defined in (17) and

r +

It follows from (31) that, for

- r)
Ic —

(31a)

.

-

1,.. .,N,
(32)

Flk(Pk(t),t)Pk(t)_pkFk(Pk(t),t]

which implies that the capitalized value of source

Ic has a constant elastic-

ity with respect to the price of traded asset k. Equation (32) also implies
that the replicating portfolio strategy is a constant-proportion or rebalancing strategy which allocates fraction

and fraction (1 -

3)

of the portfolio to traded asset

to the riskiess asset. In the case when positive

fractions are allocated to both assets (i.e.,

(1 -

3)

then Fk is a strictly concave function of Pk. If '3k

strictly convex function of k

> 0

and 13k

> 0),

> 1, then Fk is a

and the replicating portfolio holds traded

asset k leveraged by borrowing. In the watershed case of 13k — 1, Fk is a

linear function of k

and the replicating portfolio holds traded asset k

only.

Using (17) and (27). we can rewrite (31) to express the capitalized

value of source k in terms of the current cash flow it generates: namely,

Ic

Opima1 h,VGImCnI Srafcgi

V(t)

—

yk(t)(l—exp(—Ok(Tk

—

t)])/O,

k —

1.

N

(33)

From (17). (31a). and (32), it is a straightforward application of Ito's Lemma

to show that the total expected rate of return for holding source k from t

to t +

dt

is given by
Et[Yk(t)dt +

dVLJ/Vk(t) — (I.k +
—

[r

+

k( - r)]dt

Thus, if the rights to the cash flows k

(34)

.

t and T were sold in

between

the market place, the expected rate of return that would be required by
investors to bear the risk of these flows is

equals

r +

I3k(X, - r).

Therefore, °k

the required expected rate of return ('the capitalization rate') minus

the expected rate of growth of the cash flows, p.

By inspection of (33),

Vk(t) can be expressed by the classic present-value formula for assets with

exponentially growing cash flows. For 8 > 0, the perpetual (Tk

)

value

a

is Yk(t)/Ok and the limiting 'Earnings-to-Price' ratio, y(t)/V(t), is 8k'

constant. Applying the closed-form solution for F', we can by substitution
from (27) and (32) into (29) and (30) rewrite the optimal demand functions as

Dj*(t) — Ab1 +

—

Ab

+

E1m Hkh —

i — 1

I3jVj(t).

E Hkhkj

,

i

—

N

N+l

n

(35a)

and

D+i*(t) —

Il
—

Z1"w(t)lW(t) EN (l-13)V1(t)
K(t) AE1 b — E' E11' Hkhk) + EN 13V(t)
-

—

-

.

(35b)

O,zJmiJ Invcsjmcnt St,tcg,cs

27

Having derived explicit formulas for the values of non-endowment assets,
we turn now to the solution of the optimal portfolio and expenditure problem
in the special case where the university's objective function is given by
— exp[-pt1I1'r,log Q.

U[Q1

with p > 0

and

that £9' — 1.

(36)

m. Without loss of generality, we assume

0, j — 1

From (8), the optimal Q1 satisfy

Qja(t) —

[r1c(tflIs(t)

,

j l,...,m
—

(37)

.

From (36) and (37), the indirect utility function can be written as
U(C,S,t) —

exp[—pt]{log

C —

111'1[log S — log(F3)])

It follows from (l].a) that the optimal

C(t) —

expenditure

exp(-pt)(l/J[W,S,t))

(38)

rule is

(39)

.

It is straightforward to verify by substitution into (10). (lla), and (lib)
that

J[W,S,t) —

exp(-pt]log

W +

I(S,t]

(40)

for some function I[S,t]. By the verification theorem of dynamic programming, satisfaction of (10), (lla), and (lib) is sufficient to ensure that J
in (40) is the optimum.

It follows from (40) that

(35), k —

1,... ,m.

— 0

and hence that Hk

0 in (13) and

Therefore, for the log utility specified in (36), there

OpemI Iav1mcnI .SU1cgic

are

2K

no differential hedging demands for assets to protect against unanticipat-

ed changes in the costs of university activities. The optimal allocation of
the university's total net worth is thus instantaneously mean-variance

-J/Jw,

efficient. Noting that A —

W, we have that (35) can be written in

this special case as

D(t) — bW

—

I3jV(t)

i — l,...,N

,

—bW

i—N+l,...,n

,

(41a)

and

D*(t) — (1

—

I1'b)W

—

I(l

—

)V(t)

.

(1db)

By inspection of (41), in the absence of non-endowment assets, the

fraction of endowment allocated to risky asset i in the university's optimal

portfolio is b, i —
asset is (1 -

I1bj),

1,... ,n

and the fraction allocated to the riskiess

independent of the level of endowment. If

• D(t)/K(t) is the optimal fraction of endowment invested in asset i,
then from (41), the difference in fractional allocations caused by the nonendowment

assets is
*(t) —

b

—

R[b
Rb

-

,i

—

1

— N +

,

N

1 ,..,n

(42a)

and
Xn+i (t)

where

•

— (1

Vk(t)/Il5Vj(t)

—

— —R(I'b..

—

Z,A]

is the fraction of the capitalized value of the

(42b)

OpümaI 1umca1 Sttitcgics

university's

total non-endowment assets contributed by cash flow source k at

N and R a

time t, k — 1

IV(t)/K(t)

is the ratio of the values of

the university's non-endowment assets to its endowment assets at time t.
The differences in (42) are the result of two effects: (i) the 'wealth'
effect caused by the difference between the net worth and the endowment of the

university and (ii) the "substitution' effect caused by the substitution of
non-endowment asset holdings for traded asset holdings. Suppose, for concreteness, that the expected returns, variances, and covariances are such that
a positive amount of each traded risky asset is held in mean-variance-effi-

cient portfolios. Then, b > 0, i —

1,.. .,n.

It follows that the impact of

the wealth effect in (42), (Rb}, is unambiguous: it causes a larger fraction
of the optimal endowment portfolio to be allocated to each risky asset and

therefore, a smaller percentage allocation to the riskless asset. Because
> 0

and ).

> 0,

i — 1

N. we have that the impact of the substitution

effect in (42), (Rj)j}, is also unambiguous: for those traded assets
1

N for which the non-endowment assets are substitutes, the fractional

allocation is smaller; for the traded assets N + 1

n, the fractional

allocation is unchanged; and the allocation to the riskless asset thus
increases.

Because the wealth and substitution effects are in opposite directions

for b, > 0, whether the optimal endowment portfolio allocates an incrementally larger or smaller fraction to traded asset k depends on whether b, >

or b <

.

3kX is the fraction of the total increment to net

worth (from non-endowment assets) that is implicitly invested in asset k as

OpOmaJ Invcsmcnt Stilcgics

the

result of owning cash flow source k.

If that fraction exceeds the

optimal one for total wealth. bk. then the optimal endowment portfolio will
hold less than the mean-variance-efficient allocation. Indeed, if

R)b/(R3k), then X*(t) <

0

).,,

> (1

+

and the university would optimally short-sell

traded asset k in its portfolio. This is more likely to occur when R is
large (i.e., non-endowment assets are a large part of university net worth)

and Xk is large (i.e., cash flow source k is a large part of the value of
non-endowment assets).

The implications of (42) for optimal endowment are intuitive. If. for
example, a significant amount of gift-giving to a particular university
depends on the performance of the general stock market, then in effect that

university has a "shadow" investment in that market. Hence, all else the
same, it should hold a smaller portion of its endowment in stocks than another

university with smaller amounts of such market-sensitive gift-giving. The
targeting can be more specific: If a school specializes in science and
engineering and if an important part of gifts comes from entrepreneur alums.
then the endowment should underweight (or even eliminate) investment in

venture capital and hi-tech companies. Indeed, if a single donor is expected
to give a large block of a particular stock, then the optimal explicit holding
of that stock in the endowment may be negative (although such short-sales

might offend some donors). Much the same story applies to concentrations in
other assets, including real estate. The same analysis also follows where
grants from firms or the government are likely to be strongly correlated with
the financial performance of stocks in the related industries.

Opomai Invimcn1 5u-4tcS1

It

31

is perhaps a bit of a paradox that the university should under-invest

the endowment in those sectors of assets for which it has special expertise

(e.g., science and technology). But, the seeming paradox is resolved once the
principle of diversification is invoked. However, the underweighting in those
assets for diversification reasons can be offset by sufficiently strong

demands to hedge against costs. For example, suppose that a specialized
institute of biology believes that the cost of keeping the faculty will rise
by considerably more than tuition in the event that there is a strong demand

for such scientists outside academe. Then it may be optimal to invest a
portion of its endowment in bio-tech stocks to hedge this cost even though
those stocks' returns are highly correlated with alum gifts and industry
grants.

The analysis leading to (29) and (30) requires that there exist traded
securities which are instantaneously perfectly correlated with the changes in
Y1. ...

,YN.

If this assumption is relaxed, then the capitalized values of

those non-endowment cash flow sources will no longer be independent of the

university's preferences and endowment. However, the impact on endowment
investments will be qualitatively similar. This more general case of nonreplicable assets can be analyzed along the lines of Svensson (1988).

We can use our model to examine the impact of non-endowment cash flow

sources on optimal expenditure policy. From (39) and (40), we have that the
optimal

expenditure

rule is the constant-proportion-of-net-worth policy
C0(t) — pW(t)

.

(43)

Opima1 Invcslmcn St rat cgci

endowment will not follow a constant

However, current expenditure

proportion strategy. Optimal expenditure from endowment at time t is
(C*(t) -

Yk(t)]dt, which can be either positive or negative (implying net

saving from non-endowment cash flow sources). If s*(t) denotes the optimal
expenditure rate as a fraction of endowment( [C*(t) -

Yk(t)]/K(t)), then

from (4) and (43)

s(t) — p +

R(t)(p

—

y(t)J

(44)

where R(t) is as defined in (42) and y(t) E (' Yk(t))/(Ij V(t)) is the
current yield on the capitalized value of the non-endowment sources of cash

flow. In the special case of (33) where the cash flows are all perpetuities

(i.e., Tk

and 0k

> 0,

k — 1

N), Vk(t)

yield on source k is constant and equal to ek.

Y(t)/Ok, and the current
In that case, y(t) —

).kOk. the value-weighted current yield. From (31a), O will tend to be
smaller for assets with higher expected growth rates of cash flow,

If

{ik).

on average, the current yield on non-endowment assets is less than p. then
the current spending rate out of endowment will exceed p.

yield is high so that y(t) > p. then s*(t) < p.

R)/R,

If the current

Indeed, if y(t) >

p(l

+

then s*(t) < 0 and optimal total expenditure is less than current cash

flow generated by non-endowment sources. Because both R(t) and ).(t)
change over time, we have from (44) that the optimal current expenditure rate
from endowment is not a constant, even when expected returns on assets, the
interest rate, and the expected rate of growth of non-endowment cash flows are
constants.

33

OptiowJ 1nvtmcnS St,iicgi

We can also analyze the dynamics of the mix of the university's net

worth between endowment and non-endowment assets. If

cx a

r

+

b(cx

-

r)

denotes the instantaneous expected rate of return on the growth-optimum, meanvariance-efficient portfolio, then as shown in Merton (l990a, 169-71), the
resulting distribution for that portfolio is log-normal with instantaneous

expected return cz(> r) and instantaneous variance rate equal to

(cx -

r).

It follows from (6), (41), and (43) that the dynamics for the university's net

worth are such that W(t)/W(O) is log-normally distributed with
E0[W(t)J

W(O)exp((cx —

p)t

E0(log(W(t)JW(O)J) — ((cx +

Var(log(W(t)/W(O)]) —

If Xk(t) a

Vk(t)/W(t)

(a

r)/2

-

p]t

r)t

-

(45)

.

denotes the fraction of net worth represented by non-

endowment cash flow source k, then because Vk and U are each log-normally
distributed, X(t) is log-normally distributed and from (33) and (45),
Eo(Xk(t)] —

Xk(O)expl(p

—

O)t]

r

E(lOg(X(t)/X(O))) — (P.k + p — (cx +
Var(log(X(t)/X(O)]) — (6k2 +

for k —

1

cx

+

r

-

+

ô2)/2Jt

2(p.

+

Ok)]t

(46)

N.

From (46), the fraction of total net worth represented by all sources of

non-endowment cash flow, X(t) a

Xk(t) — R(t)/[1

grow or decline depending on whether p >

• min[6j, k —

1,... ,N.

or

+

R(tfl,

is expected to

p < 0.Ln where

In effect, a university with either a high rate

()p6maI lnvcstmenf Sitcgi

of

time preference or at least one (perpetual) high-growth non-endowment asset

(i.e.. with p > 0Ljfl)

is

expected to 'eat' its endowment. Indeed, it may

even go to a 'negative' endowment by borrowing against the future cash flows

of its non-endowment assets. Whether this expected growth in X(t) is the
result of declining expected net worth or rising asset values can be deter-

mined from (45). Because a >

r,

if

p <

r,

then both the arithmetic and

geometric expected rates of growth for net worth are positive. For p <

it

follows that E0(X(t)] — 0

as t

- . Hence,

in the long run of this

case, endowment is expected to become the dominant component of the univer-

sity's net worth. Of course, these 'razor's edge' results on growth or
decline reflect the perpetual, constant-growth assumptions embedded in non-

endowment cash flow behavior. However, this special case does capture the
essential elements affecting optimal portfolio allocation and expenditure

policies. (cf. Tobin (l974).

OpimaJ 1avctizwnt

Sacpc

4. Summary and Concluslon8
As indicated at the outset, a common approach to the management of

endowment is to treat it as if it were the only asset of the university. A
consequence of this approach is that optimal portfolio strategies are focused
exclusively on providing an efficient tradeoff between risk and expected

return. The most common practice is to measure portfolio risk by the variance
or standard deviation of its return. Because the returns on all mean-variance
efficient portfolios are perfectly correlated, a further consequence of
exclusive focus on efficiency is that the optimal endowment portfolios of
different universities should have quite similar risky components, at least as
measured by the correlations of their returns.

But, as we all know, universities have other assets, both tangible and

intangible, many of which are important sources of cash flow. As noted in
Section 2, examples of such sources include gifts, bequests, university

business income, and public and private-sector grants. The analysis in the
preceding sections shows that taking account of those assets can cause the
composition of the optimal endowment portfolio to deviate significantly from

mean-variance efficiency. It follows that two universities with similar
objectives and endowments of the same size can nevertheless have very different optimal endowment portfolios if their non-endowment sources of cash flow

are different. The effect on the composition of the optimal endowment
portfolios induced by differences in the size of non-endowment assets can be

decomposed into two parts: the wealth effect and the substitution effect.
To illustrate the wealth effect, consider two universities with identi-

OptimJJ Iavcsmca1 SlnttcSIcs

cal

preference functions and the same size endowments, but one has non-

endowment assets and the other does not.

If, as is perhaps reasonable to

suppose, the preference function conmon to each, exhibits decreasing absolute
risk aversion, then the university with the non-endowment assets (and hence
larger net worth) will prefer to have a larger total investment in risky

assets. Such behavior is consistent with the belief that wealthier universi-

ties can afford to take larger risks with their investments. Thus, if the
average risk of the non-endowment assets is the same as the risk of the
endowment-only university's portfolio, then the university with those assets
will optimally invest more of its endowment in risky assets.
The substitution effect on the endowment portfolio is caused by the

substitution of non-endowment asset holdings for endowment asset holdings. To
illustrate, consider the two universities of the previous paragraph, but now
increase the size of the endowment of the endowment-only university so that

net worth or wealth is the same for both. The optimal deployment of total net
worth is identical for each university. However, those assets held as nonendowment assets will not appear in the endowment portfolio. Thus, if the
composition of the two endowment portfolios are compared, they will differ in
both scale and fractional allocations among the various assets.
To illustrate the substitution effect more concretely, we draw on some

examples analyzed in Section 3. Consider a university that on a regular basis
receives donations from alums. Clearly, the cash flows from future contributions are an asset of the university, albeit an intangible one. Suppose that
the actual amount of gift-giving is known to be quite sensitive to the

OpttrnJJ lnvcstnicn( StraicSics

37

performance of the general stock market. That is. when the market does well,
gifts are high and when it does poorly, gifts are low. Through this giftgiving process, the university thus has a 'shadow' investment in the stock

market. Hence, all else the same, it should hold a smaller portion of its
endowment in stocks than another university with smaller amounts of such
market-sensitive gift-giving.

As discussed in the previous section, the same principle applies to more

specific asset classes. If an important part of gifts to a school that
specializes in science and engineering comes from entrepreneur alums, then the

school de facto has a large investment in venture capital and hi-tech companies and it should therefore invest less of its endowment funds in those

areas. That the school should optimally invest less of its endowment in the
science and technology areas where its faculty and students have special

expertise may seem a bit paradoxical. But, the paradox is resolved by the
principle of diversification once the endowment is recognized as representing

only a part of the assets of the university. The same analysis and conclusion
applies if we were to change the example by substituting either government and
corporate grants for donations and gift-giving as the sources of cash flows or

alum wealth concentrations in other assets such as real estate for concentra-

tions in shares of stock. As also shown in the preceding section, the nature
and size of a university's non-endowment assets should significantly influence

optimal policy for expenditure of endowment. Hence, neglecting those other
assets will bias the optimal expenditure policy.
In addition to taking account of non-endowment assets, our analysis

OpiwaJ 1sw1 meal Sepc

differs

from the norm because it takes account of the uncertainty surrounding

the costs of the various activities such as education, research, and knowledge

storage that define the purpose of the university. As discussed in Section 2.
the breakdown of activities can be considerably more refined. For instance,
one activity could be the education of a full-tuition-paying undergraduate and
a second could be the education of an undergraduate who receives financial

aid. The unit (net) cost of the former is the unit cost of providing the
education less the tuition received and the unit cost of the latter is this

cost plus the financial aid given. As shown in Section 2, an important
function of endowment investments is to hedge against unanticipated changes in
the costs of university activities.
As an example, consider the decision as to how much (if any) of the

university's endowment to invest in local residential real estate. From a
standard mean-variance-efficiency analysis, it is unlikely that any material

portion of the endowment should be invested in this asset class. However,
consider the cost structure faced by the university for providing teaching and

research. Perhaps the single largest component is faculty salaries. Universities of the same type and quality compete for faculty from the same pools.

To be competitive, they must offer a similar standard of living. Probably the
largest part of the differences among universities in the cost of providing

this same standard of living is local housing costs. By investing in local
residential housing, the university hedges itself against this future cost
uncertainty by acquiring an asset whose value is higher than expected when the

differential cost of faculty salaries is higher than expected. This same

Op(ituJJ 1m.mcnt Ss:cpcs

asset may

also

39

provide a hedge against unanticipated higher costs of off-

campus housing for students which would in turn require more financial aid if

the university is to compete for the best students. Note: This prescription
of targeted investment in very specific real estate assets to hedge against an
unanticipated rise in a particular university's costs of faculty salaries and
student aid should not be confused with the often-stated (but empirically
questionable) assertion that investments in real estate generally are a good

hedge against inflation. See Bodie (1976;1982) for empirical analysis of the
optimal assets for hedging against general inflation.
Similar arguments could be used to justify targeted investment of
endowment in various commodities such as oil as hedges against unanticipated

changes in energy costs. Uncertainty about those costs is especially significant for universities located in extreme climates and for universities with
major laboratories and medical facilities that consume large quantities of
energy.

As discussed at the end of Section 2, the hedging role for endowment
derived here is formally valid as long as there are traded securities with
returns that have non-zero correlations with unanticipated changes in the

activity costs. However, the practical significance for this role turns on
the magnitude of the correlations. As illustrated in Bodie's (1976;1982) work
on hedging against inflation, it is often difficult to construct portfolios
(using only standard types of traded securities) that are highly correlated

with changes in the prices of specific goods and services. Nevertheless, the
enormous strides in financial engineering over the last decade have greatly

Opthn.a! Invc1mcaZ Stritegics

4U

expanded the opportunities for Custom financial contracting at reasonable
costs. As we move into the twenty-first century, it will become increacingly
more common for the financial services industry to offer to its customers
private contracts or securities that allow efficient hedging when the return

properties of publicly-traded securities are inadequate. That is, implementation of the strategies prescribed in Sections 2 and 3 will become increasingly

more practical for universities and other endowment institutions. See Merton
(1990a, Ch. 14;l990c. 264-9) for a prospective view on financial innovation
and the development of custom financial contracting.

There are of course a variety of issues involving endowment management
that have not been addressed but could be within the context of our model.

One such issue is the decision whether to invest endowment in specific-purpose
real assets such as dormitories and laboratories instead of financial (or

general-purpose physical) assets. The returns on those real assets are likely
to be strongly correlated with the costs of particular university activities
and thereby the assets form a good hedge against unexpected rises in those

costs. However, because the real asset investments are specialized and
largely irreversible, shifting the asset mix toward such investments reduces

flexibility for the university. That is, with financial assets, the university has more options as to what it can do in the future. In another paper, I
plan to analyze this choice problem more formally by using contingent-claims
analysis to value the tradeoff between greater flexibility in selecting future
activities and lower costs in producing a given set of activities.
Another issue not explicitly examined is the impact of long-term, fixed

Optimal lswcstmcnl S1z1cgic

4

liabilities such as faculty tenure contracts on the management of endowment.

As noted early in Section 2, our model using contingent claims analysis (CCA)

can handle this extension. See McDonald (1974) and Merton (1985) for CCA-type
models for valuing tenure and other wage guarantee contracts.

The formal analysis here assumes that endowment is fungible for other

assets and that neither spending nor investment policy are restricted. Such
restrictions on endowment could be incorporated using the same Kuhn-Tucker
type analysis used in Section 2 to take account of the constraint that total

expenditure at each point in time is nonnegative. The magnitudes of the KuhnTucker multipliers at the optimum would provide a quantitative assessment of

the cost of each such restriction. However, including those restrictions is
not likely to materially change the basic insights about hedging and diversi-

fication derived in the unrestricted case. The model can also be integrated
into a broader one for overall university financial planning. Such integration would permit the evaluation of other non-endowment financial policies
such as whether the university should sell forward contracts for tuition.
In summary, we have explored two classes of reasons why optimal endow-

ment investment policy and expenditure policy can vary significantly among

universities. The analysis suggests that trustees and others who judge the
prudence and performance of policies by comparisons across institutions should
take account of differences in both the mix of activities of the institutions
and the capitalized values of their non-endowment sources of cash flows.

C Mcrron

in 1mcn:

42

REFERENCES

Bergman, Yakov (1985), 'Time Preference and Capital Asset Pricing Models,'
Journal of Financial Economics, 14(March):145-59.

Black, Fischer (1976), "The Investment Policy Spectrwn: Individuals, Endowment Funds and Pension Funds,' Financial Analysts Journal, 32(JanuaryFebruary) 23-31.
Bodie. Zvi (1976), 'Common Stocks as a Hedge Against Inflation,' Journal of
Finance, 31(May):459-70.

(1982), "Investment Strategy in an Inflationary Environment,' in
Benjamin Friedman. ed. • The Changing Roles of Debt and Equity in Financing

__________

U.S. Capital Formation, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press: 47-64.
Breeden, Douglas T. (1979), 'An Intertemporal Asset Pricing Model with
Stochastic Consumption and Investment Opportunities.' Journal of Financial
Economics, 7(September) :265-96.
Brinkman, Paul T. (1981), "Factors Affecting Instructional Costs at Major
Research Universities,' Journal of Higher Education. 52(May-June):265-79.

________________ (1990), Higher Education Cost Functions, in Hoenack and
Collins, eds. (1990):107-28.

Brovender, Shiomo (1974). 'On the Economics of a University: Toward the
Determination of Marginal Cost of Teaching Services." Journal of Political
Economy, 82(May-June) :657-64.

Constantinides, George (1989). "Theory of Valuation: Overview and Recent
Developments" in Sudipto Bhattacharya and George Constantinides, eds..
Theory of Valuation: Frontiers of Modern Finance Theory, Volume 1, Totowa,

NJ: Rowman

& Littlefield:l-23.

______________________ (1990). 'Habit Formation: A Resolution of the Equity
Premium Puzzle.' Journal of Political Economy. 98(June):5l9-43.
Detemple, Jerome B. and Fernando Zapatero (1989), 'Optimal ConsumptionPortfolio Policies with habit Formation,' Working Paper, Graduate School oi
Business, Columbia University, New York. NY.
Duffie. Darrell and Larry Epstein (1989), 'Stochastic Differential Utility and
Asset Pricing,' unpublished manuscript, Graduate School of Business,
Stanford University. Stanford. CA (September).
Eisner, Robert (1974). "Endowment Income. Capital Gains and Inflation
Accounting: Discussion,' American Economic Review, 64(May):438-41.

43

OpemaJ I,w1mcnS Scratcpcs

Ennis. Richard and J. Peter Williamson (1976), 'Spending Policy for Educational Endowments,' Research and Publication Project, The Common Fund
(January).
Fama, Eugene and Michael C. Jensen (1985), 'Organizational Forms and Investment Decisions," Journal of Financial Economics, 14(March):lOl-19.

Fischer, Stanley (1975), "The Demand for Index Bonds,' Journal of Political
Economy, 83(June):509-34.
Ford Foundation Advisory Committee on Endowment Management (1969), Managing
Educational Endowments: Report to the Ford Foundation, Ford Foundation.
New York, NY.
Grinold, Richard, David Hopkins, and William Massy (1978), 'A Model for LongRange University Budget Planning Under Uncertainty.' Bell Journal of
Economics, 9(Autumn):396-420.
Grossman, Sanford and Guy Laroque (1990). 'Asset Pricing and Optimal Portfolio
Choice in the Presence of Illiquid Consumption Goods,' Econometrica,
58(January) :25-52.

Hansmann. Henry (1990), 'Why Do Universities Have Endowments?" Journal of
Legal Studies, 19(January):3-42.
Hindy. Ayman and Chi-fu Huang (1989), 'On Intertemporal Preferences With a
Continuous Time Dimension II: The Case of Uncertainty," Working Paper No.
2105-89(March), A.?. Sloan School of Management, MIT. Cambridge. Massachusetts.
Hoenack, Stephen and Eileen Collins, eds. (1990), The Economics of American
Universities, Albany: State University of New York Press.
Litvack, James, Burton Malkiel and Richard Quandt (1974), 'A Plan for the
Definition of Endowment Income,' American Economic Review. 64(May):433-42.

McDonald, John (1974), 'Faculty Tenure as a Put Option: An Economic Interpretation," Social Science Quarterly, 55(September):362-71.
Merton, Robert C. (1977), "A Reexamination of the Capital Asset Pricing
Model," in Irwin Friend and James Bicksler. eds., Risk and Return in
Finance, Volume 1, Cambridge, MA: Ballinger Publishing:141-60.

_________________ (1985), 'Comment: Insurance Aspects of Pensions,' in David
A. Wise, ed., Pensions, Labor and Individual Choice, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press:343-56.

________________

(l990a),

Continuous-Time Finance, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Optimal lnvcstmcnt Sracgica

44

________________ (1990b), "Capital Market Theory and the Pricing of Financial
Securities," in Benjamin Friedman and Frank Hahn, eds., Handbook of
Monetary Economics, Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing:498-58]..

________________ (1990c). 'The Financial System and Economic Performance,"
Journal of Financial Services Research, 4(December):263-300.
Nichols, Donald (1974), 'The Investment Income Formula of the American
Economic Association," American Economic Review, 64(May):420-26.

Nordhaus, William (1989), "Risk Analysis in Economics: An Application to
University Finances,' unpublished paper (May), Cowles Foundation, Yale
University, New Haven, CT.
Snyder, Thomas (1988), "Recent Trends in Higher Education Finance: 1976-77 to
1985-86,' in Thomas Snyder and Eva Calambos, eds., Higher Education
Administrative Costs: Continuing the Study, Washington, DC: Office of
Educational Research and Improvement, Department of Education:3-23.
Sundaresan, Suresh (1989), "Intertemporally Dependent Preferences and the
Volatility of Consumption and Wealth,' Review of Financial Studies, 2:7389.
Svensson, Lars (1988). 'Portfolio Choice and Asset Pricing With Nontraded
Assets,' Working Paper No. 2774, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, HA (November).

______________ (1989), 'Portfolio Choice With Non-Expected Utility in
Continuous Time,' Economic Letters, 39(October):313-17.
Tobin, James (1974), 'What is Permanent Endowment Income?' American Economic
Review, 64(May):427-32.

</ref_section>

