                    NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




                WHAT ENDED THE GREAT DEPRESSION?




                       Christina D. Romer




                     Working Paper No. 3829




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          September 1991




I am grateful to Barry Eichengreen, Robert Gordon, Frederic
Mishkin, David Romer, and David Wilcox for helpful coiments and
suggestions. This research was supported by the National Science
Foundation and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. This paper is
part of NBER's research programs in Economic Fluctuations and
Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #3829
                                        September 1991




                WHAT ENDED THE GREAT DEPRESSION?



                            ABSTRACT


     This paper examines the role of aggregate demand stimulus in
ending the Great Depression. A simple calculation indicates that
nearly all of the observed recovery of the U.S. economy prior to
1942 was due to monetary expansion. Huge gold inflows in the
mid- and late-1930s swelled the U.S. money stock and appear to

have stimulated the economy by lowering real interest rates and
encouraging investment spending and purchases of durable goods.
The finding that monetary developments were crucial to the
recovery implies that self-correction played little role in the
growth of real output between 1933 and 1942.




                                       Christina D. Romer
                                       Department of Economics
                                       University of California,
                                        Berkeley
                                       Berkeley, CA 94720
                                       and NBER
                       WHAT ENDED THE GREAT DEPRESSION?




I.   INTRODUCTION

      Between 1933 and 1937 real GNP in the United States grew at an average

rate of over 8 percent per year; between 1938 and 1941 it grew at an average

rate of over 10 percent per year. By any prewar or postwar metric these rates

of growth are spectacular, even for an economy pulling out of a severe

depression. Yet the recovery from the collapse of 1929—1933 has received

little of the recent attention that economists have lavished on the Great

Depression. Perhaps because the cataclysm of the early 1930s was so severe,

modern economists have focused on the causes of the downturn and of the

turning point in 1933. Once the end of the precipitous decline in output has

been explained, there has been a tendency to let the story drop. The eventual

return to full employment is merely characterized as slow and incomplete until

the outbreak of World War II.

      This paper examines the source of the recovery from the Great Depression

in detail. It argues that the rapid rates of growth of real output in the

mid— and late—1930s were largely due to conventional aggregate demand

stimulus, primarily in the form of monetary expansion. My calculations

suggest that in the absence of aggregate demand stimuli the economy would have

remained depressed far longer and far more deeply than it actually did. This

in turn suggests that any self—corrective response of the U.S. economy to low

output was weak or non—existent in the l930s.



A. Previous Studies

       The possibility that aggregate demand stimulus in the form of changes in

government spending was the source of recovery from the depression was
                                                                                     2

analyzed extensively in the 1940s and l9SOs. Smithies asserts that "fiscal

po icy did prove to be an effective and indeed the only effective means to

recovery" though his conclusion seems to be more the result of faith than of

evidence [1946, p. 12). Hansen, on the other hand, argues that fiscal policy

was not used extensively in the 1930s [1941, p. 84). Brown uses a

conventional Keynesian multiplier model and the concept of discretionary

government spending to support Hansen's view. His often—cited conclusion is

that "fiscal policy, then, seems to have been an unsuccessful recovery device

in the 'thirties —     not   because it did not work, but because it was not tried"

[1956, pp. 863—866).

      Friedman and Schwartz [1963) stress that Federal Reserve policy was not

the source of the recovery from the Depression either. They state: "In the

period under consideration [1933—1941), the Federal Reserve System made

essentially no attempt to alter the quantity of high—powered money by using

either of the two instruments which had been its major reliance up to 1933W

[1963, p. 511). While they are clearly aware that other developments, in

particular New Deal gold policy, led to a rise in the money supply during the

mid—1930s, Friedman and Schwartz appear to be so intent on castigating the

Federal Reserve for its inaction that this monetary expansion receives

relatively little attention.

      The emphasis that these early scholars place on policy inaction and

ineffectiveness may have led modern economists to assume that conventional

aggregate demand stimulus could not have mattered in the recovery from the

Great Depression. Bernanke and Parkinson [1989] analyze the apparent trend

reversion of employment in the 1930s and are struck by the strength of the

recovery. They believe, however, that "the New Deal is better characterized

as having 'cleared the way' for a natural recovery ...      rather   than as being
                                                                                    3

the engine of recovery itself" (1989, p. 212). As a result, they argue that

the trend reversion of the interwar economy is evidence of a strong self—

corrective force. De Long       and   Summers (1988) sound a similar theme. They

state that "the   substantial   degree of mean reversion by 1941 is evidence that

shocks to output are transitory." The only aggregate demand policy that they

think might have contributed to the recovery was World War II, and they

conclude that "it is hard to attribute any of the pre—1942 catch—up of the

economy to the war" [1988, p. 467].



B. Overview

      Despite   this conventional wisdom, there is reason to suspect that

aggregate demand developments, particularly monetary changes, were important

in fostering the recovery from the Great Depression. This reason is the

simple but often neglected fact that Ml grew at an average rate of nearly 10

percent per year between 1933 and 1937, and at an even higher rate in the

early 1940s. Such large and persistent rates of money growth were

unprecedented in U.S. economic history and thus would seem to provide a

possible explanation for the unprecedented growth of real output in the mid—

and late—1930s.

      To quantify the importance of these monetary changes and other aggregate

demand stimuli in ending the Depression, I perform a simple "back—of—the—

envelope" calculation. The recessions of 1921 and 1938 are both episodes in

which independent monetary and fiscal policy changes are typically thought to

have accounted for nearly all of the movements in real output. Thus, one can

use the experience of the economy following these policy changes to derive an

estimate of the effect of changes in the government deficit and changes in the

money supply in the interwar era. These simple policy multipliers can then be
                                                                                 4

used to estimate the effects of expansionary monetary and fiscal developments

in the period 1933—1937 and 1939—1942.

      Such simulations suggest that monetary changes were crucially important

to the recovery, while fiscal policy had very little effect. According to the

calculations, real GNP would have been approximately 25 percent lower in 1937

and nearly 50 percent lower in 1942 than it actually was had the money supply

continued to grow at its historical average rate. I also find that

calculations based on policy multipliers from a large macromodel yield similar

conclusions.

      To see if this huge estimated effect of monetary developments during the

recovery phase of the Great Depression is sensible, I then look more closely

at the source of the monetary expansion in the mid— and late—1930s and at the

possible transmission mechanism for monetary developments.     I find that the

monetary expansion was primarily due to gold inflows, which were themselves

due to devaluation in 1933 and to capital flight from the political

instability in Europe after 1935. Estimates of the cx ante real rate suggest

that, coincident with these gold inflows, real interest rates fell

precipitously in 1933 and remained low or negative throughout most of the

second half of the 1930s. These low real interest rates are closely

correlated with a strong rebound in interest—sensitive spending. Thus, it

seems quite plausible that the expansionary monetary developments were working

through a conventional interest—rate transmission mechanism.

      The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II presents

key facts about the strength and timing of the recovery phase of the Great

Depression. Section 111 discusses the calculation of the effects of aggregate

demand stimulus during this period. It discusses why the 1921 and 1938

experiences provide a reasonable way of estimating the effects of policy and
                                                                                S

then shows what the resulting policy multipliers imply about the importance of

policy in the mid— and late—1930s. Section IV discusses the source of the

monetary expansion during the recovery and examines the likely transmission

mechanism for monetary developments. Finally, the conclusion summarizes the

results and suggests the importance of the findings for other analyses of the

Great Depression.




II. THE STRENGTH OF THE RECOVERY

      This paper's emphasis on the source of the high rates of real growth

during the recovery from the Great Depression may seem strange to those

accustomed to thinking of the recovery as slow. The conventional wisdom is

that the U.S. economy remained depressed for all of the 1930s and only

returned to full employment following the outbreak of World War II. The

resolution of these two seemingly disparate views is that the falls in real

output in the early 1930s. and again in 1938, were so large that it took many

years of unprecedented growth to undo these declines and return real output to

normal.

      For most of the analysis in this paper I examine annual estimates of

real CNP from the Bureau of Economic Analysis [1986]. Because this series

only begins in 1929, I extend it, when necessary, with my revised version of

the Kendrick—Kuznets CNP series (see Romer, [19881). The percentage changes

in real GNP shown in Figure 1 clearly demonstrate both the enormity of the

collapse of real output between 1929 and 1933 and the strength of the

subsequent recovery. Between 1929 and 1933. real CUP declined 35 percent.

Between 1933 and 1937, it rose 33 percent. In 1938 the economy suffered

another 5 percent fall in real CUP, but this was followed by an even more
                                                                                6


spectacular rise in real CNP of 49 percent between 1938 and 1942. Clearly, by

almost any standard, the growth of real GNP in the four—year periods before

and after 1938 was spectacular.

      On the other hand, it is also the case that despite this rapid growth,

output remained substantially below normal until about 1942. A simple way to

estimate trend output for the 1930s is to extrapolate the average annual

growth rate of real GNP over the period 1923—1927 forward from 1927. The

period 1923—1927 is chosen for estimating normal growth because these are the

four most normal years of the 1920s: this period excludes the recession and

recovery of the early 1920s and the boom of the late 1920s. It is also a

period of price stability, suggesting that output was neither abnormally high

nor abnormally low. The resulting figure for normal annual real CUP growth is

3.15 percent. Figure 2 shows the log level of actual real CNP and trend CNP

based on this definition of normal growth. The graph shows that CUP was about

38 percent below its trend level in 1935. In 1937, the economy was 26 percent

below trend. Only in 1942 did the economy return to its trend path.

      The behavior of the unemployment series is perfectly consistent with the

behavior of the real GNP series. While many scholars have emphasized that

unemployment was still nearly 10 percent as late as 1940, it is also the case

that unemployment had dropped substantially from its high of 23 percent in

1932.1 Indeed, the unemployment rate fell by more than four percentage points

in both 1934 and 1936. The fact that unemployment did not return to its full

employment level until 1942 simply reflects the fact that real output remained

below trend until that time.
                                                                                   7



III.    THE EFFECTS OF AGGREGATE DEMAND STIMULUS IN THE RECOVERY

        To examine whether aggregate demand stimulus could explain the high

rates of real growth during the recovery phase of the Great Depression, I

perform an illustrative calculation. I first derive estimates of the policy

multipliers, which show the effects of policy stances of a given size on real

output. I then derive measures of the stances of monetary and fiscal policy in

the recovery. These two sets of estimates are then combined to measure the

effects of aggregate demand policy in the mid— and late—1930s.



A. Application of the Narrative Approach to the Interwar Era

        Framevork. Of these steps, by far the most difficult one is estimating

the multipliers for monetary and fiscal policy. The approach that I use

focusses on two policy experiments that bracket the     recovery period. In 1920
and 1937 there were major contractionary shifts in both monetary and fiscal

policy. Relatively severe recessions followed each of these shifts.

Furthermore, there do not appear to have been any other significant changes in

the economic environment in these years that could account for the recessions.

        As a result, one can decompose the percentage change in real output

(relative to normal growth) in each of these two episodes into the part due to

lagged monetary changes and the part due to lagged fiscal changes. That is,


(1)     Output changer —      pm(Motary Change)      + flf(Fiscal Change)_1.


where      and fl   are the multipliers for monetary and fiscal policy, and t is
either 1921 or 1938. Substituting in actual measures of the change in real

output and the changes in the monetary and fiscal stances for both 1921 and

1938 (the calculation of which is described in detail below) yields two
                                                                                8

equations In two unknowns. One can then solve this system for the monetary

and fiscal policy multipliers.

      To believe that 1921 and 1938 are times that provide good evidence on

the effects of policy, it is important to show that the policy changes were

not responses to movements in real output occurring for other reasons. If the

monetary and fiscal changes occurred in response to declines in real output,

the procedures would yield excessively large estimates of the effects of

policy.2 It must also be the case that there are no additional factors that

account for the severe recessions that followed the shifts in policy. Again,

if other factors were important, my procedure would overestimate the impact of

the policy changes.

      This method of deriving rough estimates of the effects of policy is an

example of what David Romer and I have referred to in previous work as the

narrative approach [1989 and 1990). The basic idea is that to estimate the

impact of policy, particularly of monetary policy, one often does not want to

use a regression of output on the monetary policy variable or even the

estimation of a big macroeconomic model of the U.S. economy. The reason for

this is that any regression procedure is likely to pick up both the effect of

money on output and the endogenous response of money to movements in real

output. We argue that by using the historical record, such as information

about the motivation of policy makers or important developments in the world

economy, one can identify times when policy moved for reasons unrelated to the

state of real output and times when other factors were not acting to move real

output. Such times, we suggested, provide the clearest evidence of the

effects of policy.

      Independence of Policy Changes. Turning to the two policy experiments

of the interwar era, it is clear that the fiscal policy change in 1920 was not
                                                                                  9

caused by developments in the real economy: it was the end of World War I

that led to an enormous drop in real government spending. The magnitude of

this    change can be seen in the fact that the surplus to GNP ratio rose from —
8.3 percent    in 1919 to 0.5 percent   in 1920.
        The monetary policy change in    this episode was also quite pronounced and
largely    independent. According to Friedman and Schwartz, the Federal Reserve

in 1919 became concerned about the lingering inflation from World War I and

the postwar boom [1963, pp. 221—239]. In response, the Federal Reserve raised

the discount rate 3/4 of a percentage point in December 1919. The diaries and

papers of members of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System that

Friedman and Schwartz analyze suggest that the Federal Reserve did not

understand the lags with which monetary policy operated. As a result, when

the economy failed to respond immediately to the increase in interest rates,

the Federal Reserve raised the discount rate another 1 1/4 percentage points

in January 1920 and 1 percentage point more in June 1920. Because these

enormous rises in interest rates appear to be mainly the result of Federal

Reserve inexperience, they represent independent monetary developments rather

than a conscious response to the current state of the real economy.

         In 1937 the tightening of fiscal policy was less dramatic, but still

quite severe. In 1936 a large bonus had been paid to veterans of World War I

and this resulted in a surge in government spending. In 1937 not only was

this surge removed, but social security taxes were collected for the first

time. This increase in revenues in 1937 is clearly unrelated to developments

in the real economy; it    reflects   a conscious decision to permanently raise

taxes to finance a pension system. The result of these two changes was that

the surplus to GNP ratio rose from —4.4 percent in 1936 to —2.2 percent in

1937.
                                                                               10

      The monetary changes in 1937 were less straightforward than those in

1920, but still largely independent. Friedman and Schwartz view the main

monetary shock as the result of the doubling of reserve requirements in three

steps between July 1936 and May 1937 [1963, pp. 543—5451. The Federal Reserve

raised reserve requirements because they were concerned about the high level

of excess reserves in 1936 and wanted to turn excess reserves into required

reserves. According to Friedman and Schwartz, this action greatly decreased

the money supply because banks wanted to hold excess reserves. As a result,

they decreased lending so that reserves were still higher than the new

required levels.

      Friedman and Schwartz view the resulting change in the money supply as

independent because the Federal Reserve was not responding to the real

economy; they inadvertently contracted the money supply because they

misunderstood the motivation of bankers. Further evidence that the

contraction of the money supply was not a conscious decision by the Federal

Reserve to respond to the real economy is provided by the Minutes of the

Federal Open Market Committee for 1937. At numerous FOMC meetings, the

Chairman of the Board of Governors, Mariner Eccies, insisted that the doubling

of reserve requirements did not constitute an end to the policy of easy money

(see, for example, the Minutes for the meetings of March 13 and 15, 1937).

Clearly, the Federal Reserve was not deliberately contracting the money supply

in anticipation of future declines in output.

      In addition to this change in reserve requirements, the Treasury in 1936

began sterilizing gold inflows. This resulted in a substantial slowing in the

growth rate, though not an actual decline, in the stock of high—powered money.

This switch to sterilization appears to be part of the same policy mistake

that led to the increase in reserve requirements. According to Chandler, the
                                                                              11

Treasury undertook the sterilization at the behest of the Federal Reserve

which feared that unsterilized gold inflows would exacerbate the excess

reserves problem [1970, pp. 177—181). Evidence that the Treasury did not mean

to affect the money supply is provided by the fact that they were greatly

concerned by the resulting rise in interest rates in 1937.

      The Role of Additional Factors. In addition to this evidence that the

monetary and fiscal changes in 1920 and 1937 were independent of the real

economy, there is also no direct evidence that any factor other than monetary

and fiscal policy were important sources of the falls in output in 1921 and

1938. Scholars who have studied the 1921 and 1938 recessions almost all view

the policy changes as crucial. Friedman and Schwartz, for example, attribute

both downturns almost entirely to monetary developments. They state: "in

1920—21 and 1937—38, the decline in the money stock was a consequence of

policy actions of the Federal Reserve System ....   In   both cases the

subsequent decline in the money stock was associated with a severe economic

decline" [1963, p. 678]. This emphasis on monetary factors in 1921 and 1938

is echoed by Lewis [1949, pp. 19—20) and Roose [1954, p. 239].

      Other authors assign a much more important role to fiscal policy as the

source of these two interwar downturns. Hansen (1938], Smithies [1946), and

Cordon [1974] all attribute the recession of 1938 to the decline in government

spending. Ayres writes of the decline in government expenditures that "it

seems wholly probable that we have here the chief explanation of the

exceptionally abrupt decline in business activity which took place in the

autumn of 1937" (1939, p. 1521. Gordon also argues that the decline in

government spending after World War I was an important source of the 1921

downturn. He states: "by the beginning of 1920 government finance had come

to exercise a strong deflationary force on the economy" [1974, p. 20].
                                                                               12

      Perhaps more important evidence that policy changes were the main shocks

affecting the U.S. economy in the downturns of 1921 and 1938 is provided by

the fact that the few alternative explanations that have been advanced are

easily disproved. The policy hypotheses, in contrast, are completely

consistent with the behavior of major economic variables. For example, one

alternative explanation for the downturn in 1938 is that increases in wages

due to increased unionization decreased output and investment; in short, there

was an adverse supply shock in 1937 (see, for example, Roose [1954, p. 239]).

The main problem with this story is that an adverse supply shock should be

accompanied by rising prices and this did not occur: between 1937 and 1938

wholesale prices fell 9.4 percent. The policy hypotheses that stress a fall

in aggregate demand are consistent with the observed fall in prices. The

monetary explanation is also consistent with the fact that interest rates rose

sharply in early 1937 and interest—sensitive spending such as construction

expenditures plummeted in late 1937.

      The main alternative explanation advanced for the recession of 1921 is

that following World War I there was tremendous pent—up demand for consumer

goods. By 1920, the story goes, this demand had been satisfied and firms

faced a dramatic decline in sales (see, for example, Lewis [1949, p. 19]).

The problem with this story is that consumption actually rose quite

substantially in both 1920 and 1921. Real consumer expenditures rose 4.8

percent between 1919 and 1920 and 6.2 percent between 1920 and l92l. Any

spending story also faces conflict from the fact that interest rates rose

substantially in 1920.'



B. Policy Multipliers

       The independence of policy movements in 1920 and 1937 and the absence
                                                                               13

of additional causes of the recessions of 1921 and 1938 suggest that these two

episodes can be used to estimate multipliers for monetary and fiscal policy.

To actually do this calculation, one merely substitutes the relevant data for

1921 and 1938 into equation (1) and then solves the two equation system for

and fl.

      Output and Folicy Measures. In applying the framework of equation (1) 1
use as the measure of output change the deviation of the growth rate of real

CNP from its usual growth rate. As described previously, I define usual

output growth as the average annual growth rate in the period 1923—1927. For

the monetary and fiscal policy variables I then use measures that compare the

policy action in a given year to the usual, long—run value of that policy. In

essence, I assume that there is some usual policy stance that would keep

aggregate demand and real output growing at its trend rate. Only deviations

of monetary and fiscal policy from their normal stances would result in a

shift in aggregate demand and hence in a deviation of real output growth from

normal.

      For the monetary policy variable I use the deviation of the annual

(December to December) growth rate of Ml from its usual growth rate, where

usual is again defined as the average annual growth rate between 1923 and

l927. This definition of the usual growth rate of money is sensible because

the period 1923—1927 was characterized by constant prices and steady CNP

growth. Thus, monetary policy can be seen as basically holding aggregate

demand steady relative to CNP in these years. The average annual growth rate

of Ml over this period was 2.88 percent. Looking at monetary growth relative

to this norm can provide an indication of whether monetary developments were

working to shift the aggregate demand curve in either a positive or negative

direction.6
                                                                               14

      For the fiscal policy variable I use the annual change in the real

federal surplus to real CNP ratio.7 This measure of fiscal policy takes as

normal essentially no change in the real federal surplus. This makes sense as

a measure of normal policy because a constant deficit or surplus should leave

aggregate demand unchanged (except for balanced budget multiplier effects).8

      In describing the framework for calculating multipliers, I assumed that

the policy variables affect output with a one—year lag. While this is a crude

assumption, for the two episodes in question it is surely reasonable. In

annual data the main falls in real output In these episodes occur between 1920

and 1921 and between 1937 and 1938. The main monetary and fiscal policy

movements in each episode, however, occur in the year before the large

declines in real output. Indeed, the contemporaneous policy movements are

typically slightly expansionary in each episode. Thus the only way to derive

sensible multipliers is to assume a one—year lag.

      Results. Substituting the actual data on the departure of real GNP

growth from usual and the lagged policy measures into (1) for both 1921 and

1938 yields an estimated multiplier for monetary policy of 0.823 and an

estimated multiplier for fiscal policy of —0.233. The signs of the two

multipliers are what one would expect.     is negative because the fiscal

policy variable is based on the federal surplus; an increase in the fiscal

policy measure is contractionary.

      The magnitude of the monetary policy multiplier is quite reasonable. It

implies that a growth rate of Ml that is 1 percentage point lower than normal

results in real output growth that is 0.82 percentage points lower than

normal. As described in more detail below, this is quite consistent with the

effects of monetary developments found in large macromodels.

      The magnitude of the fiscal policy multiplier is quite small. It
                                                                               15

implies that a rise in the surplus to GNP ratio of 1 percentage point lowers

the growth rate of real output relative to usual by 0.23 percentage points.

The source of this small fiscal policy multiplier is the fact that the

deviation of real output growth from normal was slightly smaller in 1921 than

in 1938, but the fiscal policy shock was nearly four times as large in 1920 as

In 1937. As a result, it is very difficult to attribute most of the declines

in output in 1921 and 1938 to fiscal policy. I show below, however, that even

very large changes in the estimated fiscal policy multiplier would have only

small effects on the conclusions that follow.



C. Simulations

      Armed with these multipliers, it is possible to calculate the likely

effects of monetary and fiscal developments during the mid— and late—1930s.

As I have set up the analysis, the multiplier times the policy measure lagged

one year shows the effect of policy on the deviation of output growth from

normal in a given year. If one subtracts this effect of unusual policy from

the actual growth rate of real output, one is left with a series on what the

growth rate of output would have been under normal policy. Accumulating these

growth rates of real output under normal policy and then adding them to the

level of output starting in some base year yields a series on the level of

output under normal policy.

      The difference between the path of actual output and the path of output

under normal policy shows how much slower the recovery would have been in the

absence of expansionary policy. In calculating the path of real output under

normal policy I use 1933 as the base year. This path shows what output would

have done starting in 1933 under normal policy, without taking into account

the fact that the depression was probably caused to a large extent by extreme
                                                                               16

policy mistakes. This is appropriate because the purpose of this paper is not

to argue that policy did not contribute to the downturn of the early 1930s,

but rather that policy was central to the recovery in the mid— and late—1930s.

In calculating the effects of unusual policy, I do the analysis separately for

monetary and fiscal policy. In one experiment I ask what would output have

been if fiscal policy had been held at its usual level, but monetary policy

was as it actually was. In another, I hold monetary policy to its normal

level, and let fiscal policy be equal to its actual value.

      Fiscal Policy. Figure 3 shows the experiment for fiscal policy. The

dashed line shows the path of log output under the assumption that fiscal

policy was at its usual level throughout the mid— and late—1930s; the solid

line shows the path of actual log output. The great similarity of the two

lines indicates that unusual fiscal policy contributed almost nothing to the

recovery from the Great Depression. Only in 1942 is there a noticeable

difference between actual output and output under normal fiscal policy, and

even then this difference is small.

      The small estimated effect of fiscal policy obviously stems in part from

the fact that the calculation based on 1921 and 1938 yields a small estimated

multiplier for fiscal policy. However, it is more fundamentally due to the

fact that the deviation of fiscal policy from normal was not large during the

1930s. This fact can be seen in Figure 4, which shows the change in the

surplus to CNP ratio (lagged one year). The change in the federal surplus to

GNP ratio in the mid—l930s was typically less than one percentage point, and

was actually positive in some years. Even in 1941, the first year of a

substantial wartime increase in spending, the surplus to GNP ratio only

increased by 6 percentage points.

      Monetary Policy. Figure 5 shows the experiment for monetary policy.
                                                                               17

The dashed line now shows the path of log output under the assumption that the

money growth rate was held to its usual pre—Depression level throughout the

mid— and late—1930s; the solid line shows the path of actual log output. This

time the two paths are tremendously different. The   difference   in the two

paths indicates that had the money growth rate been held to its usual level in

the mid—l930s, real GNP in 1937 would have been nearly 25 percent lower than

it actually was. By 1942, the difference between CNP under normal and actual

monetary policy grows to nearly 50 percent. These calculations suggest that

monetary developments were critical to the recovery from the Great Depression.

Had money growth been held to its normal level, the U.S. economy in 1942 would

have been 50 percent below its pre—Depression trend path, rather than back to

normal output.9

      The source of this large estimated effect of monetary developments is

not hard to find. As described above, the monetary policy multiplier

estimated from 1921 and 1938 is of roughly the magnitude that is found in

postwar macromodels. Therefore, the large estimated effect of monetary

developments is not due to an implausibly large multiplier for monetary

policy. Rather the large estimated effects are due to the extraordinary rates

of money growth in the mid— and late—1930s. The monetary policy variable

(lagged one year) is graphed in Figure 6. As can be seen, the deviations of

the money growth rate from normal were enormous in the mid— and late—1930s.

For most years this deviation was over 10 percent. Hence, it is not at all

surprising to find that had this deviation from normal been held at zero, the

recovery from the Depression would have been dramatically slower.



D. Robustness

      The results of these simulations are quite robust. The stance of
                                                                                18

monetary policy was so expansionary during the recovery, and the stance of

fiscal policy was so non—expansionary, that changing the multipliers even

substantially would not make monetary policy unimportant and fiscal policy

crucial.

      One way to see this is to imagine cutting the monetary policy multiplier

in half and doubling the fiscal policy multiplier.10 This change represents a

very extreme change in the monetary policy multiplier. Nevertheless, this

reduction in the multiplier only implies that in 1942 real GNP would have been

roughly 25 percent lower than it actually was had monetary policy been held to

its usual level during the mid— and late—1930s. This result still suggests

that aggregate demand stimulus in the forii of monetary policy was crucial to

the recovery. In the case of fiscal policy, doubling the policy multiplier

would lead to the conclusion that real GNP in 1942 would have been 3 percent

lower in 1942 had the change in the surplus to GNP ratio been held to zero.

This increases the apparent role of fiscal policy, but not dramatically so.11

      Another way to evaluate the robustness of the calculations is to use

policy multipliers derived from the estimation of a postwar macromodel. The

MPS model is the main forecasting model currently used by the Federal Reserve

Board and is generally thought to be based both on good economic theory and

careful data analysis. In this model, the short—run multiplier for monetary

policy is 1.2; that is, a one—time increase in Ml above the baseline

projection of 1 percentage point results in real CNP growth over the next four

quarters that is 1.2 percentage points above the baseline projection. This

short—run multiplier for monetary policy is slightly larger than the

multiplier derived from the 1921 and 1938 episodes. The short—run multiplier

for fiscal policy in the MPS model is roughly —2.13; a decrease in the surplus

to CNP ratio of 1 percentage point results in real QNP growth over the next
four quarters that is 2.13 percentage points above the baseline projection.

This multiplier for fiscal policy is roughly 10 times larger than that derived

from the 1921 and 1938 episodes.12

      Using the multipliers from the MPS model in place of those derived from

my calculation does not change the conclusions appreciably. Substituting in

the short—run MPS multiplier for monetary policy increases the apparent

importance of monetary policy: real GNP in 1942 would have been roughly 70

percent lower than it actually was had monetary policy been held to its usual

course. Using the much larger MPS multiplier for fiscal policy clearly

increases the role for fiscal policy, but not dramatically so. According to

this simulation, if fiscal policy had been held to its usual level, real GNP

in 1942 would have been 14 percent lower than it actually was. However,

essentially all of this effect comes from the last year of the simulation:

real GNP in 1941 would have only been 1 percent lower than it actually was if

fiscal policy had been held to its usual level. Even with the much larger

multiplier, fiscal policy accounts for essentially none of the recovery prior

to 1942. Thus, using policy multipliers derived from a much different

procedure than I used in my calculation leads to the same conclusion that

monetary policy was crucial to the recovery from the Great Depression and

fiscal policy was of little importance.'3

      One characteristic of most multipliers derived from large rnacromodels is

that the effects of aggregate demand policy on the level of real output are

constrained to be zero in the long run. This is certainly the case in the MPS

model in which the long—run behavior of the economy is assunied to follow the

 predictions of a Solow growth model. In the simulations that I have done.

 both with my own multipliers and with those from the MPS model, I have not

 followed this practice. I have only considered the short—run multipliers and
                                                                                20

have not forced the positive effects of an expansionary aggregate demand shock

on the level of real output to be undone eventually.    I do this because the

constraint that the long—run effects of policy are zero is simply imposed a

priori in most models; what evidence there is in fact indicates that the real

effects of policy shifts are highly persistent (see, for example, Romer and

Rosier [1989]).

      However, provided that one does not assume that the positive effects of

expansionary policy are undone very quickly (that is, within a year or two),

allowing for negative feedback effects from a policy stimulus would not negate

the crucial role of policy in generating the high real growth rates observed

in the mid— and late—1930s. This is true both because in the first few years

of the expansion there would be no negative feedback effects from previous

policy expansions and because there are progressively larger monetary growth

rates toward the end of the recovery. Furthermore, there is no support for

the view that the effects of policy shifts are counteracted rapidly. In the

MPS model, for example, the effects of both fiscal and monetary shocks do not

start to be counteracted substantially until 12 quarters after the shock.

Thus, even under the assumption that policy does not matter in the long run,

one would still find that policy was important for the 8 to 10 years that

encompass the recovery phase of the Great Depression.




IV. THE SOURCE OF THE MONETARY EXPANSION AND THE TRANSMISSION MECHANISM

      That economic developments would have been very different in the mid—

and late—1930s had money growth been held to its usual level is obvious from

the calculations above. However, to say that it would have been a disaster to

hold money growth rates at their usual level in the second half of the 1930s
                                                                               21

is different from saying that monetary policy developments caused the recovery

we observe. The evidence presented thus far does not rule out the possibility

that money growth rates were high relative to usual because of an endogenous

response of money growth to the rapid recovery of real output. Hence, in

order to argue that it was aggregate demand stimulus that caused the recovery

rather than self—correction, one must check that the rapid rates of monetary

growth were due to policy actions or historical accidents, and were not the

result of higher output bringing forth money creation.14

      Furthermore, before one believes that even a huge independent monetary

expansion had the enormous effect that my simulations suggest that it had, it

is reasonable to consider the possible transmission mechanism. Therefore, I

also check whether there is an identifiable way in which the rapid growth

rates in the money supply in the mid— and late—1930s could have stimulated the

real economy.



A. Monetary Expansion

      Money Multiplier. It is fairly easy to find evidence that the monetary

expansion of the mid— and late—1930s could not have been endogenous. The main

way that the money supply might grow endogenously is through changes in the

lending activities of banks. It is usually argued that in response to a boom,

banks may raise the deposit to reserve ratio and customers may accept a higher

deposit to currency ratio. Both of these changes Imply that a given supply of

high—powered money can then support a larger stock of Ml. However, neither of

these conditions were satisfied during the recovery from the Great Depression.

The deposit to reserve ratio fell steadily in the mid— and late 1930s, from

8.86 in January 1933 to 6.67 in December 1942. The deposit to currency ratio

rose initially in the recovery as the banking system regained credibility, but
                                                                               22

then remained fairly constant from 1935 until 1941. In late 1941 and 1942,

this ratio then fell quite sharply.1 The behavior of both these ratios

suggests that it could not be the case that the money supply rose in the mid—

and late—1930s because of demand—induced changes in the money multiplier.

     The Rise in High-Powered Money. Since the money multiplier, if

anything, fell during the recovery from the Great Depression, it is clear that

any rise observed in Ml must have been due to a rise in the stock of high—

powered money. And indeed, the stock of high—powered money rose substantially

more than the stock of Ml. It is theoretically possible that this rise in

high—powered money was endogenous, occurring because the monetary authority

increased the money supply to accommodate the higher transactions demand

caused by higher output. In truth, however, Federal Reserve monetary policy

was far from accommodating. Essentially none of the increases in the stock of

high—powered money during the second half of the Great Depression were due to

active Federal Reserve policy. The Federal Reserve maintained a policy of

caution throughout the recovery and even stopped increasing Federal Reserve

credit to meet seasonal demands in the mid— and late—1930s (see Friedman and

Schwartz [1963, pp. 511—514]). Thus, there is no evidence that high—powered

money increased in response to the increase in real output.

      The source of the huge increases in the U.S. money supply during the

recovery were the tremendous gold inflows that began in 1933. Friedman and

Schwartz state: "the money stock grew at a rapid rate in the three successive

years from June 1933 to June 1936 ....   The rapid rise was a consequence of

the gold inflow produced by the revaluation of gold plus the flight of capital

to the United States. It was in no way a consequence of the contemporaneous

business expansion" [1963, p. 5441. The monetary gold stock nearly doubled

between December 1933 and July 1934 and then increased at an average annual
                                                                               23

rate of nearly 15 percent between December 1934 and December 1941.18

      The above quotation indicates that Friedman and Schwartz believe quite

reasonably that the tremendous initial rise in gold inflows in 1934 was the

result of the significant revaluation of gold that became official on January

31, 1934 [1963, p. 508—509]. In this way a large part of the rise was the

result of an active policy decision on the part of the Roosevelt

administration. Bloomfield reiterates this conclusion saying that "the

devaluation of the dollar, for technical reasons, was also the direct cause of

much of the heavy net gold imports of $758 million in February—March, 1934;

for it created a marked 'gap' ... between the prices of gold in the United

States and in foreign countries and thereby induced large—scale gold imports

on an arbitrage basis until that 'gap' was finally wiped out" (1950, p. 142).

      Both Bloomfield and Friedman and Schwartz attribute most of the

continuing increases in gold throughout the later l930s to political

developments in Europe. Bloomfield points out that the gold inflows were

primarily caused by huge net imports of foreign capital to the U.S; the U.S.

ran persistent and large capital account surpluses in the mid— and late—

19305.17 He then states: "Probably the most important single cause of the

massive movement of funds to the United States in 1934—39 as a whole was the

rapid deterioration in the international political situation. The growing

threat of a European war created fears of seizure or destruction of wealth by

the enemy, imposition of exchange restrictions, oppressive war taxation .

Huge volumes of funds were consequently transferred in panic to the United

States from Western European countries likely to be involved in such a

conflict" (1950, pp. 24—25). Friedman and Schwartz are more succinct when

they conclude: "Munich and the outbreak of war in Europe were the main factors

determining the U.S. money stock in those years (1938—19411, as Hitler and the
                                                                               24

gold miners had been in 1934 to 1936" (1963. P. 545).

      Roosevelt's Gold Policy. Given that unsterilized gold inflows were the

source of the monetary expansion of the mid— and late—l930s, it is important

to analyze why the Roosevelt administration devalued in 1933 and why the

Treasury did not sterilize the gold inflows during most of the recovery

period. If these decisions were prompted by the recovery itself, then the

monetary expansion could, at some level, be considered endogenous. This,

however, is almost surely not true.

      Johnson's [1939) analysis of the Roosevelt administration's gold policy

suggests that to the extent that the Treasury was responding to the real.

economy, it was trying to counteract the Depression through easy money, rather

than trying to accommodate the recovery. That is, the administration was, if

anything, seeking to increase the money supply because output was low, not

because output was high or growing. Johnson stresses that Roosevelt's desire

to encourage a gold inflow was not based on a conventional view of the

monetary transmission mechanism, but rather on the view that an increase in

the gold supply would directly raise prices and reflation would directly

stimulate recovery [1939, pp. 9—28].

      The fact that the continuing gold inflows of the mid—l930s were not

sterilized appears to be partly the result of technical problems with the

sterilization process. The Gold Reserve Act of 1934 set up a stabilization

fund and made explicit the role of the Treasury in intervening in the foreign

exchange market. However, because the stabilization fund was endowed only

with gold, it was technically able to only counteract gold outflows, not gold

inflows (see Johnson (1939, pp. 92—114)). As a result, sterilization would

have required an active decision to change the new operating procedures. Such

a decision was not made because Roosevelt believed that -unsterilized gold
                                                                              25

inflows would stimulate the economy through reflation.

      This discussion of gold policy during the recovery suggests that the

devaluation and the absence of sterilization were the result of active policy

decisions and a lack of understanding about the process of exchange market

intervention. To the degree that active policy was involved, it was clearly

policy aimed at encouraging recovery, not policy responding to a recovery that

was already under way. Together with the discussion of the role of political

instability in causing gold flows, these findings make it clear that the

increase in the money supply in the recovery phase of the Great Depression was

not endogenous. Since the simulation results of Section III showed that the

large deviations of money growth rates from normal appear to account for much

of the recovery of real output between 1933 and 1937 and between 1938 and

1942, it is possible to conclude that independent monetary developments

account for the bulk of the recovery from the Great Depression.



B. Transmission Mechanism

      The usual way that loose monetary policy is thought to affect real

output is through real interest rates: an increase in the money growth rate

lowers real interest rates, and this in turn stimulates interest—sensitive

spending by lowering the cost of borrowing or by reducing the opportunity cost

of spending. To see if this usual mechanism could have been operating in the

second half of the 1930s, it is necessary to look at the behavior of interest

rates and interest—sensitive spending.

      Interest Rates. Nominal interest rates declined around the same time

that money growth expanded rapidly. For example, the commercial paper rate

dropped from 2.63 percent to 1.25 percent between the second and fourth

quarters of l933.j However, in an environment where prices are changing
                                                                               26

rapidly, nominal interest rates are clearly not the best indicator of the cost

of borrowing. Rather, one wants to consider the behavior of real interest

rates. This is especially true given the fact that nominal interest rates

were close to zero by 1934. Clearly if monetary developments affected real

rates substantially in this period, it must have been through expected

inflation, not through further declines in nominal rates.

      The simplest way to estimate real interest rates Is to consider the cx

post real rate. To calculate cx post real rates I use quarterly data on the 4

to 6 month commercial paper rate and subtract off the actual change in the

producer price index over the following quarter (at an annual rate).19 The

nominal commercial paper rate and the ex post real rate are graphed in Figure

7. The figure shows that ex post real rates dropped precipitously at the

start of the monetary expansion in 1933 and remained low or negative for the

rest of the decade (except for the rise during the monetary contraction of

1937—1938). Indeed, the drop in cx post real rates between the contractionary

and expansionary phases of the Great Depression is remarkable. Ex post real

rates fell from values over 15 percent in the early 1930s to values typically

around —10 percent in the inid—l930s and early 1940s. That nominal interest

rates were close to zero during most of this period emphasizes the fact that

inflation was quite significant starting in 1933.20

      While the behavior of the ex post real rate is suggestive that the

interest—rate transmission mechanism could have been working in the recovery

phase of the Great Depression, it is the ex ante real rate that is actually

relevant for decision making. To estimate cx ante real interest rates I

employ the simple regression procedure suggested by Mishkin [1981].

Manipulation of the Fisher identity shows that the difference between the cx

ante real rate that we want to know and the cx post real rate that we observe
                                                                                   27

is unanticipated inflation. Under the    assumption of   rational expectations,

the expectation of unanticipated inflation using information available at the

time   the forecast is made is zero. Therefore, if one regresses the ex post

real rate on current and lagged information, the fitted values provide

estimates of the ex ante real rate. This is true because the expectation of

both the OLS error term and unanticipated inflation are zero.

        To apply this procedure 1 regress the ex post real rates calculated

above on a variety of contemporaneous and lagged variables. In particular, I

include in the regression the current value and four quarterly lags of the

monetary policy variable described in the multiplier calculations <but

disaggregated to quarterly values), the percentage change in industrial

production, actual inflation, and the level of the nominal commercial paper

rate. To account for possible seasonal variation I also include a constant

term and three quarterly dummy variables. This regression is run over the

sample period 1923 to 1942.21

        The results of this regression are shown in Table 1. The included

explanatory variables explain a substantial fraction of the total variation in

the cx post real interest rate; the R2 of the regression is 0.52. Of the

individual explanatory variables, the one of most interest is the monetary

policy variable. Obviously, if the conventional transmission mechanism is

operating, the monetary policy variable should enter with a significant

negative coefficient. As can be seen, this is clearly the case. The        first
lag    of the monetary policy variable enters the regression with a coefficient

of —0.463 and has a t—statistic of —3.02. This suggests that on average in

the interwar sample period monetary developments had a substantial negative

correlation with real interest rates.

        The fitted values of this regression are graphed in Figure 8. As
                                                                               28

described before, these fitted values provide an estimate of the ex ante real

rate. These estimates of the real rate show the same marked drop that the ex

post real rate showed, and the drop is again nearly contemporaneous with the

switch to expansionary monetary policy in 1933.22 While one cannot be sure

that actual real rates dropped the same amount as these estimates or that the

drop was caused by monetary developments, the regression results certainly

suggest that the expansionary monetary developments of the mid— and late—1930s

did have a substantial impact on real interest rates. Thus, this aspect of

the conventional monetary transmission mechanism appears to be operating in

the recovery phase of the Great Depression.

      Response of Interest-Sensitive Spending. For expansionary monetary

developments to have stimulated the economy in the mid— and late—1930s, it

must be the case that real interest rates not only fell, but that investment

and other types of interest—sensitive spending also responded positively to

this drop in real interest rates. While a detailed investigation of the

determinants of investment and consumption is clearly outside the scope of

this paper, it is important to see if the gross movements in these series

suggest that the conventional monetary transmission mechanism could have been

operating in the mid— and late—1930s.

      Figures 9 and 10 graph the annual percentage change in real total fixed

investment and in real consumer expenditures on durable goods.23 In both

figures the annual average of the estimates of the ex ante real interest rate

are also graphed. These graphs suggest that there is a very strong negative

relationship between real interest rates and the percentage change in

interest—sensitive spending in the mid— and late—1930s. Fixed investment and

the consumption of durable goods both turned up shortly after the plunge in

real rates in 1933. Over the next several years real rates remained negative
                                                                                29

and spending grew rapidly. In 1938 the recovery was interrupted as real rates

turned substantially positive and spending fell sharply. Starting in 1939

real rates fell again and the rapid growth of spending resumed.

      The relationship between spending and interest rates can be quantified

by computing the correlations between the percentage change in fixed

investment or consumer spending on durables and the level of the ex ante real

rate. Table 2 shows these correlations, which are estimated over the period

1934—1942. The table shows that there is a very strong contemporaneous

correlation between interest rates and the growth rates of investment and

consumer spending on durable goods in the recovery phase of the Great

Depression. There is also a reasonably strong correlation between the

percentage change in spending and interest rates lagged one year.

      This same relationship also holds with the available quarterly series on

construction contracts. These data show the floor space of new buildings for

which construction contracts have been drawn up during the quarter.24 This is

a series that one might, reasonably expect to respond quickly to movements in

interest rates because it refers to planned rather than actual expenditures.

And indeed, over the period 1933—1942, the contemporaneous correlation between

the percentage change in construction contracts and the ex ante real rate is

—O.4. The low interest rates of the mid—1930s and the early—1940s

correspond to periods of rapid increase in construction contracts.

      These correlations obviously do not prove that the fall in interest

rates caused the surge in investment and durable goods expenditures. However,

they do at least suggest that there is no evidence that the conventional

transmission mechanism for monetary developments failed to operate during the

mid— and late—1930s. One piece of evidence that suggests more of a causal

link between the fall in interest rates and the recovery is the difference in
                                                                               30

the timing of the rebound in consumer expenditures on durables and on

services. Whereas consumer expenditures on durables Increased between 1933

and 1934, real consumer expenditures on services did not turn around until

1935. This suggests that it was not a surge of optimism that was pulling up

all types of consumer expenditures in 1934, but rather some force, such as a

fall in interest rates, that was operating primarily on durable goods.25




V. CONCLUSION

      The main finding of this study is that monetary developments were a

crucial source of the recovery of the U.S. economy from the Great Depression.

The very rapid growth of the money supply beginning in 1933 appears to have

lowered real interest rates and stimulated investment spending just as

conventional models of the transmission mechanism would predict.

      These expansionary monetary developments were almost surely independent,

in the sense that the money supply increased for reasons unrelated to the

growth of real output. However, whether the expansion should be attributed to

good luck or good policy is more debatable. The money supply grew rapidly in

the mid— and late—1930s primarily because huge gold inflows to the U.S. went

unsterilized. While the later gold flows were mainly due to political

developments in Europe, the largest gold inflows occurred immediately

following the revaluation of gold mandated by the Roosevelt administration in

1934. Thus, the gold flows were partly due to historical accident and partly

due to policy. The decision to let the gold flows swell the U.S. money supply

was also at least partly a policy choice. The Roosevelt administration chose

not to sterilize the gold flows because they hoped that such flows would

stimulate the depressed U.S. economy.
                                                                               31

      The finding that monetary developments were very important and fiscal

policy was of little consequence in the mid— and late—1930s suggests an

interesting twist on the usual view that World War II was important in causing

or accelerating the recovery from the Great Depression. As mentioned above,

even in 1942, the year that the economy returned to its trend path, the

effects of fiscal policy were small. As a result, it is hard to argue that

the changes in government spending caused by the war were a major factor in

the recovery; the recovery was nearly complete before the war had a noticeable

fiscal impact.

      However, Bloomfield's and Friedman and Schwartz's analysis of the cause

of the gold inflows that raised the U.S. money supply actually suggest a

direct link from the war to the money supply. The U.S. money supply started

to rise in 1938 because of capital flight from Europe caused by Hitler's

increasing belligerence; the resulting gold inflows increased dramatically

after war was officially declared in Europe. In this way the war may have

been quite important in keeping the U.S. money supply growing rapidly after

1938. This could obviously have contributed substantially to the recovery as

early as 1939. Thus, World War II may have helped to end the Great Depression

in the U.S., but its expansionary benefits worked initially through monetary

developments rather than through fiscal policy.

      The finding that monetary developments were crucial to the recovery

confirms some other views of the end of the Great Depression. Most obviously,

it supports Friedman and Schwartz's view that monetary developments were in

general very important during the depression. It suggests, however, that

Friedman and Schwartz's emphasis on the inaction of the Federal Reserve after

1933 was misplaced. What mattered was that the money supply grew rapidly;

that this rise was orchestrated by the Treasury rather than the Federal
                                                                               32

Reserve is of secondary importance.

     The paper is also supportive of studies that emphasize the devaluation

of 1933—1934 as the engine of recovery. Temin [1989] argues that the

devaluation signalled the end of a deflationary monetary regime and that this

change in regime was crucial to improving expectations. In this story it was

the change in expectations that brought about the turning point in 1933. My

work bolsters Temins argument by showing that the deflationary regime was

indeed replaced by a very inflationary monetary policy. Thus, it may explain

why the regime shift was viewed as credible. More importantly, it explains

why the initial recovery was followed by continued rapid expansion. Without

actual inflation and actual declines in real interest rates, the recovery

stimulated by a change in expectations would almost surely have been short—

lived. In the same way, this paper also bolsters the argument of Eichengreen

and Sachs [1985] that devaluation could stimulate recovery by allowing

expansionary monetary policy. It shows that in the case of the U.S.

devaluation was indeed followed by salutary increases in the money supply.

      On the other hand, the results here appear to contradict studies, such

as Bernanke and Parkinson [1989] and De Long and Summers [1988], that suggest

that the recovery from the Great Depression was due to the self—corrective

powers of the U.S. economy in the 1930s. My finding is that aggregate demand

stimulus was the main source of the recovery from the Great Depression. The

simulations suggest that without the tremendous increases in the money supply,

the economy would still have been approximately 50 percent below its pre—

Depression trend level in 1942, rather than back to full employment as it

actually was. This certainly seems to suggest that the self—corrective power

of the U.S. economy in the l930s was very weak. Thus, the Great Depression

does not seem to provide evidence that large shocks are rapidly undone by the
                                                                              33

forces of mean reversion. Rather, it suggests that large negative shifts in

aggregate demand are sometimes followed by large positive shifts, the

combination of which leaves the economy back on trend.
                                                                               34

                                     REFERENCES




Ayres, Leonard P. Turning Points in Business Cycles. New York: Macmillan,
      1939.

Bernanke, Ben S.  "Nonxnonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the
      Propagationof the Great Depression." American Economic Review 73 (June
      1983): 257—276.

Bernanke, Ben S. and Martin S. Parkinson. "Unemployment, Inflation, and Wages
      in the American Depression: Are There Lessons for Europe?" American
      Economic Review 79 (May 1989): 210—214.

Bloomfield, Arthur I. Capital Imports and the American Balance of Payments.
      1934—39. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1950.

Brown, E. Cary. "Fiscal Policy in the 'Thirties: A Reappraisal." American
      Economic Review 46 (December 1956): 857—879.

Chandler, Lester V. America's Greatest Depression. 1929—1941. New York:
      Harper and Row, 1970.

Darby, Michael. "Three—and—a—half Million U.S. Employees Have Been Mislaid:
      Or, an Explanation of Unemployment 1934—1941." Journal of Political
      Economy 84 (February 1976): 1—16.

De Long, J. Bradford and Lawrence H. Summers. "How Does Macroeconomic Policy
      Affect Output?" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1988:2): 433—
      480.

Eichengreen, Barry and Jeffrey Sachs. "Exchange Rates and Economic Recovery
      in the 1930s." Journal of Economic History 45 (December 1985): 925—
      946.

Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz. A Monetary History of the United
      States. 1867—1960. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1963.

Gordon, Robert Aaron. Economic Instability and Growth: The American Record.
      New York: Harper & Row, 1974.

Hansen, Alvin. Full Recovery or Stagnation? New York: W. W. Norton, 1938.

________      Fiscal   Policy and Business Cycles. New York: W. W. Norton, 1941.

Johnson, G. Griffith. The Treasury and Monetary Policy. 1933—1938.
      Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1939.

Kendrick, John W. Productivity Trends in the United States. Princeton:
      Princeton University Press for NBER, 1961.

Lewis, W. Arthur. Economic Survey. 1919—1939. London: George Allen and
      Unwin, 1949.
                                                                             32


Lipsey, Robert E. and Doris Preston. Source Book of Statistics Related to
      Construction. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1966.

Mishkin, Frederic. "The Real Interest Rate: An Empirical Investigation." In
      The Costs and Consecuences of Inflation edited by Karl Brunner and Alan
      Meltzer. Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol.
      15, 1981. PP. 151—200.

Romer, Christina D. "World War I and the Postwar Depression: A
      Reinterpretation Based on Alternative Estimates of GNP." Journal of
      Monetary Economics 22 (July 1988): 91—115.

Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer. "Does Monetary Policy Matter? A New
      Test in the Spirit of Friedman and Schwartz." NBER Macroeconomics
      Annual 4 (1989): 121—170.

_________    "New Evidence on the Monetary Transmission Mechanism." Brookirigs
      Papers on Economic Activity (1990:1): 149—213.

Roose, Kenneth D. The Economics of Recession and Revival. New Haven: Yale
      University Press, 1954

Smithies, Arthur. "The American Economy in the Thirties." American Economic
      Review 36 (May 1946): 11—27.

Temin, Peter. Lessons from the Great Depression. Cambridge: M.I.T. Press,
      1989.

U.S. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Banking and Monetary
      Statistics, 1943 and 1976 editions.

__________    Industrial   Production, 1986 edition.

_________     Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee. Various years.

__________   "Structure and Uses of the MPS Quarterly Econometric Model of the
      United States." Federal Reserve Bulletin 73 (February 1987): 93—109.

U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. National Income and Product Accounts. 1929—
      12.2. 1986.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Historical Data on the Producer Price Index.
      Microfiche.

U.S. Department of the Treasury. Statistical Appendix to the Annual Report of
      the Secretary of the Treasury on the State of the Finances. 1979.

 Weinstein, Michael. "Some Macroeconomic Impacts of the National Industrial
       Recovery Act, 1933—1935." In The Great Depression Revisited edited by
       Karl Brunner. Boston: Martinus Nijhoff, 1981, pp. 262—281.
                                     NOTES



1.   In these calculations I use the Darby (19761 unemployment series.

2. If, on the other hand, the policy changes were undertaken in an effort to
counteract other factors that were acting to raise output, the procedure will
understate the effects of policy.

3. The consumption data are from Kendrick 11962, Table A—ha, p. 294].

4. One partial explanation for the behavior of the economy in 1921 that is
hard to dismiss is a positive supply shock. Romer (1988) argues that the
recovery of agricultural production in Europe and a flooding of the market
with primary goods that had been stockpiled in peripheral countries during the
war caused prices of agricultural goods in the United States to plummet in
1920. This, in turn, stimulated the production of goods that use primary
commodities as inputs. The presence of a favorable supply shock in this
episode implies that the importance of policy in 1921 will be understated
because the fall in prices ameliorated some of the fall in real output caused
by the aggregate demand policies.

5. The data on Ml are from Friedman and Schwartz [1963, Table   A—i, column 7,
pp. 704—734].

6. There are obviously alternative measures of monetary policy that could be
used. One alternative that would affect the multiplier calculations would be
to use the deviation of the growth rate of high—powered money from usual as
the policy variable. This is true because in both 1920 and 1937
                                                                  high—powered
money growth was higher than normal, despite the contractionary monetary
policies. Thus, using high—powered money as the policy variable would result
in a negative multiplier for monetary policy. The peculiar behavior of high—
powered money in these two episodes is due to the fact that the monetary
policy actions undertaken in both 1920 and 1937 were ones that tended to
decrease the amount of money in circulation relative to the stock of reserves.
Since the amount of money in circulation is what is likely to affect interest
rates and spending, Ml is clearly a more sensible measure of
                                                              monetary policy
in these two episodes. Another alternative measure of monetary policy that
one could use would be some measure of the change in real
                                                           money growth; that
is, the change in Ml relative to the price level. However, this would not be
sensible given that this paper seeks to identify the contribution of
                                                                      aggregate
demand policy to the recovery. Changes in nominal money are what shift the
aggregate demand function; changes in real money result from the interaction
of aggregate demand and aggregate supply movements. Thus, to isolate the
effects of aggregate demand stimulus, one wants to use a measure of monetary
policy that only reflects changes in demand.

7. The surplus data are from the Department of the
                                                    Treasury (1979, Table 2,
pp. 4—11] and are based on the administrative budget. Because these data are
for fiscal years, I convert them to a calendar year basis by averaging the
observations for a given year and the subsequent year. The data are deflated
using the implicit price deflator for CNP. The deflator series and the real
GNP series for 1929—1942 are from the National Income and Product Accounts
[1986]; data for 1919—1928 are from Romer (19881. The administrative budget
data are used instead of the NIPA surplus data because they are available on a
consistent basis for the entire interwar era. While the two surplus series
differ substantially in some years, the gross movements in the two series are
generally similar. The surplus is divided by GNP to scale the variable
relative to the economy.

8.  In place of the actual surplus to CNP ratio one could use the full—
employment surplus to GM? ratio. I do not use this variable because it treats
a decline in revenues caused by a decline in income as normal rather than
activist policy. This is inappropriate for the prewar and interwar eras when
raising taxes in recessions was usually preferred to letting the budget slip
seriously into deficit. However, the differences between the full—employment
surplus and the actual surplus are sufficiently small even in the worst years
of the depression that the two measures yield similar results.

9. One could start the simulations in 1929 to estimate the role of monetary
developments in causing the depression. While this procedure is not strictly
correct because some of the monetary developments in the early l930s were
clearly endogenous, the results confirm the conventional wisdom: monetary
forces had little effect during the onset of the Great Depression in 1929 and
1930, but were the crucial cause of the deepening of the depression in 1931
and 1932.

10. These changes in the relative sizes of the monetary and fiscal policy
multipliers are an extreme case of what might happen if one took into account
the positive supply shock in 1921 discussed in note 4. This is true because
netting out the effect of the supply shock would tend to increase the role
assigned to the large increase in the surplus to CM? ratio that occurred in
1920 and therefore decrease the role assigned to monetary policy.

11. Any change in the fiscal policy multiplier that increases the role of
fiscal policy may alter the narrow finding of this paper that fiscal policy
was unimportant, but it will strengthen the more general point that aggregate
demand stimulus was important to the recovery.

12. These multipliers are reported in a recent report of the Federal Reserve
Board (1987, Tables 1 and 2). The monetary policy shock used in the MI'S
simulation is a permanent increase in the level of Ml of 1 percent over the
projected baseline. This is equivalent to the shock I consider in my
simulations, which is a one—time deviation in the growth rate of Ml from its
normal growth rate. I use the MPS multiplier derived from the full—model
response (Case 3 of Table 2). The fiscal shock used in the MPS simulation is
a permanent increase in the purchases of the federal government by 1 percent
of real GM? over the baseline projection. This differs from the shock I
consider, which is a change in the surplus to CNP ratio, because tax revenues
will rise in response to the induced increase in GNP. To make the MI'S
multiplier consistent with my measure of fiscal policy, I assume that the
marginal tax rate is 0.3 and then calculate the change in the surplus to CNP
ratio that corresponds to a 1 percent increase in federal purchases. The MI'S
multiplier that I adjust in this way is based on the full—model response, with
Ml fixed (Case 4 of Table 1).
13. Weinstein (1981) performs a similar calculation for monetary policy using
multipliers derived from the Hickman—Cohen model and finds a large potential
effect of the monetary expansion in 1934 and 1935. However, he emphasizes
chat the National Industrial Recovery Act acted as a negative supply shock and
counteracted the monetary expansion. While the NIRA may indeed have stunted
the recovery somewhat, it does not follow from this that monetary policy was
unimportant to the recovery. In the absence of the monetary expansion, the
supply shock cou'd have led to continued decline rather than to the rapid
growth of real output that actually occurred.

14. At some level it might not matter if money growth rates rose in response
to output growth because one could argue that the monetary authorities always
had the option of holding money growth rates at their usual level. In this
case, policy cou'd be given credit for allowing the money supply to expand
relative to normal.

15. The data are from Friedman and Schwartz 11963, Table B—3, pp. 799—808).

16. The data are from Chandler (1970. p. 162).

17. The U.S. also ran a small current account surplus in every year except
1936 (see Bloomfield [1950, p. 269)).

18. The commercial paper rate data are from the Federal Reserve Board (1943,
pp. 448—451 and 1976, p. 674]. They cover 4 to 6 month prime commercial paper
and are not seasonally adjusted.

19. The historical data on the Producer Price Index are from the Bureau of
Labor Statistics. They are not seasonally adjusted.

20. Some of the inflation in 1933 and 1934 could have been due to the NIRA,
which encouraged collusion aimed at raising prices, rather than to monetary
policy. However, the NIRA was declared unconstitutional in 1935 and its
policies were ones that would tend to cause a one—time jump in the price level
rather than continued inflation. Thus, while some of the Initial fall in real
interest rates could have been due to the NIRA, the continued negative real
rates in the mid— and late—1930s must have been due to other causes.

21. The monetary policy variable is disaggregated by converting the quarterly
growth rates of Ml during the recovery to annual rates and then subtracting
off the average annual growth rate of Ml in the mid—1920s. The industrial
production series is from the Federal Reserve Board [1986).

22. The estimates are strikingly robust to variations in the specification of
the regression. I have tried many variants of the basic regression, such as
excluding contemporaneous values o the explanatory variables, extending the
sample period to include 1921, and leaving out the seasonal dummy variables.
None of these changes alters the estimates of the ex ante real rate
noticeably.

23. These data are from the National Income and Product Accounts [1986, Table
1.2, p. 6).
24. The Dodge construction contract series is available in Lipsey and Preston
[1966, Series A17, pp. 95—96). I use the version that shows the floor space
of all types of buildings and is not already seasonally adjusted. The data
for 27 states is spliced on to data for 37 states in 1925. 1 seasonally
adjust the series by regressing the logarithm of contracts on a trend, a
constant, and 3 quarterly dummy variables.

25. For this calculation, I seasonally adjust the ex ante real interest rate
series by regressing it on a constant and three quarterly dummy variables.

26. It is perhaps useful to mention that the conventional monetary
transmission mechanism may not have been the only way that expansionary
monetary developments stimulated real growth during the mid— and late—1930s.
Many recent studies have emphasized that debt—deflation could have been an
important source of weakness in the banking sector and that banking failures
could have hurt real output by reducing the amount of credit intermediation
(see, for example, Bernanke [1983]). If this is indeed the case, then the
inflation generated by the tremendous increase in the money supply starting in
1933 could have had a beneficial effect on the financial system. By reducing
the real value of outstanding debts, the inflation may have strengthened the
solvency of banks and hastened the recovery of the financial system.
                                TABLE I

       REGRESSION USED TO ESTIMATE EX ANTE REAL INTEREST RATES



Sample Period: 1923:1 to 1942:2
Dependent Variable: The Quarterly Ex Post Real Interest Rate
R2 —   0.52


Expi anatory Variable             Coefficient         T—Statistic

Monetary Policy Variable
         Lag 0                       0.044               0.29
         Lag 1                      —0.46 3             —3.02
         Lag 2                       0.182               1.09
         Lag 3                      —0.196              —1.20
         Lag 4                       0.352               2.30

Nominal Commercial Paper Rate
              Lag 0                  0.834               0.25
              Lag   I                0.191               0.04
              Lag   2                1.181               0.22
              Lag 3                  0.954               0.18
              Lag   4               —1.079              —0. 32

Inflation Rate
         Lag 0                      —0.396              —2.54
         Lag 1                       0.129               0.81
         Lag 2                      —0.014              —0.09
         Lag 3                       0.111               0.72
         Lag 4                      —0.031              —0.21

Change in Industrial Production
         Lag 0                      —0.026              —0.47
              Lag 1                  0.04 5              0.78
              Lag 2                 —0.120              —2.00
              Lag 3                  0.012               0.22
              Lag 4                 —0.036              —0.67

              Q2                     1.497               0.27
              Q3                    —6.961              —1.76
              Q4                     5.271               0.97
              Constant              —1.804              —0.44



Sources: See text for a description of the variables and the data
sources used in this regression.
                             TABLE 2

       CORRELATION BETWEEN SPENDING AND REAL INTEREST RATES




Sample Period: 1934—1942


                     Percentage Change      Percentage Change in
                       in Real Fixed     Real Consumer Expenditures
                         Investment           on Durable Coods



Ex Ante Real Rate



      Lag 0                —0.687                 —0.746

      Lag 1                —0.292                 —0.238

      Lag 2                —0.052                 —0.030



Sources: See text for a description of the variables and data sources
used to calculate these correlation coefficients.
                                  FIgure 1
                        Percentage Change in    Real GNP
                                 (192 7—1942)




Per c e ut

20.



15



 10.


 5.


 0.


 —s




-10



-15.

         1927   1923   131     1933      1935        1937   1939   1991
         4




     8


6




61


             /
                                      Figure 3

                            Simulation for Fiscal Policy
                                     (1933—194 2)




Logarithms

7 .D —



                                                        Actual Real



6.8—




                         GNP Under Normal Fiscal Policy
6.6—




6 L   —




6.2
                     I          I       I           I      I            I




          133 139   1335      1336    1337       1336    1333    19D   1391   I 92
                                     Figure 4

                     Fiscal Policy Variable (Lagged One year)
                                    (1923—1942)




 Percent

 3.




 1.




—1




—3.




-.5.




—7


       1923   1925   1527   1925    1531   1533    1935    1937   1939   1591
                                    Figure 5

                         Simulation for Monetary Policy
                                   (1933—1942)




Logarithms
7.0—

                                                  Actual Real CNP



6.8—




6.6—


                                                                                /
                                                                             ,,.7
                                            GNP Under Normal



                     —




C .2 —                                                                 I            I


         133   339    1535   1536    1337      1538   1535     1590   1391      1392
                                      Figure 6
                     Monetary Policy Variable (Lagged One Year)
                                    (192 3—1942)




Percent
 16.


12


 8.

 9.

 0.

—9




—8




-12


-16.
       1923   1525   1927   1925    193!    1533   1935   1537    1939   19H1
                                 l1gure 7
              Nominal and Ex Post Real Commercial Paper Rate
                          (Quarterly, 1929—1942)




 Percent
 90




 20




  0.



-20




_Ll0




-SD


           13D L31 I32 133 139      13S 135 137 336 13 19D     1M1
                                 Figure 8

                Estimates of the Ex Ante Real Interest Rate
                           (Quarterly, 1929—19L2)




 Percent
LtD




30




 20




 10




  0




-10




-20




-30


       1929   1931      I33        1935       1937       1939   1991
                                     Figure 9

                   Real Fixed Investment and Ex Ante Real Rates
                                   (1930—194 2)




Real Fixed Investment                                             Ex Ante Real Rates
(Change in Logarithms)                                                     (Percent)

  .9                                                                              20.



                                                                                  16.

  .2
                                                                                  12.


                                                                                   8.
0.0


                                                                                   9.


-.2
                                                                                   0.




-.9

                                                                                   -6.



 -6                                                                              —12.


       1930 1931 1932 1533 1931 3935 1936 1937 153B 1939 1990 1991
                                   Figure 10

       Real Consumer Expenditures on Durable Goods and Ex Ante Real Rates
                                   (1930—1942)



Real Consumer Expenditures on Durable Goods                     Ex Ante Real Rates
(Change in Logarithms)                                                      (Per ce n


.3                                                                                  2D.



                                                                                    Is

.2

                                                                                    12.

 .1
                                                                                        B.



0 .0                                                                                    9.


                                                                                        0
—.1

                                                                                        -9

—.2
                                                                                        -0


—.3                                                                                 —12.


        1930 1931 1532 1533 193M 1935 1936 1937 1938 1535 190 1991
