NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES

MACROECONOMIC POLICY AND ELECTIONS IN OECD DEMOCRACIES

Alberta Alesina
Gerald D. Cohen
Nouriel Roubini

Working Paper No. 3830

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1991

May 1991; revised August 1991. Prepared for the Sapir Conference
on The Political Economy of Business Cycles and Growth, Tel
Aviv University, June 2-3, 1991. We would like to thank our
discussants, Alex Cukierman and Ron Shachar, and several
conference participants for very useful comments. Alesina's work
was supported by a Sloan Research Fellowship. This paper is part
of NBER's research program in Financial Markets and Monetary
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3830
September 1991

MACROECONOMIC POLICY AND ELECTIONS IN OECD DEMOCRACIES

ABSTRACT
The purpose of this paper is to test for evidence of
opportunistic "political business cycles" in a large sample of 18
OECD economies. Our results can be suninarized as follows: 1) We
find very little evidence of pre-electoral effects of economic
outcomes, in particular, on GDP growth and unemployment; 2) We
see some evidence of "political monetary cycles." that is,
expansionary monetary policy in election years; 3) We also
observe indications of "political budget cycles," or "loose"
fiscal policy prior to elections; 4) Inflation exhibits a postelectoral jump, which could be explained by either the preelectoral "loose" monetary and fiscal policies and/or by an
opportunistic timing of increases in publicly controlled prices,
or indirect taxes.

Alberto Alesina
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
and CEPR
Nouriel Roubini
Department of Economics
Box 1972 - Yale Station
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06520-1972
and NBER
and CEPR

Gerald D. Cohen
Department of Economics
Harvard University

Cambridge, MA 02138

1. lntroducthn

Do politicians manipulate economic policy in order to win elections? For many
economists, political scientists and laypeople, the answer to this question is obvious: of course

they do! In a very influential paper, Nordhaus (1975) formalized and clarified the idea of an
opportunistic "political business cycle." According to this model, politicians stimulate aggregate

demand before elections in order to create fast growth and reduce unemployment. The
inflationary consequences of this policy are eliminated by a post-electoral contraction.

Surprisingly, the empirical literature generated by the Nordhaus paper yielded, at best,

mixed results. Partly as a reaction to these empirical rejections and partly in response to the
"rational expectation" critique, in the late eighties a new generation of "rational political business
cycles models" emerged. This line of research includes work by Cukierman and Meltzer (1987),

Rogoff and Sibert (1988), and Rogoff (1990). These models have empirical implications which

are somewhat different from those of Nordhaus' (1975) model.

The purpose of this paper is to examine in detail the evidence of "political business
cycle" (PBC) models on a large sample of 18 OECD economies using both the Nordhaus model

and the new "rational" models as a guide to our study. Our results can be summarized as
follows:

1) We find very little evidence of pre-electoral effects on economic outcomes, in
particular, on GDP growth and unemployment, as implied by the Nordhaus model.
2) We see some evidence of "political monetary cycles"; that is, expansionary monetary

policy in elections years.

a-

3) We also observe indications of "political budget cycles," or "loose" fiscal policy prior
to elections.

4) Inflation exhibits a post-electoral jump, which could be explained by either the pieelectoral "loose" monetary and fiscal policies and/or by an opportunistic timing of increases in

publicly controlled prices, or indirect taxes.
It should be emphasized that this evidence on monetary and fiscal policy is statistically

significant, but not extremely strong. Our interpretation of these results is that pre-electoral
manipulation of economic policy occurs frequently, but not always, and is constrained by the

politicians' concern about their "reputation." These results support modelling efforts which
emphasize the constraints imposed on policymakers by economic agents' and voters' rationality.

In this paper we do not consider the "partisan" model of political cycles (Hibbs (1977,

1987), Alt (1985), and Alesina (1987)) which emphasizes systematic differences in
macroeconomic policymaking between the "unemployment averse" left and the "inflation averse"

right. However, in concluding we offer a synthesis and discussion of the results of the present
paper in light of previous research which has found strong support for the "partisan" model.

Our paper is organized as follows.

In section 2 we briefly review the theory of

opportunistic political business cycles. In section 3 we review previous empirical results.
Section 4 describes our data. Section 5 explores the extent of "political business cycles" on
growth and unemployment; this section extends earlier results by Alesina and Roubini (1990).
Section 6 presents the results on inflation. Section 7 discusses the evidence for monetary policy.

Section 8 considers fiscal policy namely budget deficits, spending and taxes. The final section

3
suggesis

an interpretation of our results in the broader context of the literature on political

cycles.

2. The Theory of "Opportunistic Political Cycles"
The original model by Nordhaus (1975) is based upon the following assumptions:

(1) The economy can be described by an "expectations augmented"
Phillips curve,
(2) Expectations arc adaptive.

(3) Politicians control a policy instrument which directly affects
aggregate demand.

(4) Politicians are "opportunistic": they only care about holding
office.
(5) Voters are naive and retrospective: they judge the incumbent

government by evaluating positively high growth, low
unemployment and low inflation. They heavily discount past
observations, and do not understand the economic model which
relates inflation and unemployment.

(6) The timing of elections is exogenously fixed.
Based upon these hypotheses Nordhaus obtains well-known empirical implications:

(a) every incumbent government expands the economy immediately before each election by
taking advantage of the favorable short-run Phillips curve; (b) inflation increases around election

time as a result of this expansion;' (c) inflation is reduced by a post-electoral contraction of

4

aggregate demand which leads to a downturn or recession; (d) the economy exhibits an "inflation

bias," that is, inflation is higher than "socially optimum."
The present paper is concerned with the first three implications. In fact, although the
experience of the past 25 years suggests that an inflation bias may indeed exist, other models

are consistent with this observation. In particular an inflation bias is the central implication of

the "time consistency" literature originated by Kydland and Prescott (1977) and Barro and
Gordon (1983a,b).

2. 1 Rational Models

The application of game theory to macroeconomics has led to a reformulation of the
insight of the "political business cycle" model in a rational expectations framework. This result
was originally achieved by Cukierman and Meltzer (1987), Rogoff and Sibert (1988), and Rogoff
(1990). Persson and Tabellini (1991) later provided interesting extensions along the same lines.

In these models, governments have the same utility function as private agents (i.e. they care
about unemployment, inflation, and government spending in the same way as private agents do),

but they are also "opportunistic." That is, governments care about winning elections, get
welfare from being in power, and do not have "partisan" motivations. These papers share two
basic ingredients: i) different governments are characterized by different degrees of competency;

ii) the government is more informed than the voters about its own level of competency.
In Cukierman and Meltzer (1987), different governments are characterized by differing

abilities to forecast. In Rogoff and Sibert (1988) and Rogoff (1990) "competency" is referred

to as the government's efficiency in reducing "waste" in the budget process. That is, more

5

competent governments can produce more public goods for given fiscal revenues. Persson and

Tabellini (1991) apply Rogoff's "competency" model to the Phillips curve case; more competent

governments can achieve higher growth with less unexpected inflation. In all of these models,

the incumbent government has an incentive to "signal" its competence by engaging in preelectoral manipulations of policy instruments.
In the present paper we will focus specifically on the monetary and budget cycles studied

by Rogoff and Sibert (1988) and Rogoff (1990). In the former paper, an equilibrium with
signaling looks as follows: incumbents reduce taxes and/or increase spending before elections,

to appear competent" since, needless to say, voters prefer competent governments to less
competent ones. Pre-electoral deficits are monetized, but the effects of monetization on inflation

and on the seignorage tax are perceived by the voters only with a lag, thus after the election.
Although voters are rational and aware of the policymakers' incentives, pre-electoral deficits for
signaling purposes still occur.2

Rogoff (1990) presents a non-monetary model in which he focuses upon government
spending on "consumption" (or transfers) and "investments." Signaling, in this model, takes the

form of pre-electoral surges in immediately visible expenditures for "consumption" or transfers

and cuts in "investment" expenditure. Although the decrease in investment is harmful for both
productivity and efficiency, these results are observable by voters only with lags. Thus, budget

cycles take the form of distortions in the allocation of resources across public spending
programs.

In summary, this body of research has made two important points:

6
(a) "opportunistic" cycles survive in rational models, with substantially different features

than the original Nordhaus formulation. In a rational model one is not likely to observe regular
multi-year cycles on GDP or unemployment.3 Rational behavior of voters and economic agents

would make these cycles impossible or counterproductive for the politicians. "Rational cycles"
should thus take the form of short-run manipulations of policy instruments around elections. In
other words, politicians may find it much easier and electorally rewarding to "mail some checks"

before elections, print money, and postpone tax increases ("read my lips"), than to reduce the
rate of unemployment in the election year.
(b) "retrospective voting" is not inconsistent with rational behavior, that is, it is a rational
strategy for the voters to judge the incumbent's performance based upon pre-electoral economic

conditions. This is, of course, a key element for the existence of opportunistic cycles.

Notice that, while the first implication concerning "signaling" crucially rests upon the
assumption of asymmetric information over the government's competence, the second does not.

In fact, one can observe rational retrospective voting even without asymmetric information, as
long as competence is serially correlated (see Alesina, Londregan and Rosenthal (1991)). That
is, rational retrospective voting emerges even in a model where the voters and the government
have the same information about the government's competence, as long as the latter is serially

correlated.

3. Review of Previous Empirical Results
Tests of opportunistic "political business cycles" can be divided into two categories: tests

on policy outcomes, namely output growth, unemployment, and inflation, and tests on policy

7

instruments such as money growth, taxes, translers, and government spending. The first set of

tests (on policy outcomes) in our view, overwhelmingly rejects the "political business cycIe
hypothesis. The second set of tests (on policy instruments) has yielded mixed results.
Soon after the publication of Nordhaus' (1975) paper, McCallum (1978) and Golden and

Poterba (1980) rejected Nordhaus' model on economic outcomes, using U.S. data. Paldam
(1978) obtained similar negative results on a sample of OECD economies. Further rejection of

the "political business cycle" model on GNP and unemployment in the U.S. were presented
more recently by Hibbs (1987) and Alesina (1988). For a large sample of OECD economies
similar rejections were obtained by Alesina (1989) and Alesina and Roubini (1990).
Haynes and Stone (1989) claim to have found support for the Nordhaus hypothesis on

GNP in the U.S. However, in our view, a careful analysis of their results suggests that they
have found evidence of "partisan" effects rather than of opportunistic cycles. The same criticism

applies to results presented by Nordhaus (1989). For an exposition of this critical observation
see Alesina's (1989) comment on Nordhaus.4

The evidence on manipulation of policy instruments is more favorable to the "political
business cycle" model. Tufte (1978) presents evidence of manipulation of the timing of fiscal

instruments, in particular transfers, and evidence of "monetary cycles." His evidence is,
however, confined to a few American elections. Results in line with those of Tufte (1978) on
fiscal transfers are also reported in Alesina (1988). Bizer and Durlauf (1990) report results on
the dynamics of taxes in the U.S. which claim to support a political budget cycle.5 Both Tufte
(1978) and Hibbs (1987) find evidence of political business cycles on disposable income. This

8

observation, coupled with the lack of similar evidence on GNP, suggests the presence of "fiscal
cycles.

Recently, McDonald (1991) has found evidence of public expenditure cycles by
examining state level evidence in the U.S. Alesina (1989) presents some qualitative evidence

which does not rule out the existence of "budget cycles" in OECD economies. This evidence
is however weak and very far from conclusive. Finally, Grier (1987,1989) reports interesting

results which identify a monetary cycle in a sample from the early sixties to the very early
eighties in the U.S. However when the sample is extended to include more of the eighties the
results tend to vanish (see Grier (1989) and section 7 of the present paper).

4. Data
We consider all the OECD economies which have been democracies for the sample
period which is, for most of our regressions, 1960 to 1987. The countries included in our study
are Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Japan, Ireland,

Italy, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and
the United States. Our data set for output, GDP, unemployment and inflation is the same one

used in Alesina and Roubini (1990). Inflation is defined as the yearly rate of change of CPI
from IMF, IFS. Output growth is defined as the yearly rate of change of real GDP (or GNP)
from IMF, IFS. Unemployment is obtained from OECD; we consider the total standardized
unemployment rate. More details on country specific data issues can be found in Table A-i of

Alesina and Roubini (1990). Data for money supply are also obtained from IMF, IFS, with
money growth defined as the yearly rate of change of Ml. Our data for the fiscal variables used

9
in section 8 are the same as those used by Roubiiii and Sachs (1989).' Sources of election dates

and of electoral results are Alt (1985) and Banks (1987,1989). The same data set for elections

used in Alesina and Roubini (1990) is adopted here. See Table A-i in the Appendix for a
description of the political data.

5. Political Business Cycles on GDP and Unemployment
In this section we review and extend results obtained by Alesina and Roubini (1990).

A simple but powerful test of the PBC is obtained by running the following panel
regression of time series cross section data, for instance on output growth:'

a0 + a1y11 + a5y3

...

+ aY

+

•

+

(1)

where y is the rate of output growth for country i at time t; this rate of growth is defined as

—

'k —

• 100 where x is the level of real GDP in country i at time t. yw is a proxy

XE4

for the growth of the world economy; this proxy is obtained as the average growth of the seven

largest economies in our sample, weighted by each country's share of GDP over the total.'
PBC is a dummy" which captures the dynamic implication of the theory. Several different

definitions of the dummy are used. In addition, we introduce country dummies in the
regressions, to correct for country specific effects. The autoregressive specification for the
dependent variable is chosen as the "besc using standard techniques.'

I0

Table I reports the results for two regressions on GDP growth, which differ in the
specification of the political dummy. The two dummies, PBCN, with N=4 and N=6 reported
in the first and second column respectively, are defined as follows:

(I in the (N-I) quarters
PBCN=

before an election and in the election

f' quarter
t.

0 otherwise

In the sample we have 144 elections.'0 The country dummies are not reported, but were
included in the regressions. In both regressions the political dummy, has the sign opposite from

the theoretical prediction, although they are insignificantly different from zero.
Table 2 reports analogous results for unemployment. The dependent variable is UDIF,
defined as the difference between the domestic unemployment rate and the proxy for the OECD
unemployment rate, defined analogously to the world average GDP growth. In evaluating results

on unemployment, one must be aware of problems of "unit roots," (see, for instance Blanchard
and Summers (1986)). By taking the difference from the world average, rather than using levels

as the dependent variable and the world average as a regressor, unit roots problems are
somewhat, although far from completely, mitigated. In any event, the results of Table 2 are
essentially identical as far as the political dummies are concerned, to those obtained by using the

world average as a regressor. In Table 2 the coefficients on PBC4 and PBC6 have the correct

sign but they are insignificantly different from zero.

11

Several different specifications of the regressions in these two tables were tried, also

leading to no support for the theory. First we tried to hold "partisan effects" constant, by
distinguishing (with appropriate dummies) "left" and "right" wing governments. As reported
in Alesina and Roubini (1990), we found substantial evidence of partisan effects, but the PBCN

dummies remained insignificant. Second, we ran the regressions without correcting for the
"world variable." One may argue that voters are so naive that they do not account for the world

economic cycle when they evaluate the state of their economy. Once again no evidence of
"political business cycles" was found. All these results are not reported but are available upon
request.

Tables 3 and 4 which are borrowed from Alesina and Roubini (1990) display country by
country results on growth and unemployment respectively. In these tables, for each country we

report the "best," in terms of the t-statistic of the coefficient on the PI3CN dummy, of the two
regression with PBC4 and PBC6. This procedure is, of course, very "generous" to the theory.

Not surprisingly, given our panel regressions, our country results are mixed at best. In

the growth regressions in only four countries, that is; the U.K., Germany, New Zealand, and

Japan, the coefficient has the sign predicted by the theory and is statistically significant (or
borderline) at standard levels. The regressions on unemployment exhibit a majority of "correct"

signs on the coefficient of the PBCN variable, but none of them is statistically significant. New

Zealand is not included for lack of quarterly data on unemployment.

12

6. Political Business Cycles on Inflation
According to Nordhaus' model, the counterpart of the pre-elecloral expansion is a surge

of inflation immediately before and/or after the election, depending on the exact specification

of the lag structure in the Phillips curve. The Rogoff and Sibert's (1988) budget cycle model
has a similar implication for inflation, but no implications for growth and unemployment.

In Table 5 we display panel regressions on the inflation rate (ir) where the "world

average," wW, is obtained analogously to the world average growth. We present two
regressions, one using PBCX, and the second one with Pf3C4 which are defined as follows:

PBCX =

( I in the two quarters preceding and following an election, and
in the election quarter
1 0 otherwise

PBC4

=

1 in the three quarters following an election and in the election
quarter
1. ü otherwise

Table 5, which extends earlier results by Alesina and Roubini (1990), shows that the dummy
PBC4 has a very significant coefficient. On the other hand, the coefficient on PBCX is much
smaller and not significant at the 5% confidence level. Further sensitivity analysis using various

13

pre- and post-electoral dummies (available upon request) confirm that the surge in inflation is
short-lived (lasts about a year) and immediately follows, rather than precedes, the election.
Table 6, reproduced from Alesina and Roubini (1990), reports country by country results

on inflation using the dummy PC4 which appears to be the most significant of the panel
regressions. This table shows that in almost all of the countries the coefficient on PC4 is
positive, as predicted by the theory; in half of the countries the t-statistic on the coefficient is

above one, and in Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, and New Zealand the coefficient is
borderline significant at the ten percent level or better. Hence, the PBC effect on inflation,
although not very strong in any country is rather widespread across countries, and therefore
appears in the panel results quite strongly.
The evidence presented in the past two sections, viewed together can now be summarized

as follows:
(1) Two countries, Germany and New Zealand, show effects on both a "real" variable,
GDP growth, and inflation which are consistent with the Nordhaus model. One other country,

Japan, exhibits borderline results, particularly on inflation." All of the other countries show
either no evidence of cycles or evidence for only one of the two variables.

(2) There seems to be a much more widespread electoral cycle on inflation than on
growth and unemployment. This finding is inconsistent with the Nordhaus model, but it is
consistent with models which emphasize cycles on policy instruments.
The finding that Germany has political business cycles is somewhat surprising, given the

fact that the Bundesbank is one of the most, if not "the° most, independent Central Bank in the

world.

14

In the next two sections we look directly at evidence on policy instruments.

7. Monetary Policy and Elections
If one expects to observe some type of electoral business cycle, then one should detect

electoral manipulation of either, or both, of the macroeconomic policy instruments; monetary

and fiscal policy. The focus of this section is to analyze the implications of the opportunistic
"political business cycle" on monetary policy. Before undertaking this task we must be careful
to note, as discussed earlier, that politicians of different countries may be severely constrained

in their monetary policy manipulation by the autonomy of the central bank.

Given this forewarning, we can now proceed with our findings. Our tests adopt
methodology analogous to the output, unemployment and inflation regressions used by Alesina

and Roubini (1990), which were extended earlier in this paper. A similar technique was also
used by Grier (1987,1989) for the United States.

The procedure used to test the PBC for both the pooled cross-section time-series
regressions, as well as the country by country regressions, was as follows:

m=

+ I3ImUL +

+ ... +

+ fl,1PBCN, +

(2)

where m1, is the rate of growth of money for country i at time t. PBCNa is the electoral
"dummy" variable discussed earlier, which takes on a positive value the last three, or five
quarters before the election, and during the quarter of the election. The PBC theory implies that

the coefficient on PBCN should be positive and significantly different from zero, indicating that
money growth is higher immediately before an election. Our sample of quarterly data includes

all the 18 countries listed above, and the sample period is l958l987.I2

15

Money growth is defined as the yearly rate of change of Ml. This definition is used to
remove seasonality from the money data. Tests with the quarterly rate of change of Ml, as well

as other methods o seasonally adjusting the data reveal no change in the results. The
autoregressive specification for the dependent variable is chosen as the "best" using standard

techniques. This is found to be an AR(9); however, the results are not dependent on the lag
specification of the model. For brevity, the coefficients on the lags are not displayed.
The top of Table 7 labelled "PBC Test" reports the results of the panel regressions for
PBC4 and PBC6. The table, which includes specifications with and without country dummies
(for conciseness the coefficients on these dummies are not reported), indicates that the coefficient

on the electoral dummy is both the correct sign, and significantly different from zero. This
outcome supports the implications of the PBC model. Thus, ceteris paribus, money growth is

higher for the year, to year and a half, before an election. All of the reported results were
found to be invariant to tests of robustness such as leading or lagging the political dummy, or

excluding individual countries which might be believed to be driving the results. In addition,
including a world average money growth variable, obtained analogously to the world average

output growth, did not change the results.13 Tests employing Grier's sinusoidal electoral
dummy yielded no change in the results. It was felt that this symmetric V-shapedvariable which

has it maximum value the period of the election, declines until the midpoint between elections

(when it reaches its minimum), and then increases until the election, constrained the dynamic
implications of the theory, and thus the PBCN political dummy was the preferred variable.
The country by country results reported in Table 8 are not as compelling. Although, for
PL3C4,

a vast majority of the countries in the sample (13 out of 18) have a coefficient greater

16

than zero, we cannot reject the hypothesis that the coefficient is positive and significantly

different from zero (at the 5% level) for only 2 countries, Australia and New Zealand. In
addition, we cannot reject for Germany at the 10% level, and three other countries have a tstatistic greater than one.

It is not surprising that New Zealand, which until recently had one of the least
autonomous central banks (see Alesina (1989) and Grilli, Masciandaro and Tabellini (1991)),
shows the most significant evidence of an electoral cycle. Conversely, it is quite surprising that

Germany, with one of the most independent central banks, displays some form of political
manipulation of its monetary policy. Finally, our results for the United States differ from those
of Gner (1987,1989). However, further study of this matter reconciles these differences. If we
split our sample in the early eighties, we discover that Grier's findings of an opportunistic PBC

in the US does in fact hold for his sample period of the early sixties to the early eighties. After

the early eighties, the model does not perform as well. One explanation may be that policy

manipulation was ineffectual, and thus not utilized after 1980 due to the well documented
instability of the money demand equation in the United States.'4

We can also note that for both the panel and the country by country data sets the
outcomes of the PBC6 regressions are weaker. This result may be explained as follows.
Opportunistic PBC models indicate that the office holder wishes to pump up the economy right
before the election, without any concurrent inflation. Given the long run inflationary implication

of monetary policy, expansionary monetary policy too far in advance will result in an a boom
too early, and high levels of inflation before the election.

17

We also investigated a "partisan/opportunistic" interaction term. As emphasized by

Lindbeck (1976) and Alesina (1989), pre-clectoral opportunistic behavior for left wing
governments may be different than that of right wing governments. More specifically, left wing

governments, who at the beginning of their administration pursued expansionary monetary
policies to lower unemployment, may be reducing money growth at the end of their terms, to

bring down the inflation caused by their initial policies.

An "opportunistic" left wing

government may want to emphasize their anti-inflation policies to appeal to the "median voter"
in election years. Conversely, right wing governments, who undertook contractionary monetary

policy to lower inflation, may be expanding money at the end of their administrations to enter
elections during a period of expansion.
A formal test of this hypothesis can made by running the following panel and country by
country regressions:

rn,,

+ 72m.2 + ... + 7rn1, +

70 +

'y1DUML + .2PBCNL,,

+ .Y,3PBCNR +

DUML is a dummy which identifies left wing governments, and PBCNL,, and PBCNR1 are
interaction terms between PBCN and the left and right wing government dummies
respcctively. If "partisan/opportunistic" political manipulation of monetary policy exists, one
expects the coefficients on the left and right wing interaction terms to be different. The strong

form of this theory, as described above, suggests that the coefficients should in fact be of
opposite sign.

The bottom of Table 7 labelled "Partisan Test" reports the results for the panel
regressions. For P13C4, we find that the coefficient for right wing governments is significantly

18

different from zero at the 5% level, while that of left wing governments is not. However, we

cannot reject the hypothesis that they are of the same magnitude. This test, which has the
correct negative sign, is displayed in Table 7 as "Difference Test4."

The panel results for PBC6 are less compelling. We find that the coefficients for both

left and right wing governments are not significantly different from zero. In addition, the
difference test has the incorrect sign. This again may be attributed to the longer length of the
political dummy, which is picking up more than just the pre-electoral dynamics.
Thus, for the country by country regressions, we present only the outcomes of the PBC4

regressions, which can be found in Table 9I6 These results indicate that only 9 out of 15
countries exhibit the expected negative sign for the difference test.11 Some of the countries
with the "incorrect" sign possess difference tests that are nearly significant.

In the sample of countries that exhibit the expected behavior, three, Austria, New
Zealand, and Norway cannot reject the hypothesis, that their political parties pursue different
monetary policies before elections, at the 5% level. In addition, two countries, France and Italy

have t-statistics for the difference test less that minus one. Finally, for Australia and Germany
we cannot reject the hypothesis that the coefficient on right wing governments is positive and

significantly different from zero (at the 5% and 10% level respectively). While we can reject
the same hypothesis for their left wing governments.
Thus, the results of the "partisan/opportunistic" tests are somewhat ambiguous, however,

they do move in the expected direction. For the PEC model the pooled time-series cross-section
results are more compelling than the country by country results indicating that political monetary

cycles occur frequently but not systematically.

19

8. Fiscal Policy, Budget Deficits and Elections
In this section we will consider the effects of elections on fiscal policy. Both traditional

and recent "rational" PBC models imply that we should observe fiscal deficits before elections.

However, these theories are vague about whether the pre-electoral fiscal expansion will occur

through a reduction in taxes, or an increase in government spending or both, In principle, the
actual combination of pre-electoral tax cuts arid fiscal spending increases might change over time

and across countries. We therefore start our analysis of pre-electoral budget cycles by
concentrating on the fiscal deficits of the public sector.

In analyzing the effects of elections on fiscal deficits, one needs a structural model of

budget deficits in order to control for the economic determinants of budget deficits. We rely
upon the structural model of budget deficits used by Roubini and Sachs (1989) to study the
effects of political instability on budget deficits. The data sample available for this section of

the paper is smaller than the one used above. The size of the sample is limited by the
availability of consistent OECD data on public debt (see Roubini and Sachs (1989)). The
countries (and sample periods) included are as follows: Austria (1970-1985), Belgium (19601985), Canada (1961-1985), Denmark (1971-1985), France (1960-1985), Finland (1970-1985),

Germany (1960-1985), Italy (l964-1985), the Netherlands (1970-1985), Norway (1970-1985),
Sweden (1970-1985), the United Kingdom (1960-1985), and the United States (1960-1985).
The specification of our model is consistent both with elements of optimizing approaches

to fiscal deficits (such as the "tax smoothing" model of Barro (1979, 1986)) and with traditional

Keynesian models of fiscal deficits.

In fact, both theories imply that fiscal deficits are

countercyclical: i.e. fiscal deficits will emerge during periods of recession and growth

20
slowdown.

In the tax-smoothing approach, recessions lead to fiscal deficits as optimizing

governments try to minimize the deadweight losses from distortionary taxation; since they will

stabilize tax rates, a recession will lead to a reduction of the tax base and a shortfall in revenues.
Similarly, transitory shocks to government spending should also be financed through budget
deficits.
In this sense, the sudden and sharp increase in budget deficits after 1973 in many OECD
countries can be linked directly to the sudden slowdown in OECD growth and the corresponding

sudden rise in unemployment after 1973. These shocks reduced revenues and increased
government spending on what appeared to be a cyclical basis. Since it was widely expected then

that the growth slowdown and the rise in unemployment would have been transitory, these
deficits in the mid-seventies could have been consistent with the tax-smoothing equilibrium

view.
In addition to the tax smoothing hypothesis, the tendency towards deficits after a
slowdown in growth, is exacerbated for two additional reasons. First, many major areas of
public spending (e.g. unemployment compensation, social welfare expenditure, early retirement

benefits, job retraining, and subsidies for ailing firms) are inherently countercyclical, so that
portions of government spending actually tend to rise automatically when growth slows down

and unemployment increases. The second reason is the intentional implementation in some

countries of Keynesian aggregate demand policies in the face of a growth slowdown. The
equilibrium model explicitly rejects the links of spending or taxes to the level of output and
employment via aggregate demand, but many governments believed (and many still do so) in

21

these Links. Right or wrong, many governments reduce taxes or increase government spending

during recessions.
In considering the economic determinants of budget deficits one should also include the

effects of real interest rate shocks. For example, after 1979 the increase in world real interest

rates, significantly and unexpectedly raised most governments' costs of debt servicing. One
useful measure of the budgetary costs of higher interest rates is given by the debt to GDP ratio

multiplied by the change in the differential between real interest rates and growth rates.
Between 1979 and 1981, this measure rose by several percent of GDP in most of the industrial

economies, thereby greatly adding to the fiscal burden.'9
Given the above discussion of the determinants of fiscal deficits, as in Roubini arid Sachs

(1989), we estimate a pooled cross-section time-series regression where the left-hand side
variable is the annual deficit, measured as the change in the debt-GDP ratio, cI(b1). The basic

explanatory variables are: (1) the lagged deficit, d(b.,); (2) the chw,ge in the unemployment
rate, d(U1); (3) the change in the GDP growth rate, denoted d(y); (4) the change in the real
interest rate minus the growth rate, multiplied by the lagged debt-GDP ratio, d(r, -

(5) a dummy for political instability, POLK, first used in Roubini and Sachs (1989) (and to be

described below); (6) an electoral dummy ELE to be defined below; and (7) an error term,
v. The basic structure of the pooled regression model is the following (i denotes country,
denotes time, and d(x) denotes the change in variable x):

d(b) =

+ &,d(b1) + d((J,)

+ o3d(y) + 4d(r,—n1)b,,, +

POLÜ

+

.6ELE, + v (4)

According to our discussion, we expect the following: 0 < ô, < I (to allow for any
slow adjustment and persistence of budget deficits); ô > 0 (since a rise in the unemployment

22

rate raises government spending above its permanent value in the short term); &3 < 0 (since a

rise in GDP growth lowers government spending below its permanent value in the short term

and may raise tax revenues); and & > 0 (since a rise in r-n directly raises (r-n)b1, which if
transitory should be accommodated by a temporary rise in the budget deficit).

Before introducing and discussing the political and electoral determinants of budget
deficits, in column 1 of Table 10 we present the results of the regression when we include only

the economic variables. This specification provides a rather successful account of the role of
economic shocks in inducing budget deficits in the industrial countries. In particular, a rise in

unemployment (denoted by DUB) raises the budget deficit; a rise in the debt-servicing cost
(denoted by DRB) raises the budget deficit; and art acceleration of GDP growth (denoted by
DGR) lowers the budget deficit, indicating that the deceleration of GDP growth after 1973

contributed to the rise in budget deficits. Note that the variable measuring this slowdown in

growth is highly significant.2° Finally, the lagged deficit (DBYL) enters with a coefficient of
about 0.70, suggesting that about 70 percent of the lagged budget deficit persists to the next
period.
In order to test the hypothesis that governments manipulate fiscal policies before elections

in order to maximize their reelection probabilities, in column (2) we add to the basic regression

a dummy ELE that takes value 1 in election years and zero otherwise. In constructing the
variable ELE we need to consider that, since our data on deficits are on a yearly basis, the exact

time of an election during a year might be important for assessing the effects of elections on

fiscal deficits. More specifically, if an election occurs towards the end of the year t, we can
expect that an opportunistic government would run a fiscal deficit during that year. However,

23

if the election occurs towards the beginning of year t, it is more reasonable to assume that the

fiscal expansion will occur in year t-1 so as to be timed with the early election time in year t.
In practice, in constructing the variable ELE we assign value 1 to the dummy in the pre-electoral

year t-1 if the election will occur in the first and second quarters of year t; while we assign
value 1 in the electoral year t if the election occurs in the third or fourth quarter of year t. As
an additional check on the model we also run regressions using a slightly different electoral
dummy (ELX instead of ELE). ELX takes the value I in the election year regardless of whether

the election occurs in the first or second half of the year.

In addition to the electoral variable we also add to the regression the political variable
successfully used by Roubini and Sachs (1989) to study the effect of government fragmentation

on budget deficits. The hypothesis in that paper was that multi-party coalition governments.

especially those with a short expected tenure, are poor at reducing budget deficits, We
therefore add to the regression the Roubini-Sachs index (denoted POL for country i at time t)

which measures the degree of political cohesion of the national government. The index is
constructed as follows:

0

one-party majority parliamentary government; or a presidential
government, with the same party in the majority in the executive
and legislative branches

I
POL =

coalition parliamentary government with 2 coalition partners; or
presidential government, with different parties in control of the
executive and legislative branches

2

coalition parliamentary government with 3 or more coalition
partners

3

minority parliamentary government

24

The results of the estimations are shown in columns (2) - (4) in Table 10. Several

different versions of the regression are shown, involving different ways of including the
variables ELE and POL, either jointly or separately. In column (2), we introduce the political
instability variable and, as in Roubini and Sachs (1989), we find that (after controlling for the

economic determinants of deficits) a greater degree of political instability (as proxied by the
index POL) leads to higher budget deficits.23 In column (3), we add our electoral dummy ELE

to the regressors used in column (2); we find that, after controlling for the economic
determinants, both POL and the electoral dummy, ELE, have the right sign and are statistically

significant at the 5% confidence level. In other words, real fiscal deficits are higher in the year
leading to an election. In column (4), we drop the POL variable and consider the effect of ELE

alone; we again find a statistically significant coefficient.
The effect of elections on budget deficits is significant both statistically and economically;

the estimated coefficient on ELE in column (3) and (4) implies, that after controlling for other
determinants of fiscal balances, real fiscal deficits will be higher in election years by more than

0.6 percent of GDP. We also ran the panel regressions in Table 10 using the electoral dummy

ELX instead of ELE (ELX takes the value I in the election year regardless of whether the
election occurs in the first half of the year or the second halt). As expected, ELX works less

well than ELE, since this dummy variable does not correspond to the timing of elections.
However, in these regressions ELX has the right sign and is statistically significant at the 10%
confidence level. These results are available upon request.
In column (5), we investigate an interaction term of the electoral variable with the lagged

deficit (termed DBYLELE), with the view that the speed of adjustment to an inherited level of

25

the deficit, d(b1) might be tower in election years. When we introduce the interaction variable

DBYLELE in column (5), we find that the sign is the expected positive one (deficits are more
persistent in election years, i.e. the fiscal adjustment to past deficits is slower during election

periods) but it is only borderline significant (the t-statistic is equal to 1.55).
The results in Table 10 provide some evidence that during an election year fiscal policy

is "loose. It would be interesting to investigate which countries exhibit more pronounced
electoral budget cycles. However, such a test difficult for two reasons: first, since the OECD
data on public debt (from which we derived the real deficits measures) are available only on a
yearly basis, the sample period for each country is quite small (ranging from 22 data points for
the United States to 14 for Denmark); second, elections are infrequent events, and the data set

for each country does not include more than four electoral observations. These small sample

problems severely constrain the possibility of running meaningful country by country
regressions. Keeping in mind the above important caveats and limitations, we ran the basic
deficit equation for each country separately. We found the coefficient on the electoral dummy

to be of the right sign in eight countries (Germany, Belgium, Japan, Austria, Netherlands,
Norway, Finland, Denmark) but statistically significant (at the 10% confidence level) in only
one (the Netherlands).24. While the above sample period constraints might account for these

weak results, the inability to find strong electoral effects at the country level would suggest
caution in arguing for a strong electoral budget cycle effect in this OECD sample.
Now that we have established some evidence in favor of fiscal manipulation, we can ask:

does the electoral budget cycle found in the results displayed in Table 10 derive from increased
spending before elections or reduced taxes? The available theoretical models of electoral budget

26

cycles do not provide a clear answer to such a question. Empirically, the issue is ambiguous

as well. First, thechoice of whether to reduce taxes or increase spending in any single country
may vary over time and over different elections. Second, different countries may differ in the
way they expand fiscal policy before elections: some may reduce taxes and others increase
spending. Given the above observations, we do not necessarily expect to find a strong effect
of elections on government spending or taxes in a large panel of countries.

Despite these caveats, we attempted to test whether there are any electoral cycles in
government spending or revenues, but found, little evidence of any effects." These outcomes

are consistent with our prior that results of this kind are difficult to detect. We therefore leave
attempts to systematically test whether particular sub-components of spending and\or revenues

have more pronounced electoral cycles, to future research.

9. Discussion and Conclusions

The results of this paper, viewed in the context of the literature on political cycles,
suggest some general conclusions. Previous empirical findings suggest that partisan effects on

both policy instruments and economic outcomes are quite widespread in OECD economies.26
In particular, left wing governments, when elected, favor expansionary demand policies leading

to a temporary increase in growth and reduction in unemployment. These policies lead to an
acceleration in inflation which often persists (because of "credibility" problems) even after the
initial real expansion has disappeared. According to this view, left wing governments often face

new elections in a situation of high inflation; in this case, any further attempt to expand, as
predicted by the Nordhaus model, would be counterproductive. In fact, the left may need to

27

signal its competence in dealing with inflation by pursuing a "cautious" monetary policy.
Conversely, when right wing governments are appointed, they are willing to incur the costs of
an immediate recessions or downturns, in order to reduce inflation. After the initial downturn,

the economy returns to its natural level of activity and inflation remains low. Thus, when the
next election approaches, right wing governments have "room" to pursue expansionary policies,

yielding a Nordhaus type political business cycle.
In addition to having these "partisan goals," politicians are "opportunistic." That is, they

prefer being in office rather than out. In addition, "partisan goals" can be implemented only if,

first, elections are won. Thus, even partisan politicians, regardless of their ideology, may
engage in opportunistic behavior if, by doing so, they can increase their chances of reelection
(see Nordhaus (1989)).

Our results of the panel regressions are quite suggestive (we tend to emphasize these
panel regressions above the country by country regressions because the former are not affected

by the very common problem in this literature of scarcity of degrees of freedom). The panel
results reject the Nordhaus formulation of the PBC but do no: reject the "rational political budget

cycles" of Rogoff and Sibert (1988). In fact, even though at the panel level we found no
evidence of cycles on GDP and unemployment, we observed evidence of electoral cycles on
monetary and fiscal policy instruments and on inflation. This result is consistent with the notion

that it is easy to manipulate policy instruments, while it is more difficult to control policy
outcomes.V The country by country results suggest however, that although these cycles are

not strong in any particular country, they occur at least occasionally in many of the OECD
democracies.

28

Our interpretation of these results is that, in general, politicians try to avoid restrictive
monetary and fiscal policies in election years and occasionally they are openly expansionary.

This view is consistent with the overall significance of the electoral dummy in the full sample
of countries, and with its lack of significance in many subsamples (i.e., specific countries). In
summary, our results suggest that monetary and budget cycles occur frequently, and in several
countries, but in no country (with the possible exception of New Zealand) do they occur in every

election, and are they of very large dimensions.
Only two countries, Germany and New Zealand do not reject the Nordhaus model. The

findings for Germany are somewhat surprising. This is the country with the most independent
Central Bank, thus one would expect very little pre-electoral manipulation of monetary policy.

One possible explanation of these somewhat puzzling results is Germany's ability to take

advantage of its favorable short term unemployment/inflation tradeoff. Due to its strong
commitment to price stability, yielding a flat short run Phillips Curve, one would expect even
small manipulations of monetary policy to have large effects on outcomes.2 The case of New

Zealand is much more convincing. The recent institutional reform in this country which
significantly increased the degree of independence of the Central Bank may have been a step

taken to limit electoral manipulation of monetary policy.
In our view, the results of the present paper are supportive of the "rational" approach to

modelling political cycles. In fact, if voters were very naive, and politicians could manipulate
the economy very easily, one should observe pre-electoral manipulations of instruments and
outcomes which are much more widespread, easily detectable, and larger in magnitude than our

findings suggest.

Instead, we ascertain that fiscal and monetary cycles probably occur

29

frequently, but not in every election and are of relatively moderate intensity. It would be quite

interesting to pursue this analysis further to study then one is more likely to observe
opportunistic manipulations of policy instruments. Perhaps, they tend to occur when incumbents

are unsure of reappointment and need an extra electoral boost, as suggested by Frey and
Schneider (1978). Conversely, political cycles may not be observed when incumbents are
"safe,' and do not need to engage in any signaling of competence.

30

Notes

I. Jn Nordhaus' (1975) original model inflation was supposed to begin to increase beore the
election. However by an appropriate choice of the lag structure in the Phillips curve one can
build a model in which inflation increases after the election, without affecting the basic results
(see Lindbeck (1976)).

2. To be precise, in Rogoff and Sibert (1988) the budget is always balanced, in the sense that
the difference between spending and taxes is covered by seignorage.

3. Electoral cycles are not regular for several reasons. First, in a separating equilibrium only

competent governments would try to signal their competence by expanding output before
elections. Second, pooling equilibria in which both competent and incompetent governments
follow the same policy are possible; in this case regular electoral cycles would again be less

likely. (See Persson and Tabellini (1991) for more on this point.)

4. In a nutshell the point is the following. The "partisan theory" with rational expectations in
a wage-contracts model as originally formulated in Alesina (1987) implies that at the beginning

of a right wing government (i.e., Republican administration in the U.S), one should observe a

downturn or recession due to an anti-inflationary policy. Later in their term of office, the
economy recovers and returns to its "natural" level of economic activity. The opposite pattern

is followed by democratic administrations. Thus, the empirical implications of the Nordhaus
model and of this "partisan" model are similar for right wing governments, but opposite for left

wing governments. Both Haynes and Stone (1989) and Nordhaus (1989) find "evidence" of

31

political business cycles only for Republican administrations which suggests that, in fact they are
not rejecting a 'partisan" model.

5. However, a careful examination of their results suggest that their time dummies are
significant in the second and third years of an administration. Conversely, an electoral dummy
assuming the value of one in the two years preceding each election is insignificant.
6. See Roubini and Sachs (1989), Tables 3 and 4 and (heir data Appendix for more information.

7. See Alesina and Roubini (1990) for a discussion of this econometric approach.

8. The seven largest countries are (in 1987 order) U.S., Japan, Germany, France, the U.K.,

Italy, and Canada.

An analogous definition is used to construct proxies for OECD

unemployment, inflation, and money growth.

9. See Alesina and Roubini (1990) for further discussions of this fixed effect model.
10.

We have adopted the convention of excluding elections which were held less than eight

quarters after the preceding one. This convention eliminates cases in which very early elections
were called to solve deadlocks caused by lack of a clear majority in the legislature resulting from

the previous balloting.

11. Ito (1990a,b) finds evidence of a strategic choice of election timing in Japan. Early
elections tend to be called when the economy is doing well. Alesina and Roubini (1990) confirm

this result for Japan.

12. There are two exceptions: because of data problems the sample for Canada is 1969.1 to
1987.4 and for Sweden is 1961.1 to 1987.3.
13. These results are available upon request.
14.

See Friedman and Kunner (1989) for an in depth discussion of the instability of the money

32

demand equation in the 1980's. Also, Grier (1989) notes, in a footnote, this difference between
pre- and post-1980 results of the political monetary cycle.
15.

This was found to be the correct specification of the model after estimating the equations

on the left and right wing governments separately. The coefficients on the lag money growth
variables were found to be virtually identical.
16.
17.

The results for PBC6, which are similar to those of PBC4, are available upon request.

During our sample period, no left wing governments held power in Switzerland and

Japan. For Canada, its smaller sample and our convention of excluding elections that were held

less than eight quarters after the preceding one, required its exclusion from the sample.

18. By the early 1980's, however, it had become clear that the shocks had considerable
persistence (to the point of spawning the new "hysteresis" theory of unemployment), and many

governments began reducing their budget deficits. In broad terms, the equilibrium approach is
much less successful in accounting for the persistence of budget deficits throughout the 1980s

in many OECD countries. See Roubini and Sachs (1989) for more tests on the equilibrium
approach to fiscal policy.
19. This rise was particularly large, of course, in countries such as Belgium, Ireland, and Italy,
which had already accumulated a large stock of debt. As with the unemployment increase and
the growth slowdown, the effects of higher interest rates have turned Out to be more persistent
than many policymakers expected in the early 1980s.
20. Its magnitude suggests that each I percentage point slowdown in GDP growth initially raises

the budget deficit relative to GDP by 0.45 percentage points.

33

21. See Alesina and Tabellini (1990) and Tabellini and Alesina (1990) for a formal model of
the effects of political instability and conflict on budget deficits.

22. Details on the construction of the index for each particular country can be found in the text
and data appendix of Roubini and Sachs (1989).

23. The magnitude of the coefficient on the POL variable, 0.004, signifies that the difference
ceteris poribus between a majority government and a minority government (p = 0 versus

p = 3), is 0.012, or 1.2 percentage points of added budget deficit per year.
24. These results are available upon request.
25. These results are available upon request.

26. See Hibbs (1977), Alt (1985), Alesina (1989), Paldam (1989a,b), and Alesina and Roubini
(1990).

27. This finding that the PBC instruments have little influence on the real variables while
inflation is strongly affected is also consistent with theories of the "dynamic inconsistency of

monetary policy." (See Barro and Gordon (1983a), and Persson and Tabellini (1991) for
surveys of this subject.)

28. We are grateful to Alex Cukierrnan for suggesting this point. (See Lucas (1973) for more
on this subject.)

34

References

Alesina, Alberto. 1989. Politics and Business Cycles in Industrial Democracies. Economic
Policy

8: 55-98.

__________ 1988. Macroeconomics and Politics. NBER Macroeconomic Annual. Cambridge,

MA: M.I.T. Press. 13-52.

__________ 1987. Macroeconomic Policy in a Two-Party System as a Repeated Game.
Quarrerly Journal of Economics 102: 651-678.
__________ Londregan, John. and Rosenthal, Howard. 1990. A Political-Economy Model of
the United States. NBER Working Paper no. 3611.

__________ and Rosenthal, Howard. 1989. Ideological Cycles in Congressional Elections and
the Macroeconomy. American Political Science Review 83: 373-398.
__________ and Roubini, Nouriel. 1990. Political Business Cycles in OECD Economies. NBER
Working Paper no. 3478.
__________ and Summers, Lawrence. 1990. Central Bank Independence and Macroeconomic
Performance: Some Comparative Evidence, unpublished.
__________ and TabeUini, C3uido. 1990. A Political Theory of Fiscal Deficits and Government
Debt in a Democracy. The Review of Economic Studies 57: 403-414.

Alt, James. 1985. Political Parties, World Demand, and Unemployment: Domestic and
International Sources of Economic Activity. American Political Science Review 79: 1016-1040.

Banks, Arthur 1987,1989. Political Handbook of the World. State University of New York at
Binghamton: CSA Publications.

Barro, Robert and Gordon, David. 1983a. Rules, Discretion, and Reputation in a Model of
Monetary Policy. Journal of Monetary Economics 12: 101-122.
__________ and __________ 1983b. A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural Rate
Model. Journal of Political Economy 31: 589-610.

Bizer, David S., and Durlauf, Steven N. 1990. Testing the Positive Theory of Government
Finance. Journal of Monetary Economics 26: 123-141.
I3lanchard, Olivier and Summers, Lawrence. 1986. Hysteresis and the European Unemployment
Problem. NBER Macroeconomic Annual. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press. 15-78.

35

Friedman, Benjamin M. and Kutiner, Kenneth N. 1989. Money Income and Prices After the
1980s. NBER Working Paper no. 2852.

Frey, Bruno and Schneider, Frederich. 1978. An Empirical Study of Politico-Economic
Interaction in the United States. The Review of Economics and Statistics 60: 174-183.

Grier, Kevin 8. 1987. Presidential Elections and Federal Reserve Policy: An Empirical Test.
Southern Economic Journal 54: 475-486.
__________ 1989. On the Existence of a Political Monetary Cycle. American Journal of

Political Science 33: 376-389.

Grilli, Vittorio, Masciandaro, Donato, and Tabellini, Guido. 1991. Political and Monetary
Institutions and Public Finance Policies in the Industrial Democracies. Economic Policy.
forthcoming.
Hibbs, Douglas. 1977. Political Parties and Macroeconomic Policy. The American Political
Science Review 71: 1467-1487.

__________ 1987. The American Political Economy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Ito, Takatoshi. 1990a. The Timing of Elections and Political Business Cycles in Japan. Journal
of Asian Economics 1: 135-146.

__________ 1990b. International Impacts on Domestic Political Economy: A Case of Japanese
General Elections. unpublished.

Kydland, Finn and Prescott, Edward. 1977. Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency
of Optimal Plans. Journal of Political Economy 85: 473-490.
Lindbeck, Assar. 1976. Stabilization Policies in Open Economies with Endogenous Politicians.
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings: 1-19.

Lucas, Robert E. 1973. Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation Tradeoffs. American
Economic Review 63: 326-334.

McCallum, Bennett. 1978. The Political Business Cycle: An Empirical Test. Southern
Economic Journal 44: 504-515.

McDonald, Matthew. 1991. Political Budget Cycles: Evidence from the States. Harvard
University Senior Thesis.

36
Nordhaus, William. 1989. Alternative Models to Political Business Cycles, Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity No. 2.
1975.

The Political Business Cycle. Review of Economic Studies 42: 169-190.

Paldam, Martin. 1989a. Politics Matter After All: Testing Alesina's Theory of RE Partisan

Cycles. Aarhus University Working Paper.
__________ 1989b. Politics Matter After All: Testing Hibbs' Theory of Partisan Cycles.
Aarhus University Working Paper.

1979. Is There An Electoral Cycle? ScandinavianJournal of Econo,nics 81: 323342.
Persson, Torsten and Tabellini, Guido. 1991 Macroeconomic Policy, Credibility and Politics.
New York, NY: Harwood Academic Publishers.
Rogoff, Kenneth. 1990. Equilibrium Political Budget Cycles. American Economic Review 80:
2 1-36.

__________ and Sibert, Anne 1988. Equilibrium Political Business Cycles. Review of Economic
Studies 55: 1-16.
Roubini, Nouriel and Sachs, Jeffrey. 1989. Political and Economic Determinants of Budget
Deficits in the Industrial Democracies. European Economic Review 33: 903-933.

Tabellini, Guido and Alesina, Alberto. 1990. Voting on the Budget Deficit. American Economic
Review 80: 37-52.

Tufte, Edward. 1978. Political Control of the Economy. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
Press.

Table I

on GDP Growth
Dependent Variable: Y

Panel Regressions

(1)
Coefficient
(t—statistic)

(2)
Coefficient
(t-statistic)

Constant

-0.0001
(-0.004)

0.130
(0.52)

Y(-1)

0.713
(28.82)
-0.055
(-2.34)

0.732
(29.49)

0.396

0.344
(12.03)

Variable*

Y(-2)

YW

(13.73)

PBC4

-0.059
(-2.48)

-0.001

(-0.64)
-0.110
(-0.97)

PBC6
R2

0.67

0.65

The estimated regressions include country fixed effects which are not reported in the table.

Table 2
Panel Regressions on Unemployment

Dependent Variable: U'

Variable*

(1)
Coefficient
(t—statistic)

Constant

0.035

(3.10)

u(-1)

(2)
Coefficient
(t-statistic)

0.167
(3.77)
1.323

1.334
(49.10)

(50.98)

U(-2)

-0.333
(-12.07)

-0.335
(-12.79)

PBC4

-0.003
(-0.13)

-0.014
(-0.80)

PBC6

R

0.99

0.99

* The estimated regressions include country fixed effects which are not reported in the table.

Political

Table 3

Bueines Cycle Theory
Dependent Variable: I

(t..tatisttc. in parentheses)

Country

US

UK

Austria

-2

Const

-i

0.247

1.139

-0.384

(0.83) (12.21)

(-4.20)

(1.22)
(1.72)

-0.062
(-0.16)

0.517
(5.03)

-0.099
(-1.05)

-0.392

0.863

-0.168

(-0.423) (8.565) (-1.734)

R2

P,3cw)
0.334 (6)

0.101

0.78

(1.31)

0.737 (6)

0.317

0.45

(3.16)

0.129 (4)
(0.135)

0.484

0.623

(2.363)

Denmark

0.112
0.758
-0.150
-0.105 (6)
(0.323) (7.739) (-1.601) (-0.334)

0.330
(3.739)

0.657

Norway

0.964'
(3.043)

-0.144
-0.006 (6)
(-1.437) (-0.027)

0.086
(1.602)

0.613

0.510
(5.15)

0.72

0.873
(5.630)

0.690

0.555
(5.47)

0.66

Canada

Eelgium

0.847

(8.450)

0.401

0.742

(1.24)

(7.73)

-0.258
(.3.03)

(0.25)

-1.774

0.628

-0.073

-0.287

0.081 (6)

(4)

(-2.930) (6.594) (-0.845) (-0.470)
Germany

Italy
Netherlands

Australia

New Zealand

Finland

Sweden

Ireland

France

Japan
Switzerland

-0.961
(-2.37)

0.463
(4.58)

0.051
(0.58)

0.905 (6)
(2.56)

0.246
0.948
-0.238
-0.100 (4)
(0.356) (9.638) (-2.368) (.0.153)
-1.579
(-2.95)

0.506

0.159

(4.97)

(1.71)

-0.256 (6)
(-0.51)

0.884

0.569

0.028

(1.72)

(5.71)

(0.30)

-0.253
(-0.86)

0.790
(7.74)

-0.012
(0.12)

(2.885)

-0.806 (6)
(-2.12)

0.780 (4)

0.194

0.431

(0.23)

(3.27)

0.205
(1.53)

(1.28)

0.405
(0.80)

0.528
(4.10)

0.024
(0.19)

(1.22)

-0.710
(-0.55)

0.588
(3.58)

-0.148
(0.95)

(0.34)

1.071 (4)

0.660 (4)
0.512 (4)

0.498

0.317

0.270

-0.720

(0.95)

(2.80)

(2.52)

(-1.28)

0.147
0.835
(0.350) (8.297)

0.031
(0.322)

(1.775)

-1.201

0.144
(1.235)

(0.788)

0.614

(-2.252) (5.062)

0.627 (6)

0.501 (4)

0.284

0.666

(2.145)

0.839

0.76

(6.06)

0.327

0.59

(3.39)

0.154

0.76

(2.46)

0.240

0.33

(1.50)

0.096

0.33

(0.81)

1.203

0.60

(2.86)

0.308

0.42

(2.761)

0.124

0.811

(1.343)

0.499
(3.968)

0.696

1.504
(14.34)
1.610
(17.13)
1.705
(13.74)

0.003
(0.078)
0.009
(0.22)
0.101
(1.18)

France

Gennany

Ireland

(—1.10)

1.412
(15.83)

—0.066

0.984

—0.010
(—0.22)

—0.066
(—0.79)

—0.619
(—6.40)

—0.710
(—5.42)

0.993

0.972

0.944
0.077
(1.06)

—0.075
(—0.88)

(—0.12)

0.975

0.935

0.995

—0.516
(—4.73)

—0.469
(—5.28)

—0.480
(—4.35)

1.445
(12.96)

0.0524
(0.93)

—0.011

(—3.90)

—0.077
(—1.18)

—0.010

—0.549
(—6.53)

1.981

1.87

1.925

2.057

1.989

1.999

2.142

2.02
—0.011
(—0.16)

—0.200
(—1.79)

(—2.49)

0.878

2.09

0.944

0.075
(0.99)

—0.273

PI3C'1

D.W.

UF(3)

P8c(o

U'(-2)

(—0.16)

Finland

UDIF

—0.363

Denmark

Variable:

(t—statistics in parentheses)

Dependent

1.312
(14.23)

0.097
(1.65)

Canada

1.55

1.082
(8.83)

1.243
(11.50)

(18.64)

0.064.

—0.422
(—2.89)

(—0.52)

—0.026

Constant U'(—l)

(1.61)

Belgiu

Austria

Australia

country

Lj

political Business Cycle

Table

1.567
(17.33)

—0.124
(—1.89)

Japan

0.226
(3.15)

USA

—0.594
(—7.07)

—0.310
(—3.11)

1.307
(13.62)

0.063
(1.33)

UK

1.492
(18.15)

—0.550

(—5.10)

1.507

(13.72)

—0.276

(—0.48)

—0.029

(—1.19)

—0.101

(1.62)

0.099

—0.034

(—0.01)

—0.001

—0.247
(—1.21)

—0.035
(—0.37)

(—0.63)

0.049
(1.00)

pcq

—0.466

(—1.46)

Switzerland

U°(—3)

(continued)

—0.142
(—1.04)

f

(—4.90)

—0.106
(—1.26)

Sweden
1.431

1.018

(7.27)

—0.346
(—1.61)

Norway

(15.24)

—0.101

(—0.72)

0.918
(6.79)

0.220
(1.21)

—0.592
(—6.53)

(—2.32)

—0.230

U°(—2)

0.270
(2.22)

Netherlands

1.168
(11.83)

0.138
(1.66)

U1"(—l)

Italy

Constant

TABLE

0.918

0.965

0.960

0.959

0.857

0.974

0.982

0.889

p2

1.929

2.04

1.967

1.954

1.981

1.914

1.974

2.106

D.W.

Table 5
Panel Regressions on Inflation

Dependent Variable:

i

(2)

(1)
Coefficient
(t-statistic)

Coefficient
(I-statistic)

Constant

-0.009
(-0.72)

-0.129
(.1.06)

i(-l)

1.085

(47.06)

1.078
(46.93)

T(2)

-0.115
(-3.41)

-0.114
(-3.40)

i(-3)

-0.118
(-5.43)

(-5.17)

Variable

IW
PJ3CX

0.141

0.141

(13.06)

(13.12)

0.100
(1.76)
0.263

PBC4
R2

-0.111

(4.67)

0.93

0.93

* The estimated regressions include country fixed effects which are not reported in the table.

—0.011
(—0.10)

0.934
(2.57)

0.249
(1.01)

0.119
(0.80)

0.042
(0.35)

—0.050
(—0.16)

Canada

Denmark

Finland

France

Germany

Ireland
0.544
(6.55)

0.049
(2.35)

0.198
(5.55)

0.183
(3.82)

0.263
(3.66)

0.134
(4.47)

0.142
(4.49)

—0.070

Belgium

(—0.45)

0.132
(3.52)

0.513
(2.20)

Austria

0.122
(2.69)

0.104
(0.47)

IW

Australia

Constant

6
w

0.662
(6.97)

1.079
(11.15)

1.126
(12.29)

1.217
(13.59)

0.843
(8.57)

1.158
(12.45)

1.130
(11.92)

0.853
(8.65)

1.158
(11.78)

(-1)

(0.38).

0.31

—0.196
(—2.03)

—0.311
(—3.88)

(—4.65)

—0.385

(—2.08)

—0.194

(—3.46)

—0.293

—0.285
(—3.30)

—0.118
(—1.25)

(—2.94)

—0.273

w(—2)

—0.503
(—1.43)

0.216
(1.92)

0.306
(2.13)

0.111
(0.48)

0.514
(1.64)

0.079
(0.620)

0.172
(1.17)

—0.108
(—0.57)

0.066
(0.31)

1

(t-statistics in parentheses)

Dependent Variable:

POLITICAL BUSINESS CYCLETHEORY

TABLE

0.929

0.923

0.968

0.937

0.816

0.974

0.952

0.829

0.945

R2

1.99

1.96

1.69

2.08

2.04

2.08

1.94

1.92

2.05

D.W.

0.398
(1.54)
0.406
(1.45)
0.371
(2.11)

Norway

Sweden

Switzerland

0.059
(0.44)

0.006
(0.02)

New Zealand

USA

0.197
(0.73)

Netherlands

—0.167
(—0.70)

0.148
(0.43)

Japan

UK

—0.220
(—0.89)

Italy

Constant

0.293
(1.26)
0.118
(0.52)

—0.173
(—1.02)

—0.256
(—2.90)
—0.067
(—0.76)
—0.312
(—3.37)

1.075
(11.54)
0.836
(8.68)
1.201
(12.69)

0.139
0.203
(4.45)
0.024
(0.91)

(1.67)

0.051

(4.65)

0.310

(3.44)

1.390
(15.36)

(—5.49)

—0.469

(—5.33)

—0.421

0.088
(0.65)

0.365
(1.22)

0.892

0.690
(2.62)

—0.419
(—4.94)

1.323
(15.50)

0.115
(2.47)

1.224
(14.40)

0.883

—0.098
(—0.40)

—0.004
(—0.004)

0.835
(8.43)

(—2.80)

0.111
(2.58)

(0.75)

0.966

0.957

0.890

0.948

0.84

0.878

0.430
(1.35)

(4.12)
—0.2.67

2.15

2.03

2.02

1.98

2.13

1.85

1.94

2.11

1.97

0.967

1.174
(12.44)

D.W.

p2

0.040

0.417
(1.52)

I'
—0.357
(—4.33)

(—2)

(continued)

1.234
(13.55)

!(—1)

6

0.235

iW

TABLE

Table 7
Panel

Data Money Growth

Dependent

Description*
PBC Test
PBC4

PBC6

Variable: m

No Country Dummies

Coeff.
(t-stat.)

R2

N Obs.

0.477
(2.49)

0.73

0.356
(2.03)

0.73

1887

1852

With Country Dum.
Coeff.
(t-stat.)

R2

N Obs.

0.480
(2.50)

0.73

0.355
(2.01)

0.73

1887

1852

Partisan Test

Coefficient
(t-statistic)

Coefficient
(t-statistic)

PBC4 - Left

0.415
(1.42)

0.411
(1.40)

PBC4 - Right

0.527
(2.09)

0.531

(2.09)

Difference Test4

-0.112
(-0.29)

-0.120
(-0.31)

PBC6 - Left

0.403
(1.52)

0.409
(1.52)

PBC6 - Right

0.323
(1.39)

0.314
(1.33)

Difference Test6

0.080
(0.23)

—

0.095
(0.27)

* The estimated regressions include lags of the dependent variable which are not reported in
the table.

Table 8

Country Money Growth PBC Test
Dependent Variable: m
PBC6

PBC4

Country

.

Coefficient
(t-statistic)

R2

N Obs.

0.945
(1.73)

0.87

-0.207
(-0.36)

0.78

0.104
(0.22)

0.75

0.563
(0.39)

0.82

-0.607
(-0.67)

.

Coefficient
(t-slatistic)

R
N Obs.

0.376
(0.71)

0.87

-0.146
(-0.28)

0.79

0.153
(0.35)

0.75

0.571
(0.45)

0.79

0.61

0.553

0.62

108

(0.64)

106

0.840
(0.77)

0.65

0.176
(0.17)

0.67

0.401
(0.39)

0.46

-0.398
(-0.45)

0.46

0.596
(1.46)

0.82

0.520
(1.37)

0.83

-0.047
(-0.05)

0.71

0.724
(0.85)

0.71
106

0.552
(1.19)

0.85

0.381
(0.91)

0.85

0.604
(0.95)

0.89

0.647
(1.06)

0.89

Netherlands

0.777
(1.20)

0.75

-0.092
(-0.16)

0.74

108

New

2.235
(2.03)

0.70

1.575

0.70

108

(1.52)

106

0.226
(0.26)

0.54

0.425
(0.57)

0.56

Australia

Austria
Belgium
Canada

Denmark

Finland
France
Germany

Ireland

Italy
Japan

Zealand

Norway

108

108

108

64

108

108

108

108

108

108

107

106

106

106

62

106
106

106

106

106

106

106

PBC4

Country'
Sweden

.

Coefficient
(t-statistic)
1.825

(1.13)

PBC6
.

N Obs.

Coefficient
(t-statistic)

N Obs.

0.64
96

0.823
(0.53)

0.64
94

0.578
(0.71)

0.74

-0.500
(-0.79)

0.84

-0.109
(-0.47)

0.85

R2

Switzerland

-0.034
(-0.04)

0.73

United
Kingdom

-0.156
(-0.22)

0.85

United
Slates

0.144
(0.53)

0.87

108
108
108

R2

106
106
106

The estimated regressions include lags of the dependent variable which are not reported in

the table.

Table 9
Country Money Growth Partisan Test
Dependent Variable: m

PBC4 - Left
Country

•

Coefficient
(t—st.atistic)

Australia

PBC4 - Right
•

Diff. Test4
•

Coefficient
(t-statistic)

Coefficient
(t—statistic)

1.448

1.073

(1.00)

(1.82)

0.375
(0.25)

Austria

-1.223
(-1.50)

0.914
(1.05)

-2.137
(-1.75)

Belgium

0.285
(0.27)

-0.013
(-0.02)

0.298
(0.21)

Denmark

-0.702
(-0.63)

-0.269
(-0.16)

-0.432
(-0.21)

Finland

1.684
(1.33)

-1.365
(-0.65)

3.048
(1.23)

France

-2.161
(-0.83)

0.997
(0.85)

-3.158
(-1.07)

Germany

0.379
(0.67)

0.872
(1.42)

-0.493
(-0.61)

Ireland

-0.625
(-0.37)

0.178

-0.803

(0.16)

(-0.40)

Italy

0.240

1.802

-1.562

(0.47)

(1.63)

(-1.29)

Netherlands

1.961
(1.57)

0.242
(0.30)

1.718
(1.12)

New

-2.338

3.080

-5.418

Zealand

(-0.88)

(2.69)

(-1.93)

-1.289
(-1.14)

2.668
(1.89)

-3.957
(-2.09)

3.139
(1.61)

-1.437
(-0.47)

4.576

-0.052
(-0.04)

-0.220
(-0.24)

0.168

Norway
Sweden

United
Kingdom

(1.24)
(0.12)

PBC4 - Left
Countrys

United

States

•

PBC4 - Right
•

Diff. Test4

Coefficient
(t-statistic)

Coefficient
(t-satistic)

Coefficient
(I-statistic)

-0.097
(-0.24)

0.393
(0.96)

-0.490
(-0.82)

* The estimated regressions include lags
the table.

of the depedent variable which are not reported in

Table 10
Panel Data Regression of Deficit with Political Variables

Dependent Variable: DRY
Equation
(2)

Equation
(3)

Equation

(4)

Equation
(5)

-0.002
(-1.19)

-0.006
(-2.73)

-0.007

(.3.28)

-0.004
(-1.97)

-0.0037
(-1.98)

0.74
(17.0)

0.71
(16.0)

(16.2)

0.74
(17.2)

0.70
(14.0)

Equation

(I)

Regressors:

Constant

DRYL

0.24

0.24
(3.17)

0.23
(2.98)

0.18
(2.32)

0.19
(2.51)

(3.15)

0.56
(2.66)

0.61
(2.91)

0.56
(2.71)

(2.46)

-0.47
(-8.49)

-0.45
(-8.31)

-0.46
(-8.50)

(-8.69)

-0.47
(-8.49)

1.82

2.75
(2.16)

2.62
(2.07)

1.76
(1.42)

1.70
(1.38)

DUB
DRB
DGR

0.72

DUJAPS

(1.46)

0.51

-048

0.50
(2.38)

ELE

—

—

0.0065
(2.17)

0.0072
(2.41)

0.0063
(2.04)

POL

—

0.0039
(2.57)

—

—

DBYLELE

—

0.0042
(2.77)
—

—

—

0.13
(1.55)

0.65

0.66

0.67

0.66

0.66

R2

t-statistics in pare ntheses

* The regressor DUJAP is a country specific dummy for DUB for Japan. This is the only country for
which a country specific effect was found in the data: its positive estimate implies that an increase in
Japanese unemployment has a much stronger effect on budget deficits than in any other countries. The
results, however, do not depend in any way on the inclusion of this variable.

Table A•1
Election and Regime Change

E —

Election;

CH L — Change

AUSTRALIA: Endogenous

1961:4 E
1963:4 E
1966:4
1969:4

E

1972:4
1974:2
1975:4
1977:4
1980:4
1983:1
1984:4
1987:3

E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

1961:1

1973:1
1974:1
1977:2
1978:4
1981:4
1985:4
1987:4

RIGHT a

CE L
(*)b
cli R

E

E

1966:1
1970:1
1971:4
1975:4
1979:2
1983:2
1986:4

E
E
E

RIGHT c

£
CU R
CU L
(*)

E
£
E

CR R c

E

Cli R

(*)

CANADA:

1962:2

RIGHT

CM L
Cli R

E
£
E
E
E
E

1959:2
1962:4

CE L

Endogenous Timing. 4 'IRS

1965:2 E
1968:1 E
1971:4 £

Ch R — Change Righc

Timing, 3 YRS AUSTRIA: Endogenous Timing, 4 YRS

E

BELGIUM:

Left;

CM L
(*)

CU R
CU L

1963:2
1965:4
1968:2
1972:4
1974:3
1979:2
1980:1
1984:3

Endogenous Timing, 5 'IRS
E
E
E
E

£
E
E
£
E

RIGHT

CM L

(*)

(*)

CU R
CU L

(*)

Cli R

DENMARK: Endogenous Tthing, 4 YRS

FINLAND: Endogenous Timing, 4 YRS

1960:4
1964:3

1962:1

1966:4
1968:1

1971:3
1973:4
1975:1
1977:1
1979:4
1981:4

E
E
E

1963:4
1966:1

£

CU R (*)

E
E
E
E
E
E

CU L

CUR
CU I.

CE R

1982:3
1984:1

£

1987:3

E

(*)

1970:1
1972:1
1975:3
1977:2
1979:1
1983:1
1987:1

E

E
E
E
E

LEFT
CU R
CH L

CUR
CH L

E
E
E

CU R
Cli R

T*ble A-I (continued)

FRANCE: Endogenous Timing, 5 'IRS

GERflANY: Endogenous

1962:4

E

1967:1
1968:2
1973:1

E
E
E
E
E

1961:3
1965:3
1966:4
1969:3
1972:4
1976:4
1980:4
1982:4
1983:1
1987:1

1978:1
1981:2
1984:3

1986:1

RIGHT
(*)

CR L
CM R
CU R

E

Endogenoua Timing, S YRS

IRElAND:

1961:4

E

1965:2.. E
1969:2

CR I.

E
E

CR K

JAPAN:

(*)
(*)

Endogenous Timing.

1960:4 E
1963:4 £
1967:1
1969:4
1972:4
1976:4

CR L
CII K
CII L

RIGHT

E
E
E
E

1979:4 E
1980:2

1983:4
1986:3

E
£
E

(*)

4 'IRS

RIGHT

CH L c
CII L
CII R

Gil K

E
E

ITALY: Endogenous

1962:4
1963:2
1968:2
1972:2
1974:4
1976:2
1979:2
1983:2
1987:2

E

E
E
E

E
E
E
E

Timing, S YRS

RwWr
ca L

RIGhT

1973:1 E
1977:2
1981:2
1982:1
1982:4
1987:1

E
£

Timing, 4 'IRS

E
E
E
CII K

E
E

CII L

£
E

NETHERLANDS:Endogenous Timing. 4 YRS
1959:1
1963:2
1965:2
1967:1
1971:1
1972:4
1973:2
1977:2
1977:4
1981:2

1982:3
1986:2

E
£

RIGHT
Cli L

E
£
£

CR R
(*)
CII L

E
E
£
E

CR R
CR L
CII K

(*)

Table A

(continued)

NEW ZEALAND: Endogenouc TSing, 3 'IRS NORWAY:

1960:4

1961:3
1965:3
1969:3
1971:4
1972:4
1973:3
1977:3
1981:3
1985:3
1986:2

RIGHT

1963:4
1966:4

E
E
E

1969:4
1972:4
1975:4
1978:4
1981:4
1984:3
1987:3

E
E
E
E
E
E
E

SWEDEN:

Exogenous Timing. 3 'IRS

1960:3
1964:3
1968:3
1970:3
1973:3
1976:3
1979:3
1982:3
1985:3

E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
E

CM L
CR R

CH L

Exogenous Timing, 6 'IRS
E

E
E
E
E
E
E

LEFT
CM R
CM L
CM R
CH L
CII R

CM L

SWITZERLAND: Exogenous Timing,
4 'IRS

since late 6Cc. constitutional reform
LEFT

CM R

CR L

UK: Endogenous Timing. S 'IRS

1959:4
1964:4
1966:1
1970:2

E
E

E
E

1974:1 E
1974:3 E
1979:2 E
1983:2
1987:2

RIGHT
CM L
(*)

CM R

CM L (*)
CH R

1959:4
1963:4
1967:4
1971:4
1975:4
1979:4
1983:4

E
E
E
E

1.987:4

E

RIGHT

E
E
E

USA: Exogenous Timing, 4 YRS
1960:4
1964:4
1968:4
1972:4
1976:4
1980:4
1984:4

E
E
E
E
E
E

RIGHT
CM L
CH R

CM L
CM R

E

E
E

a RIGHT or LEFT indicates the type of government in power at the beginning of
the sample which is 1959:1. We also indicate for each country whether
elections dates are endogenous or exogenous and the official number of years
between two elections.

b Elections denoted with an asterisk * are not included in tests of the
political business cycle theory because they are too close (less than two
years) to previous elections. They are however included in tests of the
opportunistic endogenous election model.
c both Germany and Austria had grand coalitions of Left and Right parties.
Thus, a finer administration variable was used in the RPT inflation and
partisan (Hibbs) regressions. This also explains the occurence of a rightuard
shift from an already central Right leaning party.

Table A- j.

(continued.)

Source: Election Dates are obtained fro. Banks (1989); dates of change. of
obtained fro.
govern.nt and their classification of Right" and Left"
Alt (1985) and Banks (1989).

ar,

