                   NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




 RISK-SHARING, ALTRUISM, AND THE FACTOR STRUCTURE OF CONSUMPTION




                         Fuznio Hayashi

                         Joseph Altonji
                       Laurence Kotlikoff




                     Working Paper No. 3834




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          September 1991




We are grateful to V.V. Chari, who urged us to study the
distinction between risk-sharing and altruism, and M. Rosenzweig
for a useful discussion. The research reported here was
supported by grants from National Institute for Aging and
National Science Foundation. This paper is part of NBER's
research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                         NBER Working Paper #3834
                                         September 1991




 RISK-SHARING, ALTRUISM, AND THE FACTOR STRUCTURE OF CONSUMPTION



                              ABSPRACP

     We consider four models of consumption that differ with

respect to efficient risk-sharing and altruism. They range from
complete markets with altruism to family risk-sharing. We use a
matched sample of parents and independent children available from

the Panel Study of Income Dynamics to discriminate between the

four models. Our testing procedure is designed to deal with the
set of observed independent children being endogenously selected.
The combined hypothesis of complete markets and altruism can be

decisively rejected, while we fail to reject altruism and hence

family risk-sharing for a subset of families.




Fumio Hayashi                            Joseph Altonji
Department of Economics                  Department of Economics
McNeil Building                          Northwestern University
University of Pennsylvania               2003 Sheridan Road
3718 Locust Walk                         Evanston, IL 60208
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297              and NBER
and NBER


Laurence Kotlikoff
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
                                1. INTRODUCTION

      An infinitely-lived representative agent is the central economic actor

in a good many modern macroeconomic analyses. The justification for such an

egent rests on complete markets and pure intergenerational altruism. With

pure altruism, the family acts as a single immortal decision making agent.

With complete markets, efficient risk-sharing leads heterogeneoua agents to

act in a manner equivalent to that of a aingle representative agent.1 This

paper uses micro data to test these two distinct hypothesis motivating the

representative agent assumption.

      If, as it turns out, the joint hypotheais of complete markets and pure

altruism (our model a) fails empirically, we would like to know which compon-

ent of the joint hypotheais is responsible for the failure.     Therefore we

also test pure altruism (model b) and complete markets (model c) separately.

They are, in turn, special casea of an arguably more credible model, family

risk-sharing (our model d), which posits that efficient risk-sharing implied

by complete markets takes place within, but not necesssrily between, feisili-

es.    Since family risk-sharing occurs automatically if family members are

altruistically linked, the four models of consumption we test are partially

nested, as shown in Figure 1.

      It is well known that complete markets imply a very specific factor

structure for the log marginal utility.2 We will show that each of the other

three models of consumption also has its own factor structure. Since each

factor structure can be translated into a set of restrictions on the same

covsrisnce matrix between consumption and endowments, we can teat the four



1See, e.g., Hansen and Sargent (1990) for an explicit statement of the
aggregation procedure.
2See, e.g., Altug end Miller (1990).


                                       -I-
models sequentially using the same sample, starting with family risk-sharing

and proceeding to the joint hypothesis of complete markets and altruism.

     Two of the four models axamined in this paper have been tested, indepen-

dently from each other, by several researchers. A particular linear combina-

tion of the covariance restrictions implied by complete markets amounts to

the zero restriction on the contemporaneous income growth coefficient in a

cross-section regression of consumption growth. This has been tested exten-

sively in the literature.    Recent tests of complete markets using various

micro data sets on households includes Abel and Icotlikoff (1988), Cochrane

(1989), Mace (1989), and Townsend (l989). Altug and Miller (1990) examined

covarisnce among food consumption, leisure and wages and found no evidence

sgainst complete markets.     The only available consumption-based test of

altruism using micro data to our knowledge is in Altonji, Hayashi, and Kotli-

koff (1989), who tested a particular linear combination of the covariance

restriction implied by altruism.4'5

     The data to be used in this paper come from the Panel Study of Income

Dynsmics which includes not only households originally sampled but also their



3As argued in Hmymshi (1987), all papers that have regressed the change in
consumption against current and/or lagged income changes (see, e.g, Altonji
and Siow (1987)) have tested efficient risk-sharing implicitly.    Abel and
Kotlikoff (1988) derived the regression from altruism, but the restriction
tested is really an implication of complete markets.
4There is a strand of literature that tests for the existence of some
altruism using data on wealth. See, e.g., Hurd (1989).
5Another model of consumption that figures prominently in the literature is
self insurance, which delivers the well-known martingale property of the
marginal utility. However, as first pointed out by Chamberlain (1984), this
cannot be tested in a short panel unless one is willing to make a very speci-
fic assumption about how endowment depends on the state of the world. Avail-
able tests of self insurance (see Hayashi (1987) for a aurvey) require that
endowment be the sum of an economy-wide and an idiosyncratic components. But
then it is not clear why households do not share idiosyncratic risk. Previ-
ous tests of complete markets as well as our covariance-based test do not
make any assumption about the endowment process.


                                      -2-
split-offs, independent households headed by their children.      We define a

family to be a parent household plus its split-offs. The factor structures

for the four models of consumption imply testable restrictions on the covari.

ance matrix in consumption and endowment between member households of the

family.   Execution of the covariance-based test in the sample of families,

however, requires a resolution of several difficulties. First, the composi-

tion of the family varies from one family to another, requiring us to adapt

the test to each family type. Second, since the sample observation is "part-

ial" in that it does not necessarily include all the member households of the

family, our test has to take into account not only possible sample selection

bias but also uncertainty due to the fact that the family's true type cannot

be determined from data. Third, since the marginal utility is not directly

observable, it has to be estimated. The second half of the paper is devoted

to a resolution of these and other difficulties.

     The contents of the paper are as follows.     Section 2 contains an over-

view of our covariance-based test.    In section 3, we formally derive the

factor structure of the marginal utility from household optimization.     This

section generalizes the standard model of pure altruism to incorporate uncer-

tainty. Section 4 shows how to translate the factor structure into a set of

covariance restrictions for each family type. Sections 5 provides a solution

of the difficulties arising from the partial nature of the sample. Section 6

shows how to broaden the definition of the family type so that the proposed

solution is feasible given our limited data. Section 7 describes and justi-

fies our two-step procedure, which consists of regressing consumption and

endowment on household characteristics (including leisure) and then calculat-

ing covariances using regression residuals. The sample is briefly described

in section 8. Section- 9 reports our results.



                                     -3-
                                       2. AN OVERVIEW

        To see the main idea of the paper, consider the           following   simple situa-

tion. Take a sample of N families, each consisting of a parent household

indexed by k — 0 and its split-off (an independent household headed by the

child of the parent household) indexed by k —             1, for three years. 1985, 86
and 87. Let                       be the log consumption and the log endowment for

household k (—     0,1)    of family i in year t (— 85,86,87).              The observation

                                                                       —
provided by the i-th family is a 12-dimensional vector
                                                                            (c,y)   where ci
—                                                       and y is defined similarly.
     (c1085c1086.c087.c185cj186.c1187)
        The instantaneous utility function is the power function C1°/(l-p). If

     stands for measurement error in consumption, then (-p1 times) the log

marginal utility (8) is related to the log consumption (c) as:


(2.1)             Cjkt —   8ikt   + #ikt for k —   0,1;   t —   85,86,87.

Assume the measurement error is uncorrelated in cross-section with endowment:


(2.2)            Cov(jk,yj) — 0          for all k,t (—    0,1);   t,s (—   85,86,87).

        The well.known implication of complete markets (our model (c) in Figure

1) is efficient risk-sharing, namely that the change in the log marginal

utility is common to all households. Thus by (2.1) consumption growth diff-

ers across households only because of measurement error.                Since measurement

error is uncorrelated with endowment by (2.2), we have:


         Cov(Acik86,yiS) — 0,       Cov(Ac87,y) —          0    for all k,,s,
or

(2.3) Cov(cjkgs,yjt) — Cov(cik          86'iL — Cov(cik87,yjfS)
                                                             for                all k,t,s,


where Cikt —
                cik.cik     t-l is the consumption growth rate from year t-l to t.

This is a set of equality restrictions on the 6x6 cross covariance matrix

Cov(cik,yi) (k,t — 0,1; t,s — 85,86,87), which is displayed in Table 1(i).


                                           -4-
        A weaker form of complete markets is family risk-sharing (our model

(d)), which is that efficient risk-sharing occurs within, but not necessarily

between, families. Then the change in log marginal utility differs between

the parent household and the split-off only because of measurement error

which is uncorrelated with endowment. Thus:


(2.4)       Cov(cjü_Acji,yj5) — 0 for all 1, t (— 86,87), s (— 85.86,87),

which is a set of restrictions, not shown here but weaker than that in Table

1(1), on the 6x6 covariance matrix.

        Nov suppose that the parent household and the split-off are altruistica-

lly linked (our model (b)).      An extreme version of altruism (which will be

somewhat relaxed later on) is that the level of marginal utility is equalized

within the family.      Consumption differs within the family only because of

measurement error which is uncorrelated with endowment. Thus:


(2.5)                 Cov(cjo.cj1t.yj6) — 0      for all Its.

The implied restrictions on the cross covariance matrix are displayed in

Table 1(u). As is clear from comparing (2.5) with (2.4), altruism (model

(b)) is stronger than family risk-sharing (model (d)). The joint hypothesis

of complete markets and altruism (our model (a)) combines restrictions (2.3)

and (2.5).

        We have thus translated into the set of covariance restrictions the four

partially nested models of consumption shown in Figure 1. The implied covar-

iance restrictions are all linear and can easily be jointly tested.           We

emphasize that our covariance-based test of the four models requires neither

assumptions about the endowment process nor data on Arrow-Debreu prices.

         The 1987 tape release of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID)

provide a sample of 192 families, each having one parent household and only



                                       -5-
one split-off. There are two consumption components available in the PSID:

food expenditure and housing consumption (actual and isputed rent).      Figure

2A(i) is a plot of (cioss+c1igs+cio86+ci1s&+cio87+c187v6, the log

food expenditure averaged over family members and over time, against the

corresponding log average household endowment (labor income).6        We verify

that there is a highly significant correlation between food expenditure and

endowment (the regression coefficient is 0.25 with a t value of 5.1 and      of

0.12). The corresponding plot for housing consumption is in Figure 28(i).

The regression coefficient is 0.61 with a t of 6.5 and It2 of 0.18.

     To visually examine the impact of risk-sharing within families, consider

the following linear combination of the set of covariance restrictions (2.4):


  cov(cio87-ci085-ci187-ci185.yi087-yi085-yi187y185) —0.

This is a covariance in differential 2-year changes.     Figure 2A(ii) (Figure

28(u)) is a plot of this covariance for food (housing). The strong associ-

ation apparent in Panel (i) mostly disappears, particularly for food, On the

other hand, altruism does not hold in the data. To see this visually, consi-

der the difference in time averages:


               Cov(Ecto/3cii/3, Yo/3-XYi1/3) 0,
which is a linear combination of (2.5). That this restriction does not hold

is clear from Figure 2A(iii) and 28(iii).




6Conaumption (c) and endowment (y) are residuals from regressing c and y on
household characteristics. For more details, see section 9.




                                       -6-
                        3. FOUR MODELS OF CONSUMPTION


     This section derives the factor structure of the marginal utility for

the four models of consumption displayed in Table II. Readers not interested

in the derivation can skip this section without losing continuity.

    We begin by describing aspects of the economic environment that pertain

to the properties of consumption we examine. Since households are finitely-

lived, the set of existing households varies across states of the world. We

index households that existed in some particular past state by "i'.        These

households may give birth to spl.Lt-offs, separate households headed by their

children that exist in some states of the world.          The k-th split-off of

household i is indexed by "ik. To emphasize that household i is a parent

household, we index it by "i00.        A family is a collection of households

consisting of a parent household and its split-offs. Whether it is signifi-

cant that the household belongs to a particular family depends on the model

we will consider below. For each household ilc, there is a set Aik of states

in which the household is alive, which consists of a unique birth state (eik)

and a set of states that follow the birth state. The household's consumption

in state e in date t is a scelar Cik(e) defined over Aik.         (Extending the

analysis to the multi-commodity case is atraightforwsrd.) Figure 3 gives an

illustration of our notation. Household iO exists in state a. It has five

(potential) split-offs (k —   1,2,..   ,5).   Split-offs (k's) that are alive in

each state are listed in braces in the figure. Thus, for example, the birth

state for k — 1 is state b, and Aik for k — 1 is (b,c,d).7



7This example makes it clear that we distinguish between households with
different birth states even if their utility function and the endowment
process conditional on the birth state may be the same. We chose this conv-
ention, found in Wright (1987), because the notation (particularly (3.8) and
(3.9) below) is simpler.



                                        -7-
                     Complete Markets with Selfish Households

        We first consider the well-known case of complete markets with selfish

households.     The household's objective is to maximize its expected lifetime

utility:

(3.1)                 Uik —     E w(ele.k)uik(Cik(e);e)
                              e cA.
                               t ik
where w(eteik) is the probability of e conditional on eik.                  (If there is

discounting, it is embedded in the dependence of uik on er.) Let P(eIe) be

the price at state e of a claim to one unit of the good payable in state et.

The first-order condition for optimality is


                                  au.k(c.k(e);e) —
(3.2)                 7r(eleik)                                AikP(eIek)
                                             3Cik
where Aik is the Lagrange multiplier for ik's lifetime budget constraint.

Taking the log of the first-order condition (3.2) and using the arbitrage

relation P(eIeo) —                                     we obtain:
                      P(eIeik)P(eikIeO).
(3.3)                 ek(e) — Aik        +

where
                                      rauik(G.k(e) ;e)
(3.4)                 0 kt —
                                  log                  3G.
                                                         ik
is the log marginal utility in state e and

(3.5)                     —                  -
                              log(Aik)
(3.6)                 p(e) —   log(P(ele0)/w(eIe0)].
That is, as noted moat recently by Townsend (1989) end Altug and Miller

(1990), the log marginal utility for household ik has a simple factor struc-

ture, consisting of two "effects" or factors, one representing household ik's

endowment or lifetime resources 'ik and the other en undiversifiable aggrega-

te shock p(e)



                                                 -8-
                  Family Risk-Sharing between Selfish Households

        Efficient risk-sharing between households within families is equivalent

to the situation in which contingency claims are traded within but not neces-

sarily between families.       The security prices can differ across families.

The firat.order condition is now


(3.7)                 #ik(e) —          +


Note the difference from (3.3): the p factor can differ across i.


                                        Altruism

        The alternative specification of preferences is that households within

families are altruistically linked.            Our specification of altruism is that

household iO's objective function              is defined over its own consumption and

that of ita offspring:

                          —
(3.8)                          X w(eIej0)fl0Ui
where Ui is defined in (3.1), and the summation is over household iO and all

its potential offspring m. The summation can be rewritten as:


(3.9)
                      Xm(etleio)[
                                             i(et)iomimtmt
where the summation E is over all states of the world emanating from e iO
                    at

and Ei(e) is the set of offspring (including the parent household) that

exist in state e.

        If the utility weight 0iOm satisfies


(3.10)                0iOm — 0iOk0ikm        with 0ioo — 1,

then        can be rewritten recursively as

                           —        +
(3.11)                         U0           ,r(e.kleio)niokvik


                                             -9-
where the summation now is over all potential split-offa (i.e., direct off-

apring) of household iO and where Vik is defined by (3.8) with "0" replaced

by "k'. Therefore the collection of utility functions Vik is intergeneratio-

nally consisrenr in the sense that each generation views its children's

utility as a sufficient statistic fot all its offspring's actions.      Thia of

course is a generalization to uncertainty of the Barro dynasty utility.

       Now consider the problem of maximizing household i0's objective function

(3.8). The maximization is over the actions by itself and all its offspring

subject to a sequence of lifetime budget constraints, each pertaining to an

offspring, under complete markets. Since the prefetencea are interganeratlo-

nally consistent, the solution will be self-enforcing in that future off-

spring, each acting to maximize its own objective Vi. end up choosing the

same action prescribed by the parent household.8

       If the non-negarivity constraint on bequests is not binding for the k-tb

split-off,9 the first-order condition for maximization of (3.8) or (3.9) with

respect to consumption in state e by the k-tb split-off is:


                                 au.k(c.k(e) ;e) —
(3.12)           w(eIeO)U.Ok                         A.oP(efe.o),
                                         ik

where       is the Lagrange multiplier for the family's combined single budget

constraint. Taking logs of both sides of (3.12) we obtain


(3.13)                eik(e) —      +      + p()

5The solution has this self-enforcing property even if the sequence of life-
time budget constraints are not integrated due to binding nonnegativity
constraints.  Streufert (1989) shows, for the case of certainty, that the
solution is the outcome of a subgame-perfect equilibrium in Narkov strategies
in a game played by generations (with or without the non-negativity constrai-
nt).
5We will identify such split-offa in the data from information on the amount
of expected bequests.

                                        -10-
where Ojk(e) is the log marginal utility (3.4), p(e) is as in (3.6), and

                       —              -
(3.14)                     1og(A0)        1og(P(e10Ie0)/s(e0Ie0)]

(3.15)             'ik —    log(Iiok).
If complete markets do not necessarily exist, the p factor can depend on the

family, so that the factor structure becomes:


(3.16)              Oik(et) —   Ai   + 'ik + pi(e).

     In order for this model of altruism to be empirically distinguishable

from non-altruistic models of consumption, the utility weight wik must satis-

fy two requirements.       First, it cannot depend on the endowment process

Y1k(e), eGAjk.1° Consider distinguishing (3.13) from (3.3). The Lagrange

multiplier Aik in (3.3) is a function of the value of ik's endowments,

                            If the utility weight Wik in (3.13) is allowed to

be a function of the endowment process, then, for any non-altruistic alloca-

tion of consumption Cjk(.) satisfying (3.3), there exists a function wik such

that (3.13) holds for the same allocation. Thus, to make the model of altru-

ism observationally different, the model must be specific about how the

utility weight depends on the endowment process. But since we do not observe

the endowment process (what we observe is a particular realization of the

process for some dates), the only model of altruism empirically distinguisha-

ble from non-altruistic models is one in which the utility weight does not

depend on the endowment process.

     The second requirement for the model of altruism to be distinguishable

is more subtle.   Define the ax-ante type of a family to be a specification



'°The standard model of altruism seems to be of this type. For example, the
model in Chapter 8 of Becker (1981) apparently assumes that the beneficiary's
income does not affect the altruist's preferences.



                                          -11-
indicating which households are alive in which state.       Figure 3 actually is

an example of a particular ex-ante type; if there is another family for which

the same figure can be drawn aftet suitably re-labelling k's, then they sre

of the same type. Now suppose that the actual history is, say, (s,e,f) in

Figure 3 and that we have observations on families with one split-off in dste

e and two in date f.   There can be many ex-ante family types, not just the

type in the figure, that have one split-off in date e and two in date f. If

the utility weight depends on the family type, what could happen is that the

utility weight appears to be correlated with endowments in the cross-section

of families because certain family types may tend to have lsrger endowments.

     The following utility weights satisfy the two requirements:

(3.17)                    '°ik


where bi(k) is the birth order of k. For example for the family type depict-

ed in Figure 3, b.(l) —    b.(3) — 1, b.(2)   —   b.(4) — bi(5) — 2.   Under this

assumption the utility weight cannot depend on the number of existing split-

offs, which is actually a desirable property. For, refer back to Figure 3.

The number of splir-offs is one in state e and two in state f.         Clearly, if

the utility weight is to depend on the number of split-offs, it must be

state-dependent. For the rest of this paper we assume that (3.17) is part of

our model of altruism."

     To summarize, we have derived the factor structure of the log marginal

utility implied by the four models of consumption.        They are displayed in


11Assumption (3.17), which assumes that the utility weight is the same across
families if the birth order is controlled for, is a sufficient but not nece-
ssary condition for the two requirements to hold. We could allow the utility
weight to deviate randomly from (3.17) across families in the way specified
in section 4.2 for #.    We decided to take the more restrictive assumption
(3.17) only because doing so substantially simplifies the exposition in the
rest of the paper.



                                    -12-
Table II.   In the table and for the rest of the paper, we take as given a

particular history of the state of the world, so that the dependence of any

variable on e can be represented by subscript t. Also, since the split-off

can be uniquely identified by its birth order given the particular history,

hereafter the subscript 'k" will represent the birth order. For model (c),

which is the union of the case of complete markets with selfish households

and model (a) (complete markets with altruism), the factor structure in the

table certainly is true for the case of complete markets with selfish house-

holds (see (3.3)) and is also implied by the factor structure for model (a).

That is, the factor structure displayed for model (c) in the table is an

implication of complete markets with or without altruism.      Similarly, the

factor structure for model (d) is an implication of risk-sharing per Se.




                                    -13-
                           4. THE COVARIANCE RESTRICTIONS


         In this section, we translate the factor structure of log marginal

utility displayed in Table II into a aet of restrictions on the cross covari-

ance of consumption with endowments between parents and their split-offs.

This task is rather complicated for two reasons.               First, the population of

families contains many family types with different household-year combinatio-

ns.      So, for example, the covariance of the parent's consumption with the

third split-off's endowment cannot be defined for all families in the popula-

tion. This section addresses this problem. The next section deals with the

second problem, which is that the sample observation on a family does not

necessarily include all member households of the family.


4.1. Sub-population of Families

         Consider the set of all U.S. families consisting of (parent) households

that existed in 1968 and their split-offa (if any). For each family i, we

assign Ic — 0 to the parent household and index its split-offs (if any) by k

(—    1,2,..)   ordered by birth.   We divide the population of families into

sub-populations by the (ex-post) family type, indexed by a, which is the set

of household-year combinations ((k,t)'s). For the set               of variables pertai-

ning to households, we define a vector of random variables,                      defined
over sub-population a of families. For example, the family type a displayed

in Table III has the parent household (k —          0)   and the first split-off (k — 1)

in the first year, joined by the second split-off (k —            2) in the second year,
yielding 5 household-year combinations with the associated set a —               ((0,1),
(1,1), (0,2), (1,2), (2,2)1. For consumption we can define a 5-dimensional

                                          —                                    over the
random vector C" —         (C,(k,t)ca)         (C

sub -   population.


                                        -14-
4.2. The Maintained Hypothesis

        The two consumption items available from the PSID are food expenditure

and housing consumption (actual and imputed rent). We assume that the utili-

ty from the commodity is additively separable from the rest of the commoditi-

es (except for leisure, see below). The utility from the commodity in year t

for household k in family i of type a is

(4.1)                                                  p > 0


where         is   now either food      or housing consumption and        is   a taste
shifter    that affects the utility of the commodity. If              is (-p times)

the log marginal utility of the commodity in question, we have:


                        1og(C) —             +
(4.2)                                            1og().
        The taste shifter is not directly observable, but there is available a

vector of observed household characteristics,                  that affects the taste

shifter. Also, let                be household ik's endowment. We make the following

assumption on the joint distribution of (1ogx1Y) (k,t)ca, over
sub-population a of families:


(4.3a)
                                                       —


(4.3b)                  —
                            °kt
Assumption (4.3a) has three parts, each of which seems a reasonable assumpti-

on. First, the household characteristics of other households within the same

family do not help to predict the taste shifter of the household, given its

own   characteristics               Second, the residual taste shifter, 1ogeZ4a) -

             which would include things like the average physical body weight of
the individuals within the household, is unrelated to endowments                  This


                                            -15-
is an implication of the basic premise in economics that preference mnd

endowments are unrelated. This is an identifying assumption; once one permi-

ts unrestricted correlation between unobserved taste shifters and endowments,

no theory can deliver any testable restrictions on the correlation between

consumption and endowments. Third, the conditional expectation of the taste

shifter conditional on the household characteristics is linear. This is not
                                    (a)
restrictive because our choice of Xikt  consists of dummy variables and numer-

ical variables with their squares. Assumption (4.3b), which will be needed

for proving the Proposition in the next section, says that the relationship

between the taste shifter and the characteristics of the household does not

depend on what relatives this household has within the family.

        The maintained hypothesis (4.2) and (4.3) can be rewritten as:


(4.4a)              —        +                 I(xrYr)(ts)€aJ —0, (k,t)€a,
                                      Ef
where


(4.4b)
              (a)
             ck         (a)
                  — log(C.)      -
                                     akxk
                                       (a)           (a)
                                                    0ikt —   log()
                                                               (a)   -       (a)
                                                                         °kt'ikt
We will include in xc not only the usual demographics (family size, age,

etc.) but also leisure of the head and the spouse, thus allowing for the

possible interaction between consumption and leisure in the utility function.

Measurement error in consumption can be included as part of                        as long as

it satisfies (4.4a).         It can be correlated with true consumption.                Also,

endowments can have measurement error that is independent of the taste shift-

er. We must not make any assumption about the relationship between                        and
  (a)     (a) (a)
                        because consumption demand, and hence the log marginal

utility          depend on                   and


4.3. The Covsrisnce Restrictions

        The residual consumption           defined in (4.4b) is not directly observe-


                                             -16-
ble unless we know the coefficient vector             until section 7, we temporarl-

ly assume that we know           Since we do not make any assumptions about the

correlation between elements of            (k,t)ea,    no restriction can be placed

on the consumption covariances Cov(c                defined over sub-population a.

However, each of the four models of consumption does imply a set of restric-

tions on the cross covarlance matrix between consumption cjk and any trans-

form of endowment           —
                                h(Y)   for (k,t),(t,s)Ec.     To see this, we note

that


(4.6)                   Cov(,y) —        0, (k,t)eo, (t,s)a,

so that the cross covariance can be written as


(4.7)              Cov(c,y) —       Cov(8,y),          (k,t)Ea, (,s)€a.

Combining this with the factor structure displayed in Table II leads to the

cross covariances in Panel (i) of Table IV. For example, consider the factor

structure for model (a) in Table II.           Since Uk and Pt are constant across

families of all types, only the          factor contributes to the covariance of

        with         An equivalent representation of the covariance restrictions

in Panel (1) is the set of equality restrictions displayed in Panel (ii) of

Table IV. For example, the equality restrictions for the family type which

has k —    0,1   for three years (t—85,86,87) have already been shown in Table I

for models (b) (altruism) and (c) (complete markets).




                                        -17-
              5. TESTING COVARIANCE RESTRICTIONS ON "PARTIAL" DATA


       If we had observations on all the houaehold-year combinations for each

family in the sample, then testing the restriction displayed in Table IV for

sub-sample a would be straightforward.      This is not the case for our data,

where the observation on the family is only partial: some households may not

have been in the sample from the start, and others may be initially in the

sample but have temporarily or permanently dropped out. Therefore, an obser-

ved type r, which is a set of observed household-year combinations, is only a

subset of a. This section describes the problems arising from this partial

nature of the data and how their resolution.        Readers not interested in

technical details can skip to the last paragraph of this section.

       Let      —
                    ((log(C),9    ,log(t),x,y), (k,t)ea), be m random
vector, defined over sub-population a of families, of the variables pertain-

ing to each household in the sample family i. The maintained hypothesis is

the restriction (4.3) on the joint distribution of            We have shown in

section 4.3 that, under the maintained hypothesis, the covariance restrictio-

ns in Table IV are immedistely implied by the factor structure for             in

Table II.    Let       be the sub-vector of        corresponding to rca.      The

partial nature of the data creates two problems. The first is the familiar

selectivity bias: if the selection rule determining which (k,t)'s are observ-

able is not rsndom, the distribution of        is not the marginal of 4°,

that   the covarisnce restrictions may not hold on the (conditional) distribu-

tion of 4).     The second problem is less standsrd: we do not know the set of

missing (k,t)'s, so that there is no way of telling which sub-population the

pmrtial observation was drawn from. That is, if the sample family is of type

r, it can come from any sub-population a that includes r.            If 411     —



                                        (k,t)ei-, is the sample observation of


                                     -18-
observed type r, the distribution of                  is a mixture of conditional distri-

butions: 12



(5.1)                     —     with        probability p      where     p —   1.


        The question is: does the maintained hypothesis also hold on the distri-

bution of T)?        If   so, then the covariance restrictions immediately follow

from the factor structure. The following proposition says that the answer is

yes if the selection rule is not based on consumption.


PROPOSITION. Suppose the sample selection is such that the set r of house-

hold-year combinations is observed for family i from sub-population a if

                        where (x0),y0))         —                   (k,t)Ec.       Then the

maintained hypothesis holds on                 that   is, (4.4) holds for r — a.


PROOF.     From (5.1) and the assumed sample selection rule, we have, for any

function g(.) of (r)

(5.2)             E[g(T))] -

Now define          —
                         log(')     -
                                        Oktxikt      and let             be the elements

corresponding to (x',y').                    Let h(.) be an arbitrary function of

                 Then .h(xT),y)) is a function of                        Thus by (5.2),

                                        —
(5.3)         E[.h(xT),yT))3

12An analogy to a different situation may help to understand the notation
here. Suppose the population consists of singles (a — 1) and couples ça —
2). Let          be the head's and the wife's income. For singles, 1 > —

y>,      and for couples        —
                                    (y,y).
couples are in the sample if y(2) — 0.
                                                        The sample selection rule is that
                                                       For couples in the sample, all we
observe is the head's income and we do not know whether the head is married
or not. So there is only one observed type, which consists of the household
head only. The sample observation                    is either y1'> or y.


                                              -19-
(This would not be true if °kt' which defines                in (4.4b), depended on a.)

The term B[        .h(xc,y')),(xa),yr))Er] on the right hand side of (5.3)

equals (with f(x,y) here being the density of (x,y))



        J(x,y)Er
                   E[.h(x0),y)x,yjf(x,y)dxdy/Prob((x0),y)ep),
which is zero because the integrand is zero by (4.4a).                        Therefore,
                        — 0 for any function h(.) for which the expectation

exists. But since

(5.4)                              —

it is necessary that                             — 0 for all (x),yT)).            Q.E.0.



REMARX.    The reader may have noticed that the relationship between a and r          is
analogous to that between ex-ante types and a. There are many ex-ante family

types that could have produced an ex-post type          a. Thus assuming (4.3) for a
amounts   to assuming the same for ex-ante types as well.


        Thus, as far as testing goes, we can proceed as if the observed type r

is the true type a. The intuition here is that even if the values of cross

covariances are contaminated by the sample selection and mixing of distribu-

tions, the equality restrictions between cross covariances remain valid.




                                          -20-
                   6. BROADENING THE DEFINITION OF FAMILY TYPE


      In order to carry out our covariance-based tests for each sub-sample

defined by the observed type, we need a sample vsriance-covarisnce matrix of

cross covariances, requiring the sample size be grester than the square of

the number of household-year combinations. Unfortunately, our sample is not

large enough to allow us to strictly adhere to the definition of the observed

type in dividing the sample into sub-samples.              We therefore restrict our

attention to the moat popular family types, which are "balanced" families,

families in which the same set of member households including the unique

parent household are continuously in the sample throughout the sample pariod.

      Still, sub-samples of "balanced" families are still too small relative

to the number of cross covariances. This difficulty can be largely resolved

if we decide not to use the information on the birth order: for each family,

we take a random permutation of split-offs to re-assign the household index k

(—   1,2,..).   That this broadens the definition of the type can be seen from

an example provided in Table V. The two families in Panel (i) of the table

are "balanced" because the set of split-offs is the same over time.               They

are, however, different types because the composition of the split-offs

differs between the two families. But the number of split-offs is the same,

so they are of the same broader type after the random permutation of split-

offs. For the rest of the paper we use H (the number of ever-present split-

of fs) to index the broader type.    Even under this broader definition of the

observed type, there are not sufficiently many families with N >             2.     We

henceforth focus on sub-samples with N —     0,1   or 2.

       Since the permutation of split-offs is random, the distribution of the

sample observation of type N — 2 satisfies symmetry:




                                      -21-
(6.la)                 (2)          (2)                 (2)       (2)
                  Cov(c1y6) —                   Cov(cjttyik)             for k,t —   1,2,

(6.lb)                (2)           (2)                     (2)   (2)
                  Cov(c60y) —                   Cov(c0y1)                for k,1 —   1,2,

(6.lc)                (2)           (2)                     (2)   (2)
                 Cov(cjkt.yjo) —                Cov(c.1y0)               for k,t —   1,2.

These symmetry restrictions sre displayed in Table V(ii); for any given year

combinations (ta), the 9 covariancea are described by S unique cross coven-

ances. If symaetry is imposed on the cross covanisnce matrix, the random

permutation of split-offs does not affect the test statistics numericslly.

So there is no need to literally take a random permutation of split-of fs in

the first place.     Symmetry is a logical consequence of the construction of

broader types, and we will incorporate it in our testing procedure. Table VI

lists the parameters (unique cross coveriances) to be estimated under symmet-

ry. We use         for the stacked vector of unique cross covariances, ordered

as indicated in Table VI, for type M —                        0,1,2.
        The same argument we made for the Proposition in section S establishes

that the asintsined hypothesis holds for any M.                              Thus, the covariance matrix

                  for k,t —         0,.. ,M     and t,s —         1,.. ,T,   where          is defined as

                       (H)                      (H)                (H)
(6.2)                 ck   —          log(C)            -
                                                              OktXikt
satisfies the covsriance restrictions in Table IV for a — M.                                 The covariance

restrictions can be essily translated into a set of linear restrictions on

the unique cross covariances

                          (H)
                                —         (H)         (H)
(6.3)                 6                           ç          free parameters.


The appropriste matrix WM for each of the four models of consumption is

displayed in Table VII.




                                                       -22-
                               7. ESTIMATION AND TESTING


        So far we have assumed that the ak vector necessary for calculating the

residual consumption c1 in (6.2) is known.                        This section describes our

two-step procedure for estimation and testing of the covarisnce restrictions

whose first step estimates °kt by regressing the log of consumption and

endowment on household cherscteristics. The second step uses the residual

for consumption and endowment from the first-stage regression to calculate

the cross covariances and tests the restriction (6.3) on the covsriance

matrix. Readers not interested in econometric details can skip the rest of

this section without losing continuity.

        Let   E*(log(C )Ix) be the population least squares projection of
        (H)       (H)          A(H)              (H)                 (H)   (H)              A(s)
                                                                                   Define
log(Cikt) on xik and let cik —              log(Cikt)
                                                         -
                                                              E*(log(Cik)jxik).
similarly. By (6.2),

                        A(H)     (H)             (H)     (H)
(7.1)                   cik —   cik E*(ciktlxikt).
                                        -


                                       A(H)             (H)
It is important to note that cik and cik are not equal because the log

marginal utility (9), which is a component of cI (see (4.4s) for a —                         N),
can be correlated with                      This raises two questions.           First, do the

covsrisnce restrictions for cIr and y nevertheless hold for                                  and

         Second, if so, can we carry out the covariance-bssed test for                       and

        while ignoring the sampling error that arises from the fact that the

population least squares projection has to be estimated from the sample by
                                       A(H)    A(s)
                                                 -
OLS   (ordinary lesst squares) to obtain ck and y17 This is sometimes
referred to as the problem of generated regressors.

        The answer to the first question is yes. Since the maintained hypothes-

is (4.4) holds for a — M snd since                       is a lineer function of x end

y, we have Cov(,) —                    0.     Thus the same set of coverience restricti-



                                               -23-
                                                      CM) ACM)
ons     (6.3) holds for the unique elements of Cov(cikt.yit).                      But
        CM) ACM)    —        ACM) ACM)              ACM)                   CM)   ACM)
                        Gov(c.y6).        because 'ikt is orthogonal to Xikt and cikG

depends linearly on x. Therefore, (6.3) also holds for the unique elemen-

ts of Cov(,) under the respective models of consumption. Hereafter
           CM)               .               ACM) ACM)
we use S         for the unique elements of Cov(cyff).

        If we have data on               and 9C, resting the covariance restriciion
                                                       be the stacked vector of cross
(6.3) is quite straightforward.             Let
                                                  M)
products           9)• For H —       0 or 1, the symmetry restriction is absent and

the optimal estimator VM) of unique covariances is simply the sample mean of

)M) because        Cov(,9) —             E(IV).        Its asymptotic covariance matrix

)M)   is   consistently estimated by the sample variance of 1M),            For M — 2,

let 0 be the selection matrix representing symmetry (6.1) that maps the

stacked vector of covariances into the unique covariances 6C2), A consistent

and asymptotically efficient estimator tC2C of 5C2) and a consistent estimate

      of its asymptotic variance are given by


(7.2)               t)2) —                          C2) —
                             (ov-1oJ[0v-1J,
where a and V are, respectively, the sample mean and the sample variance of

)2)        Given (M),aCM)), the linear restriction (6.3) on 6)MC can be easily

tested for each H using the fact that the minimum over çCM) of


(7.3)
                          NCM)(8CM).WMc)M))h[M)J(6)M)WHcCM)),

where N)M) is the number of observations in sub-sample H, is asymptotically

distributed /(q) where q equals the dimension of 6)M) minus the rank of WH.

        The answer to the second question we posed above is also yes: estimation

and testing can proceed exactly as described in the previous paragraph while

ignoring the problem of generaied regressors. The proof, which is straight-

forward but tedious, is in Appendix 1.



                                             -24-
                                   8. SAMPLE


     This section briefly describes the construction of our sseple. The P510

begsn in 1968 with 4,802 original (parent) households, consisting of s sample

representative of the U.S. populstion (2,930 households) and s supplementary

sample of low income households (1,872 households). The P510 has reinter-

viewed not only the parent households but slso new households which arise

when members of the parent households split off to form an independent house-

hold (a split-off). Hence, the P510 provides matched data on parents togeth-

er with at least a subset of their independent children.

     The tapes for the 1987 wave contain 36,580 individuals who ever existed

in the survey.13 Our sample construction has two steps. First, we identify

the head, the spouse (if any) and children (including those yet to be born as

of 1968) for each of the 4,802 parent households.       There are 24,945 such

individuals; virtually all the rest consists of those who married parent

household members after 1968.   Second, for every year we check whether they

are a household head or spouse. If so, they are either in a parent household

or in a split-off household.     Since each individual record also contains

information on the household the individual inhabits, we can get information

on the household from the record on the head. This generates, for each year

and for each parent household, a set of households (i.e., a fazsiiy) whose

head or spouse was a member of the parent household.       We performed these

steps for the period 1985-87 to produce 20,519 household-year combinations

for 3,070 families.14 (The rest of the 4,802 original households disappeared

from the survey by 1985 and did not re-emerge by 1987.) We choose to focus



"see Survey Research Center (1989), Part 9 of Section 1 for details.
14A complete documentation of the sample along with the SAS programs is avail-
able upon request from the first author at a nominal charge.


                                    -25-
on the most recent three yests to msximize the number of split-offa.

     From this sample we exclude observations in the supplementary sample of

low income households, because doing so mskes the sample more representative.

As discussed in the next section, the effect of including the low income

sample on our results is small.     This reduced the ssmple size to 11,060

observations (household-year combinations) for 1,819 families. We then dtop

119 split-off observations for which 1985 was the first year of existence,

because their reported income for the first year may be for the parent house-

hold from which they split off.   This should not bias our results; it only

forces us to focus on a particular type of family. We then delete 27 obser-

vations with top-coded values for relevant consumption and income components.

We also delete 39 observations whose food expenditure (food at home and away

from home, plus the value of food stamps) is zero, and 223 observations whose

food figure was assigned by the Survey Research Center. Although the exclu-

sion of these 262 (— 223 + 39) observations does not materially change our

results, this is nonetheless a sample selection based on consumption, which

may bias our results. Our justification is that these cases are distinguish-

ed because of measurement errors.15 We then delete 196 observations for which

the sum of annual labor income and pension income, which is our measure of

endowment, is 0.   Since this is a sample selection based on endowments, it

should not bias our results. This leaves us with a sample of 10,446 house-

hold-year combinations for 1,793 families. Table VIII contains simple stati-

stics for this sample by parent/split-off and by year.



'5There are 4 clear outlying observations whose food expenditure at home is
greater than or equal to $52,000.     Inspection of their record led us to
believe that their number is off by one digit, ao we decided to divide their
food expenditure at home by 10.    This made very little difference to our
results. For housing consumption, there was no observations with zero consu-
mption or obvious extreme values.


                                    -26-
                                  9. RESULTS


     Although there is no technical difficulty in testing the covarisnce

restrictions jointly, we do the test for food snd housing consumption sepa-

rately. The reeson is thst the unique cross covarisnces of endowments with

both food end housing consumption sre too numerous for some sub-samples.

Appendix 2 provides the definition of the vsriables used in analysis.       In

particular, endowment is the sum of labor income, pension income, end social

security benefits. Asset income is not a good measure of endowment because

it reflects past savings behavior, which csn be related to a permanent

component of the taste shifter.     The vector of household characteristics

includes leisure and health dummies, for head and spouse.

     We created two samples of balanced families from the sample of 10,446

household-year combinations described in section 8. The difference between

the two samples lies in the set of observations (household-year combinati-

ons) to be deleted before balanced families are extracted: the first sample

excludes no observations, while the second sample excludes split-off obser-

vations whose head in the 1984 survey expected to receive no bequests.'6 We

wish to examine this second sample because family members will not be effec-

tively linked by altruism if the non-negativity constraint on bequests is

binding.'7 Since whether the constraint binds or not depends on the distri-

bution of endowments within the family, our Proposition in section 5 guaran-



'6The 1984 wave of the PSID contains information on expected amount of beques-
ts.   Its tape code is V10950.    Since split-offs that did not exist in 1984
were already excluded from the sample (see section 8), this variable in the
split-off's record is for that split-off, not for its parent household.
'7We are thus excluding in the second sample those split-offs whose expected
bequests are zero but who are nevertheless altruistically linked through
other form of transfers. This is not a problem; what is important is that
those in the sample are altruistically linked under altruism, and those with
positive expected bequests are certainly so.


                                    -27-
tees that the covariance restrictions hold for this sample as well.        Table

IX gives en enumeration of balanced families by number of aplit-offs (11).

Since about 80% of split-offs expect to receive no bequests, balanced fami-

lies with two or more split-offs in the second sample are scarce. Since the

sample size must be sufficiently greater than the number of unique cross

covariances (which equals 5xT2 — 45 for 14 2) for the Chi-squared statistic

(7.3) to be reliably calculated, we are forced to restrict the application

of our two-step procedure to sub-samples H —     0,1,2   for the first sample end

14 —   0,1   for the second sample.'°

        Panel (i) of Table X reports our results from the first sample.       The

lower half of the panel displays the Cbi-squared statistics, derived from

the upper panel, appropriate for sequential testing of the four partially

nested hypotheses.         It only reports the statistics aggregated over sub-

samples, which are also Chi-squared.       The Chi-square statistics aggregated

over family types point to a rejection of all four models of consumption.

Only on sub-sample H — 1 for food, neither model (c) (complete markets) nor

 (d) (family risk-sharing) can be rejected, which suggests that our food data

are noisier than data on housing. One possible reason for the relatively

weak evidence from food consumption against complete markets end family

 risk-sharing is that its measurement error is not persistent so that the

 signal-to-noise ratio gets very saall in first differences.'9

        Panel (ii) of Table X shows results from the second sample of balanced



 '8The first-stage regression of log consumption end endowment on household
 characteristics is for each (k,t) and for each H.     However, by symmetry
 (6.1), split-offs with different birth order can be pooled in the first-
 stage regression.
 t9As made clear in section 2 (see (2.3) end (2.4)), the covariance restricti-
 ons implied by complete markets and family risk-sharing reduce to restricti-
 ons on first differences in consumption.



                                         -28-
 families, which excludes split-offs with zero expected bequests. Again, the

 results for food are weak for complete markets and family risk-sharing, but

 if date on housing are to receive more weights, the evidence as a whole is

 that all the four models can be rejected.

     In order to check the robustness of our results, we perturbed the two

samples in the following ways: (i) drop leisure from the vector of household

characteristics; (ii) conduct the test in levels rather than in logs; (iii)

delete observations whose food consumption or endowment is leas than $520 in

1987 dollars before extracting balanced samples; (iv) delete split-offs

inhabited by married daughters of parent households; and (v) include the low

income supplementary sample.      Overall, our tesulta are robust to these

perturbations.     The only notable exceptions are the following. The Chi-

squared statistic for models (c) and (d) based on food is sensitive but only

slightly so; the overall p-value for model (d) for food in the basic sample

is slightly above 5% when the low income sample is included. There are only

three instances where the overall p-value based on housing is above 1% for

any model, and they occur in the second sample: if married daughters are

excluded, the p-value for model (b) (altruism) is about 6% and the p for

model (d) is about 1%; if the low income sample is included, the p for model

(d) is about 9%.

     Our reading of the evidence can be summarized as follows.        First,

clearly, complete markets fails empirically. Its failure is obscured by the

low signal-to-noise ratio for food changes and the additional noise from the

low income sample.    Second, altruism may hold but it is operative only for

families for which the non-negativity constraint on intergenerational trans-

fers is apparently not binding.




                                     -29-
            APPENDIX 1: PROOF OF THE CLAIM IN THE END OF SECTION 7


     We prove that the problem of generated regressors does not arise in the

context of our covariance-besed test. Since the proof can he easily adapted

to include symmetry (6.1), we focus on the case with N — 0 or I. To simplify

the notation, we drop the superscript "(N)" in the following proof.

     Let kt'kt be the coefficients in the (population) least square

projection of (log(Cikt). 'ikt on xfk and let kt'kt be their OLS

counterparts. As in the text,               is the stacked vector of cross products

calculated from ikt —                               end its —                 and (*,A)
                            b0g(Cf)
is the sample mean and the sample variance matrix of .                         We   write

                    for the OLS counterpart of (i,ikt9ikttA)                   In parti-

cular,     is the sample variance of                We wish to show that    has the same

asymptotic distribution and that A and A converge in probability to the same

limit.     The latter is immediate from the fact that the OLS                  estimator
ktikt) is consistent for (PktlktL
     To evaluate the asymptotic distribution of Z,              we note that the typical

element of Vc(-Z) is

                        A        A                         —    —
    N    tsam mean of                 -
                                          sample mean of


—                                     +   'tats
                 [xikit/N]                               [1lxiktits1NI
                             -
                                     'ktkt
Clearly, the last term converges to 0 in probability. The first two terms on

the right hand side also converge to 0, because the probability limits of the

bracketed terms are zero by construction of ikt end                     and ktkt
and /iGk--vk) are bounded in probability.



                                             -30-
        APPENDIX 2: MAPPING OP THE PSID CODES TO VARIABLES IN THE ARALYSIS


        This appendix provides an explicit mapping from the PSID tape codes (see
Survey Research Center (1989) for the definition of the coded variables) to
the variables used in this study.


1. Consumption and Endowments
        The following is our definition of food (FOOD), housing consumption
(HOUSE), and endowment ('1):

        FOOD   — FDEXHO   + FDEXRE + l2*FDSPMO,
        HOUSE — O.O8*HOUSEV + RENT     +   IRENT,
        Y — EARNH + EARNW + SSgHW + PENVET +PENNVT.

Table Al provides the        mapping from the PSID tape codes to the components of
food,      housing, arid endowments.       The labor income (EARNH, EARNW) available
from the PSID includes a labor component of business income imputed by the
Survey Research Center.


2, Household Characteristics: Categorical Variables
        Table A2 provides the mapping along with the number of dummies created
from each categorical variable. The dummies relating to the spouse are zero
if   the   spouse does not exist.


3. Household Characteristics: Numerical Variables
        The first three variables in Table A3 along with their squares are also
included in the vector of household characteristics.           To calculate leisure,
we assume that time endowment is 24 hours a day. The log of leisure and its
square are included in the vector of characteristica.            If the head is not
married, the apouae'a leisure is zero.




                                            -31-
                 TABLE Al: VARIABLES USED FOR CONSUMPTION AND ENDOWMENT


                                                               PSID tape code
variable
name                description                      1985       1986             1987

FDEXHO         food at home                          11375      12774           13876
FDEXRE         food away from home                   11377      12776           13878
FDSPMO         value of food stamps last month       11373      12772           13874
HOUSEV         value of house                        11125      12524
RENT           annual rent                           11133      12532           13732
IRENT          rental value of free housing          11135      12534           13734
EARNH          labor income of head                  12372      13624           14671
EARNW          labor income of spouse                11404      12803           13905
SSBHW          social security benefits              11433      12832+12853     13934+13955
PENVET         veteran's pension for head            11436      12835           13937
PENNVT         other pension income for head         11438      12837            13939




              TABLE A2: CATEGORICAL VARIABLES OF HOUSEHOLD CHARACTERISTICS

                                           #dummies             PSID tape code

                description                created           1985      1986       1987

           head's sex                            1           11607     13012      14115
           head's race                           2           11938     13565      14612
           head's marital status                 1           12426     13665      14712
           head's health condition               4           11991     13417      14513
           spouse's health condition             4           12344     13452      14524




               TABLE A3: NUMERICAL VARIABLES OF HOUSEHOLD CHARACTERISTICS

                                                                PSID tape code

                description                                  1985      1986       1987

           head's age                                        11606     13011      14114
           number of adults in the household                 11605     13010      14113
           number of people under age 18                     11609     13014      14117
           head's annual hours worked                        11146     12545      13745
           spouse's annual hours worked                      11258     12657      13809




                                          -32-
                                  REFERENCES


Altonji, J. , F. Hayashi, and L. Kotlikoff, 1989, "Is the extended family
altruistically linked? Direct Tests using Micro Data", NBER W.P. Mo. 3046.

Altonji, J. end A. Siow, 1987, "Testing the Response of Consumption to
Income Changes with (Noisy) Panel Data", Quarterly Journal of Economics 102,
pp. 293-328.

Altug, S. , and It. Miller, 1990, "Household choices in equilibrium",
Econometrica 58, pp. 543-570.

Becker, C., 1981, A Treatise on the Family, Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, Mass.

Chamberlain, C. , 1984, "Panel Data", in Z. Criliches and M. Intriligator
eds., Handbook of Econometrlca, North-Holland.

Cochrane, J., 1989, "A test of consumption insurance", mimeo. ,   University   of
Chicago.

Hayashi, F., 1987, "Tests for liquidity constraints: a critical survey and
some new observations", in Advances in Econometrics, 5th World Congress,
vol. II, ed. by T. Bewley, Cambridge University Press, pp. 91-120.

Hansen,    L.P. and T. Sargent, 1990, "Recursive Linear Models of Dynamic
Economies",   mimeo.

Hurd, M, 1989, "Mortality Risk and Bequests", Econometrica 57, No. 4, pp.
779-814.

Mace, B., 19B8, "Consumption volatility: full insurance in the presence of
aggregate uncertainty", Ph.D. thesis, University of Chicago.

Streufert, F, 1989, "Consistent Preferences and Intergenerational Equilibri-
um in Markoff Strategies", in B. Duttm, S. Cangopadhyay, D. Mookerjee, and
D. Ray (eds.), Theoretical Issues in Economic Development: Selected
Proceedings from the 151 Conferences in Economic Theory, Oxford University
Press.

Survey Research Center, 1989, A Panel Study of Income Dynamics: Procedures
and Tape Codes, 1987 Inverviewing Year, Institute for Social Research,
University of Michigan.

Townsend, It., 1989, "Risk and Insurance in Village India", mimeo., Univer
sity of Chicago.

Wright, It., 1987, "Market Structure and Competitive Equilibrium in Dynamic
Economic Models", Journal of Economic Theory 41, pp. 189-201.




                                     -33-
                        TABLE I

   EQUALITY RESTRICTIONS ON CROSS COVARIANCES

              (i) Complete Markets

                                  endowment (y)
                                      t—86                 t—87
                                                k—i   k—O        k—i

                                                 x     X         X

                                                 X     (         X

                                                 x     x         x
                                                 x     x          x

                                                 x     x          X

                                                 x     x          x



                      (ii) Altruism
                                  endowment (y)
                       — 85                t—   86          t—   87

               k-O       k-i        k-O         k-i   k-O        k-i


        :
t—86             II        II                    II        1      I!
        k—i      x        x          x           x     x          x
        k—O      x        x          x           x     x          x
t—87             II        II         II               II         I
        k—i      x        x          x           x     x          x




                          -34-
                                     TABLE II
             FACTOR STRUCTURE OF LOG MARGINAL UTILITY OF INCOME


          Model
                                                             ek
     (a) complete markets with altruism:              A. +        +

     (b) altruism:                                    A1 +   Wk +
     (c) complete isarkets:
                                                      Aik         + Pt
     (d) family risk-sharing:
                                                      Aik         + pit
Note: i is the family index and k the member household index ordered by
birth.




                                    TABLE III
                                EXA)(PLE OF A TYPE




                                      -35-
                                      TABLE IV

                          REPRESENTATION OF RESTRICTIONS

       (1) Representation of Restrictions on Coveriances based on Factors


                                                             (a)   (a)
      Model                                           Cov(c1y1)
                                                             (a)
(a) complete markets with altruism:              Cov(4°
                                                             (a)           (a)     (a)
(b)   altruism:                                  Cov(A),y1) + COV(Pir ''ita
                                                             (a)
(c)   complete markets:                          Cov(Ay1)
                                                             (a)           (a)     (a)
(d) family risk-sharing:                         Cov(4,y15) + Cov(Pi


       (ii) Equivalent Representation of Restrictions besed on Equalities


       Model                                     Equality Restrictions


(a) complete markets with eltruiam:              Cov(c (a) —           Cov(cy)
                                                                           (a)     (a)


                                                 for all (k,t),(m,v),(ts)Ca.


                                                 Cov(c° (a)        —       (a) (a)
(b) altruism:                                                          Cov(cjyj15)
                                                 for all (k,m,t,ta) such that
                                                 (k,t) (m,t) (t,a)€a.


                                                 Cov(c° (a) —              (a) (a)
(c) complete markets:                                ikt''its          Cov(c.y1)
                                                 for all (k1,tv,a) such that
                                                 (k,t) (k,v) (t,a)€a.


                                                 Cov(c° (a)              (a)     (a)
(d) family risk-sharing:

                                                 —   Cov(c     (a))C     (c.y1)
                                                                           (a)     (a)


                                                 for all (k,m,t,t,v,a) such that
                                                 (k,t) (k,v) (m,t) (mv) (t,a)ea.




                                        -36-
                                       TABLE V

                           BROADENING THE FAMILY TYPE

                          (i)   Birth Order and the Type



                                                              \1
                    na.          na.


            (ii) Symmetry Reduces the Number of Unique Covariances

                          Covariance Matrix for M —                    2




                           \\
                            clOt:
                                      'iOs

                                       1
                                                   i1s
                                                    3
                                                               'i2s

                                                                   3


                                       2            4
                            c1                                     5


                                       2            5              4
                            c2

                                       TABLE VI

                    LIST OF UNIQUE CROSS           COVARIAMCES             (.5 )

            M— 0                             H— 1                                   H—     2


              (0) (0)                         (1)       (1)                                CM)
                                                                                         ,y0 )]
                                                                                     CM)
    vec[Cov(c10 ,y10 )1         vec(Cov(c0   ,y0 )]                         vec[Cov(c.0
                                                                                           (H)
                                                                            vec[Cov(c.0 ,y1 )]
                                         (1)   (1)                                   CM)
                                vec(Cov(ci0 ,c1 )]
                                                                                           CM)
                                                                            vec[Cov(c1 'y10 )]
                                              (1)       (1)                          CM)
                                vec[Cov(c1          ,c0 )]
                                              (1)       (1>                          CM)       (K)
                                vec[Cov(cj1 ,c11              ))            vec[Cov(c11 •'11 )1
                                                                                     (H)       (H)
                                                                            vec[Cov(c1 "i2
                                                  (ti)
Note:         (H)    (H)
        c — (cik1..,cjkT) ik
                                    CM) —
                                            ik1" 'ikT
                                              (H)




                                            -37-
                                      TABLE VII

               REPRESENTATION OF RESTRICTIONS ON CROSS COVARIANCES


       Model                                                            #restrictions
                                               WM

                                        M-O
      complete markets with altruism:                                   T2 - I
(a)                                            1T®'T

(b) altruism:                                                           0
                                               1T2

(c) complete markets:
                                                                        T2 -       T
                                               IT®4T

(d) family risk-sharing:                                                0
                                               IT2

                                        N    -1
                                                                        4T2 - 2T
(a) complete markets with altruism:            120'2®1T®'T

(b) altruism:                                                           4T2    -       212
                                               12®42®IT2

(c) complete marketa:                                                   4T2    -       4T
                                               141011

(d) family risk-sharing:                                                4T2    -
                                                                                       (212+21)
                                                   (I2012®IT2.I4TeIT)

                                        N    —2

(a)   complete markets with altruism:                                   ST2 -          21
                                               0®1T®'T
                                                                        512 - 2T2
(b) altruism:                                  00IT2
                                                                        ST2 - ST
(c) complete markets:                              ISTOLT
                                                                        ST2 -          (2T2+3T)
(d) family risk-sharing:                           (G0I12I5T®LT)

Note: 1T is a T dimensional column vector of ones.
                             I ®c
                    C    —
                   5x2       0 1
WI for model (d) has 2T2+4T columns, but only (2T2+2T) of them are linearly
independent, Similarly, WM for N             2 for model (d) has 2T2+ST columns, hut
only 212+31 of them are linearly independent.




                                            -38-
                                    TABLE VIII
          SIMPLE STATISTICS FOR PARENT HOUSEHOLDS AND SPLIT-OFFS BY YEAR

1985                                   Mean       Std Dcv                 Mean     Std Dcv

                                     parents (N — 1728)            split-offs (N — 1637)

MARRIED       1 if married             0.65             0.48            0.71          0.46
RACE         head's age               58.66            13.91           31.17          5.98
FSZ          family size               2.43             1.28            3.01          1.46
NKID         #people under lB          0.45          0.88               1.24          1.19
FOOD         food consumption        4362.2        2952.6             4250.0        2137.7
ROUSE        housing consumption     5805.6        4750.7             5137.7        4144.7
1'           endowment              27051.1       25268.3            30129.8       23385.0
INCOME       household income       35835.5       33912.3            33470.0       25220.1

1986                                 parents (N — 1712)            split-offs (N — 1824)

MARRIED      1 if married              0.65          0.48               0.70          0.46
RACE         head's age               59.39         13.70              31.31          6.33
FSZ          family size               2.38          1.26               2.95          1.45
NKID         #people under 18          0.41          0.82               1.18          1.20
FOOD         food consumption        4230.4        2600.9             4182.7        2141.9
ROUSE        housing consumption     5812.8        4931.6             5138.4        4507.9
Y            endowment              26992.9       26580.1            30150.2       23900.6
INCOME       household income       35721.1       31994.3            33271.7       25459.9

1987                                 parents (N — 1649)            spllt-offa (N — 1896)

MARRIED      1 if married              0.64          0.48              0.70           0.46
RACE         head's age               59.80         13.44             31.90           6.48
FSZ          family size               2.35          1.23              2.99           1.45
NKID         #people under 18          0.38          0.79              1.21           1.20
FOOD         food consumption        4071.3        2461.4            4229.6         2153.3
ROUSE        housing conaumption     6068.3        5481.3            5437.9         5U95.2
Y            endowment              28038.9       32402.3           31386.9        22931.4
INCOME       household income       36935.1       38492.5           34887.9        24946.6

Note: Consumption, endowment and income are in 1987 dollars. See Appendix 2
for the definition of FOOD, ROUSE and Y. INCOME is household pretax income.

                                    TABLE IX

            ENUMERATION OF BALANCED FAMILIES BY NUMBER OF SPLIT-OFFS


                                            Number of split-offs (M)

 Description of the sample                  0     1      2     3      4       5+     total

basic sample                            643      192    121    67     17     11      1,051
no split-offs with zero bequests      1,066      162     27     2      2      0      1,259



                                     .j9.
                                            TABLE X

                  CHI-SQUARE TESTS OF THE FOUR MODELS OF CONSUMPTION
                                  Panel (i): Basic Sample

                                                      food                     housing

subsample #fsmilies            d.f.             x2        p-velue        x2       p-value

Model (a): Complete Markets with Altruism
H — 0               643          6             12.0        0.0612       24.0       0.0005
H — 1               192         30             68.8        0.0001       84.6       0.0000
H — 2               121         39            227.4        0.0000      217.4       0.0000

total:              956         75            308.2        0.0000      326.0       0.0000

Model (b): Altruism
H — 0               643          0              0.0        1.0000        0.0       1.0000
H — 1               192         18             46.6        0.0002       56.2       0.0000
H — 2                121        27            136.5        0.0000      181.6       0.0000
total:              956         45            183.1        0.0000      237.8       0.0000

Model (c): Complete Merkets
H — 0                643         6             12.0        0.0612       24.0       0.0005
M — 1                192        24             32.0        0.1266       61.7       0.0000
H —    2             121        30            113.0        0.0000      140.0       0.0000
total:               956        60            157.0        0.0000      225.7       0.0000

Model (d): Family Risk-sharing
H — 0                643         0              0.0        1.0000        0.0       1.0000
H — 1                192        12             18.8        0.0926       34.7       0.0005
H — 2                121        18             61.5        0.0000      121.2       0.0000

total:               956        30             80.4        0.0000      155.9       0.0000


                     Chi-squere Statistics for Sequential Testing

                                                          food                  housing
null             maintained
hypothesis hypothesis                d.f.            x2      p-value      x2       p-value
Model      (b)   model   (d)          15        102.7         0.0000     81.9       0.0000
Model      (c)   model   (d)          30         76.7         0.0000     69.8       0.0001
Model      (a)   model   (b)          30        125.1         0.0000     88.2       0.0000
Model      (a)   model   (c)          15        151.2         0.0000    100.2       0.0000




                                             -40-
                                             TABLE X

                  CR1-SQUARE TESTS OF THE FOUR MODELS OF CONSUMPTION
                Panel   (ii):   No Split-offs with Zero Expected Bequests

                                                           food                    housing


subsample       #fainilies      d.f.             x2         p-value          x2       p-value

Model (a): Complete Markets with Altruism
M— 0           1066       6            11.5                  0.0736         43.0       0.0000
M — 1               162          30             68.0         0.0001         89.1       0.0000
total:             1228          36             79.5         0.0000        132.2       0.0000

Model (b): Altruism
M — 0              1066           0              0.0         1.0000          0.0      1.0000
M — 1               162          18             31.1         0.0282         49.7      0.0001
total:             1228          18             31.1         0.0282        49.7       0.0001

Model (C): Complete Markets
M —   0            1066           6             11.5         0.0736        43.0       0.0000
M —   1             162          24             29.9         0.1869         59.0      0.0001
total:             1228          30            41.5          0.0796        102.0      0.0000

Model (d): Family Risk-sharing
M — 0              1066          0              0.0          1.0000         0.0       1.0000
M — 1               162          12             4.2          0.9793        29.5       0.0034
total:             1228          12             4.2          0.9793        29.5       0.0034


                     CM-square Statistics for Sequential Testing

                                                            food                   housing
null        maintained
hypothesis hypothesis                 d.f.            x2      p-value        x2       p-value

Model     (b)   model   Cd)             6           26.9          0.0002    20.2       0.0025
Model     (c)   model   (d)            18           37.2          0.0049    72.5       0.0000
Model     (a)   model   (b)            18           48.4          0.0001    82.5       0.0000
Model     (a)   model   Cc)             6           38.1          0.0000    30.2       0.0000




                                             -41-
                               FIGURE 1




                     maintained hypothesis




                                   I




                      r
                               model (d)
                       family risk-sharing




         model (b)                                  model (c)
          altruism                              complete markets
with or w/o complete markets               with or without altruism




                               model (a)
                          altruism and
                         complete markets
            FIGURE 2A - Food and Endowment
             (i)Average over Family Members and Time
     0.6

                                                                                    II        I
     0.4
                                                           II    I
                                                                         I
                                                                              I
                                                                                      I               liii
c
0 0.2
                                                Ii                                  ll I  "I I I ''

E                                 I             I                            IiI_             •1
       0                                             .11    •1       —




                                                                                    II.I
                                                                                         —.




8                                     I   l'    l" I:I•l
                                               - Ii II
                                                                             IIlit .,. I I
0                                                          Ii II II
0,                                                         II
0 -0.4
                                               II
     -0.6


             -1.5         -i          -0.5                      0                                 0:5
                               log endowment




            FIGURE 2A - Food and Endowment
                    (ii) Differencial Changes in Logs




g
0.
E

0a
0
8




                               log endowment
          FIGURE 2A - Food and Endowment
             (iii) Differences in Time Averages
     1,




C
0
aE
0
I
8'




     —1



                         log endowment
                 FIGURE 2B - Housing and Endowment
                             (i)Average over Famdy Members and lime




E

8
0,
C
0
8'




                                                                               log endowment


                 FIGURE 2B - Housing and Endowment
                                                (ii) Differencial Changes in Logs
        U

      2.C
                                       I

                               I
C
0 1.5                                                                              I


                                                                I
E                                  I                      Ii
        1                I
C                                      II
                                                                      I
                                                                               i
0                                                                                              I
0    0.5                                              II?pIII             II
C)
C
Q)
        0                                                             1: I I
0                    I                          III   11111

                                       II L                    lIIi
C) —0.5                      Ii
0                i


                                                I
       —1
                                                II    J



     -1 .G
                     I                      I         I
                                                               I
            -2                                      0                                              6
                                                                               log endowment
      FIGURE 2B - Housing and Endowment
           (iii) Differences in time Averages




C
0
a.
E
D
Cl)
C
8
0)
C
U)
 0
-c
0)
0




                      log endowment
        FIGURE 3




a
    /              (1,2)




                   (1)


                   (3,4)




    (3N\           (5)
