                   NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




      DO INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTABILIZE STOCK PRICES?
            EVIDENCE ON HERDING AND FEEDBACK TRADING




                       Josef Lakonishok
                        Andrei Shleifer
                        Robert W. Vishny




                     Working Paper No. 3846




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          September 1991




We are grateful to Louis Chan, Jay Ritter, Jeremy Stein, and
Richard Thaler for helpful comments; and especially to Gil
Beebower and Vasant Kamath for guidance with the data. Financial
support from LOR-Nikko and Dimensional Fund Advisors is
gratefully acknowledged. This paper is part of NBER's research
program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                         NBER Working Paper #3846
                                         September 1991


      DO INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTABILIZE STOCK PRICES?
            EVIDENCE ON HERDING AND FEEDBACK TRADING

                              ABSTRACT

     This paper uses a new data set of quarterly portfolio
holdings of 769 all-equity pension funds between 1985 and 1989 to
evaluate the potential effect of their trading on stock prices.

We address two aspects of trading by money managers: herding,
which refers to buying (selling) the same stocks as other

managers buy (sell) at the same time; and positive-feedback
trading, which refers to buying winners and selling losers.
These two aspects of trading are commonly a part of the argument
that institutions destabilize stock prices. At the level of
individual stocks at quarterly frequencies, we find no evidence

of substantial herding or positive-feedback trading by pension
fund managers, except in small stocks. Also, there is no strong
cross-sectional correlation between changes in pension funds'
holdings of a stock and its abnormal return.

Josef Lakonishok                         Andrei Shleifer
Department of Finance                    Department of Economics
University of Illinois                   Harvard University
 at Urbana-Champaign                     Littauer Center 315
Chicago, IL 61820                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         and NBER

Robert W. Vishny
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
DO INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTABLIZE STOCK PRICES?



1.   Introduction
     Contrary to the predictions of the standard asset pricing model, the vast majority
of investors do not just buy and hold the market portfolio of stocks. Instead, most
investors follow strategies of actively picking and trading stocks. When investors trade

actively, their buying and selling decisions may move stock prices. Understanding the
behavior of stock prices then requires understanding the investment strategies of
active investors.

     Institutional investors hold about 50 percent of the equities in the United States.
In 1989, their trading and that of member firms accounted for 70 percent of the
trading volume on the New York Stock Exchange (Schwartz and Shapiro 1990). It
may be the case, then, that institutionai investors' trades influence stock prices. In
this paper, we use data on the changes in a large number of institutional investors'
portfolios to fmd out whether they herd.; whether they follow positive-feedback
strategies; and whether their trading is associated with stock price movements.
Answers to these questions allow some tentative conclusions about the likely impact
of institutional activity on stock prices.

     There are two extreme views of the impact of institutional investors on stock
prices. According to the first view, institutions destabilize asset prices, which usually

means that they move prices away from fundamental values, thereby increasing long-
run price volatility. This view rests to a large extent on two premises. The first
premise is that swings in institutional demand have a larger effect on stock prices
than swings in individual demand. In part, any given institution has much larger
holdings than most individuals do, and so its trades are much larger. More

importantly, this problem may be aggravated by herding, i.e., correlated trading across
institutional- investors. When large investors attempt to buy or sell a given stock at
DO INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTABLIZE STOCK PRICES?                                        2

the same time, their effect on its price can be large indeed. A pension fund manager
has described this problem succinctly: "Institutions are herding animals. We watch the
same indicators and listen to the same prognostications. Like lemmings, we tend to
move in the same direction at the same time. And that, naturally, exacerbates price
movements"         October 17, 1989).

     There are several reasons why institutions might herd more than individuals.
First, institutions might tiy to infer information about the quality of investments from
each others' trades and herd as a result (Shiller and Pound 1989, Banerjee 1991).
Since institutions know more about each others' trades than do individuals, they will

herd more. Second, the objective difficulties in evaluating money managers'
performance and separating "luck" from "skill" create agency problems between

institutional money managers and fund sponsors. Typically, money managers are
evaluated against each other. To avoid falling behind a peer group by following a
unique investment strategy, they have an incentive to hold the same stocks as others
do (Scharfstein and Stein 1990). Third, institutions might all react to the same
exogenous signals, such as changes in dividends or analysts' recommendations, and
herd as a result. Because the signals reaching institutions are typically more

correlated than the signals that reach individuals, institutions might herd more. When
many large institutional money managers end up on the same side of the market, we
expect the stock price to move as long as the excess demand curve for this stock
slopes downward.

     Herding by itself, however, does not necessarily mean that institutional investors
are destabilizing stock prices. As we mentioned above, they might herd if they all
react to the same fundamental information in a timely manner. If they do, they are
making the market more efficient by speeding up the adjustment of prices to new
DO INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTAI3LIZE STOCK PRICES?                                   3

fundamentals. Or they might herd if they all counter the same irrational moves in
individual investor sentiment. In this case as well, herding is stabilizing. In such
cases, observing herding does not suffice to conclude that institutional investors

destabilize prices.
     This leads to the second premise of the argument that institutions destabilize
stock prices: their strategies tend not to be based on fundamentals. A possible reason
for this premise as well is agency problems in money management. Fundamental
strategies, such as the Graham-Dodd contrarian investment strategies of buying

"cheap" high-dividend yield or high-book-to-market stocks, often take a long time to

pay off, and may actually do very badly in the short run. Money managers, however,
can be dismissed after only a few quarters of bad performance, and, therefore,

contrarian strategies put managers at significant risk. As a consequence, money
managers might follow short-term strategies based not on fundamentals, but on
technical analysis and other types of feedback trading.

     One particularly common example of a potentially destabilizing short-term

strategy is trend chasing, or positive-feedback trading (Dc Long et al 1990, Cutler,
Poterba and Summers 1990)—the strategy of buying winners and selling losers. Such
trading might simply be driven by a belief that trends are likely to continue, a popular
concept in the behavioral literature (Andreassen and Kraus 1988). From the money

manager's perspective, the strategy of adding winners to the portfolio and eliminating
losers has the added advantage of removing "embarrassments" from the portfolio for
the sake of the sponsors, i.e., "window dressing."

     Positive-feedback trading would be destabilizing if it leads institutions to jump on

the bandwagon and buy overpriced stocks and sell underpriced stocks, thereby
contributing to a further divergence of prices away from fundamentals. Positive-
DO INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTABLIZE STOCK PRICES?                                       4

feedback trading is not necessarily a destabilizing strategy: for example, such trading

will bring prices closer to fundamentals if stocks underreact to news. Nonetheless,
positive-feedback trading, like herding, is associated with the popular belief that
institutional investors destabilize stock prices. The prevalence of herding and of
positive-feedback trading by institutional investors are, therefore, the focus of our

empirical analysis.
     An opposing view of institutional investors argues that they are rational and cool-
headed investors who counter changes in the sentiment of individual investors. Unlike
individual investors, institutions are exposed to a variety of news reports and analyses,
as well as to the guidance of professional money managers. This puts them in a
better position to evaluate the fundamentals. According to this view, institutions may
or may not herd. They would herd if they all received the same information and
interpreted it similarly, or if they countered the same swings in individual investor
sentiment. But they would not herd if they received uncorrelated information or
interpreted the same information in different ways.

     More importantly, this view predicts that rational institutions are likely to pursue
negative-feedback strategies of buying stocks that have fallen too far and selling stocks
that have risen too far. Although it is possible that trend chasing is a rational strategy
if individuals underreact to news, the most commonly argued notion of market
irrationality is overreaction (De Bondt and Thaler 1985), which would make negative-
feedback strategies rational. The stabilizing view then predicts that institutions sell
stocks that have risen and buy stocks that have fallen.
     There is also a third, and more neutral, view of institutional investors. On that
view, institutions are neither the smart negative-feedback investors, nor are they the
destabilizers who herd and chase trends. Instead, institutions are heterogeneous: they
DO INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTABLIZE STOCK PRICES?                                     5

use a broad variety of different portfolio strategies, which by and large offset each
other. Such trading does not destabilize asset prices because there are enough
negative-feedback traders to offset the positive-feedback traders. In addition, the

diversity of the trading strategies is great enough that the aggregate excess demand by
institutions is close to zero, so that no herding emerges in equilibrium. Pursuit of
these various strategies is therefore fairly benign, for although it might generate a
substantial trading volume, institutions are not destabilizing stock prices.
     In this paper we empirically examine the trading patterns of institutional
investors, with a particular emphasis on the issues of herding and positive-feedback
trading that have attracted so much attention. We evaluate a sample of 769 all-equity

pension funds, managed by 341 different institutional money managers. The data
were provided by a pension fund performance evaluation service, SEI. This sample is

particularly appropriate for addressing the questions of herding and positive-feedback
trading. These money managers directly compete with each other, both because they
pursue the same customers, and because they are evaluated by the same service.
This selection criterion creates scope for finding more herding and positive-feedback
trading in this sample of institutions than in a random sample of institutions.
     Our data consist of end-of-quarter portfolio holdings for each of the 341 money
managers between 1985:1 and 1989:4. These data enable us to estimate how much
each manager bought and sold in each stock in each quarter. We can then assess
how much correlation there is across money managers in buying and selling a given
stock (or industty grouping) to test for herding. We can also examine the relationship
between the past performance of a stock and money managers' demands for that
stock to test for positive-feedback trading. Finally, we can examine the relationship
between the excess demand by institutions and contemporaneous stock price changes
DO INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTABLIZE STOCK PRICES?                                      6
directly. Answers to these questions shed light on the potential destabilizing effect of
institutional investors.

     In brief, our results suggest that neither the stabilizing nor the destabilizing
image of institutional investors is accurate. There is virtually no evidence that
institutions herd in their trades in large stocks, which is where over 95% of their
trading is concentrated. There is some evidence of herding in smaller stocks, but
even there the magnitude of herding is far from dramatic. As far as trading strategies
go, on average, institutions appear to follow neither positive nor negative-feedback
strategies. There is some evidence of positive-feedback trading in smaller stocks, but
not in large stocks which are the institutions' preferred habitat. Finally, the
correlation between excess demand by institutions for a stock in a given quarter, and
its price change in that quarter is extremely weak. This provides some evidence
against the view that large swings in institutional excess demand drive price
movements of individual shares. The overall picture of institutions that emerges from
this paper is one of investors pursuing a broad diversity of trading styles that, to a
large extent, offset each other.
     These results are most closely related to research done some twenty years ago.
In a remarkable early paper, Kraus and Stoll (1972) addressed the question of
"parallel trading," which is the same as herding, by institutions, using the data from
the SEC study of institutional investors on monthly changes in holdings. Like
ourselves, they found little evidence of herding, and weak evidence of a

contemporaneous relationship between price changes and excess demand by
institutions. Also of great interest and relevance is the study of mutual funds by
Friend, Blume, and Crockett (1970). One of their findings related to the current
paper is that mutual funds tend to buy stocks which in the previous quarter were
DO INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTABLIZE STOCK PRICES?                                      7

bought by successful funds, whom they are probably imitating. Such behavior would
lead to herding, as well as to positive-feedback trading.
     The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The next section describes
our data in more detail. Section 3 examines the issue of herding. Section 4 deals
with feedback trading strategies. Section 5 presents direct evidence on the correlation
between institutional demand and prices and Section 6 concludes the paper.

2. Data
     The analysis is based on a sample of 769 tax-exempt equity funds provided by

SEI, a company that specializes in portfolio performance evaluation. According to
the SE! definition, equity funds hold at least 90 percent of their assets in equities.
For each fund, at the end of each quarter from 1985 to 1989, the dataset contains the
number of shares held of each stock. Sponsors of most of the funds are corporate
pension plans, but there are also a few endowments, as well as state and municipal

pension funds.
     The total amount under management in these 769 funds at the end of 1989 is
$124 billion, or about 18 percent of the total actively managed holdings of pension
funds. The average equity holdings of a fund are $161 million. Equity purchases and
sales are estimated based on changes in holdings from end-of-quarter to end-of-
quarter of all NYSE, AMEX, and OTC stocks that funds held. The prices used to
estimate dollar values are averages of beginning and end-of-quarter stock prices. All
holdings and prices are adjusted for stock splits and stock dividends. The data do not
alLow us to measure intraquarter round-trip transactions. Such transactions are
infrequent and should have a minor impact on the results, particularly since we are
interested only in price destabilization at frequencies below one quarter.
     Typically, a money manager has more than one fund under management. In our
1)0 INST!TW'IONAL INVESTORS DESTABLIZE STOCK PRICES?                                    8
case, the 769 funds are managed by 341 different money managers, with the number
of funds under one management ranging from 1 to 17. In general, different funds
managed by the same manager have similar, if not identical, holdings. Therefore, the
appropriate unit of analysis for this paper is a money manager rather than a fund.
All the holdings of different funds with the same money manager are therefore

aggregated. Money managers in our sample might manage additional funds that are
not in our sample, which will happen, for example, if these funds are not evaluated by
SE!. The average portfolio of a money manager at the end of 1989 is $363 million.
Twenty-three money managers had more than one billion dollars under management
and the largest money manager in the sample had twelve billion dollars.
    An important part of this paper will be the distinction between the trading
strategies of money managers in large and small stocks. It is, therefore, important to
note that the vast majority of holdings and trading of these investors are in large
stocks. Table 1 presents information on buying and selling activity by size (market
capitalization) quintiles. The cut-off points for size quintiles were determined from
the universe of NYSE and AMEX stocks and updated quarterly. The table presents
the number of portfolio changes and the dollar value traded in each size quintile.
     Taking each quarterly change in a stock as a separate observation, we have a
total of 26,292 cases where holdings were changed by at least one money manager in
our universe. Only 338 of these changes, or 1.3 percent, are in the smallest quintile
stocks. In contrast, 35.7 percent of the changes are in the largest quintile stocks, and
an additional 34 percent are in the next to the largest quintile. In terms of dollar
values, the results are even more dramatic. While only .07 percent of holding
changes by value are in the smallest quintile of stocks, fully 84 percent are in the
largest quintile of stocks, and another 12.7 percent in the second largest. Roughly
DO INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTABLIZE STOCK PRICES?                                      9
speaking, 97 percent of the dollar value traded by money managers is in the largest
40 percent of the stocks by market capitalization. The bottom line is that institutional

investors trade large stocks. This observation is important to keep in mind in

interpreting our findings on herding and positive-feedback trading.

3.   Herdina

     Measurement of Herding
     In this section we explore whether money managers tend to end up on the same
side of the market in a given stock in a given quarter. In other words, for a specific
stock in a given quarter, are a disproportionate number of money managers buying
(selling) this stock? To illustrate our measure of herding, assume that, in a given
quarter, when aggregated across stocks and money managers, half of the changes in
holdings were increases and half were decreases. Consider first the case where, in
that quarter, for most individual stocks as well we observe that half the money
managers increased their holdings and half cut their holdings. In this case, we would
conclude that there was no herding at the level of individual stocks. Suppose

alternatively that, for many stocks, 70 percent of the money managers increased their
holdings while only 30 percent decreased holdings. For other stocks, in contrast, 70
percent of the money managers decreased their holdings and 30 percent increased
them. In this case, for most stocks, money managers ended up on the same side of
the market and we would conclude that there is herding at the level of individual
stocks.

     Generally, our measure of herding for a given stock in a given quarter. H, is
defined as:


(1) H= B/(B+S)-pI -AF
DO INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTABLIZE STOCK PRICES?                                     10

where B is the number of money managers who increase their holdings in the stock in
the quarter (net buyers), S is the number of money managers who decrease their

holdings (net sellers), p is the expected proportion of money managers buying in that
quarter relative to the number active, and AF is the adjustment factor explained
below. The herding measures are computed for each "stock-quarter" and then

averaged across different subgroups.
     In a given quarter, we should not necessarily expect the same number of
purchasers and sellers of a stock. In fact, in our sample, 51.5 percent of the quarterly

changes in holdings are purchases, consistent with money managers being net buyers
during this period. This ratio varies from quarter to quarter. In computing our
herding measure H, we therefore have a different p for every quarter. Each quarterly
p is the number of money managers buying relative to the number active, aggregated
across all stocks that the money managers traded in that quarter.
     The adjustment factor AF in equation (1) accounts for the fact that under the

null hypothesis of no herding, i.e., when the probability of any money manager being
a net buyer of any stock is p, the absolute value of B/(B+S) - p is greater than zero.

AF is, therefore, the expected value of I B/(B+S) - p I under the null hypothesis of
no herding. Since B follows a binomial distribution with probability p of "success," AF
is easily calculated given p and the number of money managers active in that stock in
that quarter. AF for a stock declines as the number of money managers active in
that stock rises.


     Empirical results on herding
     Table 2 presents our main results on herding. Because our samples are so large,
all results are statistically significant and we do not report standard errors. The first
column reports the mean and median herding measures for the whole sample. The
DO INST1TUIONAL INVESTORS DESTABLIZE STOCK PRICES?                                      11

mean herding measure, .027, is one of the key numbers in this paper. If p, the
average fraction of changes that are increases, was .5, this number would say that in

an average stock, 52.7 percent of the money managers were changing their holdings in
one direction, and 47.3 percent in the opposite direction. The median herding
measure is even smaller, only .001, which suggests that there is virtually no herding in
a typical stock.

     Should we be surprised by how low this number is? As a matter of fact, we
were. However, there might be an argument that we should not have been. In the
market as a whole, aggregating across all traders, there can be no herding, since for
every share bought there is a share sold. So, if we think that our sample of money
managers is a random sample of traders, we would not expect to find any herding.
Herding can only be detected within subsets of investors. We are analyzing one such
subset, pension fund managers, and herding within this subset can exist. Some might
argue that we should look within a finer subset of money managers who share a
similar investment style in order to detect herding. We are not persuaded by this

argument.
     First, all of the money in our sample is managed by stock-picking pension fund
managers evaluated by the same service. We do not have individuals or even most
types of institutional investors. It is hard to believe that we have a random sample of

U.S. equity investors, given how homogeneous our sample is by construction. In fact,
we have argued earlier that restricting our sample to all-equity pension fund managers
evaluated by the same service significantly increases the chances of detecting herd
behavior.

     Second, suppose that there are some large subgroups of institutions, with each
subgroup practicing a distinct investment philosophy, and suppose that there is a great
DO INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTABLIZE STOCK PRICES?                                      12

deal of herding among members of each subgroup. This would raise two possibilities.
First, the strategies of different subgroups are uncorrelated and, hence, they do not
counter each others' demand shifts. For example, growth money managers destabilize
growth stocks and value money managers destabilize low PIE stocks. But, in this
case, our measure of herding calculated, even on a random sample of institutions,
would detect a lot of herding, since the herding subgroup of institutions would cause
the whole set of institutions to be on one side of the market, with individuals taking
the other side. Our results reject this possibility, since we do not find much herding
looking at all stocks.

     The second possibility is that while within subgroups money managers herd, the
subgroups trade with each other so as to systematically counter each other's effects on

prices. For example, if growth money managers buy a stock, value money managers
sell it to them. But in this case, there is no destabilization since money managers just
trade with each other. This possibility is consistent with our evidence of very little

herding by institutional investors.
     For many stocks in our sample the number of managers who changed their
holdings in that stock is quite small. In Table 2 we also provide herding results for
stocks in which a substantial number of money managers were active (at least 10 and
at least 20). This restriction eliminates many of the smaller stocks. The results are
similar to our earlier findings of fairly little herding.
     There is another intuitive way to look at herding. One can ask: what fraction of
purchasing behavior of an individual money manager can be explained by what other
money managers are doing? For that, we run a regression across "stock-quarters," in
which the dependent variable gets the value of one if a randomly chosen money
manager who traded in that stock-quarter is a net buyer and zero if he was a net
DO INSTITIJIIONAL INVESTORS DESTABLIZE STOCK PRICES?                                      13

seller. The independent variable is the fraction of money managers active in that
stock in that quarter who bought it (excluding the randomly chosen money manager
whose behavior we are trying to explain). The slope coefficient in this regression is

.05 (t= 13.8), but more interestingly, the R-squared is only .7 percent; indicating that,
in a cross-section, less than 1 percent of an individual money manager's behavior in a
stock can be explained by the aggregate behavior of other money managers in that
stock. In sum, the money managers in our sample do not seem to herd very much;

they most likely represent a variety of trading styles that result, on average, in
uncorrelated trading decisions.


     Further Results
     We have established, so far, that, on average, there does not seem to be much
herding in individual stocks in our sample. This does not preclude the possibility of
more extensive herding in some particular types of stocks, such as stocks of particular
size or performance record. Institutions might also be more prone to herd in

allocating funds across industry groups compared to individual stocks. Finally, herding
may be more prevalent among subgroups of managers than in the aggregate. These

possibilities are explored below.
     Panel A of Table 3 shows herding by stock size. The stocks in which the money
managers were active in a given quarter were assigned into size quintiles. The cut-off
points for the size quintiles were determined from the universe of NYSE and AMEX
stocks and updated quarterly. Herding was then examined within each of the size
groups. The results reveal more herding by institutional investors in small stocks than
in large stocks; the observed relationship is monotonic in size. For the smallest
quintile stocks, our herding measure is 6.1 percent, while for the largest stocks it is

only 1.6 percent.
DO iNSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTABLIZE STOCK PRICES?                                    14

    The result of greater herding in small stocks has several possible explanations. It
might simply reflect unintentional herding, in which all institutions just respond
similarly to particular news. For example, they may all want to sell small obscure
stocks that have lost value in order to "window dress" their portfolios to avoid
embarrassment. Dumping losers may be less of an issue with larger stocks, which are

held by many institutions. Conversely, money managers might all want to buy a well-
performing small stock because higher market capitalization increases the stock's

liquidity and coverage by analysts.
     Intentional herding should also be more prevalent in small stocks. There is less

public information about these stocks, and, therefore, managers are much more likely
to pay attention to each others' behavior and make decisions based on the trades of
others in these stocks. This view of herding is consistent with Baneijee's (1991) idea
that herding might result from rational inference under very limited information. The
result of greater herding in small stocks is also consistent with Scharfstein and Stein's

(1990) agency interpretation of intentional herding. Fund managers may well sell a
small stock that other managers also sell in order to avoid embarrassment, but
holding onto IBM when others sell it is probably fine. Consistent with this story,
Lakonishok et al (1991) find more "window dressing" in small stocks.
     We also examined herding, conditional on past performance of the stocks. At
the beginning of every quarter, we divided the universe of NYSE and AMEX stocks

into past-quarter performance quintiles. Stocks in which the money managers traded
were then assigned into these quintiles, and herding measures computed for each
group. The results are in Panel B of Table 3. Herding does not seem to depend on
past stock performance. At most, there is some weak indication of slightly more
herding in better performing stocks.
DO INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTABLIZE STOCK PRICES?                                      15

    One might argue that herding should be more pronounced within certain industry
groups of stocks, such as technology stocks, whose cash flows are much more

uncertain. For example, one might expect to observe more herding in Apple
Computers than in a less glamorous stock like General Motors. To test this
hypothesis, we have divided the stocks in our sample into eleven broad industry

groupings, provided to us by SEI, and computed our herding measure for each group.
Again, we did not find much herding in any group. The measure of herding within
various industry groups ranged between .029 and .015. There is no industry with an

unusually large amount of herding.
    Another hypothesis is that money managers herd in their portfolio allocations
across industries rather than across individual stocks. For example, when money
managers are "excitedt' about computer stocks, one of them might buy IBM, another

might buy Apple Computers, and the third might buy COMPAQ, leading to
significant herding at industry but not the firm level. To test this hypothesis, we
looked at the 54 two-digit SIC industries with at least 10 stocks traded in our sample
in each quarter. For each money manager, for each "industry-quarter," we computed
the dollar purchases and dollar sales. A value of 1 was assigned to a money manager
if he was a net buyer, and 0 if he was a net seller. For each industry-quarter, then,
we had the number of buyers and the number of sellers, and could compute our
herding measure treating the whole industry as if it were a single stock. This
calculation produced a herding measure of .013, suggesting even less herding at the
industry level than at the individual stock level.
     The issue of herding at the industry level leads us to discuss a central limitation
of this paper, namely that we cannot say anything about stock-market-wide herding.
It is possible that while there is very little herding in individual stocks and industries,
DO INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTABLIZE STOCK PRICES?                                    16

there are times when money managers simultaneously all move into stocks and times
when they all move Out of stocks. Since our data set contains only all-equity funds,

we cannot examine this type of herding.
     A final issue we consider is the possibility of herding among subsets of money
managers. One alternative is that money managers with a similar amount of money
under management herd with each other, on the theory that similarly-sized money

managers are in more direct competition for fund sponsors. Accordingly, we have
divided our money managers into quintiles once a year by asset size under
management, and computed our measure of herding within manager size quintiles.
Panel C of Table 3 presents the results. There is less herding among the smallest
managers than among the largest managers, but neither group herds a lot. Like the
evidence on the subgroups of stocks and industries, this evidence on subgroups of

money managers reveals little herding.

4. Feedback Strategies
     At any level of herding, institutional investors have more potential to destabilize

asset prices if they follow strong positive-feedback strategies. Our earlier analysis was
based on a count of money managers, which is the right measure of herding, and not
on the amount of excess demand. From the point-of-view of destabilization of prices,
the relevant variable is excess demand. We, therefore, compute current quarter's net
buying (aggregated across all money managers in a given stock) conditional on the
 past quarter's as well as on the past year's stock performance.
      We use two measures of excess demand in a quarter, Dratio (dollar ratio) and
 Nratio (numbers ratio). For a given stock-quarter, i, Dratio is defined as:


 '(2/ Dratio(i' / = $buys(i)  $sells(i)
                    $buys(i) + $sells(i)
DO INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTABUZE STOCK PRICES?                                        17

where $buys(i) is total dollar increases by all money managers in the given stock-

quarter (evaluated at the average price during the quarter), and $sells(i) is similarly
defined as total dollar decreases in holdings. Similarly, Nratio is defined as:


(3) Nratio(i) =       #acti()
where #buys(i) is the number of money managers increasing the holding of the stock

in quarter i, and #active(i) is the number of money managers changing their holdings.
In the results presented below, Dratios and Nratios are simple averages taken over all
stock-quarters in a given group. We use two measures because they might, in
principle, yield different results. For example, most managers might be engaged in

positive-feedback trading, but the negative-feedback managers might be making the
larger trades, in which case trend chasing would show up in the Nratio but not in the

Dratio.
     Table 4 presents the results for Dratio and Nratio by past-quarter performance
quintiles and size quintiles. The results for Dratio show fairly substantial trend
chasing for smaller stocks: the excess of sales over purchases in the worst performing
smallest stocks is 18 percent of total value traded, whereas the excess of purchases
over sales among best performing smallest stocks is 3.6 percent. A similar pattern is
also observed in the second smallest size category. Moreover, in both of these size
quintiles, excess demand is monotonically increasing in performance. As we move to

larger stocks, the relationship between excess demand and past performance
disappears. Among the largest quintile stocks, where increases in holdings always
exceed decreases, there is no evidence whatsoever of positive-feedback trading. The
results thus reveal positive-feedback trading for the smaller, but not for the larger,
stocks. Aggregating across all size groups, we do not see any evidence of positive-
DO INSTITIJFIONAL INVESTORS DESTABLIZE STOCK PRICES?                                        18

feedback trading on average, because of the concentration of trades in larger stocks.

    The results for Nratio, like those for Dratio, point to positive-feedback trading in
small but not in large stocks. In small stocks, 42 percent of money managers
changing their holdings of worst performers are buyers, whereas 51 percent of the

money managers changing their holdings of best performers are buyers. Within this
size quintile, Nratio increases monotonically with past performance. Positive-feedback
trading is still evident in the second size quintile, but disappears in larger quintiles.
Finally, Table 5 reports the results on trading as a function of past-yJ: performance

and size. Consistent with the results in Table 4, there is evidence of positive-feedback
trading in small but not in large stocks.
     The result of positive-feedback trading in smaller stocks is intriguing. Perhaps
the most obvious explanation is window dressing: money managers dump losers
among small stocks to dress up their portfolios. The strategy of dumping small stock
losers makes sense if sponsors are less sensitive to holdings of poorly performing blue
chips than to holdings of poorly performing unknown stocks.

     The observed positive-feedback strategies in smaller stocks might also be a
consequence of institutional practices and constraints that funds face. For example,

past losers dumped by money managers might be fallen angels who stopped dividend
payments. Some institutions might be prohibited from holding such stocks.

Alternatively, money managers might restrict their holdings of small capitalization or
illiquid stocks, which creates a positive correlation between past returns and
institutional excess demand. It is not clear then, whether we are finding evidence of
behavioral strategies, agency problems, or of simple institutional restrictions.

Regardless of the motive for such positive-feedback trading, it might have an impact
on share prices of small stocks.
DO INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTABLIZE STOCK PRICES?                                         19

     Incidentally, this result for small stocks is suggestive of the evidence that
overreaction is concentrated in small stocks (Chopra, Lakonishok, and Ritter 1991).
If institutional investors change their demand for these stocks in response to extreme
performance, and if their demand affects prices in the short run, we would expect to
observe overreaction.
     The preferred habitat of institutional investors is in large stocks, however, and
that is where their trading strategies are probably most important. For these stocks,
we see no evidence of positive-feedback trading. Under the most common notion of
destabilizing speculation, this implies that institutions are not destabilizing. The
evidence on trend chasing in the largest stocks, like the evidence on herding, strongly
points against the accusation that institutional investors destabilize prices of the
individual stocks they trade. Of course, our analysis leaves open the possibility that
institutional investors destabilize prices of individual stocks at a higher frequency, or

that they destabilize aggregate stock prices.

5.   Institutional Excess Demand and Contemporaneous Price Movements
     We have looked at two possible ways in which trading by institutions might
destabilize stock prices and found little evidence that either of these is very important.
Our analysis begs the obvious question: why haven't we looked directly at the
contemporaneous correlation between institutional excess demand and price changes?

In this section, we analyze the relationship between demand for stocks by our money
managers and contemporaneous stock returns.
     This analysis, however, is not necessarily a superior way to address the question
of destabilizing speculation, for two reasons. First, even if institutions affect prices,
they might move them toward, rather than away from, fundamentals. Second, and
more importantly, our data set is not ideal for analyzing the impact of institutional
DO INSTITUTiONAL INVESTORS DESTABLIZE STOCK PRICES?                                      20

demand on prices. Our data contains quarterly changes in institutional holdings, and,

therefore, we can compute quarterly changes in demand. But, looking at the
quarterly data does not enable us to separate within-quarter trading strategies that
respond to within-quarter price moves from the impact of trades on prices. For
example, if we found that a particular group of stocks that institutions bought in a
quarter rose in price in that quarter, it may be evidence of either responsiveness of
positive-feedback trading to short-term price moves, or of the effect of institutional

trading on prices, or even of both effects operating at the same time. In interpreting
the results presented below, it is crucial to recognize this limitation of quarterly data.
     Table 6 presents some basic statistics on the relationship between institutional
demand for stocks in a quarter and size-adjusted excess returns in that quarter, which
are computed by deducting from the quarterly buy and hold stock return the return
on an equally-weighted quarterly buy and hold portfolio of its size decile. The cut-off

points for size deciles were updated quarterly. In each quarter, we divided stocks
traded by our money managers into two broad categories: stocks of which in
aggregate they were net buyers; and those of which in aggregate they were net sellers.
Each category is, in turn, divided into three groups depending on the size of the
imbalance between dollar purchases and dollar sales (scaled by market capitalization).
Small excess refers to the bottom quartile of stocks in terms of dollar excess demand,
 medium excess to the middle half, and large excess to the quartile of firms with
 largest excess demand in dollar terms. The same groups are defined for firms for

 which sales exceed purchases.
      The results in Table 6 show a statistically and substantively significant size-
 adjusted excess return of 1.8 percent per quarter for firms that were on net bought by
 our money managers. This result may reflect a price impact of institutional trades,
DO INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTAIILIZE STOCK PRICES?                                     21

which might, but does not have to be, destabilizing. The positive excess return could

also result from positive-feedback trading in response to recent price increases,

without causing these increases. When we look at the subcategories of net buying by

the magnitude of our institutions' excess demand, waters get a little muddier. The

abnormal return is actually somewhat smaller for large excess demand cases than for

cases with small excess demand.

     For stocks which are on net sold by institutions, the abnormal return is

substantially lower than for stocks which are on net bought, although in magnitude

the former return is a fairly small -.3 percent in the quarter. The average excess

return, however, is a more substantial -1.7 percent for firms where the excess of sales

over purchases is the largest. This might be evidence of destabilization or of

responsiveness of demand to very recent price movements.

     To clarify the above picture, the analysis was extended to five size quintiles, and

size-adjusted abnormal returns are calculated for each of the size groups. The results

are also presented in Table 6. As before, results differ substantially by size group.

For the smallest stocks, the average abnormal return when purchases exceed sales is

close to zero. Within that category more buying is not associated with higher returns;

in fact, the mean abnormal return on smallest stocks with the largest excess demand

is -2.9 percent. On the other hand, the returns on the smallest stocks for which sales

exceed purchases are sharply negative. Moreover, they are the most negative when

the excess supply by institutions is the largest. This evidence suggests that, within

smallest stocks, either institutions sell recent losers, or they depress the prices of

stocks they sell.

     The results for the second size quintile are consistent with either intraquarter

positive-feedback trading or the direct impact of institutional trades on share prices.
DO INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTABLIZE STOCK PRICES?                                       22

The mean abnormal return for stocks for which purchases exceed sales is 2.8 percent,
and the mean return for stocks for which sales exceed purchases is -1.8 percent.
These returns are roughly monotonic in the magnitude of excess demand. In the
third size quintile, we again see positive returns for stocks for which purchases exceed
sales, but negative returns only for stocks for which the excess of sales over purchases

is the largest. There is, however, again a rough monotonic relationship between
excess demand and abnormal returns, indicating either price pressure by institutions

or intraquarter positive-feedback trading.
     Even these rough relationships, however, disappear in the two largest size
quintiles, where institutional trading is concentrated. In the fourth quintile, both the
stocks which are on net bought and the stocks which are on net sold earn a positive
excess return. Moreover, stocks for which the excess supply by institutions is the
largest have an abnormal return of 2.0 percent. In the largest quintile, stocks which
institutions on net buy have lower abnormal returns than stocks which institutions on
net sell, which seems more consistent with stabilizing negative-feedback trading.
Indeed, stocks with the largest excess demand have a return of -.5 percent, and stocks
with the largest excess supply have a return of 3.1 percent. What little support we
saw for positive-feedback trading or price pressure from institutions in smaller

quintiles disappears in the largest two quintiles.
     In sum, the results of this section are the least conclusive. Stocks that
institutions buy on net have higher contemporaneous abnormal returns than stocks
that institutions sell on net. However, a closer inspection reveals that this result is
driven by the smaller stocks, particularly those in the second and third quintiles. In
the largest two quintiles, the pattern of abnormal returns for the net buy and net sell
cases is essentially identical. For the smallest quintile stocks, when institutions are net
DO INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTABLIZE STOCK PRICES?                                        23

sellers, a monotonic relationship between gradations of excess supply and abnormal
returns is observed. However, no such relationship exists for stocks which institutions
buy on net. In light of this evidence, the destabilizing effect of institutions in
individual stocks, even if it exists, is unlikely to be large.

6.   Conclusion
     This paper has presented evidence on the herding and trend-chasing behavior of
institutional money managers. We found weak evidence of herding, and somewhat

stronger evidence of positive-feedback trading, in smaller stocks. However, there is
virtually no evidence of either herding or positive-feedback trading in the largest
stocks, where most institutional holdings and trading are. There is also no consistent

evidence of a significant positive correlation between changes in institutional holdings

and contemporaneous excess returns, except again in small stocks where we may just
be observing intraquarter positive-feedback trading. We conclude that there is no

solid evidence in our data that institutional investors destabilize prices of individual
stocks. Instead, the emerging image is that institutions follow a broad range of styles
and strategies and their trades offset each other without having a large impact on
prices. We must conclude, however, with two caveats: our results do not preclude
market-wide herding, such as would occur if money managers followed each other in

market timing strategies, or herding in individual stocks at higher-than-quarterly

frequencies.
DO INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTABLIZE STOCK PRICES?                                   24



                                    Bibliography
Andreassen, Paul and A. Kraus (1988). "Judgmental Prediction by Extrapolation,"
Working Paper, Harvard University.
Banerjee, Abhijit. "A Model of Herd Behavior," Quarterly Journal of Economics
(1991), forthcoming.
Chopra, Navin, Josef Lakonishok, and Jay Ritter. "Performance Measurement
Methodology and the Question of Whether Stocks Overreact" (1991), unpublished
paper.
Cutler, David, James M. Poterba, and Lawrence H. Summers. "Speculative Dynamics
and the Role of Feedback Traders," American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings (1990),63-68.
DeBondt, Werner and Richard Thaler. "Does the Stock Market Overreact?" Journal
of Finance (1985), 793-809.
De Long, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert J.
Waidmarin. "Positive Feedback Investment Strategies and Destabilizing Rational
Speculation." Journal of Finance (1990), 379-395.
Friend, Irwin, Marshall Blume and Jean Crockett. Mutual Funds and Other
Institutional Investors (1970), McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Kraus, Alan and Hans R. Stoll. "Parallel Trading by Institutional Investors," Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis (1972), 2107-2138.

Lakonishok, Joseph, Andrei Shleifer, Richard Thaler, and Robert W. Vishny.
"Window Dressing by Pension Fund Managers." American Economic Review Papers
& Proceedings (1991), 227-231.
 Scharfstein, David S. and Jeremy C. Stein. "Herd Behavior and Investment."
 American Economic Review (1990), 465-479.
 Schwartz, Robert and James Shapiro. 'The Challenge of Institutionalization for the
 Equity Market," Working Paper, New York University.
 Shiller, Robert J. and John Pound. "Survey Evidence on Diffusion of Interest and
 Information among Investors," Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization
 (1989), 47-66.
DO INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTABLIZE STOCK PRICES?                             25



                                   TABLE 1

                            Sample Characteristics

Number of changes in holdings and dollar value of changes (in millions) by size
(market capitalization) quintiles determined from the universe of NYSE and AMEX
stocks. The numbers in parenthesis are the percentage of changes in holdings and
the percentage of dollar value of changes in holdings by size quintiles.


                                                           Dollar Value of
                                   Number of              Changes in Holdings
          Quintile             Changes in Holdings           (in millions)
          Smallest                     338                        270
                                     (1.3%)                     (.07%)
             2                         2,087                     1,648
                                      (7.9%)                    (.42%)
             3                        5,515                      11,030
                                      (21%)                     (2.8%)
             4                        8,963                      50,373
                                      (34%)                     (12.7%)
          Largest                     9,389                     333,310
                                     (35.7%)                     (84%)
DO INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTABLIZE STOCK PRICES?                                 26



                                     TABLE 2
                 Herding Statistics for All Stock-Quarters and
                   for Stock-Quarters with Active Trading

The mean and median herding statistics are presented for all cases ("stock-quarter")
and for cases where more than 10 and more than 20 money managers were active.



                                     More than 10 Money        More than 20 Money
                    All Cases         Managers Active           Managers Active
   Mean               .027                   .020                      .021

   Median             .001                   .001                      .002
                                                           -
DO INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTAI3LIZE STOCK PRICES?                                  27


                                         TABLE 3
          Herding Statistics by Firm Size, Past-Quarter Performance,
                      and by Money under Management

Panel A reports the mean herding statistic by firm size (market capitalization)
quintiles. Panel B reports the mean herding statistic by past-quarter return quintiles.
Panel C reports the mean herding statistic by money under management quintiles
determined from the universe being evaluated by SE!.



     Panel A: By Firm Size

                Quintile 1    Quintile 2    Quintile 3    Quintile 4    Quintile 5
                 (Small)                                                 (Large)
     Mean          .061          .039          .028          .020          .016

     Panel B: By Past-Quarter Performance

                Quintile 1    Quintile 2    Quintile 3    Quintile 4    Quintile S
                • Worst                                                   (Best)
      Mean         .020           .018         .020          .024          .027

     Panel C: By Assets under Management

                Quintile 1    Quintile 2    Quintile 3    Quintile 4    Quintile 5
                (Smallest)                                              (Largest)
      Mean         .006           .016         .016          .012           .018
DO INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTAIILIZE STOCK PRICES?                                28



                                      TABLE 4

               Past-Quarter Performance and Trading Activity of
                      Money Managers by Size Quintiles

In Panel A, the mean excess demand by past-quarter performance and size (market
capitalization) is presented. The excess demand for a given "stock-quarter," Dratio, is
defined as the difference between dollar buys and dollar sells scaled by total activity
($ buys + $ sells). In Panel B, the proportion of money managers that are net
buyers, Nratio, by past-quarter performance and size is presented.


                                                 Size
      Past-Quarter
      Performance       Small          2           3            4         Large

     Panel A: Excess Demand (Dratio)

     Worst               -.180       -.030        .105         .047        .016
     2                   -.159       -.080        -.047        -.107       .058
     3                   -.057       -.015        .017         .025        .110

     4                   -.005        .038        .077         .063        .025

     Best                .036         .056        .052         .055        .011


     Panel B: Proportion of Money Managers Buying (Nratio)

     Worst                .42         .48          .55          .53         .49
     2                    .42         .47          .46          .44         .53
     3                    .48         .50          .51          .51         .54

     4                    .49          .52         .54          .53         .51

     Best                 .51          .52         .52          .52         .49
DO INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTAIIUZE STOCK PRICES?                                  29



                                      TABLE 5

                 Past-Year Performance and Trading Activity of
                       Money Managers by Size Quintiles

In Panel A, the mean excess demand by past-year performance and size (market
capitalization) is presented. The excess demand for a given "stock-quarter," Dratio, is
defined as the difference between dollar buys and dollar sells scaled by total activity
(S buys + $ sells). In Panel B, the proportion of money managers that are net
buyers, Nratio, by past-year performance and size is presented.


                                                  Size
       Past-Year
      Performance       Small           2           3            4        Large

     Panel A: Excess Demand (Dratlo)

     Worst               -.158        -.222       -.101        .005         .025
     2                   -.035        -.077        .012        .045         .042
     3                   -.056        .029         .041        .042         .067
     4                    .068        .073         .029        .032         .051
     Best                 .059        -.001        .090        .036         .012

     Panel B: Proportion of Money Managers Buying (Nratio)

     Worst                .42          .39         .46          .50         .52

     2                    .48          .46         .51          .52         .51

     3                    .47          .47          .51         .52         .51
     4                    .54          .53          .51         .52         .51

     Best                 .53          .49          .54         .52          .50
DO INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS DESTABLIZE STOCK PRICES?                                  30



                                      TABLE 6
            Contemporary Excess Demand and Quarterly Returns

Average abnormal quarterly returns (size-adjusted) are presented for various levels of
excess demand. The results are presented for all firms as well as by firm size. Excess
demand is defined as dollar buys minus dollar sales scaled by market capitalization.
Small excess refers to the bottom quartile of stocks in terms of dollar excess demand
(supply), medium excess to the middle half, and large excess to the quartile of stocks
with the largest excess demand. The numbers in parenthesis are t-statistics.


                             All
         Category           Firms     Small       2           3         4      Large
  $ Buys Exceeds $ Sells      .018      -.007     .028        .027      .017     .010
                           (13.70)     (-.97)   (6.46)     (10.00)    (8.13)   (6.04)
     Small Excess             .016      -.014     .017        .027      .015     .016
                            (6.47)    (-1.03)   (2.39)      (5.00)    (3.54)   (4.37)
     Medium Excess            .021      .006      .042        .029      .017     .013
                           (11.80)    (5.24)    (6.25)      (7.47)    (5.83)   (6.31)
      Large Excess             .013     -.029     .016        .025      .021     -.005
                             (4.58)   (-1.78)   (1.87)      (4.68)    (4.48)   (-1.13)
  $ Sells Exceeds $ Buys      -.003    -.083      -.0 18      .003      .013     .016
                            (-2.02) (-12.8)     (-4.86)     (8.52)    (5.00)   (7.87)
      Small Excess             .004     -.072     -.002       .014      .013     .013
                             (1.59)   (-5.32)   (-2.70)     (2.67)    (2.97)   (3.27)
      Medium Excess            .001     -.069     -.007       .010      .009      .013
                              (.31)   (-7.50)   (-1.23)     (2.35)    (2.65L (5.13)
      Large Excess            -.017     -.115     -.057       -.019     .020      .031
                            (-5.08)   (-9.27)   (.7.79)     (-3.07)   (3.21)    (5.04)
