                   NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




                   WHAT IS A BUSINESS CYCLE?




                       Victor Zarnowitz




                    Working Paper No. 3863




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          October 1991




Prepared for the 16th Annual Policy Conference of the Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis, October 17 and 18, 1991. This paper
is part of NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #3863
                                        October 1991


                    WHAT IS A BUSINESS CYCLE?



                            ABSTRkCT

     This paper considers the question in its title from several
angles. Part 1 looks at economic history and the development of
thinking about business cycles - the popular meaning and
economists' definitions and ideas. Part 2 reviews the lessons
from business cycle chronologies and duration data, the concepts
of periodicity of cycles and phases, and the apparent moderation
of macroeconomic fluctuations in the second half of the 20th
century. Part 3 compares the recent business cycles and growth
cycles for several major industrialized, market-oriented
countries. Part 4 discusses the role of endogenous cyclical
variables, the outside shocks of various types, the systematic
timing sequences, and the regularities of cyclical comovements
and amplitudes. Understanding business cycles is aided by each
of these models of analysis.
     Business cycles have varied greatly over the past 200 years
in length, spread, and size. At the same time, they are
distinguished by their recurrence, persistence, and
pervasiveness. They make up a class of varied, complex, and
evolving phenomena of both history and economic dynamics.
Theories or models that try to reduce them to a single causal
mechanism or shock are unlikely to succeed.


                                       Victor Zarnowitz
                                       Graduate School of
                                        Business
                                       University of Chicago
                                       1101 East 58th Street
                                       Chicago, IL 60637
                                       and NEER
                             What is   a Business Cycle?



1. The Emergence of Business Cycles in History and Economic Thought    2


     1.1 Early Observations and Interpretations                        2


     1.2 Popular Meaning                                               4

     1.3 Economists' Definitions                                       7


     1.4 Past Views of the Scope and Nature of Business Cycles         10

     1.5 New Developments and Ideas                                    12

     1.6 Some Basic Reflections and Further Steps                      16

2. The Changing Dimensions of Business Cycles                          17

     2.1 The Historical Reference Cycle Chronologies on the NBER       17

     2.2 A Cautionary Note                                             20

     2.3 The Last—Half Century: Long Expansions, Short Contractions    22

     2.4 Phase Durations in Eras of Inflationary and Deflationary

            Trends                                                     24

     2.5 Some Other Analytical Uses of the Duration Data               26

     2.6 On Theories and Evidence Relating to Periodic Business

            Fluctuations                                               28

     2.7 The Moderation of U.S. Business Cycles                        30

3.   Some International Comparisons of Cyclical Movements and Growth

          Trends                                                       33

     3.1 The Major Market Economies After World War II                 33

     3.2 Estimated Dimensions of Business Cycles in Eight Countries    34

     3.3 Possible Reasons for the Observed Differences                 38

     3.4 Growth Cycles                                                 40

4. The Observed Tendencies, Disturbances, and Regularities             43
   4.1 Endogenous Cyclical Variables                43

   4.2 Exogenous Variables and the Role of Honey    45

   4.3   Monetary, Real, and Expectacional Shocks   46

   4.4 Leads and Lags                               53

   4.5 Comovements and Amplitudes                   57

5. General Conclusions                              60
                                             I

Sober men, whose projects have been disproportioned to their capitals, are as

likely to have neither wherewithal to buy money, nor credit to borrow it, as

prodigals whose expence has been disproportioned to their revenue. before their

projects can be brought to bear, their stock is gone, and their credit with it.

When the profits of trade happen to be greater than ordinary, overtrading becomes

a general error both among great and small dealers.

                                                   Adam Smith 1776 (p. 406).



When prices fall, production is arrested until the expences of production fall

in equal degree; and whilst production is thus arrested, consumption is also

diminished ...    the   inducements to employ labour .   .   . are   diminished ... and the

prices of labour fall. The consumption of labour is thus diminished, and the

prices of property again fall, and again act in depressing labour, and in

crippling production ...      It   is the deficiency of money which has occasioned the

depression of prices
                                                   Thomas Attwood 1817 (pp. 99, 101).



We find [the state of trade subject to various conditions which are periodically

returning: it revolves apparently in an established cycle. First we find it i.n

a state of quiescence, —     next improvement, — growing confidence, — prosperity,
—   excitement,   —     overtrading,   —   convulsion,   —   pressure.    —   stagnation,   —
distress,   — ending     again in quiescence.

                                                    Lord Overstone 1857 (p. 44).




 Sut though men have the power to purchase they may not choose to use it.                   For

 when confidence has been shaken by failures, capital cannot be got to start new
                                             2


companies or extend old ones .   . In   short there is little occupation in any of

the trades which make Fixed capital              Other trades, finding a poor market for

their goods, produce less; they earn less, and therefore they buy less .         . . Thus

commercial disorganization spreads      .   . The chief cause of the evil is a want of
confidence.

                                        Alfred and Mary Marshall 1881 (pp. 154—55).



     I. The Emergence of Business Cycles in History an Economic Thought

1.1 Early Observations and Interiretatios

      Well before the concept of a business (or trade) cycle originated, serious

episodes of commercial and financial instability were repeatedly observed by

contemporaries. The four selected quotations above, from Adam Smith 1776 to

Alfred Marshall 1881, illustrate the reactions of some of the classical

economists and politicians in England. Smith's brief mention of overtrading

is the only one in The Wealth of Nations.1 Attwood, a banker and politician.

blamed reductions in the money supply under the gold standard for the resulting

deflation and interacting declines in spending and incomes (see Link 1958, pp.

6—35; Backhouse 1988, pp. 134—34). The "famous words" of Lord Overstone, who may

have been the first to write about a multi—stage cycle of trade," were cited

with approval by Marshall a quarter of century later.                The stress on the

confidence factor in Marshall of 1881 recalls not only Pigou of 1929 but also

Keynes of 1936. There is much in these and other early theories of crises and

cycles that deserves to be rediscovered and reconsidered today.2

      Because of the predominance of classical tradition, problems of 1on—term

equilibrium constituted the principal concern of the prominent theorists in the

nineteenth century and short—term business cycle problems at best a secondary
                                       3


interest. Yet throughout that century. from Sismondi and Maithus to Marx and

Hobson, intense controversies prevailed about the validity of Say' s Law     that
supply creates its own demand and about the possibility of a "general glut

(Sowell 1972). There can be little doubt that this was so largely because of the

pressure of events: the need to account for the recurrent "crises," the related

decreases in sales and profits, and the increases in unemployment.

      A study of monetary statistics for France and England (since 1800) and the

United States (since 1836). led Juglar ((18621889) to believe that    crises   are

merely stages in recurrent business cycles.      Although the title of his work

refers to the "periodic return' of the crises, the durations of his cycles vary

considerably.3   According to Juglar, cycles are principally a feature of

economies with highly developed commerce and industry, division of labor,

external trade, and the use of credit. This Idea was accepted and developed

further by most of the leading scholars In the field.

      The association of business cycles with modern capitalism is reflected in

the NBEP. reference chronologies which begin (for annual dates of peaks and

troughs) in 1792, 1834, 1840, 1866 for Great Britain, United States, France, and

Germany, respectively.4    There is a substantial agreement that wars, poor

harvests, and other episodic disturbances played a greater relative role in the

preindustralization era than afterward, and the endogenous cyclical influences

a smaller role. The main reason, presumably, is the pronounced cyclicality of

 investment in "fixed" capital —   plant,   machinery, and equipment. It was only

after the great technological innovations of the latter part of the eighteenth

 century were adopted that the size of such investment and    its share in output,

 began to increase rapidly, in England, then      Western Europe, and the United
 States.   In earlier times, processing of raw materials by labor must have
                                       4

represented a much larger part of total production. It is likely, therefore,

that fluctuations of trade and inventory investment accounted for most of the

overall economic instability prior to the industrial revolution.       But these

movements tend to be shorter in duration and more random in nature than the

fluctuations related to investment in business plant and equipment.

      Differences of opinion still persist on when modern business cycles came

into being. Schumpeter (1939. vol. 1, chap. 6B) argues that capitalism goes "as

far back as the element of credit creation and that there must have been also

prosperities and depressions of the cyclical type in the seventeenth and

eighteenth centuries.6 Indeed, there is a modest amount of evidence on how

harvests, grain prices, exports, imports, and sales and profits of a small sample

of enterprises changed from year to year in Great Britain between 1720 and 1800.

Four economic historians compiled chronologies of commercial crises for this

period, which show a fair amount of consensus. There may have been six or eight

major contractions of credit, and several more downturns of profit.7 The problem

is not with the existence of some substantial fluctuations but with their nature.

How comparable are they with the later business cycles? Unfortunately, there is

no conclusive answer to this question because of severe limitations of the

available data.



1.2 Popular Meaning

      Unlike a theoretical concept such as that of equilibrium, a business cycle

is in the first place an empirical phenomenon founded upon historical experience.

People engaged in business and public affairs have long observed that economic

conditions are generally satisfactory or good much of the time but weak or bad

some of the time. An old term for the good times was "prosperity'S, an old term
                                       5


for the bad times was depression'. The transition from the former to the latter

used to be called a crisis' (and occasionally a recession, but this desig.-.

nation came to be reserved for a mildly depressed period and is so applied

presently). The transition from depression to prosperity was called 'revival

(today the term 'recovery is more common). It seems fair to say that these

broad descriptions soon acquired a rather good intuitive meaning and wide

acceptance in use.

      The evidence comes from hundreds of official documents and contemporary

reports where such characterizations of the prevailing business situations are

found over long sequences of years for market economies at various stages of

development and industrialization. The terms denote phases of what came later

to be called business (in England. trade) cycles, and their Context was from the

outset an economy with increasing population, labor force, productive capacity.

and output. In the nineteenth century, long—term economic growth trends, like

the fluctuations around them, became a widely recognized empirical phenomenon.

Thus, prosperity soon got to have the connotation of an 'expansion and

depression that of a contraction," although these terms came into use only later

and were given a more explicit technical meaning by economists. Depressions were

seen clearly as distressful interruptions of growth that was necessary to

maintain prosperity.    The dynamic nature of the perceived processes is well

documented by the qualifiers frequently attached to the descriptions of the state

of the economy. For example, a depression might be mild or 'severe', a revival

might be 'slow or 'rapid. etc.

      Business annals based on a large collection of such materials were compiled

by the lational Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) as one of its earliest

projects (Thorp 1926). They provide comprehensive qualitative records of general
                                        6


economic changes in a number of countries between 1790 and 1925.8             The

construction of the historical NBER business cycle chronologies for the United

States, Great Britain, France, and Germany was accomplished by a complementary

use of the business annals and quantitative information drawn from a large

collection of time series on aspects of general economic activity, price indexes.

monetary and financial statistics, etc.     (Burns and Mitchell 1946).     On the

whole, a good agreement was found between the dates of the business cycle peaks

and troughs suggested by the annals and the dates based on the statistical time

series (for evidence, see Mitchell 1927, pp. 20—31).

      That many contemporaries were able to diagnose business conditions rather

well even in the face of great limitations of public data on the economy, is a

remarkable fact, which is a testimony to the persistence and pervasiveness of

business cycles. It takes months for downturns and declines to spread through

the economy, and much more time yet for their effects to grow and recede. Such

developments hurt the well—being of people in many occupations, industries., and

regions, hence are generally apprehended by them, although often with lengthy

lags and great uncertainty. A similarly extended recognition process applies to

economic upturns and rises. Business people track their sales and profits and

learn when they are high or low, increasing or decreasing. Workers learn when

jobs and wages are easy and when they are hard to get. Consumers know how much

money they are able and willing to spend. One would expect sharp turning points

and strong, sustained expansions or contractions to be recognized more promptly

and reliably than gradual transitions and weak, erratic upward or downward

movements
                                        7

1.3 Economists' Definitions

      It may be easy to recognize some manifestations of a business cycle,

particularly the more extreme ones, but the history of event:s and ideas suggests

that it is anything but easy to define what a business cycle actually j•10 In

recording sharp economic fluctuations, contemporaries and historians alike

observe in the first place the diverse disturbances, from bad weather to

political upheavals and speculative manias and panics, which seem to account for

crises and downturns. The concentration on isolated episodes and outside shocks

precludes a definition of the entire fluctuation or cycle as an economic

phenomenon and analytical target.

      In contrast, economic theorists who accept the existence of general

economic fluctuations are interested in the concept of the' business cycle and

its main cause or causes.      In come cases, the theory appears to rule the

definition. For example according to Cassel, "A period of boom is one of special.

increase in the production of fixed capital; a period of decline or a depression

is one in which this production falls below the point it had previously

reached... This means that the alternation between periods of boom and slump is

fundamentally a variation in the production of fixed capital, but has no direct

connection with the rest of prOduction" (see [1923) 1932, pp. 550, 552). Cassel,

like Tugan-Baranovskii and Spiethoff before him, believed that changes in cost

and value of capital goods are the main force driving the cyclical motion of the

economy -

      As another example, consider Hawtrey's statement that "The trade cycle is

above all a periodical fluctuation in manufacturing activity and in the price

level, the two fluctuating tOgether" (1927, p. 471). Hawtrey's theory stressed

the role of movements in bank credit, inventory investment, and prices in the

relatively regular cycles of the pre—.lorld War I gold standard era.
                                         8

      The search of literature for definitions of business cycles is on the whole

frustrating.      Most authors do not formulate such definitions by means of

identifying empirically the principal "stylized facts about what happens during

expansions, downturns, contractions, and upturns. However, Mitchell proceeded

along this way and arrived at a tentative working definition near the end of his

1927 volume (p. 468). With some modifications suggested by experience in using

it,' that definition was restated as follows at the beginning of the 1946 volume

by Burns and Mitchell (p. 3):

               Business cycles are a type of fluctuation found in the aggregate

               economic activity of nations that organize their work mainly in

               business enterprises: a cycle consists of expansions occurring

               at about the same time in many economic activities, followed by

               similarly general recessions, contractions, and revivals which

               merge into the expansion phase of the next cycle; this sequence

               of changes is recurrent but not periodic; in duration business

               cycles vary from more than one year to ten or twelve years; they

               are not divisible into shorter cycles of similar character with

               amplitudes approximating their own.

      The main point here is the comovernent of many economic variables or

processes, which occurs with a rough synchronism (allowing for leads and lags of

mostly moderate length) in the course of any business cycle. What matters is

that many diverse activities tend to expand and contract together; also, it

should be added, that they evolve over time and cannot be reduced to any single

aggregate (Moore and Zarnowitz 1986, p. 737).         Hence the question of what

precisely constitutes the aggregate economic activity' is purposely and properly

left open. The nature of business cycles depends on, and changes with, the major
                                       9


characteristics of the economy, society and polity. The most common and salient

feature of business cycles is their pervasiveness and persistence (the high

cyclical conformity or coherence of numerous variables and their pronounced

serial correlation). It is n the fluctuation of any single aggregate, however

important.

      In support of this argument, note that in the peacetime cycle before World

War II prices as well as quantities of industrial products tended to increase in

expansions and decrease in contractions, which implies that nominal values of

total output and income would have had larger amplitudes of procyclical movement

than the real values. In contrast, in more recent times the overall level of

prices continued to increase during contractions, albeit often at a slower pace

(lower rates of inflation). Hence, real CNP is now a much more sensitive measure

of cyclical changes in aggregate economic activity" than nominal CNP is—

whereas historically the opposite must have often been the case.

      Of course, no statistics on GNP in either current or constant dollars were

available before World War I, and none appeared on any regular basis in the

interwar period. In fact, no single comprehensive measure of aggregate economic

activity, with sufficient comparability of coverage and validity of estimation,

exists for a long stretch of historical time. This applies to annual data and,

still more so, to monthly and quarterly series that are much needed for the study

of business cycles (as well as of short—term economic changes in general) .       It
is therefore not only conceptually desirable but also statistically necessary to

use a number of indicators rather than any single one. To be sure, they should

include the most reliable and comprehensive time—series data that can be had.

In practice, for periods before 1914 or 1929, series representing various

activities of production, consumption, investment, trade, and finance had to be
                                      10

collected and used as composite indexes of business activity, along with price

indexes and other useful aggregates such as bank clearings and debits.'1

      The Burns—Mitchell definition refers to a broad range of durations (1 — 12

years), thereby accommodating both short and long cycles. It includes no strict

amplitude criterion, but rules out accepting smaller—than—usual movements as

cyclical (this is roughly the intended effect of the last clause of the

definition; see Burns and Mitchell 1946. pp. 7—8). No distinction between major

and minor cycles is made.    The definition admits equally vigorous and weak

expansions, severe and mild contractions.



1.4 Past Views on the Scooe and Nature of Business Cycles

      All descriptions and definitions of business cycles are guided in part by

some theoretical ideas and in part by some observations and measures of what is

going on in the economy. The data available to the early generations of students

of the subject were meager indeed. Juglar, in the first large—scale work on the

history of commercial crises and cycles (1862), assembled mainly monetary.

banking, and price statistics. He showed that discounts and deposits were high

in crisis (peak) years. low in liquidation (trough) years, while the reverse was

true for bullion reserves. Prices rose before and fell after a crisis. Later,

those economists who stressed the cyclical role of business investment in plant

and equipment used various proxies such as prices and output of pig iron for

production of capital goods and output of coal for total nonagricultural

production (Tugan—Baranovskii (18941 1901; Cassel 1923).

      Note that the emphases on some selected factors and data need not imply a

view of business cycles as movements that are narrowly defined in spatial or

temporal terms. On the scope and nature of the cycles, widely different opinions
                                       11

have been held by some economists. Referring to 'cyclical fluctuations during

the period l870—19l4, Cassel. stated that they 'have no absolute necessity, but

are to a great extent caused by factors which represent passing phenomena of

economic history, or which may be, if not eliminated, at least to a great extent

controlled (1932, p. 538). In contrast, according to Robertson (1937, p. 171),

 1n industrial fluctuation we are up against a problem very deep—seated in the

nature of capitalist industry — perhaps of all modern industry — perhaps of man

himself.   I do not believe myself that we can solve it.

      Overall, a perusal of the literature leaves a strong impression that most

of the principal writers on business cycles recognized the large dimensions and

importance of their problem and task. The interdependence of all parts     of the

economy, which essentially accounts for the wide diffusion of cyclical movements

from any initial source, was well understood long before the advent of modern

macroeconomic analysis. Indeed, the latter in some ways narrowed the approach

to the study of business cycles, making it generally more aggregative and often

also less dynamic. The pioneers in this field had a lively appreciation of the

importance of endogenous cyclical processes and their connection with long—tern

economic growth and development. Many later contributions show less scope and

vision in these respects. To be sure, the more recent work also displays the

major benefits of using much more abundant, comprehensive, and accurate data as

well as new techniques and insights of modern stochastic and econometric

 approaches. 12

       Those scholars who engaged in large—scale empirical research on the subject

 have been particularly insistent on seeing business cycles as complex phenomena

 of great importance: not only the main form of economic instability but also the

 uneven path of economic growth. Thus, to Burns and Mitchell, "The problem of how
                                              12

business cycles come about is             .
                                              inseparable from the problem of how a
capitalist economy functions.' They were 'snot content to focus analysis on the

fluctuations of one or two great variables, such as production or employnient' but

 sought to interpret the system of business as a whole             .   . to   penetrate the

facade of business aggregates and trace the detailed processes— psychological,

institutional, and technological — by which they are fashioned and linked
              13
together.

       Similarly,      Schumpeter's opening statement in his 1939 treatise that

 Analyzing business cycles means neither more nor less than analyzing the

economic process of the capitalist era" conveys the sense of a most inclusive

conception.        Although "economic fluctuations properly so called (are] those

economic changes which are inherent in the working of the economic organism

itself," the effects of "external factors" or disturbances are also numerous and

important; indeed in many instances they "entirely overshadow everything else"

(19'39, vol. 1, pp. 7 and 12). But Schumpeter has no single definition of a

business cycle. Rather, his "really relevant case" is that of interaction of

"many simultaneous Waves"               p. 212). The scheme involves 3—4,      7—10, and 48—

60 year cycles (named     after their   investigators Kitchin, Juglar, and Kondratieff,

respectively; see •jj, chap. 5). But there is little support from the data for

periodicities in the occurrence of groups of major and minor cycles, although it

is certainly true that individual cycles vary greatly in amplitude, duration, and

diffusion (Burns and Mitchell 1946, chap. 11; Zarnowitz and Moore 1986, pp. 522—

23).




1.5 Mew Developments and Ideas

       Momentous developments bearing on thinking about business cycles occurred
                                           13

during the 1930s in the worlds of both real events and ideas.              The Great

Depression was not only an entirely unexpected calamity, it seemed to contradict

the established ways and means of economic analysis. Seeking new explanations

and remedies, Keynes claimed to have shown ... what determines the volume of

employment at any time and that therefore our theory must be capable of

explaining the phenomena of the Trade Cycle.      Any particular cycle, he believed,

 is highly complex and ...   every   element in our analysis will be required for its

complete explanation.    But the essential character of the Trade Cycle and,

especially, the regularity of time—sequence and of duration which justifies us

in calling it a cycle, is mainly due to the way in which the marginal efficiency

of capital fluctuates' (1936, p. 313). Investment depends on the MEC as compared

with the rate of interest, which recalls Wicksell's ([1898] 1936) account of the

relation between the value and the cost of capital goods, and Fisher's (1907)

concept of the 'rate of return over cost.              But Keynes adds the ex ante

discrepancies between investment and saving, the multiplier, and the cycle—

induced, changes in the liquidity preference and the propensity to consume. He

stresses the instability of investment due to sharp fluctuations in business

confidence under uncertainty about long—run returns.

      Keynes' leading role in the development of macroeconomics of income

determination is beyond doubt, but his analysis of business cycles was quite

fragmentary and his influence on the subsequent work in this area proved rather

limited.'4    Formal models of dynamic disequilibrium based mainly on an

interaction of the investment accelerator and the consumption multiplier enjoyed

considerable popularity between the late l930s and the early 1950s (Samuelson

1939; Metzler 1941; Hicks l950)' But it soon became apparent that these models

are limited to a mechanical treatment of relations between a few aggregates and
                                       14

neglect potentially important factors of prices, money,            finance, and

expectations. A more lasting impact is attributable to the general idea that

random shocks and changes in exogenous factors provide impulses that are

propagated into cyclical movements by the dynamics of the interdependent market

economy. This conception had some earlier origins but was first formalized by

Frl.sch (1933).

      Starting in the 1930s, econometric models came into use as vehicles for

testing business cycle theories (Tinbergen 1939). Their early postwar versions

were heavily influenced by the Frisch impulse—propagation model and the Keynesian

I—S model of Hicks (1937). The development of macroeconometric models depended

critically on the growth of modern statistics, and particularly the system of

national income accounts.

      Hansen ([1951] 1964, p. 4) defines the business cycle as a fluctuation in

(I) employment. (2) output, and (3) prices.     Although he refers to Mitchell's

1927 definition, he is content to use only the aggregative measures of output and

employment, plus the indexes of consumer and wholesale prices. More recent

studies tend to restrict the criteria further to measures of real income and

output, dropping the comprehensive price indexes because of their continued rise

during the business contraction of the past 30—40 years. Other measures such as

those of the diffusion of cyclical movements attract little attention. Elowever,

the dates of business cycle peaks and troughs as identified by the NBER continue

to be generally accepted.

      Views on the nature and scope of business cycles remain disparate. The

once prevalent theories of endogenous or self—sustaining cycles have been.for

some time in retreat, though surviving in various nonlinear macrodynainic models

and lately experiencing some resurgence. The predominant type is theories of
                                          15

cyclical response to various exogenous disturbances. The main controversies

concern the source of the originating shocks: Are they real or monetary? To

aggregate demand or aggregate supply? Monetarists stress the instability of

growth in money supply due to errors in monetary policy. Keynesians stress the

instability of private spending on capital goods and consumer durables. Both

groups see the main shocks as arising on the demand side, but some new equili-

brium theorists give more attention to supply shocks that impact the relative

prices of oil and other major inputs, technology, and productivity.

      This is no place to discuss in any detail the recent evolution and present

state of business cycle theories (for a treatment of this subject, see Zarnowicz

1985, 1991). only a few remarks are in order here, but more will be made later

in the context of a descriptive analysis of past and recent business cycles.

      The range of contemporary views is indeed remarkably wide. Some theories

predict the recurrence of serious financial crises and business depressions

(Minsky 1982). Others see the cycles' as phenomena of moving equilibrium, no

more than adjustments to random shocks (e.g., to technology) and of low social

cost (Plosser 1989). Most of the writings can be located somewhere between these

extremes.

       The debate increasingly concerns the underlying institutional and market

conditions.      Increases in the weight of the public sector and the role of

government    actions   first resulted in rising beliefs that business cycles can be

not only reduced but even entirely eliminated by proper stabilization policies.

The   focus of   such expectations shifted over time from fiscal to monetary

policies, and from purely discretionary to more rules—oriented policies. But in

the process the high hopes of banning all boom and bust sequences were repeatedly

disappointed.     The celebrated inflation—unemployment tradeoff has seemed to
                                           16

vanish altogether in the 1970s, but this was a temporary eclipse reflecting the

worsening inflation (actual and expected) and the novel supply shocks (huge oil

price jumps). What became clear is that the tradeoff is neither stable nor

predictably exploitable for purposes of stabilization policy, but is itself

dependent on the varying sources and characteristics of business cycles.

      A related issue is the cyclical sensitivity of prices and wages. The new

classical economists believe that prices in general are flexible, reacting

promptly to clear the markets.       The new Keynesian economists believe that

industrial prices and wages are sticky, reacting but slowly. In this view, both

nominal and real (or relative) rigidities exist, and they are presumed to have

good reasons, that Is, to be consistent with considerations of self—interest of

individuals and more or less organized groups. These reasons, however, are not

yet well understood, so the causes of price and wage stickiness are in urgent

need of much further research.



1.6 Some Basic Reflections and Further Steps

      The preceding sections have shown that the documented history of business

cycles goes back at least two hundred years. The popular awareness of recurrent

crises and alternations of, prosperous and depressed times is reflected in

similarly long records. Serious thought about the nature and causes of major

economic fluctuations accompanied serious thought about the nature and causes of

industrial development and economic growth since the early writings on political

economy.

       If this is so, should it   then   not be clear by now what a business cycle is?

Why the need to raise this question time and again? The reason is that business

cycles are changing as well as complex. A process that repeats itself with
                                       17

substantial regularity over long periods of time will not withhold its secrets

from inquiring minds over many decades of intensive study, even if it were quite

complicated. But business cycles involve many interacting processes (economic,

political, and broadly social) whose roles vary and evolve.        They are most

probably caused in part by uncontrollable outside disturbances and in part by

errors of public policy and private decision makers that may be avoidable; but

they are also, just as plausibly, to a large extent self—sustained and self—

evolving. They are certainly not the same at all times and in all developed

market economies, although they show a great deal of international inter-

dependence.

      To improve our understanding of business cycles, it is necessary to learn

from their past as well as present, and to study both their common features and

diversity, continuity and change. In what follows, I shall consider the main

lessons from the chronologies of business cycles in the United States and abroad,

and from research on the indicators and measures of cyclical and related.

processes. This will include examples of stable and changing behavior,     and of

some international similarities and differences.



                 2. The Changing Dimensions of Business Cycles

2.1 The Historical Reference Cycle Chronologies of the NBER

      Annual chronologies of reference cycles, that is. business cycle peaks

and troughs, as estimated by Burns and Mitchell (1946) from time series studies

and Thorp's annals, are available for the United States and Great Britain

between 1790 and 1858.     Monthly (as well as quarterly and annual) reference

 chronologies from the same source cover the U.S. and Britain for 1854—1938,

 France for 1865—1938, and Germany for 1879—1932. Table 1 sums up the record of
                                        18

durations of business expansions, contractions, and full cycles as derived from

these dates.     Part A lists the means and standard deviations for the overall

periods covered and consecutive segments of 3—6 (mostly 4 and 5) cycles each.

Part B lists the shortest (S) and the longest (L) durations over the same periods

and somewhat fewer successive subperiods

        It is clear that the durations have varied greatly, as shown by the huge

S—i.   ranges in part B.   For example, the U.S. expansions ranged from 10 to 72

months, contractions from 8 to 72 months, full cycles from 24 to 108 months

(trough—to—trough) or 17 to 101 months (peak—to—peak). The results for the other

countries are very similar:      slightly larger S—i. differences still for the

British cycles, slightly smaller for the shorter histories of the French and

German cycles.

        However, these are comparisons between outliers, which can greatly

overstate the more common differences between the duration measures. Indeed,

U.S. business &xpansions in peacetime averaged 22—26 months in each of the four

segment of 1854—1938 and 25 months in the period as a whole.'6 Remarkably, the

corresponding contractions were not much shorter, averaging 19—20 months in three

segments, 27 months in one, and 21 months over the total period 1854—1938.

Expansions varied relatively much less than contractions, as shown by the

standard deviations attached to these averages. For full cycles, most of the

mean durations are close to four years, with overall standard deviations of 18—20

months.     These Statistics disclose no systematic changes in phase and cycle

durations. They surely justify the phrase recurrent but not periodic" in the

BER definition. Still, the central tendency of the duration figures suggests

a modest degree of regularity. Thus, 15 of the 19 peacetime expansions of 1854—

1938 (791) fall into the range of 1 1/2 to 2 1/2 years, and the same proportion

applies to contractions in the range of I to 2 years.
                                        19

     The cycles in the other countries show more variability in durations both

across and within subperiods.    The U.S. cycles tended to be more numerous and

shorter." They numbered 21 in 1854—38, averaging 4 years, while the British

cycles numbered 16 and averaged 5 1/3 years. For the longest common period.

1879—1938, the comparison is as follows:



                              United States   Crest Britain    France   Germany

Number of cycles (T to T)          17              13           14         10


Mean duration (months)             48              65           53         64

Standard deviation (months)        18              31           25         24




Figure 1 compares by means of a schematic diagram the timing of business cycle

peaks and troughs in the four countries. It suggests a fairly high degree of

corr'espondence between the chronologies. Of the total of 146 turning points

shown, 92 (631) match for all four countries and another 36 (251) for three

countries. Four turning points can be matched for two countries and only 14

(101) are unmatched. Practically the same proportions apply to peaks and troughs

taken separately.

      When examined more closely, Figure 1 shows that during the first quarter—

century covered French and German cycles diverged considerably, probably in part

because of annual dating. The U.S. cycles conformed better to the British and

German than to the French cycles. In the period 1879—1914 —    the heyday of the

pre—Worid War I gold standard — the conformity between the business cycles in

 the European countries was particularly close, but the U.S. economy followed a

 different pattern of shorter and more frequent fluctuations   The timing of the
                                       20

wartime expansions (1914—18) and contractions (1918—19) was very similar in all

four countries. In the l920s and 1930s. the European economies were much less

in phase with each other than in the preceding forty years, but the degree of

conformity between their cycles and those in the United States increased (see

!4orgenstern 1959, chap. 2).'



2.2 A Cautionary tote

      The limitations of data, particularly for the early times, might have

produced various errors in the identification of the reference cycles.         A

particularly likely type of error is that of mistaking a serious slowdown (phase

of a low, i.e., below—trend but still mainly positive, growth) for a contraction

(phase of an absolute decline in the overall economic activity). One reason to

suspect this is that the reference contractions are so much longer and more

frequent in the pre—Worid War II era than for the more recent times about which

there is much better and more complete statistical information (see the-next

section).   Another reason is that business annals and indexes representing

deviations from normal" business conditions (where the Thormal" levels or trends

themselves are not quantified) were extensively used in determining the U.S.

reference dates for the period before 1873, and these sources may be especially

susceptible to the suspected bias (Zarnowitz 1981, pp. 494—99).

      A reassessment of the evidence must take into account that the historical

contractions may represent declines in real or nominal aggregates or both,

depending on the strength and persistence of the concurrent movements in the

general price level. Deflations greatly aggravated some past depressions, and

wholesale price indexes are among the oldest important cyclical indicators. Both

real and nominal representative time series must therefore be carefully
                                             21

considered, and when this is done the NBER chronology is found to be in good

overall agreement with dating by other economic historians and generally well

supported by the available evidence (Burns and Mitchell 1946, pp. 107—13;

Zarnowitz 1981, pp. 494—505; Moore and Zarnowitz 1986, pp. 755—64).

         This does not mean, however, that        all   the identified cycles (let alone

their precise dates) are equally well confirmed. A few episodes are doubtful.

They include four NBER contractions: 1845—46, 1869—70, 1887—88, and 1899—1900,

of which the first one is most uncertain. (The last three have their peaks and

troughs marked ? in figure 1.) The information on hand seems to me insufficient

to make a conclusive determination of whether these were periods of actual

declines or retardations below average growth. There are some problems with a

few other minor contractions as well but they are easier to resolve (Zarnowitz

1981).

         If the episodes listed above were treated as slowdowns instead of

contractions, the average durations of expansion (E) would be considerably

increased, both absolutely and relative to those of contractions (C).                The

following tabulation shows this for the two principally affected pjods.l



                                1834 — 55                     1854— 1919

Number of cycles (T to T)        5      4                     16      13

Expansion, months (E)           26      36                    27      37

Contraction, months (C)         24      27                    22      23


Ratio, E/C                      1.1    1.3                   1.2     1.6




          Some of the reference dates for the other countries may also be questioned.
                                       22

Burns and Mitchell (1946, P. 113) mention explicitly the German 1903—05

contraction2° and France after 1932.   Consequently, question marks are attached

in figure 1 to the former case and the French contraction of 1933—35 (as well as

to three pairs of U.S. turning points as already noted).        In addition, the

authors of the NBER dating methodology warn that The chronology for France in

the 1860s and 1870s requires careful consideration (.jj). It is therefore

possible that some of the several discrepancies between the French and the other

turning—point dates in this period are spurious (but, for lack of more specific

information, these dates are left unquestioned in the diagram).

      Figure 1 indicates that elimination of such dubious phases as U.s. 1887—88

and France 1933—35 would clearly improve the - inter—country correlation of

cyclical movements. But in other cases the opposite effects are suggested:

note U.S. 1899_190021 and Germany 1903—05. Treating the U.S. 1869—70 period as

one of a slowdown rather than contraction would improve the conformity with Great

Britain but worsen the conformities with Germany and France (the dates for which,

however, are themselves uncertain).



2.3 The Last Half—Century: Long Extansions. Short Contractions

      The NEER chronology identifies 15 business cycles measured from peak to

peak in 1857—1918; that is. on average one every four year. In 1918—45 there

were six cycles with a mean duration of about 4 1/2 years. Between 1945 and 1990

nine cycles occurred, averaging approximately five years.           Consequently,

according to these estimates (see Table 2. lines 7—9), the length of U.S.

business cycles increased and their frequency diminished gradually. However,

these differences are small and they could be due largely to errors in a few

early reference dates.22 The predominant feature of the average full—cycle
                                         23

durations, when compared across such long eras, is their relatively high degree

of stability.

       What table 2 definitely demonstrates is that business expansions tended to

be much longer, and contractions much shorter after World War II than before.

In the period 1854—1919, expansions averaged 27 months and contractions 22

months; for 1919—45, the mean durations of the respective phases are 35 and 18

months; and for 1945—90 they are 50 and 11 months. Excluding wartime episodes

would make the averages slightly smaller for expansions and slightly larger for

contractions, but it would not alter significantly the changes between the

periods.

       Even allowing for the largest plausible errors in the early dating would

still leave a large contrast between the pre—1945 and post—1945 cycles with

respect to their relative divisions by phase. Thus the E/C ratio for 1854—1919

can be estimated at 1.2—1.6 (see tabulation on page 21 above). The E/C ratio

for 1919—38 is 1.9, that for 1945—90 is 4.5 (based on the entries in lines 8 and

9).    In other words, in the    last 50 years the economy has been in expansion

phases about 80 percent of the time; before then, perhaps only 55—60 percent of

the time.

       Business expansions have become not only longer but also more variable,

hence less predictable with regard to their durations. The standard deviations

of the latter, in months, increased from 10 before 1918 to 26 in 1919—45 and 31

in 1945—90.     The range of peacetime expansions was 10 to 50 months before 1945

and   12 to 92 months thereafter (the longest wartime expansions lasted 80 months

in 1938—45 and 106 months in 1961—69; see lines 7—14       columns   3 and 4).
        In   contrast, business contractions have become not only shorter but also

wore uniform in length, hence in this sense more predictable. Their standard
                                       24

deviations, in months, dropped from 13 and 14 in 1857—1919 and 1920—45,

respectively, to 4 in 1945—82. The range of peacetime contractions was 8 to 65

months before 1945 and 6 to 16 months thereafter (see lines 7—14, columns 5 and

6).

      Both expansions and contractions, and hence full cycles, increased in

length and variability between the early part of the recent era (the 1940s and

l9SOs) and the later part (the 1960s, 1970s, and l980s). This is true for both

peacetime and all cycles, as shown in some detail in table 2, lines 1—6.



2.4 Phase Durations in Eras of Inflationary and Deflationary Trends

      Through the great contraction of the early 1930s, prices in the United

States and Europe followed alternating upward and downward trends (Table 3).

This is best seen in the wholesale or producer price indexes, which also have the

longest records, but even the less flexible consumer prices show an alternation

of periods of inflation and deflation. The complete upswings in wholesale prices

lasted generally between 20 and 30 years. the downswlngs varied more, from 9 to

32 years.    Over long stretches of time, the deflations nearly offset the

inflations, even when the war periods are included, so that the level of

wholesale prices at the bottom of the depression in 1932 was not much higher than

in the early times of the Republic, more than 140 years earlier. However, no

significant deflationary trends appeared in the nearly 60 years since, only brief

price declines in the recessions of 1937—38 and 1948—49. Ours is the age of the

most persistent and pervasive inflation on record.

      The long—period averages in table 3. column 2, are instructive, even though

they conceal much variability over shorter time intervals.           Before 1950,

comprehensive price indexes had generally, in addition to the longer trends,
                                       25

clear procyclical movements, up in expansions and down in contractions.

Thereafter, disinflation replaced deflation as a frequent concomitant of business

recessions and some major slowdowns.     Inflation became a grave and stubborn

problem primarily because the deflationary slumps have disappeared, not because

the booms have grown more inflationary. This is a very important but relatively

neglected point.

      Periods of rising trends in prices witnessed relatively long business

expansions and relatively short contractions, whereas periods of declining trends

in prices witnessed the opposite. This was observed as early as 1926 by Mitchell

(in his introductory chapter to Thorp 1926, pp. 65—66) and confirmed by Burns and

Mitchell in 1946 (pp. 437—38, 538). Table 3 provides a summary of their findings

and of the generally consistent later results (see also Moore 1983, chap. 15, and

Zarnowitz and Moore 1986, pp. 525—31). In times of rising prices, the expansion—

contraction duration ratios E/C averaged 2.1—2.5; in times of falling prices, E/C

averaged 0.8—1.0. These are large and systematic differences based on U.S. data

for 1789—1990 and on European data for periods beginning 1854—95 and ending in

the 1930s. The documented relationship is robust: it does not depend on the

inclusion of the highly inflationary wartime expansions, for example, or on our

use of average rather than total phase durations.23

      The longest and most severe contractions in the history of U.S. business

cycles were associated with major deflations, including 1873—79, 1882—85, 1895—

97, 1920—21, and 1929—33. This last world depression was ascribed by Irving

Fisher (1932, 1933) mainly to debt—deflatlon, that is, an overexpansion of

debts in the preceding expansion followed directly by sharp downturns in prices

and profits.24 Similar ideas on the role of overindebtness, credit restrictions,

and liquidation reappear in some recent theories that also stress the instability
                                       26

of real investment along the lines of Keynes and are adapted to the present

environment of large government and persistent inflation (as in Minsky 1982).

But one does not need to accept all these ideas to agree that the avoidance of

major deflations helped the postwar economies greatly to avoid major depressions

as well.     Many monetarists and Keynesians alike would probably accept this

statement.

      Let it be made immediately clear that to argue against deflation does not

mean at all to argue for inflation. Recent experiences with high inflation In

developing countries and with stagflation in North America and Europe leave no

doubt that any long and sizable inflation is harmful to both real growth and

economic stability.     Once allowed to develop, inflation, like deflation, is

difficult to control and can be self—accelerating by generating perfectly

reasonable expectations about its own future. But it is also true that a small

rate of inflation really amounts to the desired state of stability in the general

price level, given the inevitable technical limitations of price—index

measurement. Further, expansions favor price raises, while contractions favor

cost and price cuts.2



2.5   Some Other Analytical Uses of the Duration Data

      Are business expansions, contractions, and full cycles more likely to end

or less likely to end as they grow older, that is, do they exhibit a positive or

a negative duration dependence? Diebold and Rudebusch (1990, 1991) attempt to

answer this question by fitting hazard functions to the NBER duration data.26

Using an exponential—quadratic hazard model, which is relatively flexible yet

parsimonious, they find evidence of a positive duration dependence for pre—World

War II business expansions in the United States, Great Britain, France, and
                                        27


Germany.    Thus, the longer these expansions lasted beyond their minimum

durations, the more likely they were to end. On the other hand, the pre—1940

business contractions show no duration dependence at all in any of the four

countries. For full cycles (both T—to—T and P—to—P) there is evidence of some

positive duration dependence but less than for expansions.

       These results are definitely associated with the findings reported earlier

in part 2 of this paper: prewar expansions and postwar contractions have both

stable average durations and positive duration dependence, prewar contractions

and postwar expansions have neither. These tendencies are of great interest but

difficult to explain.     They are not consistent with models of purely random

'Monte Carlo fluctuations that would show no systematic duration dependence for

either upward or downward movements. They are also not consistent with models

that would produce positive duration dependencies in both expansions and

contractions.

       It is important to note that a strong periodicity of expansions implies

that business cycle peaks should be in large measure predictable. But they are

not:    even the best reputed professionals seldom make good forecasts of an

approaching downturn, and the public often recognizes a recession tardily, with

a surprise. Moreover, if the timing of economic downturns were predictable,

strong efforts would probably be made to prevent them, or at least to diminish

them greatly, so as to avoid the large individual losses and social distress

caused by business contractions.      If such efforts fully succeeded, business

cycles as they are known now would no longer be with us. If they were repeatedly

frustrated, we would try to learn why. In any event, the experiment remains only

a mental one; were it actually performed, the working of the economy itself could

well be significantly altered. The upshot of the argument is simply that strong
                                       28

pariodicities of axpansion are not to be expected. This is quite consistent with

indications of a significant positive duration dependence in pre—Worid War II

expansions.

      For contractions, stable durations have different implications and are not

so difficult to imagine.    That contractions have become much shorter in the

postwar age can be explained in part by changes in the structure of the economy

and in part by the direct and indirect effects of much increased efforts of

government policymakers to combat recessions and unemployment. The experience

of more persistent growth helped to generate expectations that a recession, once

known to be under way, will prove to be over soon. A business recovery in the

near future is always a highly welcome event (worries about an inflationary boom

can wait), and forecasts of a recurrence of such an event are always popular and

apt to spread.



2.6 On Theories and Evidence 8.elatin2 to Periodic Business Fluctuations

      The duration data based on the reference cycle chronologies give no.

encouragement to any theories that imply strong phase and cycle periodicities,

but they do not exclude the possibility of some weak and latent periodicities.27

The class of strongly periodic theories includes the early deterministic versions

of multiplier—accelerator interaction and nonlinear limit cycles (Samuelson 1939;

Kaldor 1940; Metzler 1947; Hicks 1950; Goodwin 1951). Adding shocks can relax

the periodiciti-. of the cycles generated by these models. Adding relations

involving money, finance, and expectations can enrich and diversify the models.

However, none of these refinements are likely to produce any systematic

asymmetries and shifts in phase durations.

      Nor is it probable that the answer lies in any single impulse or
                                       29

propagation mechanism. The models of 'forced oscillations driven by factors

that are themselves periodic are the simplest and also the easiest to dismiss.

The oldest example here is that of weather and harvest cycles that used to be

attributed to variations in sunspots or other extraterrestrial influences (Jevons

1884; Henry Moore 1914). There is no doubt that changes in weather can and do

cause major and recurrent fluctuations of production, prices, wealth, and welfare

in poor agricultural countries. Some of these may be strongly or weekly periodic

and are occasionally very large.2a But today the weather and other seasonal"

hypotheses have hardly any plausibility as      explanation of   business cycles in

the modern industrialized countries (including their farm sectors).

      A more timely and currently much debated hypothesis is that of a political

business cycle linked to the electoral cycle in democratic countries. Here,

too, there are elements of forced oscillations, though not ordained by nature but

due to events with a calendar rhythm imposed by a nation s laws and institutions.

That economics and politics interact in various ways is important and widely

acknowledged. But the notion of a regular political business cycle encounters

serious theoretical problems, being based on assumptions that would enable the

government to pursue a purely self—interested and myopic but highly effective

fine—tuning policy.     Not surprisingly, good evidence in support of this

hypothesis is hard to find.29

       Cycles with a positive duration dependence, and indeed a substantial degree

of periodicity can be produced by damped linear models with small and dense
                                                                                    in
white—noise shocks and the required structural properties. This hypothesis.

 the form developed by Frisch (1933), has strongly influenced the theory and,

 particularly, the econometric modeling of business cycles. It belongs to a class

 of models of 'free oscillations, which explain the cycles by the way the
                                       30

economic system responds to the forces that impinge upon it, not by the

cyclicality of these forces. This is a useful approach when given a sufficiently

broad interpretation. But the empirical validity of models with purely random

shocks was never adequately demonstrated. Indeed, the conclusion from simulation

studies that used macroeconometric models driven by such shocks only is that the

so generated movements lack the dimensions and properties observed in the actual

data on business cycles (Hickman 1972).

      One of the needed extensions is to large shocks, which contribute to

macroeconomic instability along with the small ones (Blanchard and Watson 1986).

Large shocks presumptively occur at irregular intervals but are often serially

correlated:     think of wars, shifts in policy, embargoes, price—level

disturbances, speculative waves, financial crises, major bankruptcies and

strikes. In general such events and their direct and indirect effects are likely

to increase the diversification and irregularly of business cycles over time.

2.7 The Moderation of U.S. Business Cycles

      Business contractions in the United States have become not only much

shorter but also much milder in the post—World War II era compared with earlier

times. Severe depressions like those of the 1870s, 1880s, and l930s appear to

have disappeared for good. Table 4 compares measures of depth and diffusion for

the five contractions of 1920—38 and the eight contractions of 1948—82. The

former set includes two major depressions (1920—21 and 1937—38), one disastrous

depression (1929—33), one mild recession (1926—27), and one more severe recession

(1923—24). The latter set includes three mild recessions (1960—61, 1969—70, and

1980) and five more severe recessions (1948—49, 1953—54, 1957—58, 1973—75, and

1981—82).     The presently available, complete data indicate that the U.S.

recession of 1990—91 (not covered here) will qualify as another mild one.
                                       31

      Table 4 leaves no doubt at all about the relative shallowness of even the

most severe of the recent recessions (1973—75 and 1981—82), which contrasts

sharply with the depth of either of the two interwar depressions, let alone that

of the 1929—33 collapse. Despite the upward trend in joblessness during the

recent period, the maximum unemployment rate in the early 1980s was still less

than half the level of the rates reached in the 1930s (column 5). Consistent

evidence is also provided by diffusion measures, although here the differences

are less striking, with the proportions of industries with declining employment

ranging from liZ to bOX (column 7).

      For the pre—Worid War I period, comprehensive estimates of economic

activity are scarce and their quality leaves much to be desired. Quarterly data

used in table 5, lines 1—3, suggest that output was 1½ times more volatile in

1919—45 than in 1875—1918 and twice as volatile in 1919—45 as in 1946—83 (column

3)•30 Although the pre—1919 figure may be an overestimate (Romer 1986), there

is little doubt about the ranking of the three periods in terms of both quarter—

to—quarter and cyclical variability. In percentage terms and on average, the

trough—to—peak increases were the largest in 1919—45 and somewhat larger after

1945 than before 1919 (column 6). The peak—to—trough decreases were very large

in 1919—45, much smaller in 1875—1918, and the smallest by far in 1946—83 (column

9).

      Before 1945, wholesale prices tended to rise in expansions and fall in

contractions, as shown clearly in table 5 (see lines 4—6, columns 6 and 9). The

trend in prices was just moderately up in 1875—1918 and mildly down in 1919—45,

despite the big inflations of World Wars I and II, but it was strongly up in

1946—83 (column 2).

       Even though economic growth decreased and cyclical instability increased
                                           32

in the latter part of the postwar era (since the early l970s), business cycles

remained moderate in comparison to the pre—Worid War I and, p fortiori, the

interwar periods. In other major countries with higher growth rates, business

contractions became much less frequent and much milder still (see part 3 below).

Several not mutually exclusive hyptheses may explain the observed reduction of

the   business    cycles in the United States.    I can only list them briefly here

(Zarnowitz (19891 1991 offers an extended discussion).

        I.   Employment in service—producing industries and government, which is

             only weakly procyclical or acyclical. increased greatly relative to

             employment in goods—producing industries, which is strongly

             procyclical.

        2.   Fiscal automatic stabilizers relating to the procyclical income

                 taxes and countercyclical transfer payments, became quite effective,

             particularly before the rise in inflation and its distortionary tax

             effects.

        3.       Federal deposit insurance prevented general banking panics, although

                 lately at high cost to the taxpayers.

        4.   The rates of change in money supply were more volatile in 1875—1917

                 and, particularly, 1919—39 than after 1946.

        5.   The record of discretionary fiscal and monetary policies, although

                 quite mixed over time, was on balance sufficiently positive to help

                 avert depressions and persistence of high unemployment.

        6.   The gradual recognition that business contractions have become

                 shorter and milder strengthened the confidence of businesspeople,

             workers, and consumers and made them adopt behavior promoting growth

                 (but this was partially offset in more recent times by the
                                         33

            expectational effects of rises in inflation and unemployment).



3.   Some International Comoatisons of Cyclical Movements and Growth Trends

3.1 The Major Market Economies After World War II

      World War II devasted the• economies of Continental Europe and the Far East.

The physical wealth and capital of once rich nations —         cities,   factories,

machinery —   lay   in ruins and in dire need of reconstruction. Eut human capital

was much better preserved, that is, people tetained their high productive

potential — education, skills — and the backlog of effective demand was huge.

Monetary, fiscal, and political reforms enabled both the defeated nations and the

nations liberated by the Allies to make a relatively smooth transition from

closed war economies to open market economies, and from totalitarian and

oppressive to democratic and free social systems. Foreign aid, mainly fom the

United States, was also made available to friend and former foe alike.

      The result of this historically rare, perhaps unique, combination of

circumstances was that France, Italy, West Germany, and Japan (as well as a

number of smaller countries) came soon to enjoy extraordinarily high rates of

real economic growth. Of course, the initial activity levels were very low,

which helps explain the long persistence of very high and only gradually

declining growth rates, but anyway the progress achieved in the 1950s and l960s

was spectacular, particularly in the case of West Germany and Japan.

      As long as the steep upward trends in employment and output (much of it

exported) continued, real growth in continental Europe and the Far East was

 interrupted infrequently and mostly by slowdowns rather than absolute declines

 in overall economic activity. Thus, the benefits of high growth were augmented

 by those of high cyclical stability.
                                          34

      Figure 2 presents the evidence. The data, collected and processed by the

Center for International Business Cycle Research (CIBCR) at Columbia University

Business School, are composite indexes of coincident indicators, which combine

monthly and quarterly measures of aggregate activity (total output, industrial

production, employment, real sales, inverted unemployment) and have trends made

equal to those of the corresponding series for real CNP or GDP. Note that West

Germany had   its   first postwar recession in 3/1966—5/1967, Japan (for which the

index begins In 1954) in 11/1973—2/1975 (see figure 2A).         For France (since

1955), the first postwar contraction shown is in 4/1958—4/1959, for Italy it is

in 10/1963—3/1965 (figure 2B). Meanwhile, Canada and the United Kingdom (figure

2C), and the United States and Australia (figure 2D), all countries that suffered

much smaller direct wartime damages, had less need of domestic reconstruction,

slower growth rates, and earlier and more frequent recessions.

      Economic growth slowed markedly everywhere during the 1970s and 1980s, and

recessions became both more common and more severe. They spread worldwide in

1947—75 after the oil embargo and huge increases in the OPEC cartel oil prices,

and again in 1980—82 after new price shocks and strong counterinflationary policy

moves in the United States. However, the index for Japan shows only a brief

decline in late 1980; its growth after the mid—1970s was much slower than before

but also remarkably steady. The index for France shows frequent but only short

and shallow declines throughout, except in 1958—59 and 1974—75 (its sharp decline

in the spring of 1968 reflects largely the concurrent political unrest).



3.2 Estimated Dimensions of Business Cycles in Eight Countries

      There is no NBER—type international reference chronology of business cycle

peaks and troughs for the post—World War II period. Perhaps the main reason for
                                         35

this is the belief that recessions have been generally replaced by were

retardations of growth in most countries.         But this is a vague view or

expectation, not a well—established fact.        What is certainly true is that

contractions of total output and employment have been short, few and far between

in developed and developing countries that achieved high average rates of real

growth.

      The laborious and data—intensive task of identifying and dating business

cycles in different economies cannot be attempted here. However, much can be

learned from the rich data bank of CIBCR, and particularly their coincident

indexes, covered in figure 2.

      The black dots in figure 2 mark peaks and troughs of specific cycles in the

indexes. The so identified declines last several (as a rule, six or more) months

and have amplitudes of several or more percentage points (as a rule, at

least U). They presumably reflect business contractions. The open dots mark

shorter and/or smaller declines that do not qualify as recessions but may be

associated with significant retardations in general economic activity. However.

substantial business slowdowns can occur without any noticeable decreases in the

levels of the index series, particularly in places and times of very high overall

growth (see, e.g., West Germany, 1956—57, and Japan, 1957 and 1964).

          The charts show some important similarities between the country indexes,

notably the concentration of long expansions in the 1960s and l980s, of       mild

recessions or slowdowns in mid— or later 1960s, and of more severe contractions

in mid—1970s and early l980s. But the differences are even more pronounced, and

 it is clear that they are primarily related to the longer growth trends. The

main point here is that high growth helps to reduce the frequency and depth of

business contractions.
                                          36

      Thus, periods of rapid and recession—free growth are observed for West
Germany   and   Italy before 1962; for France in most of the 1960s and again after

1985; for Japan before 1973; for Canada between 1961 and 1981; and for Australia

between 1961 and 1973. The economies of the United States and United Kingdom had

relatively low rates of real growth and most cyclical variability. In sharp

contrast, Japan had both the fastest growth and least cyclicaliry; indeed, one

can say that business cycles as we know it were essentially absent there.3'

      Figure 2 suggests that the postwar business cycles were shorter and more

numerous in the United States than in any other of the seven countries.         In

1955—90, the longest common period covered, the numbers of complete peak—to—peak

cycles in the indexes were as follows: United States, 6; United Kingdom and

Italy, 5 each; France and Australia, 4 each; Canada and West Germany, 3 each; and

Japan, 2.       Comparisons between fewer countries over longer periods yield

generally consistent results. Further, inspection of the charts suggests that

the greater frequency of U.S. cycles was mainly due to the shorter durations of

U.S. expansions. On the whole, it was the expansions that differed greatly

across the countries in both length and amplitude, whereas the contractions

varied much less in both dimensions.

      Table 6 presents a summary based on the data plotted and the specific—cycle

turning points identified in figure 2. It demonstrates that the cyclical rises

in the U.S. index were on average much shorter than the rises in the foreign

indexes (column 6). and also much smaller in percentage terms than the indexes

for the other countries, with the sole exception of the United Kingdom (column

7).   As for the cyclical declines in the U.S. index, they were on average

considerably deeper than the declines in the other indexes, but not particularly

long (columns 9 and 10).       The entries on mean durations and mean amplitudes
                                       37

quantify the impression from the charts that expansions differed greatly across

the countries (even apart from the extreme cases of West Germany and Japan),

while contractions differed only moderately.32

        A comprehensive assessment of how business cycles in the different

countries compare would require an analysis of the performance of many individual

indicators, which is not possible here.      However, I examined the industrial

production and employment components of the coincident indexes under

consideration, and find that a few general observations deserve to be made. The

industrial production indexes cover sectors of high cyclical sensitivity

(manufacturing everywhere, mining and/or public utilities in most countries)."

Therefore they have at least as many specific cycles as the coincident indexes

(which cover less sensitive sectors and processes as well), often significantly

more.      Thus, the industrial production series for Japan (mining and

manufacturing) shows clearly seven expansions and six contractions in the period

1953—90.

        In the United States, although nonfarm employment has a much broader

coverage than industrial production, the cyclical profiles of the two indicators

are quite similar.     This is definitely not the case in some of the other

countries, however. In Japan, total employment of 'regular workers had only one

cyclical contraction (4/1975—5/1976) between 1954 and l990. In the United

Kingdom, employment in production industries followed a gradual downward trend

since 1966, and the same applies to West German employment in manufacturing and

mining from 1971 until mid—1984 as well as to French nonfarm employment between

mid—1974 and mid—1985. This stands in contrast to the United States, where an

upward trend in employment prevailed throughout. It is well known that,      after

having stayed very low in the earlier postwar years, unemployment in Western
                                       38

Europe increased rapidly (quadrupled) between 1970 and 1985, from well below to

well above the U.S. levels. Yet, despite the dountrends in employment and clear

cyclical movements around them, business cycles apparently remained milder in

Europe than here.      This suggests that the persistent rise in European

unemployment was largely noncyclical in nature, which is consistent with most

recent hypotheses .



3.3   Possj.ble Reasons for the Observed Differences

      There are no tested hypotheses, let alone accepted knowledge, on why the

U.S. economy may be subject to more frequent and deeper recessions than Japan,

West Germany or France.    However, there is much debate about the sources of

differences in longer—term growth rates between the major industrial and trading

countries. Insights from this literature bear on the present problem insofar as

higher growth is in fact conducive to greater cyclical stability.

       The central argument here is simple. Investment in human and physical

capital produces advances in knowledge, technological progress, and increased.

rates of growth in factor productivity, output, and real income.         What is

desired, therefore, is higher maintained rates (and shares in total output) of

saving—cum—investment in real terms.36      There is no need here to cite the

voluminous theoretical and empirical work on sources of economic growth, which

generally supports this basic position.       As a practical outcome, there is

considerable consensus that the most successful economies are those that have the

highest average long—term rates of capital investment. The United States had for

some time now relatively low shares of private saving and total productive

investment, hence it is widely and variously urged to perform better in this

respect, as its main competitors in Europe and the Far East do.
                                       39

      On the other hand, fluctuations in business and consumer capital outlays

have long been recognized to be a major source of cyclical instability in

aggregate demand. The above argument seems to ignore or assume away the problem.

Since investment is much more cyclical than consumption, is it not necessarily

true that a larger share of investment will increase the fluctuations of the

economy, along with its growth?

      The short answer is no. Investment can be both high and stable, provided

it is a part of, and a response to,.growth in aggregate demand that is sufficient

to keep the economy near full employment. As the classical long—run version of

the accelerator theory has it, net investment is in the end only justified by

growth in the demand for the product of the new capital (which ought to be given

the broadest interpretation).     But, as noted before, it is equally true that

growth itself depends positively on prior rates of investment. Increases in real

capital, physical and human, generate improvements in productivity that can

reduce costs and prices. This is particularly important in the competitive world

of open economies.

      In sum, higher rates of saving, investment, and growth can coexist with,

and indeed may favor, greater cyclical stability. The problem is how to maintain

them. Eut several heavily export—oriented countries in Europe and Asia did very

well on this score, and their experiences may hold useful lessons.

      The other side of the argument that more growth promotes more stability is

that economic fluctuations can have costly long—term consequences in the form of

suboptimal investment and growth. In a recent model, firms must make technology

commitments in advance, and unanticipated volatility causes errors in these

decisions (e.g., on the scale of a new plant or size of the work force) which

have substantial negative output effects (Rarney and Rarney l99l).'
                                       40

      To be sure, there are other factors to be considered. Business cycles have

historically been more frequent and shorter in the United States than in Europe,

as shown above in section 2.1 (table I and text). This difference points in the

same direction as that observed in recent times, but it is much weaker and there

are no large and systematic disparities in country growth trends to account for

it. To my knowledge, it was never explained. Possible reasons include a larger

role of short inventory fluctuations in the United States and more frequent

financial disturbances.

3.4 Growth Cycles

      In countries where growth persisted at high rates and business contractions

occurred rarely and remained mild for a considerable time, even mere slowdowns

cause much public concern and indeed are often treated as actual recessions are

treated elsewhere.     This is so because the slowdowns are themselves of

significant duration, result in some rise in unemployment and weak business

conditions generally, and are usually associated with absolute declines in some

more cyclically sensitive activities and sectors. In the 1960s, when confidence

about the long—lasting era of high growth and rising prosperity reached its peak,

business cycles seemed increasingly obsolete and interest shifted to growth

cycles,' that is, fluctuations around the upward trend in a nation's economic

activity expressed in real terms (Bronfenbrenner 1969; Mintz 1969, 1974).

      The concept of growth cycles is an old one, as illustrated by the fact that

early indexes of eneral business conditions and trade were more often than not

available only in form of percentage deviations from estimated trend or 'normal'

curves (see Zarnowitz 1981 for a brief history of this approach and references).

Inplicitly, the idea of growth cycles has also long been popular with textbook

authors who refer vaguely to business cycles being fluctuations around the
trend and stress the transitory nature of departures of the actual from the

potential (full employment) output.      But it is very important to distinguish

clearly between business cycles and growth cycles because the two differ

qualitatively and not just in degree. A slow expansion is still an expansion;

the problems posed by a contraction are quite distinct.          Moreover, trends

interact with cycles, vary over time, and are difficult to isolate and measure.

      In spite of these difficulties, much interesting work has been done in the

last twenty years on the postwar growth cycles in many countries, particularly

by Mintz at the NBER and by Moore and his associates at the CIBCR.38 When

cautiously interpreted, the results can yield lessons on when and how expansions

speed and slow, and retardations do or do not develop into contractions.

      The chronology of growth cycles is derived from the observed consensus of

the corresponding turning points in series of deviations from trend just as the

chronology of business cycles is derived from the consensus of turning points in

series of levels. In both cases, the same basic set of data is used, namely a

country's principal coincident indicators —    the main comprehensive measures of

GNP or GOP, personal income, sales, employment, and industrial production (all

deflated or in physical units).      In both cases, too, peaks and troughs mark

specific cycles in the indicators used (whether they relate to the original

levels or those in the trend—adjusted series). The trends should be flexible and

as free of any cyclical components as possible (in the CIBCR studies they are

determined by interpolation between segments of the series determined with the

help of selected long—term moving averages).

      This paper is mainly concerned with business cycles, not growth cycles, but

a brief review of how the two units of observation       are related is in order.
 Figure   3 presents in schematic form the timing of growth cycle peaks and troughs
                                        42

in six countries. The initial and terminal dates of slowdowns that ended in

renewed expansions are marked by ordinary dots, the dates of slowdowns that ended

in contractions are marked by heavier black dots. The count below indicates chat

slowdowns—without—recession prevailed strongly in Japan, less so in West Germany

                                                     West
                          U.S.   Canada      U.K.   Germany   France     Jaoan
Slowdown, no recession     4        7         3        5        3          6


Slowdown and recession     7        5         5        3        4          2


and Canada, while slowdowns—with—recession were more common in the other three

countries, most notably the United States.39 Growth cycles include both types

of slowdown, hence are much more numerous than business cycles that are defined

by the presence of absolute decreases in aggregate activity (recessions). In the

trend—adjusted indicator series, all major retardations are reflected in

specific—cycle declines that make up growth—cycle contractions; some of these

movements descend into the negative region, others stop short of it.

      Slowdowns occur either in the late stages of business expansions (i.e.,

some time before peaks) or they interrupt long expansions.             As a result.

expansions are shorter and contractions longer in growth cycles than in business

cycles.   Growth cycles are more nearly symmetrical and less variable than

business cycles with respect to both durations and amplitudes of their phases.

Growth—cycle peaks tend to occur before the corresponding business—cycle peaks,

while the troughs of the matching growth cycles and business cycles tend to be

roughly coincident.

      Figure 3 suggests a high degree of international correspondence in the

timing of growth cycles. Thus, much (though not all) of the time, the diagrams

for the United States and Canada, and those for the United Kingdom and West

Germany, display nearly synchronous movements.      Indeed, these chronologies are
                                       43

considerably more similar than those of business cycles that can be inferred from

figure 2. This presumably reflects the effects of the elimination or reduction

of the divergencies in the national trends.



        4. The Observed Tendencies, Disturbances, and Regularities

4.1 Endoenous Cyclical Variables

      As we have seen, business cycles vary greatly in duration and intensity,

less in diffusion. They are not only diverse but also evolving. What they have

in common is not their overall dimensions but the make—up, features, and

interaction of their many constituent processes.

      Thus, in each cycle, whether long or short, large or small, production,

employment, real incomes and real sales tend to expand and contract together in

many industries and regions, though at uneven rates.      Other variables, e.g.,

hours worked per week, real new orders for manufactured goods, and change in

prices of industrial raw materials, rise and fall correspondingly but earlier,

with variable leads, Still others, e.g., inventory—sales ratios, real business

loans outstanding, and change in unit labor Cost also rise in business expansions

and fall in contractions but somewhat later, with variable lags.            These

sequential movements usually recur in each successive cycle.        They all are

significantly persistent and pervasive.

       Systematic differences exist not only in the timing of cyclical movements

 in different variables but also in their relative size and conformity or

 coherence (i.e., correlation with business cycles). Among the earliest and most

 important observations in this area is that activities relating to durable

 (producer and consumer) goods have particularly large and well—conforming

 cyclical fluctuations.    Other variables long and rightly viewed as highly
                                      44

cyclical are business profits, investment in plant, equipment, and inventories,

and cost and volume of bank credit used to finance such investments.

      More than any other sector of the modern economy, manufacturing has

historically been central to both economic growth and fluctuations. Mining.

construction, transportation, communication, and public utilities have varying

but significant degrees of cyclical sensitivity. Other nonfarm sectors, which

produce largely services rather than goods tend to be much less responsive to

business cycles. Employment in service industries broadly defined (including

government) followed a strong and smooth upward trend.       Agriculture, which

underwent a long and strong downward trend in employment and a huge secular rise

in productivity, is but weakly cyclical, except for prices. In sum, business

cycles, which developed in the age of industrialization, still affect most

strongly industries producing goods, especially durables (Zarnowitz and Moore

1986, pp. 536—39).

      Given the weight of these "stylized facts", it is not surprising that the

predominantly endogenous theories of business cycles, old and new, stress the

role of those variables that have clear patterns of regular participation in the

motion of the economy at large. These variables, which may be called "cyclical",

and the corresponding theories, are named below.40

      1.    Business fixed investment (overinvestment; vertical maladjustments;

            accelerator).

      2.    Inventory investment (multiplier—accelerator models with feedback

            effects).

      3.    Business profits (cost—price imbalances, profit margins and

            expectations).

      4.    credit and interest rates (unstable supply of bank credit;
                                       45

             discrepancies between, and changes in, the money, real, and natural

             rates of interest).

      The   cyclical   variables are endogenous — generated by the system of

relationships within which they interact.    In order for them to be primarily

responsible for the business cycles, the system must have the required dynamics

in form of some essential nonlinearities, or leads and lags, or both.        Such

elements are undoubtedly important, but we are still far from understanding well

how they work, and hence how far the endogenous models can go in explaining

business cycles.



4.2 Exogenous Variables and the Role of Money

      Recent theories view economic fluctuations as resulting mainly from changes

in observable exogenous factors (variables) or unobservable random shocks

(errors). Here the cyclical variables, although still important as propagators

of business cycles, are no longer seen as the central part of a system that can

produce self—sustaining cycles.

      Important policy variables such as the monetary base, tax rates, and

federal government spending have been traditionally treated as exogenous,

although this cannot be strictly true, since they are clearly influenced by the

economy as well as influencing it. Money supply variables are of even more mixed

nature in this regard. The extent to which a central bank controls the stock of

money or (which is more relevant) its rate of growth depends on factors that vary

across countries and over time.     They include the national and international

monetary systems; the powers, objectives, and performance of the bank; and the

 definition and composition of the supply of money.

       In the United States, narrowly— and broadly—defined monetary aggregates
                                      46

normally trend upward in both expansions and contractions, though often at

reduced rates before downturns. Long absolute declines in Ml or M2 are rare and

as a rule associated with business depressions or stagnations. Monetary growth

rates tend to lead at business cycle peaks and troughs but by intervals that are

highly variable and on average long (Friedman and Schwartz 1963a, 1963b).

Cyclical changes in the deposit—reserve ratio and, particularly, the deposit—

currency ratio, which reflect the chain of influence that runs from business

activity to money, contribute on average strongly to the patterns of movement in

money growth during business cycles (Cagan 1965; Plosser 1991). Money shows a

systematic tendency to grow faster in business expansions than in contractions,

and so does the domestic nonfinancial credit, but the stability of monetary

relationships in the cyclical context is subject to much doubt and debate (B.

Friedman 1986; Meltzer 1986). Certainly, there is more regularity in the long—

term relation between money growth and changes in the price level, and in the

procyclical behavior of interest rates and the income velocity of money (allowing

 for its long trends).

       For all of this, there is no denying that business cycles have important

 monetary and financial aspects.    A six—variable, four—lag quarterly vector

 autoregressive (VAR) model applied to postwar and earlier U.S. data by Zarnowitz

 and Braun (1990) shows that the rate of change in real CNP was significantly

 affected by lagged rates of change in the monetary aggregates (base, Ml, and

 particularly M2) but much more strongly yet by lagged values of short—term

 interest rates. However, the influence of changes in the planned volume of fixed

 and inventory investment and purchases of durable goods (represented by series

 of new orders and contracts ) proved to be strong as well.4'
                                          47

4.3 Monetary. Real. and Expectattonal Shocks

      In the original monetarist theory, money supply was treated as the main

exogenous factor driving the business cycle.        In the more recent equilibrium

version with rational expectations, the anticipated money growth can influence

only prices, not output; that is, only unanticipated money shocks have real

effects. Tests of this hypothesis have produced evidence that is mixed but

mostly unfavorable in the sense of not confirming the importance of the

distinction between the effects of the anticipated and unanticipated components

of monetary change.2
      Full exogeneity of money is one extreme and unrealistic assumption: full

endogeneity of money is another, at the opposite end of the spectrum. The latter

view posits that changes in inside money accomod.ate the money stock to the level

of economic activity; it is accepted both in some Keynesian disequilibrium models

and the real business cycle (RZC) models in which fluctuations are strictly

equilibrium phenomena.

      In the REC   model,   stochastic oscillations in the economy' s real growth path

are caused by a mixture of transitory and permanent shocks to productivity

 (Kydland and Prescott 1982). There is a long gestation lag in the production of

capital goods, which imparts some persistence to output movements.                  As

productivity gains fluctuate, so do real wages (or, more accurately, real returns

 on the work effort) to which labor supply responds very elastically.

       But the cyclical senstivity of real wages is low, and tests of the

 hypothesis of high intertemporal substitution of leisure are mostly negative

 (see, e.g., Altonji 1982). To explain booms and busts, sufficiently large and
                                                                           for them is
 frequent shocks to productivity would be necessary, yet the evidence

 hard to find (or nonexistent: has there been any technological Lt.g.LtS
                                                                                  of   a
                                         48

large—scale or recurrent nature?) When interpreted as productivity shocks, the

procyclical movement of the Solow residual supports the RBC hypothesis, but this

overlooks the high probability that much of this movement reflects the effects

of labor hoarding and measurement errors (as noted in several critiques; see,

e.g., Eiehenbauxn 1990). Indeed, a recent study whose authors include two RBC

theorists finds that productivity disturbances account for no more than 35—441

of total output fluctuations in a cointegrated VAR model with both real and

nominal variables (King, Plosser, Stock, and Watson 1991).

      Much of the recent work that seems to be concerned with explaining business

cycles is actually preoccupied with such perennial theoretical issues as the

rationality of economic expectations and behavior and the neutrality of money.

The predominant view is that stable growth at full employment would prevail in

the absence of outside shocks; moreover, the shocks tend to be reduced to one or

two broad categories per model.         Thus, as already noted, the equilibrium

theorists concentrate on either unanticipated changes in money and prices or

shifts in technology.      Some attention is given to shifts in preferences and

desired consumption (Hall 1986). One study singles out sectoral demand shifts

(Lilien 1982), another oil price shocks (Hamilton 1983). The role of shocks to,

ad imperfections of. credit markets is stressed by some authors (Wojnilower

1980; Greenwald, Stiglitz, and Weiss 1984), while the direct effects of

independent shifts in monetary policy are central to others (Romer and Romer

1989).

         However, there is also considerable and perhaps increasing recognition that

macroeconomic fluctuations may have many important sources. Blanchard and Watson

 (1986) distinguish four major categories of shocks —         to   aggregate demand,

aggregate supply, fiscal policy, and money supply — and conclude that each of
                                        49

these made a roughly equal contribution to the U.S. postwar cycles. Occasional

large disturbances are at work along with frequent small shocks, so that business

cycles are quite differentiated. Recent papers by Blanchard and others generally

assume that the effects of supply shocks are more persistent than those of demand

shocks.

        That a variety of factors can and do serve as proximate causes of business

cycles is an old Idea embodied in the synthetic theories of several early writers

such as Aftalion, Mitchell, Schumpeter, and very explicitly Pigou (1927).

Evidence from recent macroeconometric models supports this concept. Unlike the

early Keynesian models dominated by demand factors and fiscal policy, the present

models give considerable attention to supply factors as well, and actually have

monetary policy matter more than fiscal.       In large multi—sector models, the

distinction between demand and supply shocks is rather blurred anyway.

        Since the incisive and detailed analysis of the monetary history of the

United States by Friedman and Schwartz (1963a), the monetarist interpretation of

business cycle developments gained and still retains a wide acceptance, despite

critical countercurrents within the profession. It is simply very difficult to

deny that strong restrictive monetary measures designed to combat inflation have

contributed to subsequent economic downturns at least in some well—known episodes

 (notably the Federal Reserve raises of the discount rate in 1920 and of reserve

 requirements in 1936—37). Similarly, the shift to a policy of lower money growth

 and sharply higher interest rates, first signaled in October 1979, was followed

by the Volcker disiriflation and the recessions of 1980 and 1981—82. In each

 case, however, these monetary shocks were accompanied by changes        in factors

 unrelated to monetary policy that must have also contributed to the recessions

 that   followed   (fiscal stringencies in 1920 and 1936—37; an oil shock and
                                         50

financial deregulation in the late 1970s, fall in money velocity in the early

1980s). So monetary and real disturbances (or unusual developments) coincided,

and their effects are difficult to disentangle.

      Nor are these the only types of disturbances to be considered, since there

are also the psychological factors emphasized early by Pigou, that is, the

shifts in expectations that may at times spread widely enough to become self—

fulfilling. In contemporary models of financial crises or speculative price

bubbles, multiple equilibria exist, and many of them involve expectations that

appear arbitrary ex post yet are rational ex ante: many act on them because they

believe that others will (see Woodford 1981 for a brief review),

      The controversy about real vs. monetary theories of business cycles is now

very old; it has been instructive but prolonging it further is apt to produce

more heat than light.      It is time to recognize that short—term variations in

economic activity are influenced by forces of each of the three types —     real,
monetary, and expectational. Their mix varies, and the really important question

is how they interact and why.

      The recession of 1990—91 presents an interesting example, although more

time and data   will   be needed to assess it. It was preceded by a long slowdown

that started early in 1989, following a sharp decrease in monetary growth and

increase in interest rates.         Both monetary policy and credit conditions

tightened. Efforts to counteract the persistently large government deficits made

the fiscal policy quite tight, too. Real disposable income and real domestic

final sales flattened and then turned down early. So both monetary and real

factors worked to depress economic activity. They were finally joined by a sharp

drop in consumer expectations and business confidence, which occurred after

Iraq's invasion of Kuwait raised oil prices, the threat of war, and the general
                                          51

level of uncertainty about inflation and unemployment. Thus the last blow was

delivered to the old and by then seriously weakened expansion.



4.4 Leads and Lags

      Presumably,    one important reason for the differentiation of business cycles

is that they are affected by large disturbances of all kinds, including shifts

in policies. Also, changes in the economy's structure contribute to an evolution

of cyclical behavior that is more predictable, though not without some important

exceptions." Still, business cycles are like individuals of a species: diverse

yet also alike in many essential respects (think of other events of which the

same can be said, e.g., wars). The main common element, as we already know,

consists of the properties of comovements in cyclical variables.

      Table 7 covers 32 U.s. monthly indicators for which there are available

both the traditional measures of cyclical timing and variability (columns 2—6)

and new measures of filtered cross—correlation with an index designed to

approximate aggregate economic activity in real ternis.           The first set of

statistics, from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (Commerce Department), refers

to the period 1948—80; the second, from a NBER study by Stock and Watson, refers

to the period 1959—89.       The two are entirely independent and based on very

different methods, yet they are generally consistent and complementary.

      The first 17 series listed in table 7 are classified as leading at both

peaks and troughs of business cycles and include ten components of the BEA index

of leading indicators as of 1984 (marked ).        They reflect marginal employment
adjustments, which under uncertainty are made ahead of decisions that result in

changes of employment and unemployment (lines 1—3); adjustments of delivery

periods and activities marking the early stages of investment processes, which
                                       52

tend to lead production, shipments, construction, and installation of equipment

(lines 4—10); changes in inventories and sensitive prices (lines 11—13); and

changes in money and credit conditions (lines 14—17).

      Such series have a long history of leading at business cycle peaks and

troughs. They are heavily represented in a group of 75 series whose median

timing at 15 peaks and 16 troughs of the period 1885—1937 was —6(5) and —5(3),

respectively (i.e., leads six and five months, with standard deviations of five

and three months; for sources and detail, see Zarnowitz and Moore 1986, pp. 565—

71). In 1948—80, the means (s.d.), in months, of the median leads were —11(3)

at peaks and —2(2) at troughs (as calculated from the entries in lines 1—17,

columns 2 and 3).    Thus, the relative timing of these indicators remained

remarkably consistent over the past century, although the leads at peaks have

become longer and the leads at troughs shorter since 1948 than before.

      Leads maximize correlations with an index of coincident indicators in 1959—

89 for all but two of the series used in lines 1—17, columns 7_946 This is a

strong confirmation of the tendency of these series to move ahead of aggregate

economic activity (output, employment, real income and real sales). But these

leads (column 8) average —2(3) months, hence are considerably shorter than the

corresponding "al1 turns leads (column 4), which average —6(3) months.

      This would be expected for the following reasons. The differences in

timing are likely to be larger and more systematic for the major cyclical

movements than for the many small and short variations that may often be caused

by random influences which affect many variables more or less simultaneously.

The cyclical measures in columns 1—3 mostly refer to the levels of the indicators

(except where the title specifies change), but the correlation measures in

columns 7—9 mostly refer to smoothed rates of change, including those in the
                                       53

coincident index itself (note the prevalence of DLN — A in in column 7)7 Thus,

the former relate directly to business cycle turning points, whereas the latter

relate directly to all observations for growth cycles. The series that lead at

business cycle turns also tend to lead at growth cycle turns, in the United

States and elsewhere (Klein and Moore 1985). But the leads at business cycle

peaks are particularly long, reflecting high levels of demand and capacity

utilization, large backlogs of unfilled orders, and extended delivery periods.

Growth cycle peaks typically occur several months before business cycle peaks and

have shorter leads and signals (Zarnowitz and Moore 1982).

      It should be noted that table 7 covers monthly indicators only, hence omits

one particularly important class of leaders available in quarterly form only,

namely corporate profits (totals, rates, and margins, before and after taxes, in

current and constant dollars; also net corporate cash flows). Profits decline

in late stages of expansion well before sales do because costs start rising

faster than selling prices, depressing profit margins in many businesses. Labor

markets get tight and wages rise even as productivity slackens; interest rates

and cost of holding inventories rise; but product prices tend to increase less,

being held back by prior commitments and domestic and international competition

for market shares. (Mitchell hypothesized such developments as a major cause of

business cycles in his earliest treatise of 1913). Stock price indexes tend to

have strong cyclical leads (line 12) because they anticipate or reflect the early

movements in profits and also in inverted interest rates, as well as probably

other changes such as those in money and credit (lines 15 and 16).

      Roughly coincident indicators of employment, production, real personal

income, and real sales are listed in lines 18—24 of table 7 (the four marked

are components of the BEA coincident index). Here coincidences (0) or very short
                                        54

leads (—1) dominate both the all—turns and maximum—correlation timing (columns

4 and 8), but in a few cases longer leads appear, mainly at peaks, for industrial

production and sales. All of these series have pronounced growth trends and are

used in log differences for the correlation measures.

      The indicators listed in lines 25—32 are classified as lagging in the

historical NBER studies and BEA reviews of cyclical indicators (the five marked

 are components of the BEA lagging index). The common feature of these series

is that they are associated with cost of doing business.        Increases in the

duration of unemployment raise the private and social burdens of joblessness and

insurance against it. Labor cost per unit of output is the largest component of

average costs on the economy—wide scale. Interest rates measure the costs of

credit and financing investments of various types. The larger the inventories

are relative to sales, and the larger the volume of credit is relative to income,

the heavier are the costs of finance, given the level of interest rates.

Accordingly-, the lagging increase in these cost factors around the business cycle

peak works to discourage economic activity, and their lagging decrease around the

trough works to encourage it. Indeed, when inverted (i.e., divided into one),

the lagging index shows the earliest cyclical signals that anticipate even the

turning points in the leading index (Moore 1983, chap. 23).

      The eight series in the last section of table 7 have sizable median lags,

averaging in months about +3(3) at peaks, +7(4) at troughs, and ÷5(3) at all

turns (columns 2—4). It is broadly consistent with the lagging nature of these

indicators that five of them also show the best correlations for lags (which are

long, except for the two    series   of first differences in short—term interest

rates; see columns 7—9). For three series that tend to lag at business cycle

turns (inventory—sales ratio, unit labor cost, and corporate bond yields), the
                                      55

correlations with the coincident index refer to leads, but they are negative.

This is consistent with the old and well—established finding that the inverted

lagging indicators lead.48



4.5 Comovements and Amnlitudes

      The typical leads and lags of the major economic variables constitute

important and relatively enduring features of cyclical behavior. Another class

of such characteristics relates to how close the comovements of the variables

tend to be in the course of business expansions and contractions. Still another

consists of relative amplitudes of cyclical change in the different processes.

      The correlations in the last column of table 7 provide estimates of the

comovements of the selected indicators with an index that approximates well the

aggregate economic activity on a monthly basis.      The Stock—Watson index of

coincident indicators (denoted ICI for simplicity) resembles the BEA coincident

index rather closely but has a formal probabilistic interpretation.       Of the

leading series (lines 1—17), capacity utilization, the help—wanted index, and the

two aggregates of new orders show the highest positive r(k) of .89—.96, while

unemployment insurance claims has —.87 (lines 2—6). Average workweek, contracts

and orders for plant and equipment, and inventory change show r(k) correlations

of .76—.79; seven other indicators, including in descending order real money

supply, change in credit, vendor performance, housing permits, and stock prices

have r(k) of .55—.68; and for two series these measures are very low indeed (—.40

 for failure liabilities and .25 for Ml growth).

       Not surprisingly, the correlations of the individual coincident indicators

 with the ICI are high (lines 18—24). They range from .92 to .99 for five of the

 series, and are .87 for real personal income less transfer payments but only .69
                                       56

for real retail sales.    Industrial production indexes for total and durable

manufacturing show the highest r(k) coefficients.

      The comovements of the lagging indicators with the ICI are not very close.

The highest correlations here are the negative ones for unemployment duration,

inventory—sales ratio, and unit labor cost (lines 25—27). Two series on credit

and two on short—term interest rates have r(k) of .52—.63, the bond yield has one

of only —.45 (lines 28—32).

      The conventional method of analyzing time series for the study of business

cycles is to estimate and then eliminate their seasonal components. Working with

seasonally adjusted series (just as working with trend—adjusted or heavily

smoothed series) is often convenient but not without risks.9          Even after

seasonal adjustment, the month—to—month change in most series Contains a large

component of short random variations; the cyclical component represents a much

longer and smoother movement that Is often much smaller than the total change on

a per—month basis (compare the paired entries in columns S and 6)." Some

leading indicators show great volatility of monthly change, which obscures the

relatively small trend—cycle movement (inventory investment and business failures

provide extreme examples, see lines 11 and 16). In contrast, some other early—

moving series are remarkably smooth to begin with, and are dominated by cyclical

fluctuations (e.g., the help—wanted index, capacity utilization, and vendor

performance, lines 3, 4, and 7) or by the trend—cycle (e.g., real money supply,

line 15).     Most of the leading indicators fall somewhere in the broad

intermediate range, that is, they display great overall sensitivity and have both

clear specific cycles and many smaller random oscillations.

       The coincident indicators have generally much smaller, and also more

uniform, amplitudes of monthly total and cyclical change than the leading
                                       57

indicators. The following tabulation, which uses only percent entries from



                              Total change             Trend—cycle change

Leading (11 series)             5.4(7.6)                    1.5(0.8)

Coincident (7 series)           0.8(0.4)                    0.6(0.2)



columns 5 and 6, brings out the contrast between the two groups. Behind it are

important particulars. Thus, consider manufacturing of durable goods, where much

of the production is to order. Here new orders move in large swings that are

followed with variable but significant lags by much smaller fluctuations in

outputs and shipments. The resulting changes in backlogs of unfilled orders and

average delivery lags are also large, leading, and procyclical. Production of

nondurable goods is both less cyclical and less volatile than that of durable

goods (lines 22 and 23), and production of services (not shown) is least, again

on both counts.

      Other related or similar examples may be just mentioned.5' New housing

permits (and starts) lead residential investment, which is somewhat smoother.

New orders and contracts for plant and equipment lead business capital outlays,

which fluctuate much less and lag behind considerably, particularly at troughs.

Other commitments and activities marking the early stages of investment processes

are new capital appropriations, new business formation and incorporations, new

bond and equity issues (all strongly procyclical and leading), whereas other

late—stage processes are completions of industrial and commercial construction

projects, shipments and installations of machinery.

      Interest rates tend to lag at business cycle turns, especially troughs, but

they are both strongly influenced by, and themselves strongly influence, the
                                       58

general business conditions. All vary procyclically, but the short—term rates

have larger cyclical movements than long—term rates (lines 30—32). Their changes

are measured in their own units, as is also the case for some other series in

this group (lines 25—26), so no amplitude comparisons can be made here with

measures expressed in terms of percent changes. But let us note that several

important lagging indicators have strongly predominant trend—cycle components and

are very smooth (notably so for commercial and industrial loans outstanding and

the ratio of consumer installment credit to personal income; see lines 28 and

29).



                            5. General Conclusions



       In this paper, I have considered the short but no—so—easy question What

is a business cycle? from several angles. Part 1 looked at economic history and

at the development of thinking about business cycles.        Part 2 reviewed the

chronologies of business expansions and contractions; the lessons from the

duration data; the concepts of periodicity of cycles and phases; and the evidence

and reasons for the apparent moderation of macroeconomic fluctuations in the

post—World War II era. Part 3 compared the postwar business cycles and growth

cycles in several major industrialized, market—oriented countries.         Part 4

discussed the behavior of endogenous and exogenous variables; the role of

monetary, real, and expectational shocks; the systematic timing sequences

(tendencies to lead or lag); and the regularities of cyclical comovements and

amplitudes. Understanding business cycles can be aided by each of these modes

of analysis.

       Some sections of this study interpret history others literature; some
                                          59

discuss old, others new findings and ideas.         Many of the results refer to

particular aspects of theory and evidence, and there is no need to restate any

of them. Hence only a few general conclusions are collected here.

      1. A business cycle includes a downturn and contraction followed by an

upturn and expansion in aggregate economic activity, which ideally should be

represented by comprehensive and reliable measures of total employment, output,

real income, and real expenditures. (But nominal income aggregates and price

indexes can serve as good criteria, provided that the fluctuations extend to a

broad class of sufficiently flexible prices, as was the case in the now rather

distant past.)

          2.   A business cycle is pervasive in the sense that it consists of

comovements and interactions- of many variables. The regularity, magnitude, and

timing of the fluctuations vary across the variables, and these differences are

in part systematic. Thus, most activities are procyclical, mildly or strongly.

but some are countercyclical.          Some variables tend to have approximately

coincident timing, others tend to lead, and still others tend to lag.         These

patterns may or may not be symmetrical, e.g., timing may be systematically

different at peaks and troughs.

          3. A business cycle is at least national in scope, that is, it involves

most industries and regions of a country, though again with variations in

 intensity and timing. It can attain much larger dimensions when transmitted

 across countries through channels of international trade and finance.

      -
          4.   A business cycle lasts as a rule several years and so is sufficiently

 persistent for serially correlated as well as intercorrelated movements in many

 variables to develop sequentially in the downward as well as upward direction.

 The movements tend to cumulate before reversing themselves.
                                       60

      5.    In most but not all business cycles, prices in general move

procyclically, at least apart from their long trends (in the last half—century.

upward).   This indicates a long and large role for the fluctuations of, and

disturbances to, aggregate demand.      These can be of real, monetary, or

expectational origin, and may well involve interactions between any or all such

factors. But supply shifts are also part and parcel of business cycles, and they

nay be dominant in some. (The two major oil price shocks in the 1970s have been

associated with inflationary recessions.) The cyclical instability of profits,

investment, and credit has a long history and is well documented.

      6. Business cycles have varied greatly over the past 200 years in length,

spread, and size. They included vigorous and weak expansions, long and short;

mild and severe contractions, again some long, some short; and many moderate

fluctuations of close—to—average duration (about 3—5 years). But since the 1930s

the United States suffered no major depression. Business expansions have become

longer, recessions shorter and milder. The probable reasons include the shift

of employment to production of services, automatic stabilizers, some financial

reforms and avoidance of crises, greater weight and some successes of

governmental actions and policies, and higher levels of public confidence.

      7. The postwar recessions were much fewer and generally milder still in

France, Italy and, particularly, West Germany and Japan. These countries also

had much higher average rates of real economic growth than the United States,

especially in the early reconstruction phase of the post—1945 era. In the 1970s

and l980s, growth decreased everywhere and the recessions became more frequent

and serious. All this suggests that countries and periods with stronger growth

trends are less vulnerable to cyclical instability.      This is a potentially

important proposition that is in need of explanation and testing (with possible
                                      61

extensions to regions, industries, etc.),

      8.   In sum, business cycles make up a class of varied, complex, and

evolving phenomena of both history and economic dynamics. Theories or models

that try to reduce them to a single causal mechanism or shock seem to me

altogether unlikely to succeed.
                                           62

                                     Footnotes



1. In a letter of June 27, 1772, David Hume informed Smith that We are

   here in a very melancholy situation:                 Continual bankruptcies,

    universal loss of credit ..     . Do    these events any—wise effect your

    theoryv Smith's answer is unknown (see Mirowski 1985, pp. 15—18).

2. See Haberler £19371 1964; Zarnowitz 1985; Moore and Zarnowitz 1986;

    Backhouse 1988; Sherman 1991.

3. Thus, for England he listed 14 crises in 1803—82 at intervals

    averaging 6.1 years, with a standard deviation of 2.6 and a range of

    1—10 years (see also Burns and Mitchell 1946, p. 442).

4. See Burns and Mitchell 1946, Table 16, PP. 78—79.

5. For arguments and some evidence consistent with the above, see

    Backhouse 1988, chs. 2 and 5.

6. Schuinpeter refers to Mitchell arid Spiethoff as disagreeing with him on

    this point.

7. See Mirowski 1985, pp. 201—213.              The other sources of the crisis

    chronologies in question are Bouniatian 1908, Ashton 1959, and Deane

    1967. All authors agreed on two dates, three agreed on six, and two

    agreed on ten (out of the 13 dates proposed by Ashton). For 1700—

    1802, Ashton suggested a sequence of 16 cycles, with durations

    averaging about 5 years and concentrated mainly in the 3—6 years'

    range (Moore and Zarnowitz 1986, pp. 741—43).

8. The coverage of the annals is: United States and England, 1790—1925;

    France, 1840—1925; Cermany, 1853—1925; Austria, 1867—1925; and twelve

    other countries on four continents (various periods between 1890 arid

    1925).
                                         63

9.   This is certainly consistent with the recent evidence on the

     performance of business outlook analysts, policy makers, and
     forecasters (see Fels and Hinshaw 1968; Zarnowitz 1967, 1974).

10. Of course, many seemingly familiar facts or events are complex or

     controversial enough to elude a tight formulation of meaning, say, in

     a dictionary or legal sense. One is reminded, for example, of Justice

     Potter Stewarts writing, in the 1964 case of Jacobellis vs. Ohio,

     that obscenity was indeed difficult to define but 1 know it when I

     see it.

11. For some detail on the historical statistics applied in the

     construction of the business cycle chronology for the United States,

     see Zarnowitz 1981 and Moore and Zarnowitz 1986, and references

     therein.

12. For a further analysis along these lines, see Zarnowitz 1985 and 1991.

13. From the introduction by Burns to the posthumous book by Mitchell

     (1951, pp. Vil—VIlI).

14. Something similar could be said as well about some earlier important

     influences, notably that of Marx.

15. Early accelerator models made investment a function of changes in

     output (Aftalion 1913; Clark 1917). The more general and satisfactory

     formulation equates investment to some fraction of the gap between the

     desired and actual capital stock.

16. This   excludes   the expansions during the Civil War and World War I

     periods, which were longer than the average and different in some

     respects. Business contractions that followed these expansions had

     shorter than average durations. But these distinctions are blurred by

     the fact that some peacetime expansions were even longer and some
                                        64

      peacetime contractions were shorter. Compare lines 5 and 6 in Table

      1.


17. The rest of this section draws on material in Moore and Zarnowitz

      1986, pp. 754—58.

18. During the short but sharp and widespread 1920—21 decline, Germany was

      insulated by hyperinflation and the associated floating exchange rate

      (Friedman and Schwartz l963a, p. 362). During the similarly diffuse

      and painful 1937—38 contraction, Germany was no longer a free market

      economy but a controlled economy under the Nazi dictatorship, and

      heavily engaged in arming for the war, annexing Austria, invading

      Czechoslovakia, and threatening other neighboring countries.

19. The first of these is covered mainly by annual data (the duration

      measures are expressed in monthly terms for comparability). Combining

      the two periods would add little to the story.

20. This contraction is omitted from the chronology of Spiethoff (1955, p.

21. However, Friedman and Schwartz do not recognize the 1901 trough and

      the 1903 peak included in the NBER chronology for Britain (1982, p.

      74).

22. Thus, assuming that 1869—70, 1887—88, and 1899—1900 represented major

      slowdowns rather than marginal recessions, the period 1857—1918 would

      contain 12 (not 15) business cycles with an average length of 5 (not

      4) years.

23.   Indeed, using the latter would only strengthen the case, since the

      relative frequency of expansions has been somewhat greater in the long

      upswings of prices, that of contractions in the long downswings

      (Zarnowitz and Moore 1986, p. 530).

24. The results of this combination include a sharp increase in the real

      debt burdens; distress selling of assets to pay off the debts;
                                          65

    contraction of deposits; declines in production, trade,                 and

    employment; depressed confidence; and lower nominal but higher real

    interest rates. however, when the liquidation process and the debts

    and Costs are reduced sufficiently in real terms, confidence will

    gradually return, hoarding will give way to new buying and lending,

    and reflation will pave the way to another recovery.

25. For wore on the association between the price trends and the       relative
    duration of business cycle phases, see Zarnowitz and Moore 1986, pp.

     530—31.

26. A hazard function shows the dependence of the termination or failure'

     probability on the duration of the process; in this case, the

     probability of a peak (trough) as a function of the length—to--date of

     the preceding expansion (contraction). Let F(t) — Pr (I < t) be the

     probability that the duration random variable T is less than some

     value t; f(t) —     dF(t)/dt   be the corresponding density function; and

     S(t) — 1 —   F(t)   be the corresponding survivor function. Then the

     general form of the hazard function is )¼(t) —      f(t)/S(t)   (see Kiefer

     1988).

27. The following discussion draws in part on material from Zarnowitz 1985

     and 1987.

28. Consider the consequences of such natural disasters as cyclones and

     storm surges in the Bay of Bengal (for India and Bangladesh) and

     hurricanes and shifts in ocean currents (for fishing off the coast of

     Peru).

29. See Alt and Chrystal 1983.          For some more positive appraisals and

     recent contributions, see Willett 1988.

30. The measures are based on estimates by Balke and Gordon (1986.

     pp. 788—810) which use the historical annual series by Galiman and
                                         66

      Kuznets and more recent series of the U.S. Department of Commerce.

      Persons' index of industrial production and trade (1875—1918) and the

      Federal Reserve System index of industrial production (1919—46) were

      used as quarterly interpolators.

31.   Similarly, the index for Taiwan available since 1961 shows only one

      serious decline, of 9.lX, in 12/73—2/75 (a minor decline of l.3Z

      occurred in 1/90—8/90). Unlike Taiwan and Japan, the economy of South

      Korea escaped a recession in 1973—75, but had one in 1979—80. The

      Korean index declined by 10.3X in 3/79—11/80, its only lapse from

      growth since its beginning in 1963.

32. Taking into account the divergencies between the periods covered by

      the indexes does not alter this conclusion.

33. For a description of the international indicators, see Moore and Moore

      1985.

34. The Japanese series refers to the number of employees on payrolls in

      all nonagricultural establishments (private and government—owned).

      The series for U.S., Canada, France. and Italy cover nonfarm

      employment; for U.K., manufacturing, mining, construction, and public

      utilities; and for West Germany, mining and manufacturing.

35. The theories of hysteresis explain the persistence of high

      unemployment by making long—run equilibrium depend on history.
      Adverse shocks reduce demand for physical or human capital or both as

      well as the demand for labor. Or insider workers keep real wages

      high and "outsider workers Out of jobs (Blanchard and Summers 1986).

36. This assumes that investment is predominantly productive in nature,

      well allocated by market forces, and supported rather than hindered by

      government policies.

37. In this paper, volatility is associated with productivity shocks, but
                                            67

      I suspect that the analysis of the Rameys has broader applicability.

38. See Klein and Moore 1985; Klein 1990; Lahiri         and   Moore 1991.

39. This count does not include the recessions of 1990—91 in the United States,

      Canada, and the United Kingdom, and the concurrent slowdowns or possibly

      recessions in any of the other three countries. Although the initial dates

      (peaks) of some of these movements have been established, at least

      tentatively (see figure 3), their severity and duration cannot as yet be

      known.

40.   The listing uses broad labels and offers only selected types             of
      theory. The theories are in general not mutually exclusive and are

      often used in combinations, with varying emphases.             See Haberler

      (1937] 1964 and Zarnowitz 1985 for surveys of the literature.

41. Still other, weaker effects accounted for in this model are those of

      changes in a fiscal—policy variable and in the price level.             One

      should remember that a VAR   model shows the lead—lag interactions among
      all the selected variables, allowing also for the effects of their own

      lagged   values (i.e., for the serial correlations which are high in

      many important economic aggregates).

42. On the monetary policy ineffectiveness in the new classical

      macroeconomics, see Lucas    1972,   1973, and Sargent and Wallace 1975; on

      tests, see Barro 1978. Boschen and Grossman 1982, and Mishkin 1983.

43. That is. prices clear markets, expectations are rational and adjust

      promptly, and all opportunities for mutually beneficial transactions

      are used up.

44. Thus, the shift from production of goods to production of services made

      employment much less cyclical, as already noted in section 2.7 (see also

      Zarnowitz and Moore 1986, pp. 536—38). But the 1990—91 recession, although

      relatively mild, was unusually harsh in causing a shrinkage of jobs in many
                                      68


     service—producing industries.   It is much too early to tell, however,

    whether this constitutes a reversal of the previously observed trend, and

     if so to what extent.

45. It can also be shown that the opposite change occurred for the lagging

     indicators, where the lags have become shorter at peaks and longer at

     troughs (see        These changes are explained by the shift toward longer

    business expansions and shorter recessions in the postwar era.

46. The two exceptions are the change in sensitive materials prices (line 14),

     where the indicated k,, timing is 0 (coincident), and the change in

     inventories (line 11), where it is a lag of 6 months. This last result

     seems puzzling, since inventories tend to lag in levels but lead in

     changes.

47. Only the average workweek, the diffusion index of slower deliveries (vendor

     performance), housing permits, and change in business and consumer credit—

     all series with little trend—are used in level form (N) for the entries in

     columns 7—9.

48. The leads are particularly long in the case of inverted bond yields (line

     32) or, which amounts to much the same, indexes of corporate bond prices

     (Zarnowitz 1990). Note also that the average duration of unemployment,

     like other series on unemployment, is naturally taken in inverted form to

     match like turns in business activity.      This indicator has a roughly

     coincident timing at peaks but substantial and regular lags at troughs

     (line 25).

49. The big difference between seasonal and business cycles is that seasonal

     movements are much more periodic (more truly cyclical) and much more

     capable of being anticipated. Over short spans within the year, seasonal

     fluctuations dominate the changes in many variables, but over longer spans

     of several years it is the movements associated with business cycles (the
                                     69

     specific   cycles) that are predominant. The risk is that seasonal and

    cyclical movements may interact so that      their   workable separation is

    impeded.

50. The cyclical (actually, trend—cycle) component is estimated as a weighted

    moving average (Henderson curve) chosen on the basis of the relative

    amplitude of the irregular and cyclical movements.         Most series are

    smoothed with a 13—month device, but a 9—month formula is used for

    relatively smooth and a 23—month formula for very volatile series.      See

     Zarnowitz and Boschan (1975 1977, P. 173.

51. Any documentation would require more data, mainly in quarterly form.
                                                           70

                                                        Table   1

                 Durations of Buathesa Expansions and Contractions in Four Countries,
                                 Selected Periods between 1790 and 1938

         A. Phase and Cycle Durations. In Months: Means and Standard Deviations (S.D.)

       Period (No. of B.tsin,as                                            Full Cycle    Full Cycle
                C.v lea 3    .          Exoansion   Contractlon    (T to T)               (P to F)
Line TtoT              PtoP           Mean    S.D. Mean     S.D. Mean    S.D.           Mean    S.D.
         (1)              (2)         (3)     (4)         (5)       (6)   (7)     (8)    (9)     (10)

                                               United States

     F.xcludin    Civil War & WI
1    1854—79(4)      185 7—82 (4)      26       7          27        26    83      31    61      27
2    1879—97(5)      1882—99 (5)       25       7          19        11    44      17    41      11
3    1897—1915(5)    1899—1913(4)      22       8          20         5    42       4    40      11
4    1919—38(5) 1918—37(5)             26      15          20        13    46      16    45      29
5 1854—1938(19) 1857—1937(18)          25       9          21        14    46      18    46      21.

   All cyclead
6 1856—1938(21) 1857—1937(20)          26      11          22        14    68      18    48      20
7 1790—1938(35) 1790—1938(33)          28      14          23        16    50      26    50      20

                                               Great 8ritain

   Exciudint WI
8 1854—79(5)    1857—82(5)             40       9          36        28    76      37    79       32
9    1879—1914(5)     1882—1912 (5)    43      17          25        16    68      26    67       36
10 1919—38(5)    1918—37(5)            26      24          20        10    47      21    45       33
11 1854—1938(15) 1857—1937(15)         36      18          27        19    63      29    64       34
     All cvclesd
12 1854—1938(16) 1857—1937(15)         37      18          26        19    63      29    64       33
13 1790—1938(29) 1796—1937(28)         39      18          22        16    60      24    62       28

                                                         France

     Exc1.udin WWI
14   1865—87(5)       1867—81(5)       22           3      30        23    52      25    56       31
15 1887—1914(5) 1881—1913(6)           39      21          26        14    65      28    67       32
16 1919—38(6)    1920—37(6)            24      11          15         8    39      14    38       10
17 1865—1938(16) 1867—1937(15)         28      15          23        17    51      24    52       26
     All tvcles
18 1865—1938(17) 1867—1937(16)         29      15          22        16    51      23    52       25

                                                        Germany

     Exciudina WWI
19   1879—1914(6) 1882—1913(5)         39      16          32        21    71      26    75       34
20 1919—32(3)         1918—29(3)       29      12          23        15    53      25    43        8
21 1879—1932(9)       1882—1929(8)     36      15          29        18    65      26    63       31
     Ailcycles
22 1879—1932(10) 1882—1929(9)          37      14          27        18    64      24     63      29
                                                         71

                           B.   Shortest (5') and Lonset (L') Durations, in Months

                     No. of Business                                      Full     Cycle              Full Cycle
                          Cycles          ExoSnstpnb     Contraction         (1' to '1'        'I     (P to F)
Line Period        'F to 'F   P to P     S        1.      S         L    S                1.          S     L
         (1)          (2)        (3)     (4)     (5)      (6)      (7)   (8)          (9)           (10)    (11)

                                                United    States

23 1790—1855         14         13       12      72       12       72    24          108             26      84
24 1854—99           10         10       18      46        8       65    30           99             30     101
25 1899—1938         11         10       10      50        7       43    28           64             17      93

                                                Great Britain

26 1792—1858         14         14       24      72       12       36    36           84             36     108
27 1854—1900          6          6       30      64        6       81    39          135             36     123
28 1.900—38          10          9        8      61        6       37    26           79             17      98

                                                       France

29 1865—95            6           5      19      41       11       68    34           95             33     109
30 1900—38           11,        11        8      52        8       30    24           92             24     110

                                                      Germany

31     1879—1904      4           3      17      61       18       61    35          102             41     122
32     1904—32        6           6      16      52       12       40    28           77             34      69


•The years are those of the initial and terminal business cycle troughs ('F) in column 1, and those
of the initial and terminal business cycle peaks (P) in column 2, according to the NBER monthly
chronology. The numbers in parentheses refer to complete T to 'F or P to P cycles in the given
period. The entries in columns 7 and 8 correspond to the dates in column 1; the entries in columns
9 and 10 correspond to the dates in column 2. The wartime cycles consist of expansions during the
Civil War (for the United States) and World War I (WI) for all four countries: also, of the
immediately following contractions (for the I to 'F cycles) or the immediately preceding
contractions (for the P to P cycles).

bMeasured from troughs (T) to peaks (P).

eMessured from peaks (P) to troughs ('F).

4The reference cycle chronologies contain    annual segments for the United States. 1790—1855, and
Great Britain, 1792—1858. In Part A, lines 7 and 13, observations based on these dates but
converted frouz'annual to monthly durations are combined with the observations based on the monthly
reference chronologies that begin in 1854 for both the United States and Great Britain.

 Years refer to the earliest and latest reference dates in each segment. Entries in lines 23 and
26, columns 4—10, are converted from annual to monthly durations (see note d).

Refers to a wartime cycle.

Source: National Bureau of Economic Research. For detail, see Moore and Zarnowitz 1986, Tables
A.? and A.3.
                                                             72

                                                 Tabi. 2
                   Ourations of Business Expansions and Contractions in United Stst.s.
                    Selected Period.s between 1938 and 1990 and between 1854 and 1990


         Period (No. of Business                                            Full Cycle       Full Cycle
                    CyclesS
                                     •
                                          Expansion b Contraction'           (I to T)         (P to P3
Line T to T             P to P           Mean   S.D. Mean    S.D.          Mean    S.D.     Mean    S.D.
          (1)              (2)           (3)         (4)    (5)     (6)    (7)     (8)       (9)     (10)


   1938—90. excl. wartiae cycles
 1.1938—61(3)    1945—60(3)      33                    8     10       2     43       8       42             9
2 1961—82(3)     1960—90(4)      50                   34     13       6     48      18       62        38
3 1938—82(6)     1945—90(7)      43                   26     11       4     46      13       53        30
   1938—90. all       cyc1e
4 1938—61(5)        1945—60(5)            45          21      9       1     54      20       55        23
S 1961—82(4)        1960—90(S)            61          39     12       5     65      38       73        41
6 1938—82(9)        1945—90(10)           53          31     11       3     59      28       64            33
      1854—1990 all cycles
 7    1654—1919(16)    1857—1918(15) 27               10     22      14     48      19       49            18
 8    1919—45(6)       1918—1945(6)       35          26     18      13     53      22       53            32
 9    1945—82(8)       1945—1990(9)       50          31     11       4     56      27       61.           33
10    1854—1982(30)    1857—1990(30) 35               23     18      12     51      22       53            26

                                               Shortest (S) and    Loneest (L3 Durations,   in    Months

                                           S           L      S        L     S       L        S            I..
    Exciudina wartime cycles
11 1938—82(6)      1945—90(1)  12                     92      6       16    28      64       18        108
12 1854—1938(19) 1857—194S(19) 10                     50      8       65    30      99       17        101
      All cycles
13     1938—82(9)    1945—90(9)    12                106'     6      16     28     117'      18       116'
jt.    1854—1938(21) 18S7—1945(21) 10                 80d     7d     65     28      99       17       101



'1 denote initial and terminal troughs, P denote initial and terminal peaks. Entries in columns
7 and 8 correspond to the dates in column 1 th. entries in coLumns 9 and 10 correspond to the
dates in column 2. The wartime cycles consist of expansions during Civil War, World War                          I and II.
the Korean war and the Vietnam war; also, of the immediately following contractions (for the 1'                         to
T (for the T to T cycles) or the immediately preceding contractions (for the P to P cycles).

bMeasured from      troughs    (1') to peaks (1').

'Measured   from peaks (P) to troughs (1).

dRefers to a wartime cycle.
                                                        73

                                                Table 3
                  Trends in Wholesale Prices and the Business Cycle Phase Durations,
                   United State. 1789—1990 and Three European Countries between 1854
                                                and 1935

         Trend in Wholesale Prices    8usinese Exoansions' Business Contractions' Ratio
          Direction     First to Laat            Average..,,         Average_    of Average
          and Dates      Year Change           Duration (E)        Duration (C)  Duraj9ns,
Line      In Years'    (percent p.a.)b Number    in Months Number in Months          E,'C
              (1)              (2)          (3)              (4)     (5)       (6)     (7)

                                             United States
           Rising
1          1789—1814           3.1.           5                 42     4        22     1.9
2          1843—66             6.7         6(5)          32(30)        5        15     2.1    (2.0)
3          1896—1920           5.1.        7(6)          23(20)        6        18     1.3    (1.1)
4          l932—90             4.1        11(8)          53(44)       10        11     4.6    (3.8)
5      Total or Averaged       4.2       29(24)          40(34)       25        16     2.5    (2.1)
           Fa 11 in p
6          1814—43            —3.1            6                 27         7     27     1.0
7          1864—96            —3.2                7             25     8         26     1.0
8          1920—32            —6.9                3             23     4         22     1.0
9      Total or average       —3.9           16                 25    19         25     1.0

                                             Great Britain
           Rising
10         1854—73,1896—1920 3.6              10                30         8     17     2.2
           Falling
IL         1873—96,1920—33  —2.3                  5             30         7     38     0.8

                                                      France
           Rising
12         1865—73,1896—1926 6.4              11                31         9     15     2.1
           Falling
13                          —2.6                  4             30         6     34     0.9
           1873—96,1926—35

                                                      Germany
           Risine
                                2.3               6             40         6     18     2.2
14         1895—1923
           Falling
 15        1922—33             —4.2               4             32         4     42


'Through 1932 based on Burns and Mitchell 1946. p. 632. For 1932—82. see Moore 1983, p. 240.

bFor the United States 1789—1982. see Zarnowitz and Moore 1986. p. 527. For other countries, see
the sources listed in Burns and Mitchell 1946, p. 432. Author's calculations are based on the data
                                                                                                the
for the initial and terminal years; the averages are weighted by the durations in years of
periods covered.

 'The NBER monthly business cycle chronologies are used. See Zarnowitz and Moore 1986, pp. 528—29.
                                                                                             War and
 Entries in parentheses exclude wartime expansions (Civil War, World Wars I and 11, Korean
 Vietnam War).

 dupdated by author's calculations.
                                                        74

                                                      TabLe 4
                    Depth and   Diffuaion   of Business Contractions in the United States,
                                                     1920—1982

                                                                                            NonE arm
                                   Percentase Chana. in     Urtemolpyment Rate  taployment. I
         Business  Cycle        Real Indutria1    Nonfara            Percentage of Industries
Line      Contraction           CNP Production Employment Maxiaum    Increase Contracting'
              (1)               (2)     (3)           (4)          (5)        (6)            (7)

                                      A. Selected 8ualnaaa Contractions

1     1/1920—7/1921(D)    n.e.        —32.4           n.e.         11.9      10.3           97
2     10/1926—11/1927(M) —2.0          —7.0           n.e.          4.4       2.4            71
3     8/1929—3/1933(CD) —32.6         —53.4         —31.6          24.9      21.7           100
4 5/1937—6/1938(D)  —13.2             —32.4         —10.8          20.0       9.0           97
5 11/1948—10/1949(5) —1.5             —10.1          —5.2           7.8       4.5            90
6 8/1957—4/1958(S)   —3.3             —13.5          —4.3           7.3       3.7            88
7 10/1969—11/1970(N) —1.0              —6.8          —1.5           5.9       2.6            80
8 11/1973—3/1.975(S) —4.9              —15.3         —2.9           8.8       4.3            88
9 1/1980—7/1980(M)   —2.3               —8.5         —1.4           7.7       2.2            77
10 7/1981—11/1982(S) —3.0              —12.3         —3.1          10.7       3.6            79

                                       B. Averases by Desree of Severity

11.Two Major               —13.4       —32.4        —10.6          16.0       9.6            97
   Depress tons
12 Six Severe               —3.3       —13.1         —3.8           7.7       3.8            88
      Recesstons
13 Four mild                —1.7        —3.8         —1.7           6.2       2.3            77
   Recessions'

Source: Moore and Zarnowicz 1986. Table A.7.
n.a. — not available.

 Symbols in parentheses classify the contractions as follows: CD, Great Depression of 1929—33; D,
depression; S, severe recession; N. mild recession.

bheasured from peak to trough in quarterly data              for   real CM? and   monthly   data   for   industrial
production and nonfara employment.

'Entries for 1920—33 (lines 1—3) are annual averages (monthly data not available).

dBefore 1948 based on cyclical changes in employment in 41 industries. Since 1948 based on changes
in employment over six—month spans in 30 industries (1948—59); 172 industries (1960—71); and 186
industries (1972—82).
    1920—21 and 1937—38 (as marked D above).

Inc1udes the recessions of 5/1923—7/1924 and 7/1953—5/1954 in addition to the four marked S above.

'Includes the recession of 4/1960—2/1961 in addition to the three recessions marked N above.
                                                     15

                                                 Table 5
                 Variabilities of Relative Change and Amplitudes of Cyclical Movement,
                          Real CNP and Price., 1875—1918, 1919—45, and 1946—83

                                             Exosnsionsb                          Contractjons'
                   toe Differences            Mean         Mean                      Mean            Mean
Line   Period      Mean     S.D.   Number   Duration Amplitude         Number      Duration       Amplitude
                                            (quarters) (percent)                  (quarters)      (percent)
           (1)      (2)      (3)     (4)       (5)         (6)          (7)           (8)            (9)

                                      Real Cross National Product

1      1875—1918 1.0         2.4      12       8.9         17.3          12            3.2          —5.1
2      1919—1945 0.8         3.6       4      11.0         30.1            5          6.0          —14.1
3      1946—1983 0.8         1.2       7      16.3         20.9           8            2.6          —2.5

                                    Wholesale (Producer) Price Index
4      1875—1918 0.3         3.3      11        6.6       12.1           10            6.9         —11.8
5      1919—1945 —0.2        4.1       4        8.2       15.4             5           8.6         —21.6
6      1946—1983 1.1         2.3       4       12.0        8.7             5           5.0          —4.8



 Number of quarterly observations per series: 1975. 3.75; 1919—45, 107; 1946—83. 151. The annual
dates refer to the first and last turning points of the series during each period.

              specific cycle peaks and troughs in the series. Expansions are measured from peaks
bidentif ted by
to troughs, contractions from troughs to peaks. Only complete upward and downward movmeuts are
counted.


Source: Calculated from data in Balke and Cordon 1986, pp.        788—810 (see   note 30).
                                                     76

                                                  Table   6
                    Average Durations and Amplitudas of Expansions and Contractions
                in Cosposite Indexes of Coincident Indicators. Eight Countries. 1948—91

                               Datea of              Expansions                        Contractions
                   Period Turnina Points             Mean         Mean                     Mean     Mean
Line   Country Covered First Lastb Number Duration Amplitude                  Number     Duration Amplitude
                      (P e I) (p es I)     (.oeth.)  (p..et)                              (.eetb.)
1      U.S.        1948—91 48(P) 90(P)        8       49          30.4          8           13      —9.1

7      Canada      1948—91 51(P) 90(P)        5       82          57.8          5           12      —3.4

3      U.J(.       1952—91 52(T) 90(P)        6       63          29.2          5           15      —4.1

4      France      1.955—91 58(P) 91(P)       4       88          47.6          4           11      —5.8

5      Italy       1948—91 48(T) 91(P)        6        77         60.2          5           18      —4.9

6      W Germany 1950—91 50(T) 91(P)          4      101          110.8         3           26       6.5

I      Japan       1954—91 54(T) 91(P)        3       140         430.7         2           10      —4.6

8      Australia 1950—91 51(P) 90(P)          5        81          65.1         5           12      —7.5



Tha following initial or early low values are assumed to represent trough dates: Italy, 1/48;
West Cermany, 1/50; Japan, 6/54 (see figures 2A and 28).

'The   buoying late or terminal        values are assumed to represent peak dates: France. 1/91:
Italy, 1/91; West     Germany, 4/91; Japan,   2/91 (see figures 2A and 28).


Source:         Center for International Business Cycle Research. Graduate School of Business,
                Columbia University.
                                                      77

                                              Table 7
    Selected Measures of Average Cyclical Tiaing, Variability, and Correlation with an Index of
               Coincident Indicators, Thirty—two Monthly Series, 1948—80 and 1959—89


                                                Median Timineb Averase Chanae Correlation v/New ICid
        Series Title                                             All Series        Cycl. Trans— Lag(k)
Line    (BCD Number)                      Peaks Troughs Turna (s.a.)              Compo— foraa— (mos) r(k)
                                                                                   nent      tion

            (1)                                (2)         (3)    (4)     (5)       (6)       (7)     (8)    (9)
                                                      months              (percent)

I Average workweek, mfg ('1)             —11           —1        —4.5      .5        .2         N    —1      .79
2 .Unempl. insur. claims, mv. ('5)       —12               0     —5.5    5,4        2.4      DLN     —2     —.87
3 Help—wanted index (46)                  —7           +2        —2.5    2.9        2.2      DIN     —l      .95
4 Capacity utilization, mfg (82)         —11           +1        —1.5    1.6'       1.4'        D    —l      .96
5 New orders, dur. goods. c (7)           —8           —l        —3      3.4        1.4      DIN     —1      .90
6 N.0. • cons, goods & mtla, c$ ('8)     —12           —1        —4.5    2.8        1.3      DLN     —2      .89
7 Vendor performance ('32)                —6           —4        —6      3.8'       2.4'       N     —2      .6?
8 Contr. S orders, plant & equip ('20)    —8           —1         —3.5   6.2        1.6      DIN     —1      .76
9 New bldg permits, priv. housing (*29) —13            —3         —9.5   5.1        2.4         N    —6      .59
10 New bus. incorporetiona, no. (13)     —10           —1.5       —5     2.5        1.0      DIN     —3      .55
11 Change in mfg & trade invent. (31)     —6           —2         —3.5   7.1'       1.4'     DLN      6      .79
12 Stock price index, 5SF 500 ('19)       —9.5         —4         —5.5   2.7        1.6      DIN     —6      .55
13 Change in sensitive mtls prices ('99) —9.5          —3.5       —5.5     .3'       .2'     DIN      0      .55
14 Change in money stock, Ml (85)        —15           —3        —14       .3'       .03'    DIN     —3      .25
IS Money supply M2, c$ ('106)            —16           —3        —10       .42       .37     DIN     —6      .68
16 Change in bus. & cons, credit ('111) —11            —2         —7      2.9'       .8'        N    —2      .67
17 Liab. of bus, failures, mv. (14)      —14           —2        —10     27.8       2.5      DLN     —3     —.40
18 Employees on nonag. payrolls ('41)       0               0      0       .32       .28     DIN       1     .92
19 Pera. income — tranafer pats, c$ ('51) 0            —0.5        0       .5         .4     DLN      0      .87
20 Mfg & trsde sales, c$ ('57)            —3           —1         —1.5    1.0         .6     0124    —1      .94
21 Index of industrial production ('47)   —2                0      0       .9         .7     0124     0      .99
22 Indus. prod., dur. mfg (73)            —3                0      0      1.4       1.0      0124     0      .98
23 Indus. prod., nondur. mfg (74)         —1               —l     —1       .7         .6     D124    —1      .92
24 Retail sales, c$ (59)                  —4               —2     —2.5    1.1         .5     DIN     —2       69
25 Unempi., aver, duration, mv. ('91)       0              +8     +3.5    3.6       1.6         N      6    —.88
26 Invent./seles, mfg & trade, c$ ('77)    +8         +13        +10       .02'       .01'      N    —2     —.79
27 Unit labor cost, mfg, detrend. ('62)    +5         +13        +10       .6'        .3'     DIN    —2     —.69
28 Comm. & indus. loans outst., c$ ('101) +4           +6         +4.5     .9         .7      0124    10     .63
29   Cons. mnstal. credit/pers. inc. ,t('95)   +4      +7         +6       .07'       .05'    DIN      6     .57
30   Treasury bill rate. 3 mo. (114)           +1.5    +3.5       +2       .28'       .17'      D      1     .52
31   Federal funds rate (119)                  +2      +5         +2.5     .38'       .26'      D      1     .59
32   Yield, high grade corp. bonds (116)       +1      +2         +1.5     .18'       .09'      0    —12     .45




 Series titles are abbreviated. The BCD numbers in parentheses are series numbers used by the U.S.
Department of Commerce in its monthly publications Business  Conditions Direst (QQ, through March
1990) and Survey of Current Business (fl, current).
                                                          *
                                                           identifies a series included in the
composite index of leading or coincident or lagging indicators (referring to the indexes of the
Bureau of Economic Analysis in the Commerce Department as of 1984).

5The   measures   cover the seven pairs of business cycle peaks and troughs between 1948 and 1980.
                                                78

The median is the middle value in an odd—numbered array and the average of the two middle values
in an even—numbered array. Minus (—) signa are leads at business cycle turning points; plus (+)
signs are lags.

'Entries in column 5 are average changes, without regard to sign, between consecutive values in
a seasonally adjusted (s.a.) series. Entires in column 6 are average changes, without regard to
sign, between consecutive values in the cyclical component, which is a smooth, flexible moving
average of the seasonally adjumted series. Entries marked      are average actual changes in the
series, in its originial units of measurement; all other entries are average percentage changes.

t'rhe transformation codes (column 7) are: N.— no transformation; D —    first differences of the
caries; DLN — first  differences of the natural logs of the series (i.e.. growth rates). The
transformstions are generally from the original levels of the (se.) series. Entries in column
8 (k) are leads (—) or lags (+), in months, which are associated with the maximimum correlations
      as listed in column 9. These statistics are based on the cross—correlogram between filtered
log Id end the filtered series, using the 24—month moving average filter a24(L). XCI is the new
experimental index of coincident indicators by Stock and Watson; it covers the period January 1959
— May 1989.

Abbreviations: mfg — maunfacturing; dur. —  durable; insur. — insurance; mtls — materials; invent.
      —  inventories; contr. — contracts; coma. — commerical; cons. — consumer; instal. —
      installment; pers. — personal; inc. — income; outst. — outstanding; pmts. — payments; nonag.
      — nonagricultural; / — ratio (inventory/sales in Line 26; credit/income in Line 29); c$ —
      in constant dollars; mv. — inverted (peaks in the series are matched with business cycle
      troughs, troughs in the series are matched with business cycles peaks); detrend. —   adjusted
      for (deviations from) trend.

Source and detail: U.S. Department of Commerce 1984, Tables 8 and 9A, pp. 167—68. 172—75 (for
columns 1—6); stock and Watson 1990, Table 1 (for column 7—9).
                                               79
                          Figure 1
  Timing of Reference Cycles for Four Countries and Matched
                  Turning Points, 1854-1938




note: For each country, the lines connect the dates of business cycic peaks (upper turning
        points) and troughs (lower turning points). Thus the upward-sloping segments of each
        untzy line rcptcscnt cxpansions; the downward-sloping segments, contractions. The
        dashed links bctwecn thc country lines connect the matched peaks or troughs for two
        or more countries. The sign x denotes an unmatched turn. For France before 1865
        and (or Germany before 1879, the reference dates arc annuaL They arc plotted at
        midpoint of the given calendar year and connected with dashed and dotted lines. All
        other reference dates arc monthJy and ace nnccted wiih solid lines. German annual
        turning points 1855-1963 estimated from Hoffman 1965 by Rostow 1980. 38-39. All
        other dates arc from Burns and Mitchcl 1946, 78-79. ' denotes a dubious turning
        point (Sec text).
                                                Figure   2A

                 COINCIDENT INDICES                                (adjusted)
                                      Japan      and W.Germany


    Japan                                                                               W   Germany
log—scale -                                                                             log — scale
     2.50                                                                               2.25


     2.25                                                                               2.00

                                       C         4
     2.00                                                                               •1.75
                                                              .
     1.75                   Jest   Germany
                                                                                        1.50


     1.50                                                                               1.25


     1.25                                                                               1.00


     1.00                      Japan                                                    0.75


     0.75                                                                               0.50
                                                         -r
            48    52   56      60          64    68      72   76    80   84   88   92

                                                     YEAR
                                           Figure 2B

                COINCIDENT INDICES (adjusted )
                                France         and   Italy
   France                                                                                   Italy
log—scale                                                                                   log—scale
     2.50                                                                                   -2.25
                                                                           Italy
                                                                                   6


    2.25                                                                                    -2.00


    2.00                                                     a                              -1.75


                                      0
    1.75                                                                                    -1.50
                 C              France

           -
    1.50                                                                                    -1.25


    125                                                                                     1.00
                                T         68     72     76       80   84      88       92
           48    52   56   60    64

                                           YEAR
                                                         Figure 2C

                  COiNCIDENT INDICES (adjusLed)
                                                    Canada    and U.K.


  Canada                                                                                      U.K.
log—scale                                                                                     log—scale
     2.50                                                                                     2.25



     2.   25                                                                                  2.00


                                                   6
     2.00                                           0                                         1.75
                United Kingdom            •

                                                                     a


                         S

     1.75                                                                                     1.50



            -

    1.50        Canada                                                                        1.25 ('))
                             a
                                 .

     1.25                                                                           I    I
                                                                                              1.00

            48       52              56       60    64   68     72   76   80   84   88   92

                                                           YEAR
                     0)
                    '-4

                        C)

                             0
                             0
                                  Ui
                                  N
                                        0
                                        Ui
                  I)) Ui(N
                   -0
                  -1N        (N   -4    -4




     '-C
      Q-)
     -4-)
      (I)



      cj
                                                        '.0
            (r                                          N
     Cl)
            '0
     I'     C
                                                        (N
                                                        N



     II
            '-4
-4
            4.'


     z                                                  0
                                                        '.0



     U
     0
     U
                   (4.-Ui
                     0)0           0         0    If)
                                   0         Ui   N
                   -4
                   r UN            (N        -4   -4
                                                                                             Figure 3
                                                               Timing of Growth Cycles in Six Countries,                     1948-80




tin I ted States   p -
                                                                                              :                                                 ----'                                       T
Canada
                       i
                       _____                                     -
United             P
         Kingdom


West Cerinany


France
                   ?
                           :
                                                                                            ->/>
                       I   : :                        :    -"-
                   tikS           5o     51    ,       S S o                  6..             66                     72..   7's     7Q      78     fo      L       8's    26      $8   9o



                               Note:          In each schematic diagram, the drawn-out lines connect the dates of the consecutive peaks (P) and troughs (T) in growth cycles for the
                                              given country. Hcavy black dots identify slowdowns that tteesme recessions.

                               Sourct:        For the (iS, business cycle chronologies — Nailonal Bureau of Economic Research, Inc. For the growth cycle chronologies of Canada.
                                              U.lC, West Germany. France. and Japan — Ccnlcr for lntcrnaiional Business Cycle Rescarch. Graduaic School of Business, Columbia
                                              Univcrsity.
                                             81

                                         Ref erences



Aftalion, Albert.       1913.    Les    Crises    periodiques de Suroroduction.    Paris:
Rivière.

Alt, J.E. and Chrystal, K.A. 1983. Political Economics. Berkeley: University
of California Press.

Altonji, j.C. 1982. The Interteinporal Substitution Model of Labour Market
Fluctuations: An Empirical Analysis. Rev. Econ. Stud. 49: 783—824.

Ashton, T.S.    1959.      Economic Fluctuations in England. 1700—1800.           Oxford:
Clarendon Press.

Attwood, T. 1817. A Letter to Nicholas Vansittart, on the creation of money,
and on its action upon national prosperity. Birmingham: R. Wrightson.

Backhouse, R. 1988.        Economists and the Economy: The Evolution of Economic
Ideas 1600 to the     Present Day. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Balke, N.S. and Cordon, R.J. 1986. Historical Data. In The American Business
Cycle Today, pp. 781—850. See Cordon 1986.

Blanchard, O.J. and Watson, M.W. 1986. Are Business Cycles All Alike? In flag
American Business Cycle Today, pp.123—56 and 178—79. See Cordon 1986.
Bouniatian, M.   1908.  Ceschichte der Handelskrisen in England. 1640—1840.
Munich: Ernst Reinnhardt.

Bronfenbrenner, M., ed.         1969.     Is the Business Cycle Obsolete? New York:
Wiley—Interscience.

Burns, A.F. and Mitchell, W.C.    1946. Measuring Business Cycles. New York:
National Bureau of Economic Research.

Butler, W.F. Kavesh, R.A. and PlaCt, R.B. , eds. 1974. Methods and Techniques
of Business Forecasting. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice—Hall.

Cagan, P.  1965. Determinants and Effects of Changes in the Stock of Money.
1875—1960. New York: Columbia University Press for NBER.

Cassel, C.     11923] 1932.       Theory of Social Economy.         Kercourt, Brece, and
 Company.

 Clark, J.M.  1917. Business Acceleration and the Law of Demand: A Technical
 Factor in Economic Cycles. J. Pout. Econ. 25: 217—35.

 Deane, P.    1967.      The First Industrial Revolution.          Cambridge:     Cambridge
 University Press.

 Diebold, F.X. and Rudebusch, C.?.               1990.   A Nonparametric Investigation of
                                      82

Duration Dependence in the American Business Cycles.   .J. Pout. Econ., 98(3):
596—616 (June)

________    1991. Turning Point Predictions with the composite Leading Index:
An Ex ante Analysis.   Chapter 14 in K. Lahiri and C.H. Moore, eds.    Leading
Indicators:   New Approaches and Forecasting Records.   Cambridge:   Cambridge
University Press.

Eichenbaum, M.   1990.  Real Business Cycle Theory: Wisdom or Whimsy? NBER
Working Paper no. 3432.  (September) Cambridge, Mass.

Fels, R. and Hinshaw, G.E.  1968. Forecasting and Reconizinz Business Cycle
Turning Points.  New York: NBER.

Fisher, I.    1907. The Rate of Interest. New York: Macmillan Co.

Fisher, I.    1932. Booms and Depressions: Some First Principles. New York:
Adeiphi Co.

Fisher, I. 1933. The Debt—Deflation Theory of Great Depressions. Econometrics.
vol. 1, pp. 337—357.

Friedman, B.M. 1986. Money, Credit, and Interest Rates in the Business Cycle.
In Gordon, 1986, pp. 395—438, 456—458.

Friedman, M. and Schwartz, A.J. 1963b. Money and Business Cycles. Review of
Economics and Statistics: Supplement. 45: 32—64.

Friedman, H. and Schwartz, A.J. 1963a. A Monetary History of the United States.
1867—1960. Princeton: Princeton University Press for NBER.

Friedman, M. and Schwartz, A.J. 1982. Monetary Trends in the United States and
the United Kingdom: Their Relation to Income. Prices and Interest Rates 1867—
1Th. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER.
Frisch, R.    1933.   Propagation Problems and Impulse Problems in Dynamic
Economics. Economic Essays in Honor of Gustav Cassel. London: George Allen &
Unwin.

Goodwin, R.M. 1951. The Non—linear Accelerator and the Persistence of Business
Cycles. Econometrica 19: 1—17.

Gordon, R.J. 1986. The America Business Cycle Today: Continuity and Change.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER.

Creenwald, B.C.; Stiglitz, J.E.; and Weiss, A.            1984.    Informational
 Imperfections in the Capital Market and Macroeconomic Fluctuations. Amer. Econ,
      74(1): 194—199. (May)
 Haberler, C. [1937] 1964.    Prosperity and Depression.    League of Nations.
 Reprinted Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1957, 1964.
                                      83

Hall, R.E.   1986. The Role of Consumption in Economic Fluctuations.     Jr R.J.
Cordon, ed. 1986, pp. 237—66.

Hamilton, J.D. 1983. oil and the Macroeconomy since World War II.       3. PoUt.
Econ. 91: 228—48.

Hansen, A.H. and Clemence, R.V. 1953. Readings in Business Cycles and   National
Income. New York: W.W. Norton & Co.

Hansen, A.H.   [1951] 1966.  Business Cycles and National Income.        Expanded
edition. New York: W.W. Norton (first edition 1951).

Hawtrey, R.C. 1927. The Monetary Theory of the Trade Cycle and Its Statistical
Test. p. J, Econ. May: 671—86. Reprinted in Hansen and Clemence 1953, pp.
139—49.

Hickman, B.C., ed.   1972. Econometric Models of Cyclical Behavior.   2 vols.
Studies in Income and Wealth, no. 36. New York: Columbia University Press for
NB ER.

Hicks, J.R. 1937. Mr. Keynes and the 'Classics :   A Suggested Interpretation.
Econometrica 5: 147—59.

Hicks, J.R. 1950. A Contribution to the Theory of the Trade Cycle. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.

Jevons, W.S. 1884. Investigations in Currency and Finance. London: Macmillan
& Co. •   Ltd.
Juglar, C. [1862] 1889. Des Crises Comrnerciales et leur Retour Periodique, en
France, en Angleterre et au Etats—Unis. Paris: Cuillaumin.
Kaidor, N. 1940. A Model of the Trade Cycle. Economic Journal 50:        78—92.


Keynes, J.M.   1936.   The General Theory of Employment. Interest: arid Money.
London: Macmillan.

Kiefer, N. 1988. Economic Duration Data and Hazard Functions. jEcon. Lit.
26(2): 646—79. (June)

King, R.G. Plosser, C.I, ; Stock. 3K.; and Watson, M.W.   1991.   Stochastic
Trends and Economic Fluctuations.     Amer.  Econ. Rev  81(4),  September,
forthcoming.

Klein, P.A. and Moore, G.M. 1985. Monitoring Growth Cycles in Market—OrienL_d
Countries: Developing and Usint International Economic Indicators. Cambridge,
Mass.: Ballinger Publishing Company for NBER.

Kydland, F. and Prescott, E.C. 1982. Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations.
Econometrica, 50(6): 1345—1370 (November).
                                           84

Lilien, D.M. 1982. Sectored Shifts and Cyclical Unemployment. J. Pout. Econ.
90 (August): 777—93.

Marshall, A. and Marshall, M.      1881.        (2nd ed.)   IIa..   Economics of Industry.
London: Macmillan.

Metzler, A.K. 1986. Comment (on B.M. Friedman 1986) In Gordon 1986, pp. 441—50.

Metzler, L.A. 1941. The Nature and Stability of Inventory Cycles. Rev. Econ.
Stat. 23:   113—29.

Metzler, L.A. 1947. Factors Governing the Length            of Inventory Cycles. g
Econ. Statist 29: 1—15.

Minsky. H.P. 1982. Can 'It' Happen Again? Essays on Instability and Finance.
New York: M.E. Sharpe. Inc.

Mintz, 1. 1969. Datina Postwar Business Cycles: Methods and their Application
to Western Germany. 1950—67. New York: NSER.

Mintz, I. 1974. Dating United States Growth Cycles. Explorations in Economic
Research 1(1): 1—113.

Mirowski, P.   1985.      The Birth of the Business Cycle.             New York & London:
Garland Pubi. Inc.

Mitchell, W.C.    1913.    Business Cycles.        Berkeley: University of California
Press.

Mitchell, W.C. 1927. Business Cycles: The Problem and its Setting. New York:
NBER.

Mitchell, W.C. 1951. What Happens during Business Cycles: A Progress Report.
New York: NPER.

Moore, G.H. 1983. Business Cycles. Inflation, and Forecasting. 2nd ed. ,             (first
edition 1980). Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger Pub. Co. for NBER.

Moore, G.H. and Zarnowitz, V. 1986. The Development and Role of the National
Bureau's Business Cycle Chronologies. In Gordon 1986.

Moore, H.L. 1916. Economic Cycles: Their Law and Cause. New York: Macmillan
Co.

Morgenstern, 0. 1959. International Financial Transactions and Business Cycles.
Princeton: Princeton University Press for NBEP..

Overstone, S.J.L. 1837. Reflections Suggested by a Perusal of Mr. J. Horsley
Palmers' pamphlet on the Causes and Consequences of the Pressure on the Money
Market.

Pigou, A.C. 1927. Industrial Fluctuations. London: Macmillan.
                                       85

Plosser, C.!.  1989.    Understanding Real Business Cycles.    J, Econ. Persp.
Summer: 51—77.

Plosser. C.I.    1991.   Money and Business Cycles:    A Real Business Cycle
Interpretation. In MT. Belongia, ed. , Monetary Policy on the 75th Anniversary
of the Federal Reserve System. Proceedings of the Fourteenth Annual Economic
Policy Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Boston: Kiuver
Academic Publishers.

Ramey, C. and Rainey. V.A. 1991. Technology Commitment and the Cost of Econonic
Fluctuations. NBER Working Paper no. 3755 (June).

Robertson, D.H. 1937. The Trade Cycle: An Academic View. Lloyds Bank Review,
September: 5014—10. Reprinted in Hansen and Clemence 1953. pp. 167—174.

Romer, C. 1986. The Prewar Business Cycle Reconsidered: New Estimates of Gross
National Product, 1869—1918. NEER Working Paper no. 1969 (July).

Romer, C.D. and Romer, D.H. 1989. Does Monetary Policy Matter? A New Test in
the Spirit of Friedman and Schwartz. In O.J. Blanchard and S. Fischer, eds.
Macroeconomics Annual 1989. Cambridge. Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 121—170.

Samuelson, P.A.  1939. Interactions between the MultipJ.ier Analysis and the
Principle of Acceleration. Review of Economic Statistics 21: 75—78.

Schumpeter, J.A.   1939.   Business Cycles:   A Theoretical. Historical, and
Statistical Analysis of the Capitalist Process. New York: McGraw—Hill.

Smith, A. 1776. The Wealth of Nations. Cannon ed. Modern Library, 1937.

Spiethoff, A. 1955. Die wirtschaftlichen Wechsellajen.        2 vols. Tubingen:
Mohr.

Stock, J.M. and Watson, M.W. 1990. Appendixes to Business Cycle Properties of
Selected U.S. Economic Time Series, 1959—1988.    NBER Working Paper no. 3376
(June).

Thorp, W.L. 1926. Business Annals. New York: NEER.

Tinbergen, J.  1939. Statistical Testing of Business—cycle Theories. 2 vols.
Ceneva: League of Nations, Economic Intelligence Service.

Tugan—Baranovskii, M.I.     [1894, 1901] 1913.    Les Crises Industrielles en
Angleterre. 2nd ed. , Paris:  Ciard & Briere. (Published first in Russian, then
in German).

               [1896) 1936.   Interest and Prices:       A Study of the Causes
Wicksell, K.
Regulating the Value of Money. London: Macmillan.

Willett, T.D. 1988. Political Business Cycles: The Political EcononmLf Money.
Inflation, and Unemployment. Duke University Press.
                                      86

Wojnilouer, A.M. 1980. The Central Role of Credit Crunches as Recent Financial
History. Brookings Pap. Econ. Act. 2:   277—339.

Woodford, M. 1987. Three Questions about Sunspot Equilibria as an Explanation
of Economic Fluctuations. Amer. Econ. Rev, 77(2): 43—48. (May)

Zarnowitz, V. 1967. An Appraisal of Short—term Economic Forecasts. New York:
NBER.

Zarnowitz, V.   1974. How Accurate Have the Forecasts Been? In Methods and
Techniques of Business Forecasting. See Butler, Kavesh and Platt 1974. Now
chap. 17 of this volume.

Zarnowitz, V. 1981. Business Cycles and Growth: Some Reflections and Measures.
In Wirtschaftstheorie und Wirtschaftst,olitik: Cedenkschrift für Erich Preiser,
edited by W.J. Mückl and A.E. Ott. Passau: Passavia UniversitAtsverlag. Now
chap. 7 of this volume.

Zarnowitz, V. 1985. Recent Work on Business Cycles in Historical Perspective.
Journal of Economic Literature 23:  523—80. Now chap. 1 of this volume.

Zarnowitz, V. 1987. The Regularity of Business Cycles. NBER Working Paper no.
2381. (September) Reprinted as chap. 8 in Zarnowitz 1991.

Zarnowitz, V.    [1989] 1991.   Facts and Factors in the Recent Evolution of
Business Cycles in the United States. NBER Working Paper no. 2865 (February).
Now in revised form chap. 3 of this volume.

Zarnowitz, V.   1991.   Business Cycles:   Theory. History. Indicators, and
Forecasting. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for NBER.

Zarnowitz, V. and Boschan, C. [1975] 1977. Cyclical Indicators: An Evaluation
and New Leading Indexes. Business Conditions Digest (May): v—xxii. Reprinted
in U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis, Handbook of Cyclical
Indicators. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, pp. 170—184.

Zarnowitz, V. and Braun, P.   1990. Major Macroeconomic Variables and Leading
Indexes: Some Estimate of Their Interaction. In P.A. Klein, ed., Analyzing
Modern B,isjness Cycles. Armonte, N.Y.: M.E. Sharpe, Inc., pp. 177—205.

Zarnowicz, V. and Moore, C.H.     1982.    Sequential Signals of Recession and
Recovery. Journal of Business 55:    57—85.

Zarnowitz, V. and Moore, G.H. 1986. Major Changes in Cyclical Behavior. In
Gordon 1986.
</ref_section>
