                       NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




                PATENT RACES, PRODUCT STANDARDS. AND
                     INTERNATIONAL COMPETITION




                             Richard Jensen
                             Marie Thursby




                         Working Paper No. 3870




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEMCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                          CaSridge, MA 02138
                              October 1991


The authors thank Ward Hanson, Kala    Krishna. Katharine Rockett,
Bob Staiger   and             of the NBER gunner Institute and
                    participants
University of Western  Ontario Conference on International Trade
for insightful cormnents. Jensen's research was made possible by
a Suniner Research Grant from the College of Business and
Economics of the University of Kentucky. The grant was made
possible by a donation of funds from Ashland Oil, Inc. Thursby'S
research is partially funded by the Center for the Management of
Manufacturing Enterprises, Krannert Graduate School of
Management. This paper is part of NBER's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                         NBER Working Paper *3870
                                         October 1991




                PATENT RACES. PRODUCT STANDARDS, AND
                     INTERNATIONAL COMPETITION



                              ABSTRACT


    We    examine anticipatory product standards intended to
improve   the strategic position of firms in an international

patent   race where firms do R&D to develop products that are close
substitutes. The effects of a standard are shown to depend on
the way the standard is specified, which firm develops which
product, and on the order in which products are discovered.
Simple standards are, in general, time inconsistent because of

consumer  losses that occur when products ruled out by the
standard are discovered before the product set as the standard.
A state contingent standard is shown to be time consistent when
compulsory licensing by the foreign firm is introduced.



Marie Thursby                             Richard 3ensen
Department of Economics                   Department of Economics
Purdue university                         University of Kentucky
West Lafayette, IN 47907-1310             Lexington, KY 40506-0034
and NBER
1. Introduction
      International R&D competition often results in outcomes where several
firms develop and patent products that are close substitutes. In this situation, it is
not uncommon for governments to set anticipatory standards intended to improve
the strategic (competitive) position of their firms. This paper examines the impact
of such standards, and shows that in a dynamic, uncertain environment, the use of
                     standards is problematic. The welfare effects of a standard are
simple, anticipatory
shown to depend on the way the standard is specified, but more importantly on
which firm develops which product and on the order in which products are
discovered. We show that simple standards are, in general, time inconsistent Even
if a standard inaeases welfare after all products are discovered, it still can reduce ex

ante expected welfare because consumers are hurt when products ruled out by a
                                                                   set as the
simple standard are discovered before the discovery of the product
standard. Thus the only type of standard which can unambiguously Increase
welfare in a dynamic, uncertain environment is one that is complicated in the sense
that it is state-contingent.1
        Understanding the effects of product standards is important because the
Technology Policy Task Force has recommended the use of standards to "support

 U.S. industry in technology development (Technology Task Force, 1988, p.
 The aeation of the Task Force and its recommendations were prompted by concern

 over the performance of U.S. high-technology industries. Since 1980 the U.S. trade
 surplus in high-technology products has fallen, and the share of foreign companies
 in U.S. patent registrations has steadily risen.3 U.S. companies appear to be
 dropping behind in patent races in industries they once dominated. Par example.
 the U.S. market share in consumer electronics has fallen from 100% in 1970 to less
 than 5% (Technology Palicy Task Force (1988)), and U.S. firms appear to be behind in


                                           I
the race to develop high definition television (HDTV). Similar examples can be
found in other high tech industries (Wysocki (1988)).
      One example of a standard is one requiring new products to be compatible
with existing ones, such as the Federal Communication Commissions regulation
that HDTV transmission in the United States be compatible with existing
broadcasting channels. This was generally considered to have been a strategic move
to improve the position of U.S. firms trying to develop HDTV, because it meant the
Japanese MUSE system could not be used in the U.S. without adaptation (Sims
(1988)). When the standard was announced (September 1988), the Japanese MUSE
system was in working prototype. Zenith was developing a retrocompatible
version, but it was only in the theoretical stage of development and was generally
considered to be inferior to the Japanese version. Hence, retrocompatibility was, in
effect, a standard based on the product being developed domestically. The move was
considered strategic because its announced intention was to alter the Japanese
advantage in the race.
      The United States is not alone in this type of standard setting. As is well
 documented by Crane (1978), Europe never adopted a single color TV standard
 because individual governments promoted standards to protect the interests of their
 firms. Hazard and Daems (1988) and Pelkmans and Beuter (1987) also make it clear
 that the European position on HDTV standards has the same motivation.
       This paper examines the impact of standards set for strategic reasons before
 products are successfully developed. In order to examine such policies, it is
 important to modet both the racing aspect of international R&D competition and
 the simultaneous development of different products by rival firms. In Section 2, we
 present a model of uncertain R&D between a foreign and a domestic firm where the
 foreign mm has an advantage in developing the superior of two closely related
 products. Whether firms race for the same patent, pursue different patents
                                          2
simultaneously, or the lagging firm drops out Is determined endogenously in this
model. This allows us to examine the impact of a standard Imposed before the end
of the race. In the absence of policy, the unique subgame perfect equilibrium (SPE)
involves the foreign and domestic finn simultaneously pursuing different patents if
the foreign firm has a sufficiently large advantage. In this model, dropping out is
never subgame perfect in the absence of policy if pursuing an alternative patent has
positive expected return for the lagging firm.
      In Sections 3 and 4, we show that the imposition of a standard can alter these
outcomes in several ways. In Section 3, we examine the impact of the lagging firms
government imposing a standard based on the product being developed
domestically. We show it is more likely that both firms will race to develop the
same patent (in particular, the one being developed domestically). Some of the
more interesting effects, however, arise when the foreign and domestic firms still
pursue different patents in equilibrium. We show that the standard need not be
welfare improving a ante in this case even if it is certain to improve welfare after
both products are discovered. That is, expected welfare can still be lower because the
standard benefits a domestic firm only after its R&D has succeeded, but consumers
suffer losses after the foreign firm succeeds. Hence, if the foreign firm succeeds first,
losses suffered by consumers before the domestic firm succeeds can outweigh the
gains from this policy after the domestic (inn succeeds. This shows that the
 imposition of a standard can be time-inconsistent in two ways. It may not be
 optimal to impose it before either product is discovered, but optimal to impose it if
 the domestic firm discovers the inferior product first. Also, it may be optimal to
 impose it before either product is discovered, but then remove it if the foreign firm
 succeeds in developing the superior product first.
       In the latter case, the announced standard has limited credibility. Finns may
 well expect the lagging firms government to remove the standard if the foreign
                                           3
firm discovers Its product first. The FCC, for example, reversed its decision on a
color TV standard in the fifties once a superior system was developed.4 Thus, in
Section 4. we consider the effect of a domestic policy that includes a contingency to
adopt the foreign product as a standard once it is discovered. To capture common
                                                                              finn
licensing practices.5 the contingency includes a requirement that the foreign
license its patent to the domestic firm at a minimal lee. An interesting aspect of this
policy is that in equilibrium the lagging finn may drop out of the race and wait to
                                                                 be time consistent
acquire a license from the foreign firm. The policy is shown to
whether or not the lagging firm drops out. That is, when licensing occurs, domestic
expected welfare is higher at every date than it would be with no policy. In Section 5

we compare the contingent standard and the domestic standard for an example with
linear demand and constant marginal cost. Section 6 concludes.
       Our work differs from the literature on compatibility standards in two
important ways. First, we examine the impact of a standard imposed before the
successful completion of R&D. Panell and Saloner (1985 and 1986a) and Katz and

Shapiro (1986a and b) focus on the relation of compatibility and innovation, but they
address issues related to adoption of exogenously developed technologies which are
currently available. Second, we focus on international competition. Besen and
Saloner (1989), David (1987), and Farrell and Saloner (1988) discuss coordination

problems involved in international standard setting, and Crane (1979), Pelkmans
and Beuter (1987), and Hazard and Daems (1958) discuss the use of television
 standards as nontariff trade barriers to trade. Lecraw (1987) discusses Japanese
 standards for a wide range of products as trade barriers.6 However, theoretical
 models have abstracted from international issues, so that welfare comparisons in
 the existing literature examine the profits and consumer surplus of all firms and
 consumers. To understand unilateral policies, such as the recent FCC regulation, it


                                           4
is important to determine profits and surplus of domestic residents, as we do In this
policy analysis.
      Our work also differs from studies of patent races that have generally
analyzed models in which identical firms compete for the same patent (see
Reinganum (1989) for an excellent survey). One exception is the literature on
sequences of races, in which firms compete for the same patent, but are not identical
because the winner of the preceding race earns greater profit during the current race.
Another exception is the literature on preemption and leapfrogging. Pudenberg,
Gilbert, Stiglitz, and Tirole (1983, hereafter ItS?) analyze several related models in
which one finn has an advantage in a race for the same patent. In one of these
models the finn behind drops out of the race lmnwcliately (and the leader does R&D
until discovery). In the others, the laggard will not only stay in the race, but also
may be able to leapfrog into the leadership role if the R&D process involves two
distinct stages with random discovery or if there is imperfect monitoring of the
rival's R&D effort. Uppman and Mccardle (1988) show that if the decision to do
R&D is made at discrete dates, then laggard drops out only if its rival has a large
enough lead. This paper contributes to this literature by showing a laggard will not
 drop out if it can develop a related, though inferior, patent.
       Several of the issues we raise are addressed in the international trade
 literature. Dixit (1988a and b), Bagwell and Staiger (1989), and Beath (1990) examine
 international R&D competition in the context of patent races. Although they allow
 asymmetries among firms, these studies consider firms racing to develop the same
 product. Krishna (1988) and Yanagawa (1990) examine trade policy in the presence
 of compatibility issues, but they do not examine the use of standards or explicitly
 consider R&D issues. Finally, Staiger and Tabellini (1987) examine the time
 consistency of international trade policy, but they do not address R&D or standards
 issues.
                                            5
2. A Model of Uncertain R&D With Substitutes
      Consider   a   two country world in which a domestic and a foreign finn choose
whether or not to do R&D to develop a new product A. R&D is Sky because the
date of discovery is stochastic, and because winning the patent for A does not
prevent the development of
                           a close, but imperfect, substitute for A. That is,
winning the patent for A does not guarantee monopoly in the standard sense
because there is a close substitute for A that can be developed. This can occur if
patent protection is imperfect, as is often the case across countries. It can also occur
if there are many substitutes for A which are different from the view of patent law,
so it is not feasible to obtain patents for all of them (see Gilbert and Newbery (1982)
for a thorough discussion of this possibility).
       Each firm can also do R&D to develop a new product B which is a dose, but
imperfect, substitute for A. Further assume A is superior to B in that each firm
would prefer to win the patent for A. To keep the analysis tractable, assume neither
firm can, or will, try to develop both A and B. Scarcity of trained researchers and
research facilities can imply that conducting two R&D programs simultaneously
either reduces the probability of success in each program, or increases the cost of
R&D in each program, or both. In this event each firm conducting only one R&D
program at a time can be derived as an equilibrium outcome, although we do not do
so in order to avoid complicating the analysis unnecessarily, If, as noted above, it is
infeasible to patent all of the close substitutes for A, the firm that has the patent for
 A cannot prevent its rival from developing some substitute. Therefore, there is no
 loss of generality in dealing with only two products. A and some substitute. B.
                     =
                          2 m (A) be the total flow profitearned by finn i i it has
                          Z
                         iii=1                             m
 discovered A but B has not been discovered, where             is firm Is flow profit from

 country m. Let Jt(A;B) =              (A;B) be the flow profit earned by firm i if It has
                                 m=i

                                              6
discovered A and B has been discovered. Define x(B) and            (B;A) analogously.
Then the assumption
      (Al) nr(M > maxbrjm(B),zr(A;B)) and xr'(B;A) < minfrm(B),nrt(AB))
embodies both the notion that A and B are substitutes and that A is superior to B in
each market. We assume markets are segmented and that in the absence of
government policy, profits in each market are positive (i.e., ,4tt(.) > 0). Then (Al)
implies both n(A) > z1(A;B) and          ic1(B) > ,t1(B;A),   and n1(A) > x1(B) and
x(A;B) > ir1(B;A). Under this specification of R&D, (Al) guarantees the expected
return from discovering A is greater than that from discovering B when the R&D
costs of A and S are the same. Also note this does not assume A is superior enough
to B in production that it1(A;B) > n1(B). Having a monopoly with B may provide
greater profit than producing A when B is available. This profit ranking can hold
with a variety of differentiated product models, including Shaked and Sutton's
(1982) vertically differentiated demand structure and models with network
externalities and variety (Farrell and Saloner (1986b)).
      The discovery date of each new product is assumed to be stochastic and
exponentially distributed with parameter g, so that if either firm does R&D. the
probability it will discover the new product between times t and t + dt is gdt Firms
incur a constant flow cost of development, and these costs may differ by firm as well
as the product being developed. Finn i must pay a constant flow cost kiA > 0 to do
R&Don Aoraconstantflowcostk15>OtodoR&DonB(i1,2). Thenfirmihas
an advantage relative to firm j in developing A if kiA <kiA. This is the most
tractable way of giving one firm an advantage in doing R&D on A. This modeling
choice Is not macial because the analysis can be generalized to hazard rates that differ
among firms or innovations, or that depend on accumulated R&D experience, as in
FGST (1983) and Uppman and McCardle (1988)


                                           7
      Because we are interested in subgame perfect equilibria (SPE), we must
consnct payoffs which incorporate optimal behavior by the remaining Finn after its
rival has discovered A or B. First, suppose A is discovered by firm i, but B has not
been discovered. Then firm j (j = 1,2,J          1)   can either drop out or do R&D on B. lilt
drops out It earns 0. If it does R&D on B, it pays flow cost kw until it succeeds, and
earns          thereafter. Hence, the expected return from R&D on B, discounted
      ii1(B;A)
back to the discovery date of A, Is
                     = [4s/r)it(B;A) — lcJBJ/(r + a).                                      (1)
               SIB
where S is used to denote the fact that B Is the second product discovered (by J)
and r is the common discount rate. Note that the assumption
       (A2) Qx/r)m/B;A) >           forj = 1,2
guarantees that B will be developed even if A is available.
       Similarly, firm i earns z1(A) in each period after A is discovered, but before B
is discovered, and jr1(A;B) in each period after B is discovered. Hence, firm is
expected return from A, discounted back to its discovery date, is
                      = [,.(A) +
                                 W/r)it(AB)J/(r +
The notation         denotes that A is the first process discovered (by 0.
       if B is discovered first by firm i, then finn j can either drop out and earn 0 or
do R&D on A and earn the expected return (discounted back to the discovery of B)
                      = t(u/rhc/A;B) — kjA)/(r +
               5JA
The assumption
       (AS) (u/r)x(AM) >             for J = 1,2
guarantees that A will be developed even if B is available. As noted above, (Al)
implies A >        B kiA (superiority of A in production implies its superiority
in development if the flow costs are the same). Firm i's expected return from B,
discounted back to its discovery date, is
               iu =      Em?)
                                +                  +
                                    @/tht1(B;A)J/(r 10.                                     (4
                                              S
Notice (Al) also implies FIA > FiB More importantly, there is an incentive for a
firm at a disadvantage in a race for A to begin trying to develop B immediately,
rather than race for A and develop B if It loses the race. If it discovers B first, it earns

monopoly profit It(B) until A is discovered.
     Assume the R&D game begins at t = 0. Optimal behavior alter discovery of A
or B is given above. Let a denote the strategy of doing R&D on A until its discovery
(by either firm), b denote the strategy of doing R&D on B until its discovery (by
either finn), and d denote the strategy of doing nothing unless and until discovery
of A or B by the rival. Assuming that the discovery dates for A and B are
exponentially distributed with constant parameter ji allows the strategies and payoffs
for this game to be specified in a simple way. In particular, reduced-form payoffs can
be computed and the game can be analyzed as if it were a one-shot game. Table I
gives the expected payoffs to finn 1 for all possible strategies of firm 2. We omit the
payoffs to firm 2 because they are defined analogously.
        It is easy to see from these payoffs that delaying R&D cannot be an
equilibrium in this model.7 This is because (A2) and (AS) ensure that a firm's
expected return to doing R&D on either A or B is greater than the return to delaying,
regardless of its rivals strategy. As long as discovering either product has a positive
expected return, then it is surely better for a firm to begin R&D immediately because
there   is a chance it will   discover its product first. Therefore the only question
question is whether a firm conducts R&D on A or B. From Table 1, one can see that

        — F10)> kIA — kIB implies that finn I will do R&D on A regardless of firm
2s strategy. This condition simply says that firm l's expected flow return from
being first to discover A, net of the flow cost of R&D, is greater than that from being
first to discover B. Conversely, 1A —                <kI — 1'IB' then firm l's expected
 flow return from being first to discover B (net flow cost of R&D) exceeds that from
 A, and firm 1 will do R&D on B regardless of firm 2's strategy. Analogous
                                             9
arguments apply to firm 2, so that the results of Theorem 1 follow immediately.
Formal proofs of this theorem and all remaining ones in the paper, are given in the

Appendix.
     Theorem 1. Under (A1)-(A3), delaying is never a SPE. Moreover:

                                                               k8 <'"IA — F18) for i       1,2.
                                                           —
    (I)      (a,a) is the unique SPE if and only
                                                                                           —
    (ii) (a,b) is the unique SPE if and only if both (cIA — 18
             and  2A —k2B >PW2A "2&
        (iii) (frg) is the unique Sfl if and only if both              —         >         — FIB)

             and k2A —1c28 <2A —F28).
        (iv) (b,b) is the unique SPE if and only if lilA _kjB >g(F IA —F10) for i = 1,2.
        (v) There are multiple SPE and SPE in randomized strategies only if
             lilA —       = u(F,A — F18) for at least one i.
         Figure 1 is a convenient way to describe the results in Theorem 1. The lines
IL(F1A —    l& = "IA      —      and 1'"m —            =       —     divide the space into four
quadrants, where equilibria are as indicated. These lines intersect at 1. where
         "lB > 0 for both i, because (Al) implies that it is better to be first to develop A
    —


titan            >   iB   Notice that the equilibrium of this game is unique for all values
of parameters such that            —     *           — 1iB for both i = 1,2. The reason for this

                                                                                "ID < IL(FIA
                                                                                               —
is that a is firm is strongly dominant strategy if and only if              —



and b is firm i's strongly dominant strategy if and only if                 —
                                                                                     > iA      —


Because     the set of parameter values such that either               =—        —
                                                                   kID
        — 1'2B       U(F2A —        or both has measure zero (in the set of all possible
parameter values In the plane), this game has a unique subgame perfect equilibrium
generically.
      As is clear from Figure 1, whether or not one firm has an advantage over the
other in developing a product depends on the flow costs of R&D. The easiest way to
see this is to observe that, if flow R&D costs are the same for both firms and
                                                10
products, then kiA —     = "lA — 1'IB — 0. The corresponding point In the figure is

the origin, and (a,a) is the unique SPE. However, If firm I is given a large enough
advantage in developing A (by Increasing k2A enough), then the point (kIA — k15,
                                                                until (a,b) is the
k2A — 1'2B in the figure moves upward along the k2A _l2B axis
unique SPE. The latter equilibrium is the most interesting one for our purposes.
Not only is it consistent with the observation that finns often race to develop
imperfect substitutes, but also it allows us to examine the Impact of product
standards announced before products are developed.


3. A Standard Based on the Domestic Product
      In this section, we assume finn i is owned by residents of country I and and
that its advantage in developing A Is large enough that (a,b) Is the unique SPE in
the absence of government standards. To consider the strategic use of standards, we
assume firm 2 is owned by residents of country 2 and that its government sets B as a
domestic standard, so that A cannot be sold in its market (without adaptation). We
show that setting such a standard before the successful completion of R&D may not
increase country 2's expected welfare even if It is certain to improve welfare at the
end of the game.
      Let the superscript p denote a variable when B is the standard, so that firm is
total flow profit under this policy Is denoted by xj'(.) Beause A annot be sold in
country 2 under this policy, 4(A) = x(A) cx1(A) and 4(¼B) x(AB) <x1(kB).
As long as country Is government is inactive, j'(B) = x(B) bemuse B can be sold in
each market. The flow profit from B when A is available increases under the policy
because the firm selling B in country 2 earns monopoly profit from that market.
That is, 4(B;A) = 4(BA) + x(B) > z1(B). Notice that this presumes an adapter
cannot be developed to bring A in line with the standard. If an adapter could be
developed, which would not increase As production cost, then the standard would
                                        II
have no effect.   If an adapter could be developed, but was wstly to produce, then the
sLandard would have the same qualitative effects as it does in this analysis.
      Thus this policy has the effect of deceasing the return to disc.nvering A and
increasing the return to discovering B for both firms. This implies SIA < 51A' °
that In order to ensure A is developed, (A3) must be strengthened to

      (A3Y @/r)lif(AB)       > k for j   1,2.

It also implies      >   Sj, so that (AZ) still ensures that B is developed. Finally it
impliesFcFiAand4'B>Fjakrbothfirms.sothat(a.b)iSnOW1eSs11kelY.afld
(b,b) is more likely, to be the S1'E of the R&D game. In terms of the figure. the
standard causes the lines to shift so that the point I is northwest of its location in the
absene of policy.
       Theorem 2. Under (Al), (A2), and (AS)' the unique SEE with this standard is
     (0    (a,b) if and only if both k74 — kIB cu(Fç4 —                and      — k2B   >
                            and

     (ii) (kb) if and only if and kiA — kiB > WF.'A — i&for i = 1,2.
Moreover, suppose that absent this standard, the SEE is firm I develops A and finn
2 develops B. Then under this standard, the SPE is less likely to be that finn 7

develops   A and finn 2 develops B, and more likely to be that the firms race frr B.
      Although the Sfl may change, for purposes of comparison we assume
throughout the paper that the SPE is finn I develops A and firm 2 develops B with
or without the standard. It follows immediately from Theorems 1 and 2 that with
or without the standard, the unique SPE is firm I develops A and finn 2 develops B
if and only if

               kIA —       <'A             and k23 >
                                                   —               —



We would expect this outcome, for example, firm Is cost advantage is sufficiently
large or If country Ts market is small relative to the total market for A.8


                                           12
      It is clear that firm I loses and firm 2 gains from B as a standard. However
this does not imply that welfare changes in the same directions because flow welfare

in a country is its firms flow profit plus its flow consumer surptus. Let flow
consumer surplus in country i in the absence of policy be C1(A) if only A has been
discovered. C1(B) if only B has been discovered, and C(A.B) if both have been
discovered. With only two firms, a natural assumption to make is

      (A4) C(A.B) > C(A) > C1(B).
The last inequality embodies the notion that A is superior to B for consumers in
both countries, while the first implies consumers as a group are better off with
duopoly competition when both A and B are available than when only one of them
is sold by a monopolist. Under the standard, we assume

      (A5) CI'(A) = C1(A). C(B) = C1(B). and C'(A,B) = C1(A,B), and
      (.46) C(A) 0< C2(A), C(B) C2(B), and C(A,B) = C2(B).
(A5) says the standard does not change consumer surplus in country I because A
and B can still be sold there. Given (A4). (A6) says the standard lowers consumer
surplus in country 2 once A is discovered because it cannot be sold there. Notice
that (A4) does not contradict the usual consumer surplus ranldngs of competitive
models with network externalities, where a standard of A or B might be preferred to
both products being available at price equal to marginal cost. Consumers in this
model prefer variety (I.e. both A and B available) because there is increased
competition if both are available.
       There are three times at which welfare comparisons can be made: the
beginning of the game (t    0); the first discovery date; and the second discovery date
(i.e.. when both have been discovered). Suppose firm I succeeds first. Then in the
absence of policy, expected welfare, discounted back to the discovery date of A, in
each country is

        Wl(P1A)       (it1(A) + C1(A) + @/r)[1r1(AB) + C1(A,B)])/(r + s) and        (6)

                                         is
       W2(S2B) = (C2(A) + (1i/r)[g2(B;A) + C2(A,B)] — k2&/(r +                 (7)

Similarly, if firm 2 succeeds first, then expected welfare, discounted back to the
discovery date of B, in each country is
           Wl(SIA) =    (C1(B)
                                 + (i/r)[x1(A;B) + C1(A,B)] — klA}/& + F') and      (8)

            W2(F2B) =            +           + (g/r)[n(B;A) ÷ C2(A,B)J}/(r + 10.    (9)
                        (n2(B)       C2(B)
initial expected welfare (at t = 0) is defined analogously to the expected firm payoffs;
that is,
         W1(a,b) = blWl(PIA) + tWl(SlA) — klA]/(r + 2jt) and                  (10)

         W2(a,b) = LtW2(F28) + iW2(S25) — k2BI/(r + 211).                     (11)
       Expressions for expected welfare under the standard are defined analogously
to (6)-(11) with i4'(.) and Cr(s) replacing it(.) and C(•). Under our assumptions it
is clear that the standard lowers expected welfare In country I at all three dates.
However, the effect of the standard on expected welfare in country 2 is less dear.
Firm 2 gains after both A and B are discovered because it is always a monopolist in
its own market, 4(B;A) > jr2(B;A). But consumers lose after A is discovered because
they cannot consume it, C(A) =               0   c C2(A) and C(A,B) C2(A) c C2(A,B).
Although the net effect is ambiguous, some conclusions can be drawn. Suppose
that, after both A and B are discovered, the standard hurts consumers more than it
benefits firm 2, C2(A,B) — C2(A) > x(U;A) — it2(B;A), so flow welfare is lower. Then

expected welfare at the first discovery date is also lower whether A or B is discovered
first, W2(FB) <W2(F211) and W2(SB) <W2(9211), and therefore initial expected
welfare is lower under this standard, W(a,b) <W2(a,b).
           Theorem 3. Assume the imposition of a compatibility standard by country 2
hurts its consumers more than it benefits its firm, and therefore reduces flow
welfare after both A and B are discovered. Then the standard also reduces country
2's initial expected welfare and its expected welfare at the first discovery date
whether A or B is discovered first.
                                                  14
       Now suppose instead that, alter A and B are discovered, the standard benefits
firm 2 more than It hurts consumers, so flow welfare is higher. Then expected
welfare at the first discovery date Is higher under the standard if B is discovered first,
W2(F8) > Wz(F2B). However, this policy stiH has an ambiguous effect on expected
welfare at the first discovery date if A is discovered first, and thus on initial expected
welfare as well. This is particularly interesting because It shows that Imposition of a
compatibility standard may not be a time consistent policy. By a time consistent
policy we mean one that increases expected welfare, compared to that with no
policy, at every date
       Thegrca_A• Assume the imposition of a compatibility standard by country 2
benefits its firm more than it hurts its consumers, and thus increases flow welfare
after both A and B are discovered. Then this policy can also increase both initial

expected welfare and expected welfare at the first discovery      date. However, it       can

also be time inconsistent in two ways.
     (I) It can increase initial expected welfare, decrease expected welfare at the first
          discovery date     if A is discovere4 first, and then increase flow   welfare after
          B   is also   discovered.

     (ii) It can decrease initial expected welfare,   increase expected welfare   at the first
          discovery date if B is discovered first, and then increase flow welfare after
          A is also discovered.
       That this standard increases flow welfare in country 2 after both A and B are
discovered can, but need not, imply that it always increases expected welfare in
country 2 before both are discovered. It implies only that expected welfare at the first
discovery date is higher if B is discovered first. The standard can increase or
decrease expected welfare at the first discovery date If A is discovered first and initial
expected welfare. The intuition is simply that the standard hurts consumers after A
is discovered, but helps firm 2 only after both A and B are discovered. If B is
                                             15
discovered first, then the only effect occurs after both have been discovered, when
welfare is higher with the standard (by assumption in this case). However, if A is
discovered first, then consumers are hurt thereafter, but finn 2 benefits only after it
discovers B. Consumers' expected loss between the discovery times a1 A and B may
be large enough to outweigh the flow welfare increase after B is discovered. If so,
expected welfare at the date A is discovered is lower with the standard. In fact, this
interim loss may be large enough that initial expected welfare is also higher with the
standard.
      Although it is more natural to think of country 2's government setting B as a
standard, it is worth considering the effect of A as a standard. The government
might well think that imposing A as a standard could induce firm 2 to race for the
superior product. It is straightforward to show that (a,a) is more likely to be the
equilibrium with A as a standard. This is because A as a standard in country 2
increases the expected return to either firm from being the first to discover A. and it
decreases the expected return to either firm from being second to discover B.
However, with uncertain R&D it is not clear that firm 2 will win the race or that
welfare will improve. Moreover, firm 2 may have enough of a disadvantage in
R&D on A that (a,b) remains the equilibrium, in which case both firm 2 and
consumers in country 2 lose. Firm 2 loses because it can't sell B in its own market
(without an adaptor). Consumers lose for the same reason they lose with B as a
standard. If B is discovered first, they lose between the first and second discovery
dates because they cannot consume the product. They lose at the end of the race
because A is sold by a monopolist rather than both A and B being sold by duopolists.
      These results suggest that setting anticipatory standards can be problematic,
regardless on which standard is set. The results are driven, In part, by the uncertain
discovery dates, but they occur, in part, because either standard creates a monopoly
in countiy 2 even after both products are discovered. Thus, even with a standard
                                         16
based on the superior product, A, consumers would prefer duopoly competition if
both A attd B are available.


4. Toward a Time-Consistent Standard
      Suppose country 2's government decides to set A as a standard if it is
discovered by finn 2 or if firm I discovers it and licenses the patent to firm 2 at a
fixed fee (set by the government). If firm I discovers A, but does not license the
patent. B is set as a standard once It is discovered. Although this policy seems
complicated, the results in Section 3 show that contingencies such as this may be
necessary to design an anticipatory policy that would unambiguously improve
welfare. This particular policy is consistent with the strategic motive to improve
firm 2s competitive position in the race because it benefits firm 2 regardless of
which product is discovered first. As we shall show in this section, it can also
benefit consumers in country 2 (relative to either of the standards considered in
Section 3) because of duopoly competition when licensing occurs.
       We continue to assume (5) so that (a,b) is the unique SEE in the absence of
policy and when B is the standard. In addition, we focus on the case where B as a
standard benefits firm 2 more than it hurts consumers in country 2 once both
products are discovered.9 This entails no loss of generality since it is the only case in
which B as a standard is time inconsIstent. The time inconsistency arises only
because, even though the standard increases flow welfare after both products are
discovered, consumers in country 2 lose forever if A is discovered first, but firm 2

gains only after B is discovered. Therefore, a time consistent policy must have the
property that both firm 2 and consumers in country 2 benefit from it whichever
product is discovered first,
       We shall refer to the game with B as a standard as the p game and to the game
with A as a contingent standard as the c game. Suppose A is discovered first by finn
                                          17
1 in the c game. Then firm I can either of fer a license to finn 2 at fee L, in which
case firm 2 can buy the license or not, or not offer a license, If firm I offers a license
at fee Land firm 2 buys, then firm l's expected return is
               FcA = [E1(AA)/r]       + L,                                           (12)
and firm 2s expected return is
               SB = [x2(AA)/rI—L                                           (13)
where z1(A;A) is firm is flow duopoly profits from selling A in both markets. U
firm I does not license the patent, then country 2's government will not enforce B
as the standard until its discovery because it is not credible to do so. Therefore, If
firm 1 does not license, its expected return is
                    =
                         bt1(A) + (ss/r)xçCA;B)I/(r + g), and                        (14)
finn 2s expected return is
                   = fttL/r)m(B;A) —
                                     k2&/(r + 4.                                     (15)

         The assumption
         (A?) (nit) < 1n1(A;M — nç(A;B)J/[1(A) —
is sufficient to guarantee that firm I will offer a license for any nonnegative fee (i.e.,
     >   I4' for any L   0). Notice that in order for (A?) to hold, finn Is profit from
selling A in both markets when it has licensed A must exceed its profit from its own
market when A and B are both available. In this case (A?) holds for a high enough
hazard rate because increasing the hazard rate speeds up the expected discovery date
of B, and thus reduces the length of time firm 1 can earn monopoly profit from A in
both markets. The assumption
         (A8) ,r2(AA) >            + it2(B) = 4(B;A)
is sufficient to guarantee that firm 2 will buy a license at a minimal positive fee (i.e..
     >       for a sufficiently small but positive fee L). This condition simply says
flow profit if it buys the license exceeds flow profit under the standard when A is
available.10
                                             18
         Now suppose B is discovered first. Then firm 2 produces B for sale in both
countries at least until A is discovered. The outcome of the licensing game now
depends, in part, on whether firm 2 can sell both A and B in country I when it buys
a license for A. Because this would reduce firm              flow profit from its own market
(compared to duopoly production of A in both countries), it is reasonable to assume
that firm I will not sell a license unless fim 2 agrees to stop selling B in country I.
Hence, if firm I offers a license at fee L and firm 2 buys, then firm 1 earns
1x1(A;A)/rl + L and firm 2 earns [x2(A;A)/rJ — L Otherwise, B becomes the standard,
so firm I earns ir(A;B)/r and firm 2 earns jt(B;A)/r. Again, (AZ) and (A8) are
sufficient to ensure A is licensed if it is discovered second by firm 1.
         Theorem 5. Suppose country 2's government adopts the contingent standard
policy and A is discovered by firm I. Then, under (Al), (A2), (A3)ç (A7), and (A8),
there exist values        < 0 and         >   0    such that the unique SPE of the licensing
subgame induced by this policy is firm I offers the license at fee L and firm 2 buys
the license for any Le(L1,L2).
         The proof of Theorem 5 shows that country 2s government can choose a
small, but positive, license fee such that licensing occurs if A is discovered by firm 1.
Thus, whether A is discovered first or second, or by firm I or 2, it becomes the
standard in country 2, ex post. As was the case with A as an arbitrary standard, this
means that (a,a) is more likely to be the equilibrium in the c game than with no
policy. In (act, in the c game (A2) is not sufficient to ensure that B is developed by
firm j   if A has been discovered. To allow that possibility, we make the stronger
assumption
         (A2)' (is/r)nj'(B;A) >
                                  k; forj = 1,2
Even though this contingent standard makes doing R&D on B less attractive, it is
still possible that (a,b) will be the equilibrium. Notice, however, that now there is
an incentive for firm 2 to drop out of the race and wait to acquire a license for A.
                                                  19
Dropping out has the advantage of eliminating the uncertain flow costs of
developing B, but also has the disadvantage of eliminating the possibility of earning
monopoly profit with B.
        Theorem 6:       Under (Al), (A2)', (A3)', (A7), and (AB), if (5) holds and
    —      >         —       then   the unique SPE for all L€(L1,L2) is:
    (V    (a,b) if k28 < px2(W/(r + Id.
    (ii) (a4) if k28 > px2(B)/(r + Id.
      In the c game, firm is advantage in developing A does not ensure that firm 2
will develop B in equilibrium, as it did in the p game and in the absence of policy.
Finn 2 will deviate from this outcome, to wait to license the patent for A, if the flow
cost of doing R&D to discover B is greater than discounted expected monopoly profit
with B. Several remarks about this are in order. First, it is possible that only A may
be discovered under this policy even though both products would be discovered
with no policy and with B as the standard. B never is discovered if A is discovered
first. This must occur if firm 2 delays in equilibrium, but it can also occur if firm 2
tries to develop B. Second, if firm 2 does delay, then it is obviously giving up the
chance of discovering B first and earning monopoly profit until discovezy of A.
Hence this indicates that delaying is more likely to be an equilibrium the lower the
expected return from discovering B first. That is, delaying is more likely the smaller
the flow profit from B and/or the larger the flow cost of discovering B. Delaying is
also more likely the higher the return from acquiring the license, or the larger the
duopoly profit from A and/or the smaller the license fee. Third, firm I is even
willing to give a license to firm 2 (i.e., L 0) because this ensures firm l's product is
adopted as a standard.
        The remaining question of interest is whether the contingent policy is time
consistent. The following theorem shows that if B as a standard increases flow


                                             20
welfare at the end of the game, the contingent standard policy is indeed time
consistent.
       Theorem 7.         Assume the conditions of Theorem 6 and C2(A,A)
where C2 (A,A) is country 2 s consumer surplus from duopoly production of A. If
flow welfare in country 2 after both A and B are discovered is higher with B as the
standard than in the absence of policy, then the contingent standard policy is time-
consistent (i.e., expected welfare in country 2 at the beginning of the game, at the
first discovery dale, and at the end of the game are higher with this policy than with
no policy).
       The intuition (or this result is straightforward. if B is discovered first, then in
the period before A is discovered flow welfare is the sante with both policies as with
no policy. Once A is discovered, whether It is first or second, then the contingent
standard results in licensing. After this occurs, flow welfare is higher with the
contingent standard than with B as a standard (which by hypothesis is higher than
with no policy). Firm 2's flow profit must be higher because otherwise it would not
buy a license. Consumers in country 2 are better off because consumer surplus from
duopoly production of A exceeds that from monopoly production of A, and
therefore that from monopoly production of B by (A4). Hence, the contingent
standard is time consistent in the sense that it increases expected welfare, compared
to that with no policy, at every date.


5. An Example
       This section presents a simple market model to show that the results of
Sections   3 and 4 are not vacuous. Assume the demand for good A in country
(j = 1,2) is     =        +a—        —        and the demand for B in J   is   =    —     —
                     Dj         'A       $B
where D1 and a are positive constants,                 is the output of A produced for sale in j,
and        is the output of B produced for sale in j. Assume the constant average cost
                                                  21
of producing A or B is c, where 0 c a cc < znin(D11D2). Note a is a measure of the
superiority of A. Also assume a c min(D1 — c,!)2       —
                                                           c),   so A is not superior enough
that B cannot be produced when A is available.
      If firm   I develops A and finn 2 develops B, Nash equilibrium flow profits in
the absence of policy (with quantities as strategies) are ,t1(A) [CD1 + a — c)2 +
CD2 + a — c)2]/4, x1(AB) = [CD1 + 2a — c)2 + CD2 + 2a — c)21/9, g2(B) lCD1 — c)2 +

CD2 — c)2]/4 and u2(B;A) =    — a — ()2 + CD2 — a - c)21J9. flow consumer surplus

in countw J Is 5(A) —    +a           —
                                          c)2/8, CJ(B) =           —   c)2/8, and C1(A,B)
                      (D                                 (Dj
(2D÷a—2c)2/18.
                   lnthepgame,E(A)=(D1+a_c)2/4,z(a¼Bh(D1 +2a—c)2/9,
      =                   — a — c9/91 +                             C(B) = C1(B).
        x2(B), 4(BA) =
                                            —
                                        (CD2 c)2/4L C4'(A) = C1(A),
c4'(A,B) = C1(A,B), C(A)  0, and C(B) = C(A,B) = C2(B). One can verify these
satisfy (Al) and (ASHA6). Moreover, flow costs of R&D can always be chosen so
that (a,b) is the equilibrium with B as the standard. Then ordinary algebra then
gives the following.
       Lemma.
     (I)    W(F)       W2(4B) and only if a c2 — c)/2.
     (ii)   If p/r 3/2, then W2(a,b) > I%(a,b) for all a, but if p/r 3/2, then there
            exists a   unique aw such that   W2(a,b)       Vit(a,b) if and only if a aw.
            where aW is defined by         + aW — c? + 2qz/rX4a
                                                                —               —    = 0 and

           O.caw<(D2_c)/2.
     (iii) If pir 3, then W2(S2B) > W2(ScB) fir all a; but if p/r > 3, then there aiss
            a unique as such that W2(S28) W2(S8) if and only if a a5. where a5
            is defined by    + as —    + (z/r)t4]5 — — di = o and 0 c a5 < aw <

                —c)/2.

       In this example, after both A and B are discovered, the gain to firm 2 from B
as a standard exceeds the loss to consumers if and only U a            c CD2 — c)/2. However.
in order for the standard in the p game to inaease expected welfare In all cases also
                                             22
requires that the hazard rate p. be large relative to the discount rate r. This
additional condition is needed to insure that the future gains after both have been
discovered are large enough to offset the expected loss to consumers if A is
discovered first.
      If licensing occurs in the c game, then firm 2's profit is x2(A;A) =
                    +
[(D1 + a — c)2 + (D2 a — c)21/9, and consumer surplus in country I is C2(A,A)
     + a — a2 > C2(A). It then follows from Theorem 7 that the contingent standard
improves welfare at all dates for any a c (D2 —   a/i such that (A?) and (As) hold (so
that licensing occurs if A is discovered first). For this example, (A?) requires
            ((D1 ÷ a—c)2 + (D2 + a—c)2]((1.25r/R) —11< — (D1 + 2a—
and (AS) requires

              (D1 +a—c)2+ (D2+a—c)2> (D1—a—c)2 + 2.25(D2—c)2.
It is straightforward to show that these conditions and a < (ID2       —   c) /2   can hold
simultaneously (for example, set  = 12, D1 = 10, a = 4, and c = 2).



6. Conclusion
      This paper has examined anticipatory product standards in an international
setting where one government imposes a domestic standard to alter the competitive
position of its firm in an R&D race. As we noted earlier, governments often impose
standards for precisely this reason. Public policy debates on the efficacy of such
standards have focused on such issues as whether standards should be announced
before products are developed, whether they indeed alter the relative positions of
domestic and foreign firms in races, and whether consumer losses from standards
outweigh any benefits to domestic firms. Our work shows that the answers to these
questions depend crucially on the way standards are defined, as well as the
underlying R&D competition.


                                          23
      We addressed these questions in the context of a patent race between a
domestic and a foreign firm, where the foreign firm has an advantage in developing
the superior of two closely related products. Finns choose whether to race to
develop a single product, develop different products, or drop out of the race. In the
absence of a standard, the foreign firm will do R&D on the superior product and the

domestic firm will race to develop an imperfect substitute if the foreign (inns

advantage is large enough.
       Our results show that a standard may or may not alter firms' equilibrium
strategies. An important point to come out of the analysis is that simple
anticipatory standards can be problematic even when they do not change the
equilibrium. Because discovery dates are uncertain, a simple standard imposed
before the successful completion of R&D may decrease expected welfare even it it is
certain to improve flow welfare at the end of the race. This is because the standard
benefits the domestic firm only after its R&D has succeeded, but consumers suffer
losses once the foreign firm succeeds. Thus a standard can be time inconsistent if
the foreign firm discovers its product before the domestic firm is successful. For this
reason, contingent policies such as the one considered in the c game can be Pareto
superior because they allow consumers and firms to benefit regardless of which
product is discovered first.
       Notice that both the simple and contingent standards make it more likely that
firms will race to develop the product favored by the standard. In this regard, our
analysis shows that standards may Indeed result in firms dropping out of the race.
Although the lime consistent standard examined here benefits the domestic finn. It
does so because licensing is possible, so that if the (inn has a large enough cost
disadvantage it will drop out of the race. Finally, notice that we did not make
welfare comparisons for cases in which a standard would alter the equilibrium.


                                         24
Suth comparisons could be made, however, it would not be surprising to find that
time consistent policies were even more complicated in those cases.




                                       25
                                      Footnotes

     15e David and Greenstein (1990) for an excellent survey of needed research on
the use of standards in dynamic environments.
          also p. 33 and pp.    205-210   on the Task Forces recommendation that
government policy be aimed at "restoring' the consumer electronics industry.
     3me share of foreign companies in U.S. patent registrations rose from 35% In
1975 to 47% in 1988 (U.S. Department of Commerce, 199). See McCulloch (1988) for
an analysis of U.S. high technology exports.
     4This particular case involved a switch in the standard from the CBS system
that was not retrocompatible to the NTSC retrocompatible system developed by
other domestic firms. See Hanrd and Daems (1988).
     5See Farrell and Shapiro (1991) on licensing requirements associated with
standard setting of HDTV.
     6Mayer (1982) examines a theoretical model of the protective effect of standards.
but his analysis is not strategic and he abstracts from issues of compatibility and
innovation.
     7Delaying can be an equilibrium in certain policy scenarios, such as that
considered in Section 4. It can also be an equilibrium when there are spilovers or if
imitation is possible. It is also possible for (a,b) to be an equilibrium with spillovers
(or imitation) because a firm earns monopoly profits for sonic period if it discovers
its product first. Results for the race with spillovers are available from the authors.
    81n the case of HDTV, some analysts predict that Japanese and European
markets will grow faster than the U.S. market. Hence the Japanese may not find It
worthwhile to modify their development strategy.
        B as a standard reduces welfare after both products are discovered, it is not a
credible policy for country 2s government. This lack of credibility alters the
expected returns to firms I and 2 so that licensing will not occur in equilibrium.
Thus the benefits associated with licensing under the contingent policy we consider
would not occur.
       10(A7) and (AS) are stronger than is necessary for licensing to occur. All that
is necessary is that FA >      and        > ZB• A natural sufficient condition (which
 is also weaker than (A?) and (AS)) is that the present value of both finns' profits
 under licensing exceeds the present value of both firms expected profits without
 licensing,
            (iv1(AA) + xjAA)1/r> (x (A) + (is/r)14'(A;B) + 4(B;A)ll/(r +
 We make the stronger assumptions¼ecause they guarantee the contingent standard
 is time consistent under natural rankings of consumer surplus.


                                           26
                                     References

Bagwell. K. and Staiger, R., "The Sensitivity of Strategic R&D Policy to Market
    Conditions," mimeo, Stanford University. 1989.
Death. J., Models of Technological Competition for the Analysis of Intellectual
    Property Rights and the Uruguay Round," mimeo, 1990.
Besen, S.M. and Saloner, G., 'the Economics of Telecommunications
                                                                Standards, in
    it Crandall and IC. Flamm, eds., Chanting the Rules: Technoloqical Change.
    International Competition. and Regulation in Telecommunications.
    WasMngton       The Brookings Institution, 1989.
Crane, RJ., The Politics of International Standards. Norwood, New Jersey: Ablex
    Publishing, 1979.
David, P., "Some New Standards for the Economics of Standardization in the
    information Age," in P. Dasgupta and P. Stoneman, eds., Economic Policy and
                 Performance. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press,

David, P. and Greenstein, S.. "The Economics of Compatibility Standards: An
   Infroduction to Recent Research," The Economics of Innovation and New
    Technology 1,1990,341.
Dixit, A., "A General Model of R&D Competition and Policy," RAND journal of
    EconomIcs 19, 1988a, 317-326.
_________ "International R&D Competition and Policy," in A. M. Spence and
    a A. Hazard (ed.), International Competitiveness. Cambridge: Ballinger, 198th.
Farrell, J. and G. Saloner, Standardization, Compatibility, and Innovation, RAND
    Iournal of Economics 16, 1985, 70-83.
__________ "Installed Base and Compatibility:       Innovation, Product
    Preannouncements, and Predation," American Economic Review 76, 1986a,
    940-955.
               "Standardization and Variety," Economic Letters 20, 1986b, 71-74.
_________ "Coordination Through Committees and Markets," RAND journal
    of Economi 19, 1988, 235-251.
Farrell, J. and C. Shapiro, "Strategy and Standards in High-Definition Television,"
    mi,neo, University of California at Berkeley, June 1991.
Fudenberg, D., R. Gilbert, J. Stiglitz, and J. Tirole, Preemption, Leapfrogging, and
    Competition in Patent Races, Euronean Economic Review 22, 1983, 3-31.
Gilbert, R. and D. Newbery, "Preemptive Patenting and the Persistence of
    Monopoly, American Economic Review 72, 1982, 514-526.

                                        27
Hazard, H. and H. Daems, Technical Standards and Competitive Advantage in
    World Trade, xnimeo, Harvard University. 1988.
Katz, M. and C. Shapiro. "Network Externalities, Competition, and Compatibility.
    American Economic Review 75, 1985, 424-440.
_________ 'Technology Adoption in the Presence of Network Externalities,"
    Journal of Political Enmomy 94, 1986a, 822-841.
_________ Product Compatibility Choice In a Market with Technological
           Oxford Fconomlc Paners: Special Issue on Industrial Ornnizatlon.
    Pess,'
Krishna, K., "High-Tech Trade Poli0,7 in R. Baldwin, C. Hamilton. and A. Sapir
    (S.), tlS-ECTnde Relations. Clucagc University of Chicago Press. 1988.
Lecraw, D. J., "Japanese Standards: A Barrier to Trade?" in H. Landis Gabel, S..
    Product Standardization and Competitive Sfratetv. Elsevier Science Publishers,
    1981
Uppman. S. and K. Mccardle, "Preemption in R&D Races," Euronean Economic
    Review 32 1988,1661-1669.
Mayer. W., "The Tariff Equivalent of Import Standards," International Economic
     Review 23, 1982, 723-734.
McCulloch, It, "The Challenge to U.S. Leadership in High-Technology Industries
   (Can the United States Maintain Its Lead? Shouldlt Try?." NBER Working
     Paper #2513, 1988.
Pelkmans, J. and R. Beuter, "Standardization and Competitiveness: Private and
     Public Sbtte$es in the EC Color TV Industry," in IL Landis Gabel, S., Product
     Standardization and Competitive Strategy. Elsevier Science Publishers, 1987.
President's Commission on Industrial Competitiveness, Global Competition: The
     New Reality. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office 1986.
Reinganum. J., "The Timing of Innovation: Research, Development, and
    Diffusion," in K Schmalensee (S.), The Handbook of Industrial Orpanization.
     Amsterdam: North Holland, 1989.
Shaked, A. and J. Sutton, "Relaxing Price Competition Through Product
     Differentiation," Review of EconotnI Studies 49, 1982, 3-13.
Sims, C., "HUI'V: Will the U.S. Be in the Picture," New York limes. September 27,
     1988,27.
Staiger, It and Q. Tabellini, "Discretionary Trade Policy and Excessive ProtectioiV'
     Ammican Ecrnomic Review 77, 1987. 823-837.
Technology Task Polig Force, Report of the Committee on Science. Space. and
    Technolov. Washington, D.C.: U.S. House of Representatives, 1988.

                                        28
Wysocki. B., Technology: The Final Frontier." Wall Sueet Journal. November 14,
    1988. Section 4.

Yanagawa, N.. Network Externalities and Trade Policies," mimeo, University of
    Tokyo, 1990.




                                     29
                                               Table I

                                         Payoffs to Firm I


Payoffs to firm I if firm 2's sateQv is to do nothing until the discovav of A B by
firnil
              P1(a,d)       (FIFIA —   kjA)/(r +
              P1(bA) = 4IF1B—kl&/(r÷Ii)
              P1(d,d) =     C)




Payoffs to firm I if firm 2's sfrav is to do R&D on B
              P1(a,b) = (nP1A + 1A — kIA)f(r + 211)
              P1(b),) =     4IB ÷ IA — ki&/(r + 214
              P1(d,b)                  + JI)



Payoffs U, (Inn I If firm 2's strate2v is to do R&D on A
              P1(a,a) —
                        =
              P1(b,a)       (izFIB+1451B—kIs)/(r+211)
                        =
                            IBl'(T +


P1(s11s2) is the expected payoff to firm 1 (discounted to t a 0) if firm I uses   and
finn 2 uses         (a,b,d).




                                                 30
       Mguret




(Lb)                                         (b,b)




             I
                                   k 1(2t
                 ______________________________________________________________
                                          —
                                                        '2A —



(aM                                           (b,a)




        31
                                          Appendix


Proof of Theorem 1. From Table 1:
     P1(a,a) — P1(b,a)   P1(a,b) — P1(b,b) = (4LFIA — 1'1A — (I1l?1B     —
                                                                             kj&]/(r + 2pi) and
     P1(a,d) — P1(b,d) = [WFIA — F18) — (kiA — klB))/(r + is).
From the analogous payoffs to firm Z
     P2(a,a) — P2(a,b) = P2W,a) — P2(b),) =            — 1ci) —          — k28)1/(r + 2t) and

     P2(d.a) — P2(d,b) —[PLFa Fz& (k2A l2B)/
                                 —        —        -         + U).

These facts prove the "only if" parts of (O-Ov).
     Now observe that (A1MAS) imply P1(ab) > P1(d,b), P1(a,d) > P1(dM, P1(b,a)>
                                                >
                              > P2(b,d), P2(d,a) P2(d4), P2(a,b) > P2(a,d),
                                                                            and
P1(d,a), P1(b,d) > P1(d,cfl, P2(b,a)
P2(d,b) > I'2(d4).
     Suppose that S(PIA -. FIB) >               — kIB. Then P1(a,s2) > P1(b,s2)            for all
    (a,b,d). This plus P1(b,a) , P1(d,a) implies P1(a,a) > P1(d,a), and so
P1 (d,s2) for all $2E (a,b,d} also. That Is, a is finn l's strongly dominant strategy if
             1&> kIA —kiB. Now suppose instead that I1(FIA — FIB) c k1
         —                                                                                 —
                                                                                               k19.
Then P1(b.Q > P1(a,s& for all          (a,b,d). This plus P1(a,b) > P1(d,b) implies P3(b.b)>
P1(d,b), and so P1(b,s2) > P1(d,s2) for all s2e (a,b4). Hence, b is firm l's strongly
dominant strategy if is(FIA — 1B <              — B• Analogous arguments show finn
2s strongly dominant strategy is a if U(F2A — 2B                     >   2A '2B' and b if
                                                                                —



U(F — F25) c k2A -       k. These results prove the If" parts of (iXiv). and (v) then
follows immediately.


Proof of Theorem 2. The proof of (i) and (ii) are entirely analogous to that in
Theorem I. Note     and j'8 are computed as in (2) and (4) with 4(A). 11ç(kB).
4(B), and 4w;A) replacing x1(A), x1(AB), It(B). and x1(B;A). It then follows that
         ItB < FIA — FIB for I = 1,2, so it is possible that both IL(FA — IB)
     —
                                                                                     c Ic1 A — Ic1 B

                                              32
         — FIB)   and kM —     > 2A 2B > ''A
                                          —             —
                                                         F'8). U so, then (a,b) is the
unique SPE without the slandard, but (b,b) is the Sit with the standard.


Proof of Theorem 3. If WI(FA)I Wl(ScA), W2(48), and WZ(SB) are the
expressions for expected welfare at the first discovery date under the standard, then
these are defined by (6)-(9) with i4'(.) and Cf(.) replacing x1(•) and C(.). Similarly,
let Wç(a.b) and W(a,b) be initial expected welfare under the standard. Then these
are defined by (10) and (11) with Wj(FA). Wl(ScA), W2($B), and W2(SB)
replacing Wl(F1A). Wl(SIA). W2(F25), and W2(S2B). One can show that
W2(F2B) — W2(Fe) = (lL/rlix2(B;A) — 4(B;A) + C2(A,B) — C(A,B)J/(r + is) and
W2(52B) — W2(4& = {C2(A) + (js/r)[n2(B;A) — 4(B;A) + C2(A,B) — C(A,B)])/(r +
After both A and B are discovered, country 2s flow welfare is 4(B;A) + C(A,B)
with the standard and x2(BA) + C2(A$) without it, so it reduces flow welfare if and
only if ic2(B;A) — 4(B;A) + C2(A,B)       C(A,B) > 0. Hence, W2(F2B) > W2(P) and
                                      —



W2(S78) > W2($u), whence W2(a,b) > W(a,b).


Proof of Theorem 4. From the proof of Theorem 3, if flow welfare is higher with the
standard alter both are discovered, x2(BA) — 48;A) + C2(A,B)      —
                                                                      C(A.B) <   0,   then
W2(4) > W2(F29).     However, note that C2(A) > 0 implies W2(S2B) > W2(S8) can
hold. Further, because W2(a,b) — W(a,b) = Jx(Wz(F2B) — W2($0) +              —
                                                                           W7(52B)
              + 2g), it is possible that WZ(FB) > W2(F2B). W2(S2B) >
                                                                     W2(Sc). and
either W(a,b) > W2(a,b) or W2(a,b) > W(a.b).


Proof of Theorem 5. Finn 2s strongly dominant strategy is to buy a license if
    >   S (when A is discovered first) and [E2(A;A)/r] — L     > ic(B;A)/r (when B
is discovered first). It is easily shown that [g2(AA)/rJ — L > ,t(B;A)/r implies


                                           33
  B > SB. Hence, whether A is discovered first or second, firm 2s strongly
dominant strategy is to buy If [E2(A;A)/r] — L> ,t(BA)/r,   or
                            L <12 = fr2(A;A) -
where (Al) and (As) imply 12 > 0. Therefore, given any compulsory fee L < 4,           firm
Is strongly dominant strategy is to offer to seu a license at L 1A > (when A Is
discovered first) and (x1(kA)/r] + L> itç(A;B)/r (when B Is discovered first).
Because   FA > IA implies (,t1(A;A)/rJ + L> x(A;B)/r, whether A is discovered
first or second, firm is strongly dominant strategy Is to offer to sell for any L < L2 if
IA > iA      One can show that       > 1A if and only if
                 L>   = [(x1(A) + (js/r)4G¼0))/(r + p)J —
where (Al) and (A7) imply L1 <0. Thus, whether A is discovered first or second,
the unique SPE of this licensing game is firm I offers to sell and finn      2   buys for all
LE (L,1Q.


Proof of Theorem 6. Under the contingent policy.
     Pç(a,a) — P(b,a) = Pç(a.b) — P(b,b) = FFA —       — 0'1A — k18)1/(r +

     P(a,d) P(b,d) = IPIA         — 0'IA ldlB'(t + it).
             —               —


     4(a,a) — P(a,b) = P(b,a) — P(b,b) = LF — 2B — 0'2A — 1c2&1/(r + 231), and
    14(d,a) — P(d,b) = [F — 2B 0'2A 1c2B)]/(r + JO.
                                   —       —


Because      >   'Aand <F, it follows that       —
                                                    kiB <
                                                                         —
                                                                                     Implies

     kiD c s(FA — F8). Moreover, (Al). (A2)', and (AS)' imply P(a,b) >
     —


F(a,d) > P(d,d), and P?(b,a) > F(d,a). Hence, if (21) holds, then developing A is
firm l's strongly dominant strategy because P(a,s7) > P(b,Q and P(a,s2) > P(d,s2)
for s2E {a,b,d}. Because km —        >         —
                                                       implies 4(a,b) > 4(a,a). the SPE
must have firm I developing A and firm 2 either developing B. delaying, or
randomizing on these two pure strategies. The result follows from the fact that
P(a,b)      P(a,d) if and only if xx2(B)/(r        +
                                                         1c20.   Moreover,       if x2(B)
                                          34
(r +             then "28 ja2(B)/(r + t) and (A2Y can hold simultaneously, so (ii)
can Occur.



Proof of Theorem 7. Under these assumptions. (a,b) is the unique SPE in the p game
and the game with no poiicy, while in the c game the unique SPE is (a,b)

if k211 cgz2(B)/(r + g) and (a,d) if              > 11n2(B)/(r + ja).   First suppose
k23 < in 2(B)/(r + i)• Then W(a,b) — W2(a.b)                  — W2(F2B) + W2(4B) —
W2(SZB)J/(r + 2p.). One can show WZCF2B) > W2W2) if and only if L < Vt      where
                  Lw ((A;/t) —                + C2(A,A) — C2(A,B))/r.
Smilarly, W2($B) > W(S2) if and only If L c       where
LWb =
      [r(AA)/rJ [(@/r)x2(BA) — k2B}/(r + 4) + (Cj.A,A)/r] — flC2(A) +
               —



4t/r)C2(A,B)}/(r + o1.
One can show that (A4),            +   C(A,B) > x2(B;A) + C7(A,B), and C2(A,A)
C2(A) imply both L" > L2 and LWb > 4, so W2(FB) > W2(F2). Wz(SB) >
W2(S2B), and thus W(a,b) > W2(a,b).
    Now suppose k2B > gx2(B)/(r + s)       so W(a,d) = sW2(S11)/(r + p4. One can
show W(a4) > W2(a,b) if and only if L c           where
Lwd    f{x2(A;A) + C7(A,A))/rJ — [Ot(B) + C2(B) + 2(R/r)[E2(AB) + C2(A,B)])/(r + zi)]
+

Because (A4).        + C(A,B) > x2(B;A) + C2(A,BL C2(A.A) C(A), and
          + t) implyL'  >4, we have W(a,d) > W2(a,b) also.




                                         35
