                   NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




         CRIME AND THE EMPLOYMENT OF DISADVANTAGED YOUTHS




                       Richard B. Freeman




                     Working Paper No. 3875




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                          October 1991




September 1991 revision for Urban Institute. I benefitted from
the assistance of Alida Castillo and from seminar comments at
Columbia, Princeton, Rutgers, Baruch College, Rice, Texas A&M.
This paper is part of NBER'S research program in Labor Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NEER Working Paper $3875
                                        October 1991



        CRIME AND THE EMPLOYMENT OF DISADVANTAGED YOUTHS



                            ABS'rRACT


     This paper examines the magnitude of criminal activity among
disadvantaged youths in the 1980s. It shows that a large

proportion of youths who dropped out of high school, particularly
black school dropouts, developed criminal records in the decade;
and that those who were incarcerated in 1980 or earlier were much
less likely to hold jobs than other youths over the entire

decade. The magnitudes of incarceration, probation, and parole
among black dropouts, in particular, suggest that crime has
become an intrinsic part of the youth unemployment and poverty
problem, rather than deviant behavior on the margin. Limited
evidence on the returns to crime suggest that with the decline
in earnings and employment for less educated young men, crime
offers an increasingly attractive alternative.



                                        Richard B. Freeman
                                        Center for Economic
                                         Performance
                                        London School of
                                         EconomiCs
                                        Houghton Street
                                        London WC2 2AE - England
                                        and NBER
        Stories about crime in inner city poverty neighborhoods fill newspapers and tv-radio news

shows. Unlike some sensational reporting, the stories reflect reality. In this paper I show that the

proportion of disadvantaged young black men with criminal records grew so large in the 1980s that

crime became a major determinant of their economic life rather than deviant behavior on the

margin. As a result, traditional programs to help the disadvantaged -- job training, education,

affirmative action, area economic development, even full employment -- will not suffice to bring

these men into the mainstream economy. The incentives/opportunities for crime must also be

reduced, and programs devised to rehabilitate ex-offenders.

       This conclusion is based on two fmdings:

        (I) That among blacks one-fifth of 16-34 year old men and upwards of three-fourths of 25.-

34 year old high school dropouts had criminal records in the l980s, creating a sizeable relatively

permanent population of offenders and ex-offenders outside the mainstream of society -- an

"underclass' by most meanings of the word. A substantial though smaller proportion of other male

dropouts also came under supervision of the criminal justice system. Even in low unemployment

cities such as Boston at the peak of the "Massachusetts Miracle' economic opportunities were

insufficient to deter large numbers of disadvantaged youths from crime.

        (2) That incarceration and probation have longterm adverse effects on the employment of

young men, with those incarcerated at the outset of the l980s had markedly less likely to work

throughout the decade than other young men. The relation between incarceration and employment

is, moreover, "causal" rather than the result of fixed unobserved personal characteristics that are

correlated with crime and employment: proportionately fewer youths who had been incarcerated

worked years afterwards than did non-incarcerated youths with similar initial employment

experiences.

       The paper is divided into four sections. Sections 1 and II document the two factual claims

given above. Section 111 examines evidence on the earnings and costs of engaging in crime.

Section IV speculates on the causes of increased youth crime and draws implications for debates
                                                                                                      2

over the underclass".

        Because criminal activity is difficult to measure' and information on criminal earnings and

the riskiness of crime hard-to-come-by, I analyse several data sets: the Department of Justice's

1986 Survey of Prison Inmates; the Current Population Survey (CPS);published administrative

data on the criminal justice system; the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY); and two

NBER surveys, the 1979-80 Inner City Youth Survey (ICY); and the 1989 Boston Youth Survey

(BYS). I focus largely on high school dropouts, particularly black dropouts, although I present

data for other disadvantaged youths, as well.

I. Youth Involvement in Crime in the 1980s

       To document the massive participation of disadvantaged youths in crime, I examine the

overall magnitude and growth of crime; estimate the number of less educated youths with criminal

records; and examine self-reported criminal behavior on three surveys of youths.

overall criminal activity

        To begin with, figure 1 depicts five indicators of criminal activity per capita from the

1960s through the 1980s: the total crime index, the number of arrests, the number of homicides,

the number of inmates in state and federal prisons; and the number of personal and household

victimizations. The total crime index, compiled by the Federal Bureau of Investigation through its

Uniform Crime Reporting Program on the basis of reports by some 16,000 law enforcement

agencies, sums the number of seven major crimes: murder and nonnegligent manslaughter,forcible

rape, robbery, aggravated assault, burglary, larceny theft, and motor vehicle theft. The arrest

figures, also obtained by the FBI from local law enforcement agencies, measure arrests for all

crimes, not simply those in the FBI index. Arrests for index crimes make up roughly 20% of total

arrests, so the index arrest rate is approximately onc-Iiflh the total arrest rate (U.S. Departmentof

Justice, 1990, table 4.7). Homicides are obtained from Vital Statistics. The numberof prisoners

includes those in state and federal prisons but not those in local jails. Victimization figures are

derived from the National Crime Survey, which asks members of some 60,000 households about
                                                                                                       3

being victimized by crime.

        As Jencks (1991) has pointed out, widespread concern about drug-related crimes and the

'underclass" notwithstanding, crime fell in the lust half of the l980s. The total crime index

declined by 15% from 1980 to 1984; homicide rates dropped from 10.7 per hundred thousand in

1980 to 8.3 per hundred thousand in 1985, with the major victimised group, black men, less likely

to be murdered in 1984 than in 1970.2 Arrests per capita fell by 8% from 1982 to 1984. It is

erroneous, however, to view the early l980s drop in crime as a tumaway from a high crime

society. As panels A-C of figure 1 show, crime levels in the 1980s far exceeded those in previous

decades. The crime index tripled from 1960 to 1980; homicides increased from 1960 to 1974 and

were 70% above their 1960 level in the lowest 1980s homicide rate year; and arrests per capita

grew through 1982. En the latter half the 1980s, moreover, the administrative data show crime

once again rising. The crime index went up 14% from 1984 to 1989; homicides increased by 10%;

homicide became the prime cause of death of black youths; and arrests per capita were higher in

1989 than in any other post-world war 2 year.

        Most strikingly, the high rate of crime in the l980s occurred despite massive growth of the

prison population (panel D of figure 1). In 1988 604,000 persons were in federal or state prisons;

an additional 344,000 were in local jails, for a total incarcerated population of nearly one million

persons. On a per capita basis this was nearly twice the number incarcerated a decade earlier. At

the same time 0.4 million people were on parole and 2.4 million were on probation -- giving a

total of 3.7 million persons under correctional supervision (U.S. Department of Justice. Probation

and Parole 1989, table 3) -- a number equivalent to 5% of the nation's male work force!3 All else

the same, the incapacitation of so many criminals should have greatly reduced the crime rate. That

it did not implies a substatantial increase in criminal behavior on the part of the

noninstitutionalised population.'

        In contrast to the high and by the late 1980s rising crime rate in the administrative records,

the victimization data in panel E of figure 1 shows crime declining in the 1980s, so that the rate of
                                                                                                         4
victimization in 1988 was below that in 1973. There is no obvious explanation for the discrepancy

between the trend in the administrative data and in the victimization survey.5 Resolving the

diflirencc should be high on the list of research priorities, but lies beyond the scope of this study,

which is largely concerned with participation in crime on which the victimization survey is silent.

young male participation in crime

        There are three ways to estimate how many young men have criminal records or engage in

crime: (1) from criminal justice system figures on annual arrests by age. (2) from numbers in jail

or prison, on probation, and on parole by age at a moment in rime; (3) from self-reported criminal

behavior in surveys of youths. None of these sources is ideal. Arrests are limited to persons

apprehended by the police, exclude criminals who were not caught, and include some who will not

be convicted. In addition, since someone can be arrested several times, arrests reflect the number

of persons arrested and the number of times they are arrested and thus exaggerate the number

involved in crime. Statistics on incarcerations. probations, or parolees exclude those who commit

crimes without being caught or who were convicted but are no longer under supervision of the

criminal justice system. As for surveys that ask about criminal behavior, they are likely to

undersample high crime groups, often exclude prison inmates, and suffer from the reluctance of

people to admit to crime. As the three sources of data have different biases, however, they should

in tandem provide a reasonable picture of the magnitude of youth involvement in crime.

        Table 1 combines criminal justice figures on arrests and incaicerations and CPS population

data to estimate 16-34 year old male involvement in crime in 1989. Line I records the number of

arrests of 16-34 year old men and the number of index crime arrests. Line 2 gives the

noninstitutional population in the age category. Line 3 shows the ratio of arrests to the population.

For all young men, the arrest ratios are large: 0.328 arrests and 0.045 index arrests per 16-34 year

old. As some 20% of offenses known to police are cleared by arrest (U.S. Department of Justice

Sourcebook, 1989, table 4.23), the number of crimes is about five times the number of arrests,

suggesting ratios of 1.6 crimes and 0.23 index crimes per 16-34 year old.
                                                                                                       5

        The ratio of arrests to the young male population can be used to estimate the proportion   of

young men arrested given independent information on number of arrests per arrestee. Using the

crime module of the NLSY I calculated that there were 2.3 arrests per young man arrested

(booked) in a given year. Dividing the arrest ratio in table I by 2.3 suggests that 14% of young

men were arrested in 1988. Similarly, I calculated that the average number of crimes per person

who admitted to crime on the NLYS was 6.6 and divided this into the estimated crime ratio. This

suggests that 25% of young men committed crimes.

        The remainder of table 1 deals with the population under supervision of the criminal

justice system. Line 5 gives the number imprisoned. Line 6 estimates the number on probation or

parole (based on the ratio of numbers paroled and probated per incarcerated male). Line 7 records

the proportion incarcerated, while line 8 gives the proportion incarcerated, paroled, or probated --

"under supervision of the criminal justice system". The proportions are strikingly high: 2% of all

16-34 year old men were incarcerated and nearly 7% under supervision in 1989 -- figures far in

excess of the proportions in previous decades, given the trend shown in panel D of figure 1. Since

some persons with a criminal record egress from the criminal justice system, moreover, the

proportion of young men with a criminal record is even larger.

        High as the criminal activity rates are for all young men, they are a magnitude greater for

young blacks. This is reflected in the fact that a third of arrests and half of incarcerauons involve

blacks. In 1989 there were 0.78 arrests and 0.11 index crime arrests per 16-34 year old black man.

In the NLSY there were 2.3 arrests per black arrestee. suggesting that 35% of young blacks were

arrested in a year. The mean number of crimes per black youth who committed a crime was 5.7,

which, assuming five crimes per az-rest, implies that 68% of young black men committed at least

one crime.

        Consistent with the high arrest and crime rates, a striking proportion of young black men

had criminal records: 7% were in jail or prison: and 20% were under the supervision of the

criminal justice system.6 Reflecting the 1980s upsurge in incarcerations, the proportion in jail or
                                                                                                    6

prison was, moreover, far larger than the 4.4% of 20-29 year old black men institutionalised in

1980 according to the 1980 Census of Population or the 4.6% of 20-29 year old black men

institutionalised in 1970, according to the 1970 Census.

                                        crime and education

       Criminals tend to be less educated and from poorer economic backgrounds than others

(Wilson and Herrnstein). Thus, crime participation of the less educatcd and poor will exceed that

of all young men given in table 1. To determine the criminal activity of the less educated, I

calculated the distribution of prisoners by years of schooling prior to arrest using a 1986

Department of Justice Survey of Inmates and contrasted this with the distribution of years of

schooling of noninstitutionalised men. The results in table 2 tell a striking story. Whereas less

than a quarter of all 18-24 year old men and 30% of 18-24 year old blacks had fewer than 12

years of schooling, over 2/3rds of all 18-24 year old prisoners and 3/4ths of 18-24 year old

black prisoners had fewer than 12 years. Among men aged 25-34, the difference between

inmates and others is even more stnki      . 60% of all male prisoners and 63% of black male

prisoners had fewer than 12 years of schooling compared to 14% of all and 18% of black

noninstitulionalised men. As the fraction of inmates with less than 12 years of schooling rose

from 53% in 1979 to 62% in 1986 (U.S. Department of Justice, Profile of State Prison Inmates,

1986, table 1), moreover, the overrepresentation of high school dropouts among prisoners was

increasing as well as high in the 1980s.

        Given the results of the prisoner surveys, what proportion of the less educated have

criminal records? To answer this question, I combined the educational distributions in table 2 with

the table 1 estimates of the proportions in jail and CPS numbers in the relevant education-race

groups to determine the proportion of men with different levels of schooling in prison. The

resultant statistics in figure 2 show that in 1986 5.1% of 18-24 year old male dropouts and 7.4% of

25-34 year old male dropouts were incarcerated and that 14.1% of 18-24 year old black male

dropouts and 25.7% of 25-34 year olds black male dropouts were in jail or prison. Since more
                                                                                                      7

men are on probation or parole than in prison, the proportions of dropouts under supervision of the

criminal justice system are even larger. In 1988 among all men 2.&4 were paroled or probated per

incarccrtc; among blacks 1.90 men were paroled or probated per incarccrcc7 (U.S. Department of

Justice, Correctional Population in the United States, 1988, table 1.2). At these rates, 19% 0118-

24 year old dropouts and 27% of 25-34 year old dropouts would have criminal records. Among

blacks, 41% of 18-24 year old dropouts and 75% of 25-34 year old dropouts would be under the

supervision of the criminal justice system, implying that over half of the broad age group has a

criminal record! Since high school dropouts are more likely to be incarccrated than probated or

paroled, the probabation and parole to prisoners ratios are probably upwardly biased for dropouts.

Even so, the incarceration rates in figure 2 are so large that even modest probation and parole

numbers would support the claim that an   extraordinary proportion of the nation's

disadvantaged youths have criminal records.

                                            survey data
        Surveys that ask about criminal behavior obtain data on illegal acts that do not result in

arrest/conviction as well as on those that do, and thus provide a different perspective on criminal

activity than administrative data. Accordingly, I examined the crime modules of the 1979-88

National Longitudinal Survey of Youths (NLSY); the 1989 NBER Boston Youth Survey (BYS);

and the 1979-80 NBER Survey of Inner City Youths in Boston, Chicago, and Philadelphia (ICY).

        The NLSY interviewed a random sample of youths and a special sample of minority and

poor youths from 1979 to 1987. The 1980 wave asked questions about crime. In addition, the

survey interviewed youths in jail in later years, providing a separate measure of incarcerations.

The virtue of the NLSY is that it is longitudinal, permitting analysis of the link between criminal

activity and economic outcomes nearly a decade later. Table 3 records the cumulative percentages

of youths who admitted being involved with crime on the NLSY, ordered from the most to the

least serious brush with the law. In the 1980 module 4.2% reported they had been in jail, prison.

or reform school and 11.1% reported being institutionalised or probated at one time. By 1987 the
                                                                                                      8

proportion who had been incarcerated at least once had risen to 8.1%. In teims of crimes

commitied, 41% of the young mcn in the survey admitted to serious crimes and an additional 17%

admitted to petty thcft, vandalism, and the like. In contrast with administrative figures, the NLSY

data in table 3 show no racial difference in arrests or incarccrauons. This is a frequent resuit in

self-reported surveys that criminologists attribute o underreporting of crimes by young blacks

(Hindelang, et a!). The one non self-reported statistic on crime on the NLSY -- whether youths

were interviewed in jail -- shows a pattern similar to that in the administrative data: 12% of young

blacks were at one time interviewed in jail compared to 4% of nonbiacks. Assuming no

underreporting by nonbiacks, this suggests that in the NLSY blacks underreported their criminal

behavior by about three-fold -- a figure comparable to that given by 1-lindelang. et a!.

       The 1989 Boston Youth Survey asked youths from the lowest income neighborhoods in

Boston (Roxbury. pails of Dorchester, and South Boston) about committing a smaller and more

serious set of crimes than the NLSY. Table 3 gives the responses of youths to these questions.

Because the survey refers to specific neighborhoods in a single city, the percentages are not

directly comparable to national crime rates. This said, sizeable proportions of youths report illegal

activity. As Boston had one of the lowest unemployment rates in the country (the "Massachussetts

Miracle') at the time of the survey, the high reported criminal activity indicates that a tight job

market was not sufficient to resolve the youth crime problem of the 1980s.8

       The BYS also asked youths about crime in their neighborhoods (figure 3). Proportionately

more black youths than other youths reported drug dealing, crime, and violence in their

neighborhood, and having becn robbed or attacked, and knowing "very well' people in jail, in

other trouble with the police, or in gangs. Comparable proportions of blacks and others reported

knowing very well people who sell drugs or do other illegal acts. To see if the reported difference

in crime by neighbothood was accurate I obtained data on crimes from the Boston police. These

figures show that crime rose in the city as a whole and in the surveyed neighborhoods from 1984

to 1990 (Boston Police Department 1991). Consistent with the youths' description of
                                                                                                   9
neighborhoods and knowledge of people in jail/gangs, the crime rate in the primarily black

Roxbury neighborhood was twice as high as in the primarily white South Boston neighborhood.

This suggests that on the BYS as on other surveys, blacks underreport criminal activity more than

others, although they correctly report more crime in their neighborhood.

        The ICY asked crime questions of young men from the poorest predominantly black

poverty tracts in Boston, Chicago, and Philadelphia in 1979-80 (Freeman and Holzer). Table 3

gives the proportions of youths in this sample involved in crime. As in the NLSY and I3YS,a

sizeable proportion admitted committing crimes and involvement with the criminal justice system.

        All three surveys provide information on the education of youths that confirms the finding

that high school dropouts are disproportionately involved in crime. In the NLSY, 17% of dropouts

compared to 9% of men with 12 or more years of schooling reported that they had been charged

with an illegal offense beyond a traffic violation. In the BYS 14% of dropouts compared to 8% of

those with 12 or more years of schooling said they had faced charges. In the ICY also a higher

proportion of dropouts than of high school graduates said they were involved in crime. That crime

participation differs markedly among youths by education even in the NBER surveys of youths in

poverty neighborhoods indicates that this relation is not due to comparisons of educated youths

from the suburbs with less educated youths in inner cities.

        In swn, both administrative and micro-survey data show large proportions of youths,

particularly high school dropouts, involved in crime in the 1980s. The administrative data indicate

that exceptional numbers of black dropouts developed criminal records, supporting the claim that

crime moved from deviant activity by a small number to a major activity among these youths.

I! How Does Youth Crime Affect Employment?

        Standard analyses of crime and the labor market examine how unemployment or other

indicators of market conditions affect crime. They usually find a modest relation in the expected

direction (Freeman, 1983). While in the aggregate unemployment is a plausible exogenous

determinant of crime, individual criminal behavior will also affect labor market outcomes
                                                                                                        Jo

(Freeman, 1987). Some young men will reject employment because they earn more from crime.

Others will have trouble getting a job because they have a criminal record. In this section 1 show

that a criminal record markedly lowers employment in the longrun as well as in the short run.

                                     Analyses of Surveys: NLSY

        The NLSY offers a unique body of longitudinal data with which to examine the longterm

employment effects of a criminal record. To analyse these data I created a vector of mutually

exclusive dummy variables for involvement with the criminal justice system:

                JAIL = I if the person answered yes to "Have you ever been sentenced              spendto
time in a corrections institution, like a jail, prison, or a youth institution like a training school or
reform school?"

                PROB = I if JAIL=0 and the person answered yes to "Have you ever been on
probation?"

               CONVICT = I if JA[L=PROB=0 and the person answered yes to "Have you ever
been convicted of any charges other than a minor traffic violation?"

                CHARGE = I if JAIL=PROB=CONVICTO and the person answered yes to "Not
counting minor traffic offenses, have you ever been booked or charged for breaking a law, either
by the police or by someone connected with the courts?"

                STOP = I if JALL=PROB=CONVICT=CHARGE=O and the person answered yes
to "Other than for a minor traffic violation, have you ever been stopped by the police, but not
picked up or arrested?"

        I examined the effect of this vector on a dummy variable for whether the individual was

employed during the survey week (WORK) and on weeks worked in the preceding year (WEEKS)

for each year from 1980 to 1987 or 1988 (employment status is available in the survey year while

weeks worked relate to the previous year). Linking the late l980s outcomes to criminal justice

variables from the 1980 crime module helps identify the effect of having a criminal record on

outcomes from the effect of current labor market opportunities on crime. I limited the sample to

out-of-school men in each year and include numerous control variables, ranging from education,

region, age, etc. to self-reported use of drugs and alcohol (even though most of that information

comes from later surveys). My purpose was to hold fixed all personal attributes whose omission

might bias upward the estimated link between crime and employment outcomes.
                                                                                                     II
       Table 4 presents coefficients and standard errors on the crime variables from OLS

regressions, The linear probability estimates of the determinants of employment in the survey

week in panel A show that the most serious involvement with the criminal justice system --jail or

probation -- had massive longterm effects on employment while lesser involvements had small

often negligible effects. Men in jail or on probation as of 1980 had lower employment in all

succeeding years than other men with comparable characteristics. For example, those who had

been in jail or on probation as of 1980 had a 0.19 point lower chance of being employed in 1988

than those with no involvement with the criminal justice system. As a summary of all the years'

results. I pooled the data for the nine years and calculated the percentage of years in which a

person worked at the time of the survey, and estimated the effect of the criminal involvement

vector on this sample for all men and separately for blacks, The estimated effects of jail and

probation on employment for both groups are highly significant and sizeable.

        Panel B of the table presents comparable regression results for weeks worked in the

preceding year. It shows that men who had been incarcerated or probated as of 1980 worked

significantly less than others in all succeeding years. Given average weeks worked that ranged

from 35.7 to 43.7, the estimated coefficients imply that jail reduced work time by 25-30% while

probation reduced it by 10-15%. By way of summary, I formed a composite variable for those

who responded to each survey: the proportion of weeks worked from 1980 to 1987. For all men

and for blacks taken separately jail greatly reduces this variable and probation has a substantial

though smaller effect.

        What underlies the massive loss of future employment that seemingly results from a

criminal record? One possibility is that the youths who committed crime before 1980 are more

likely to be in jail in later years as weU, and thus to be jobless then. The high recividism rate of

ex-offenders -- on the order of two-thinis of state prisoners aged 18-34 are re-arrested within three

years (U.S. Department of Justice, Recividism of Prisoners Released in 1983. table 14) -- suggests

that this is part of the story. I estimated the recividism effect on 1988 employment by restricting
                                                                                                    12

the sample to youths who were not interviewed in jail in that year. The estimates thus show how

earLy incarceration affected the employment of noninstitutionalised men in 1988. The resultant

coefficient (standard error) was .12 (.02), which is 63% as large as the .19 in the comparable table

4 regression, implying that roughly 1/3rd of the effect of a criminal record on future

employment is the result of future incarceration. Another possible route of impact is that

youths who went to jail reject work in favor of crime when they are at liberty; absence of crime

questions on later NLSY surveys makes it impossible to estimate this effect A third possibility is

that employers are unwilling to hire ex-offenders even when they seek legitimate work (see

Boshier and Johnson; Dale; Finn and Fontaine; Shwartz and Skolnik); this also cannnot be

examined in the NLSY.

                               Analyses of Surveys: NBER Surveys

        Table 5 presents the results of my analysis of the effect of crime on employment and

earnings in the 1989 Boston Youth Survey. As in the NLSY, I limited my sample to out-of-school

young men. This produces a higher crime rate in the regression samples than in table 3. The

principal dependent variable is a 0-1 dichotomous measure of whether the youth worked during the

survey week. Although the survey was conducted at the height of the Boston labor market boom

only 55% of the out-of-school youths from the poverty neighborhoods had jobs during the week,

supporting the claim that while full employment raises the proportion of youths working (Freeman,

1991) it does not induce the vast majority into work. To control for personal characteristics that

are potentially correlated with labor market outcomes and crime, I included a wide variety of other

variables, as listed in the taole note. Each line in the table relates to a separate regression in which

I varied the measures of crime but kept the other variables the same.

        The regression in line I suggests that one reason for the low employment. rate among

disadvantaged youths in booming 1989 Boston was crime; youths who committed crimes were 19

percentage points less likely to be working than others. For consistency with the NLSY the crime

variables in line 2 are a set of mutually exclusive dummies: whether the individual spent any time
                                                                                                       13

in jail or reform school; whether they were convicted but did not go to Jail; whether they were

charged with a crime but not convicted; and whether they committed a crime but were not caught.

It shows that those who had been in jail had exceptionally low chances of employment. Men who

are arrested and men who commit crimes but are not caught also have lower chances of

employment than others; those who were convicted have a greater chance of employment than

those arrested, but this may be an artefact of the small sample size. Line 3 shows the strong

adverse effect of jail or probation on employment when it is entered as the sole measure of

involvement with crime. As no one in this sample was interviewed in jail, the estimated effect is

independent of recividism.

        Table 6 presents estimates of the effect of crime on employment and earnings for out-of-

school youth in the ICY Survey. As in the preceding table, each line gives the coefficients from a

separate regression in which the measures of crime differ while all other variables are the same.

The results show that despite the low employment rate of 43% at the time of the survey, youths

involved in crime had a lower probability of working than others. Those with "any criminal

involvement" (having been in jail or on probation or admitting they committed a crime) had a 0.11

lower chance of being employed (line 1). The more crimes committed, the smaller is a chance of

having a job (line 2). The greater the income from crime the smaller is the chance of having a job

(line 3). The regressions with the vector of mutually exclusive crime variables confirm that having

been in jail is the single most important deterrent to employment (line 4).

                             interpreting the crime-employment relation

        Should the regression fmdings in tables 4-7 be viewed as causal evidence that having a

criminal record reduces employment or are the results subject to econometric problems that make

them so biased as to be spurious?

         One reason for expecting the regressions to be biased is that, diverse controls for personal

 characteristics notwithstanding, there may be "unobserved personal attributes" that affect both
                                                                                           skills --
 crime and employmenL For instance, persons with exceptionally low legitimate market
                                                                                                    14

say the functionally illiterate, or those with personality problems due to childhood abuse -- may be

more likely to commit crimes and less likely to work irrespective of whether they commit crimes.9

To control for the effect of unobserved personal attributes, I switch from cross-section analyses

that compare different people with differing criminal experiences to longitudinal analyses that

contrast the same person before and after his criminal experience. I focus on the crime variable

that had the strongest cross-section effect, incarceration.

        Table 7 presents the results of longitudinal analyses of the effect of incarceration on

employment in the NLSY. Here, I exploited the NLSY information on place of interview to

determine the year an individual was in jail, and used an omitted variable regression model to

estimate the effect of jail on working. Let Y be the outcome measure, I be a 0-1 measure of

having been in jail, 0 be the omitted personal variable. In the current period, crime affects

outcomes according to

         (1)Y'= aJ+bO÷u',whereu'isanormalerrorterm.
Prior to the youths going to jail,

       (2) Y = 0 + u, where u is an error term.

Substituting for the omitted personal factor 0 yields

        (3)Y'-Y=aJ÷(b-l)Y÷u'-bu
Since u is correlated with Y this equation will yield biased coefficients. I deal with this by

instrumenting Y on outcomes in a different year preceding the stint in jail.'0

        I estimated equation (3) by instrumental variables for the year of the crime module on

which my table 4 results ate based, 1980 and for 1983. In each case my measure of incarceration

was a 0—i dummy variable for whether the person was interviewed in jail, which is potentially

more accurate measure than the self-reported JAIL used in table 4. My dependent variables were

1987 weeks worked and 1988 employment. In the regressions with 1983 incarceration as the

independent variable, I controlled for 1982 work experience instrumented on 1981 and 1980 work

experience. In the regressions with 1980 incarceration as the independent variable I controlled for
                                                                                                     15

1979 work experience instrumented on 1978 work experience. For purposes of comparison I also

cstimatcd equation (1), which does not control for omitted personal factors.

        Table 7 gives the results of this analysis. The odd-numbered columns give the OLS results

while thc even-numbered columns give the estimates of equation (3). Note first that the OLS

coefficients on 1980 incarceration are larger than in the comparable table 4 regressions. I interpret

this as resulting from smaller measurement error in interview-based than in self-reported

incarceration data. Controlling for the omitted personal factor in the even-numbered columns

reduces the effect of 1980 incarceration by 20%. In the OLS regressions the calculations focusing

on 1983 incarceration yield similar the coefficients to those on 1980 incarceration. However, the

correction for omitted variable bias reduces the coefficient on incarceration by much more in the

1983 case -- by one-half rather than by one-fifth. Still, in both cases the effect of incarceration on

employment years later is substantial and statistically significant)'

        Turning to econometric probes of the other data sets, the ICY contains a "time line' that

permits a before-after test of the effect of incarceration or probation on employment. For the time

line, interviewers asked individuals about activities over the preceding year, which the interviewers

coded to determine monthly participation in each. One hundred and thirteen men in the sample

entered jail/probation in the year. The men averaged 6 months of activity prior to being

incarcerated/probated and 3 months of activity after release. I calculated the proportions who had

a job in at least one month prior to jail/probation and after release. For comparison I estimated

the proportion of out-of-school men in the rest of the sample with a job during the first 6 months

of the time line (before) and during the last 3 months (after). The results of this longitudinal

analysis, summarized in figure 4, confirm that jail/probation has a striking adverse effect on an

individual's employment status. Prior to incarceration 50% of the jail or probation sample had a

job mat least one month. Afterwards, only 19% had a job. By contrast, there is virtually no

change in the proportion in the "control group" with a job in at least one month.

        Finally, while the BYS has no longitudinal information it contains data that can be used to
                                                                                                      16

examine the potential bias in results due to measurement crror in self-reported crime.'2 I examine

measurement error by instrumenting crime variables on youths' reported links to persons with

crime/gang activity. The hypothesis is that young men who report "close friends or family

members in jail"; 'knowing drug dealers very well", "having friends in gangs" may be involved

with crime even if they do not admit it. Since I have a limited number of instruments, I use this

technique for single crime variables. The resultant IV estimated coefficients, given in lines 4 and 5

of table 6, are much greater than the OLS estimates, supporting the hypothesis that measurement

error substantially downwardly biases the OLS results in this data set.

        Although these econometric probes support the claim that a criminal record greatly reduces

employment, the statistical results should be interpreted cautiously. Criminal behavior is not an

exogeneous experimental variable like a treatment on an agricultural plot, but rather results from

individual responses to incentives and opportunities. The table 4-8 estimates do not show what

would happen if a randomly chosen youth was given a criminal record but rather what actually

happened to youths who chose to commit crimes. Put differently, while the longitudinal analyses

rule out a fixed unobservable interpretation of the incarceration-employment relation, they are

consistent with the "true" cause of the relation being the endogenous decision to pursue crime at

the risk of incarceration and loss of legitimate employment. I turn next to that decision.

III Economic Incentives and the Supply of Young Men to Crime

        Because the data needed to apply the economic theory of criminal behavior (Becker) to

actual decisions -- measures of criminal earnings, risks of injury, apprehension, incarceration, and

the like -- are not readily available, my analysis of the role of economic factors in the supply of

crime is tentative. I use limited data on criminal earnings and youths' perceptions of the earnings

and risks of crime to assess crudely the economic rationality of their decision to choose crime.

                                       earnings from crime

        There is disagreement over how much young men make from crime. On the one hand art

reports of fortunes gained in the illegal drug business (Washington Post, Feb 15. 1989, SI). On
                                                                                                    17

thc other arc reports of low earnings and long hours: 'most of the people in the Idnigi business

work round the clock, six to seven days a week, for low real wages in an aUnosphere of physical

threat and control" (New York Times. Nov 26. 1989). One mason for disagreement is the lack of

hard information on criminal earnings. Few surveys ask about criminal earnings and those that do

may not obtain accurate estimates. Another difficulty is that criminals are often self-employed,

with consequent problems in differentiating gross and net earnings (for instance, from drug sales)

and in determining the time spent at "work" (including time planning crimes, waiting for victims or

customers, etc.). A third reason is that the large numbers who commit crimes produce a wide

dispersion of earnings that provides ready examples on both sides of the issue. This said, I

examine the available survey information to see if self-reported earnings and risk am consistent

with an economic interpretation of disadvantaged youths' choosing crime.

       Table 8 summarizes self-reported criminal earnings from several data sets: the BYS and

ICY; interviews with lower-level drug dealers in Oakland, California; a Rand survey of drug

dealers in Washington, D.C.; and the 1986 Inmates Survey. Each of these data sets is flawed. The

BYS asked how much youths made from illegal activities during the past year and how much they

believe could be made from the drug business. The ICY asked for income from illegal activities

for the past year (and in the past four weeks that I do not use here). Because criminal behavior is

understated in these surveys, so too is criminal income: Viscusi estimated that criminal income was

roughly thite times what was reported in the ICY. In Oakland two Harvard students identified

through personal connections seven "runners" in the drug business and asked them their weekly

earnings and hours worked. While their interviews yielded valuable information, particularly about

time worked, their sample is small and biased. The Rand survey, arguably the best source of

information on earnings from drugs, asked 186 persons (of whem 69 were aged 18-24) convicted

of drug dealing in Washington D.C. earnings from illegal activities during the past 4 weeks and 6

months. The Inmate Survey asked prisoners their income and sources of income prior to

incarceration, but only a fifth reported earnings from illegal sources -- hardly believable for a
                                                                                                   18

sample of convicted criminals. Problems notwithstanding, these data sets areour best source of

information on earnings from crime, and deserve examination.

        The BYS survey shows modest annual income but sizeable hourly pay from crime. Youths

who reported earnings from crime made just over $3000 per year. with a range from $750 for

those who admitted a single crime to $5400 for those who engaged in crime once a week or more.

On the basis of reported hours on the most recent crime, these figures imply hourly pay of $88.00

for those who commit one crime to $9.75 an hour for those who commit crimes weekly,'4

indicating rapidly diminishing returns. Average hourly pay from crime was $19. The amount

youths believed they could make from drug sales ranged from $2300 monthly for those who saw

few opportunities to $3600 for those who saw many opportunities. Putting these figures onto an

hourly basis on the assumption of 40 hours worked per week gives hourly pay of $13 to $21. All

these estimates, including the $9.75, exceed the $7.50 that youths in the survey earned from

legitimate work, and substantially exceed take-home pay, given a rough 25% reduction due to

Social Security and taxes to some $5.60 The $9.75 from crime is 73% greater than take-home pay

from a legitimate job whereas the $19 per hour average from crime is over 3 times take-home pay.

        In the ICY individuals who reported crime in the previous year made an average of $1607

im crime in 1979-80, or some $2423 in 1989 dollars -- moderately less than the earnings

reported by youths in the BYS. In his analysis of these data Viscusi adjusted the figures by 3 for

likely undeneporting, with the result that criminal income was 1/4th of all the income earned by

young men in the sample.

        In the Oakland intcrvws average weekly earnings was $444 and average hours worked

was 56, given an average hourly pay of $7.92. While $7.92 per hour is not going to finance a

Mercedes, this is good tax-free pay for less educated youths -- over twice the minimum wage and

in excess of pay at fast food places. Going beyond pay, however, these interviews suggest a

positive value to the non-monetary aspects of illegal jobs: selling out of one's own apartment,

setting one's own hours and receiving approbation as an independent entrepreneur. "I wasn't no
                                                                                                      19

old working fool. I was a dealer, a player! I always carried my beeper around, even when I

wasn't dealing because when people saw it they knew I was for real. People knew I was dope'

(lntervicw with Izzy. Oakland, Jan 1990, Monnin and Shedroff, p 13). This finding is in

agreement with detailed ethnographic studies that show that many young drug dealers prefer the

employment conditions of illegal work (Williams. Taylor, Bourgois).

       The Rand survey provides strong evidence that drug dealing is "much more profitable on

an hourly basis than are legitimate jobs available to the same persons" (Reuter et al, p viii). The

dealers in the survey reported net monthly mean income of $1799 from drugs and $215 from other

crimes, which cumulates to a total annual income of nearly $25,000 from crime. At the reported

hours on the last sale, the implied hourly pay was $30. Even if these men work year-round full-

time, pay exceeded $12.00 an hour. By comparison, those who held legitimate jobs averaged

$1046 per month, half the monthly income from crime. For 18-24 year olds, net monthly mean

income was $1234, while the median was $333, implying that relatively many persons made only

limited money from drug-dealing because they did it infrequently (Reuter et al, chapter IV).

        As the 1986 Prisoners Survey did not ask for earnings from illegal sources. I inferred

illegal income from differences in the earnings of persons who did/did not list illegal activity as a

source of income. The 20% of the sample who reported illegal earnings had total incomes $12,243

higher than those who did not in a regression of income on source of income. This is about the

same as the mean income from legitimate sources. Prisoners who said their sole source of income

was illegal activities had incomes nearly twice those of prisoners who earned "nothing" from

illegal sources. If these inmates worked full-time at crime, their hourly pay would have been$12.

        On net, the data suggests that men with limited skills earn hourly rates of pay that are on

the order of twice those from legitimate work, and possibly much greater.

perceived incomes and risks over time

        The 1989 BYS asked youths their perceptions of opportunities to engage in crime and of

illegal earnings. Similar questions were asked in the 1979-80 ICY survey. Figure 5 displays the
                                                                                                     20

results in the two surveys. it shows a sharp increase in the proportion who believed they could

cam more "on the street" than from legitimate work and in the propOrtiOn who see many chances

for making illegal income. In the 1979-80 survey. 31% of all youths and 41% of those in Boston

reported they could make more on the street compared to the majority who said they could earn

more from the labor market. A disproportionate number who said they could make more on the

street committed crimes (Viscusi; Freeman. 1986). in 1989 the picture was quite different: 63% of

youths said they could make more on the street: and there was no difference in the responses by

whether they committed crimes. The view that crime pays more than legal activities changed from

a minority perspective, held largely by those who committed crimes, to a general assessment held

by most disadvantaged youths. Figure 5 also shows that the proportion of youths who saw

"chances to make illegal income several times a day" roughly doubled between 1980 and 1989.

The implication is that even in labor shortage Boston criminal opportunities increased relative to

legitimate opportunities. Why? The most likely cause is the drug business, which grew so rapidly

in the late 1980s that "Boston moved behind Los Angeles, Miami, and New York as the fourth

largest drug economy in the U.S." (interview with DEA-New England, Jan 1990).

        The negative side of criminal activity is the chance of being caught and the penalties

thereof. Arrest and imprisonment reduce earnings from legal and illegal sources and impose

nonpecuniary costs and loss of fuwre employment possibilities. There is also the chance of being

physically harmed by police or by competitors for illegal earnings opportunities. Reuter et a!

estimate that regular drug dealers in D.C. had a 50% chance of being charged with a drug offense

in a given year (p 92), while those arrested had a 50% chance of incarceration (p 95). Given an

average time served of 18 months, this implies that the drug dealers spend 1/3rd of their careers in

jail. In addition, these men had high chances of injury or of getting killed. Their earnings

exceeded what they could make in the legitimate job market, but so too did their risks.

        To deterntine how disadvantaged young men perceive the risks of crime, the BYS asked

youths their chances of getting arrested, convicted and so on, coding the answers as "high", "about
                                                                                                    21

50-50", or "low' Figure 6 shows the proportion who reported high risks of crime and gives

responses to comparabhi questions asked of youths who committed crimes in the 1979-80 ICY

survey. There art two tindings. First, those who do not commit crimes saw greater risks, possibly

reflecting risk aversion, than those who commit crimes. Second, proportionately more youths saw

risks as high in 1989 than in l979-80.' This is consistent with the economic model of decision-

making, which predicts a positive relation between the risks of crime and criminal incomes, given

that youths in 1989 saw criminal incomes as relatively higher than youths in 1979-80.

        In sum, the survey evidence suggests that crime offered relatively high hourly pay to

disadvantaged youths, with commensurate risks. More work is needed, however, to determine

whether committing crime is "rational" in terms of lifetime benefits and costs or is "myopic" in the

sense that youths excessively discount future loss of employment and risks, including time spent in

jail; and to estimate the supply curve of youths to crime that can show how changed market

opportunities and criminal penalties alter criminal behavior.'6

IV Conclusion: The Criminal "Underclass"

        This study has documented the rising participation of disadvantaged young men.

particularly less educated young blacks, in crime; shown that crime has longterm adverse

consequences for their employment; and presented evidence that the decision to engage in crime

has at least a short run economic rational in terms of high hourly pay. Given the results, what

might have caused the upsurge in crime among the disadvantaged?

        One important contributing factor is likely to have been the huge drop in the real earnings

and employment prospects of less educated young men that characterized the period (Blackburn,

Bloom, and Freeman). The fall in real earnings reduced the opportunity cost of crime, and may

have convinced many youths that they have rio future in the legitimate job market. The longierm

decline in the probability of employment of the less educated (as opposed to cyclical changes in

aggregate unemployment) is likely to have had a similar impact, inducing youths into crime.

Another potential cause of the rising participation in crime is the increased income of the upper
                                                                                                       22

dccilcs of Lhc income distribution. The more money in the hands of the wealthy, the more

lucrative is robbery or burglary, and the greater is the potential demand by the wealthy for illegal

consumption items such as drugs. The exogenous growth of criminal opportunities due to

innovation and expansion of the drug business is also likely to have contributed to the rise in youth

crime. While important. the increased demand for drugs did not, however, reduce the supply of

the less educated to the legitimate market by enough to raise earnings there.

        What are the implications of this study for debates over the "underclass" and poverty?

First, the fact that in the l980s the United States developed a large relatively permanent group of

young male offenders and ex-offenders, particularly less educated blacks, outside the mainstream

economy suggests a major change in the nature of poverty and youth unemployment from that in

previous decades (Freeman and Wise). Whereas in the past one might view crime as a peripheral

issue in analysis of poverty and youth unemployment -- a topic for criminologists or ethnographers

of deviance but not for economists, sociologists, and policy analysts -- that is not longer the case.

If we are to understand and develop policies to resolve the inner city poverty problem of the

1990s, we must come to grips with the incentives for ciime. This implies that law enforcement

and rehabilitation of criminals be part of any effort to deal with poverty, particularly in the black

community. On the other side, the increased concentration of crime among school dropouts

suggests that efforts to improve their skills and increase their legitimate opportunities be part of

any crime reduction program. In the 1980s not even labor shortages raised the earnings

opportunities of dropouts enough to offset criminal opportunities.

        Finally, given annual direct expenditures of $10,000 per prisoner and total expenditures

(including capital outlays) of $20,000 ', the costs of the criminal justice system, the loss of

potentially productive citizens, as well as costs of crime to victims, my reading of the evidence is

that virtually any program -- be it schooling, crime prevention, or rehabilitation -- that has even

marginal success in making crime less attractive and legitimate work more rewarding for

disadvantaged youths is likely to have a sizeable social payoff.
                                                                                                23

                                          Bibliography

Becker, G. 1974 "Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach' in Essays in the Economics of
Crime and Punishment (ed G. Becker and W. Landcs), 1-54 NY: Columbia University Press.

Blackburn. K. Bloom, D. and Freeman, R. "The Declining Economic Position of Less Skilled
American Men" in 0. Burtless (ed) A Future of Lousy Jobs (Brookings. 1990)

Boshier, R. and D. Johnson. 'Does Conviction Affect Employment Opportunities?" British Journal
of Criminology 1974 14, 264-268

Boston. Police Dcpamncnt, data on crime by neighborhood, 1991

Bound, J. and R. Freeman "What Went Wrong? the erosion of the economic position of young
black men in the 1980s" Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming, January 1992.

Bourgois. P. "In Search of Horatio Alger:culture and ideology in the crack economy
Contemporary Drug Problems Winter 1989, 619-649

Dale. M. "Barriers to Rehabilitation of Ex-Offenders" Crime and Delinquincy 1976, 22: 322-337

Finn, R. and P. Fontaine. "The Association Between Selected Characteristics and Perceived
Employability of Offenders" Criminal Justice and Behavior 1985, 12 (3) 353-365

Freeman, R. 1983 "Crime and the Labor Market" in Crime and Public Policy (ed J.Q. Wilson) 89-
106. San Francisco: Institute for Contemporary Studies.

Freeman, R. "Who Escapes? The Relation of Churchgoing and Other Background Factors to the
Socioeconomic Performance of Black Male Youths from Inner City Tracts' in Freeman and Holzer
(1986)

Freeman, R. "The Relation of Criminal Activity to Black Youth Employment" The Review of
Black Political Economy, Summer-Fail 1987, 99- 107.

Freeman, R. 'Employment and Earnings of Disadvantaged Youths in a Labor Shortage Economy"
in C. Jencks and P. Peterson The Urban Underclass (Brookings, 1991)

Freeman, R. and Hoizer, H. (ed) The Black Youth Employment Crisis (University of Chicago
Press, 1986)

Freeman, R. and Wise, D. (ed) The Youth Employment Problem (University of Chicago Press,
1983)

Hindelang, M.J., Hirschi,T. and Weis, J. 1981 Measuring Delinquency Beverley Hills Calif, Sage

Jcncks, C. "Which Underclass is Growing?" in C. Jencks and P. Peterson The Urban Underclass
(Brookings. 1991)

Lanimore, P., Witte, A., Baker, J. "Experimental Assessment of the Effect of Vocational Training
of Youthful Property Offenders" NBER working papr 2952.
                                                                                                 24

Monnin, P and J. Shedroff "The Wages of Sin: an investigation of the street-level cocaine
economy" paper for Economics 1015, January 26. 1990

Phillips. L. and Votey, H. Demographics and Trends in Crime: A Failed Hypothesis (University
of California, Santa Barbara, May 1990).

Reuter. P. MacCoun,R. and Murphy, P. Money from Crime (Rand 1990)

Sentencing Project. Young Black Men and the Criminal Justice System: A Growing National
Problem (Washington D.C. Feb 1990)

Shwartz, R. and J. Skolnik "Two Studies of Legal Stigma" Social Problems 1962, fall, 133-142.

Taylor, C. Dangerous Society (Michigan State University. 1989).

U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics (all Washington. D.C. U.S. Government
Printing Office)
                 Correctional Population in the United States, 1988
                 Criminal Victimization in the United States, 1988
                 Crime in the United States 1990
                 Profile of State Prison Inmates. 1986
                 Probation and Parole. 1989
                 Recividism of Prisoners Released in 1983
                 Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics, various editions

U.S. Bureau of the Census Statistical Abstract, various years

Viscusi, K. "Market Incentives for Criminal Behavior", in Freeman and Holzer.

Wilson, J.Q. and Herrnstein, R., Crime and Human Nature (Simon and Schuster, NY 1985)

Williams, T The Cocaine Kids (Addison-Wesley, 1989)
                                                Endriotcs
 1. Surveys that ask if people commit crimes suffer from undcrrcporung, particularly by black youths
(llindclang, Hirschi. and Weis). Administrative data on crime art imperfect because reporting differs
across police departments and over time and because not all crimes arc reported. Rehabditation
cxperimcnts arc no panacea for inferring responses to opportunities due to problems of implcmcmauon
(Lattimore, Wine, and Baker), replication, and selectivity (they deal only with criminals).

2. See U.S. Bureau of the Census Statistical Abstract 1990

3. U.S. Bureau of the Census Statistical Abstract 1990, table 628 gives the number of men employed
as 63 million. The number under supervison is 6% of this, but 15% of those under supervision are
females. The 5% in the text relates to male prisoners over male employment.

4. An additional cause of changes in crime rates is the young male shaie of the population. Men aged
16-34 made up 58% of all persons arrested in 1988 compared to 15 or so percent of the total
population. My analyis (like that of Phillips and Votey) suggests, however, that changes in the age
structure have only moderate effects on crime rates. I estimate that at 1963 age-specilic arrest rates
the rise in the 16-34 male share of the population from 1963 to 1988 would have increased the arrest
rate by about 20% to 1988. compared to an observed increase of 61%.

5. There was an upward trend in reporting crimes to the police from 1973 to 1980 but little change
from 1980 to 1988 (U.S. Department of Justice, Criminal Victimization in the U.s. 1988. so this
cannot be the cause of the discrepancy. For some crimes, like rape, the victimization data show a
huge decline while the police data show a sharp rise, It is thus hard to see how changes or differences
in the mix of crimes might account for the divergence.

6. The Sentencing Project has reported a similar figure for a somewhat different age group. indicating
that the 20% estimate is not highly age dependent.

7. The government statistics do not give race and sex breaks, so I estimated the black male distribution
by assuming that black females constituted the same proportion of each correctional group as did all
females.

8. Consistent with this interpretation, I found no relation in the NLSY between youth criminal behavior
and rates of unemployment in local labor markets.

9.       Another possible reason for regressions to overestimate the effect of crime on future outcomes
is serial correlation itt work status. Say that poor employment opportunities in year t cause someone
to commit a crime in t, and that opportunities in t+1 are correlated with opportunities in I Then,
outcomes in t÷1 will be correlated with crime in because of the serial correlation of opportunities.
One way to examine the serial correlation problem is to compare coefficients on crime over time.
Serial correlation coefficients below 1 imply that the effect of crime on employment should decline
over time. This is. however, contraiy to the results in table 4. where the effect of crime is not
noticeably lower in the late 1980s than in the early 1980s.

10. This approach suffers if errors are serially correlated, so that the Y used as art instrument is itself
correlated with the error term.

11. That the coefficients on incarceration remain sizeabte and significant in the presence of pre-
incarceration work experience does not mean that the initial work experience of those who are
incarcerated is similar to that of those who are not. The pre incarceration employment experience of
persons who are later incarcerated is worse than that of the rest of the sample. However the
cocfficicnts on previous weeks worked or employment arc markedly below one in the regressions.
Persons who initially work little and are later incarcerated increase thcir time worked less than others
who initially work less. At the other side of the spectrum, men who initially had high weeks
worked/employment at the time of survey who were incarcerated suffered large declines in work time
relative to those who were not incarcerated.

12. Random measurement error reduces the effect of a variable on outcomes. Measurement error in
crime is, however, unlikely to be random: some of those who commit crimes will fail to report this.
but few will claim crimes they did not commit. This also leads to downward bias in the analysis,
since the sample who report they do not commit crimes will include some who do and whose
employment experience will be similar to that of those who commit crimes. This problem makes my
instrumental variables technique for treating measurement error imperfect.

13. The NLSY asked for the proportion of total income or support from illegal activities rather than
for dollars of criminal earnings, arid did not specify the income/support that served as the base, making
it near impossible to estimate actual crime incomes. The NLSY showed that 75% of youths made
"very little" from crime; 9% reported criminal earnings were 1/4th of their income support, 8%
reported criminal earnings were 1/2 of their income; 4% reported criminal earnings were 3/4ths of their
income; and 5% reported it was 'almost all' of their income. The pattern of relatively few making
most of their income from crime while most youths make just a bit is consistent with figures in Reuter
et a! on the distribution of earnings from drug sales.

14. l'his applies the hours on the last crime reported on the survey to all crimes committed, arid
assumes that the youths commit one crime per week.

15. Do youth perceptions of risk correspond to reality? Criminal justice system data show that 20%
of crimes reported to the police are cleared, with no strong trend over time (U.S. Department of
Justice, Sourcebook 1989, table 4.24). However, the ratio of incarcerations per arrest has risen. There
were 2.2 persons in prison per arrest in 1970: 2.9 persons in prison per arrest in 1980 and 4.4 persons
in prison per arrest in 1989. As a result the chances of being in jail for committing a crime has
roughly doubled.

16. The high levels of crime in the l980s in the face of the huge growth of the prison population
suggest that the supply curve of youths to crime is highly elastic, but the data are also consistent with
a massive shift in demand for crime induced by, say, the expansion of the drug business.

17. This is a conservative estimate based solely on direct expenditures, excluding capital outlays, I
obtain it by dividing direct expenditures on institutions by states by the number of state inmates using
data from U.S. Department of Justice, 1990, tables 1.7 etc
                                                                  27

                               TABLE   1:
     CRIME PARTICIPATION OF 16-34 YEAR OLD MEN IN 1989, BY RACE

                               ALL 16-34            Black 16—34
ARRESTS:
1) Number of arrests
     all crimes                11,745,200          3,617,500
     index crimes                 1,607,900          490,400
2) Number of men               35,839,000          4,615,000

3) Arrests per man
     all crimes                      0.328            0.784

     index crimes                    0.045            0.108


CRIMINAL JUSTICE POPULATION:

5) Incarcerations                    682,354        320,024

6) Numbers Probated/paroled
       probated                    1,956,000        567,000

       parolled                      379,000        273,000

7) Incarcerations per man                   .019        .069

8) "Under Supervision" (incarc
plus probation plus parole) per
person                                      .069        .200


Source: U.S. Department of Justice, Crime in the United States,
table 24 for total arrests; table 34 for male arrests by age; table
33 for all arrests by age; table 38 for arrests by race. I used all
of these data because the agencies reporting age, race, and sex
differ. For total population, Statistical Abstract, 1990, page 12.
Incarceratlons are the sum of jail and prison inmates from U.S.
Department of Justice Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics -
1989, table 6.26 and 6.43, with number of blacks from tables 6.28 and
6.47. Number probated estimated from U.S. Department of Justice,
Correctional Populations in the United States 1988, table 1.3. I
calculated the ratio of men probated to incarcerated (2.21) and the
ratio of men parolled to incarcerated (0.43). For black men, I
assumed that the proportion of black women of each category was the
same as the proportion all women were of the category and estimated a
ratio of probated to incarcerated of 1.40 and of numbers parolled to
incarcerated of 0.50.
                                                                                          28



Table 2 percentage of Men Aged 1834 With Specified Years of School
          Completed by Inmate status in 1986
                                    18—24                           25—34
Yrs of School           Total   Black                 Total                 Black
Completed         Inmate All Inmate   All          Inmate All         Inmate All
        0—7        9.1      2.0    7.0       1.9   9.0        2.8      7.0          2.0

        8         11.8      2.0    9.5       2.3   8.2        1.7      7.5          2.0

        9—11      53.4 18.9       62.3      26.7   42.3       9.0     49.6      13.9

  <12             74.5 22.9       78.8      30.9   59.5   13.5        64.2      17.9

        12        22.3 43.6       18.4      43.9   29.5   39.9        26.4      47.0

        13—15     3.1      26.1    2.9      22.3   9.8    21.4         8.6      22.1

        16,16 +   0.1      7.2     ——        3.0    1.2   25.2         0.8      13.1




Source: Inmates, tabulated from 1986 Prison Inmate Survey using survey
weights, with men receiving GED given 12 years of schooling
         All   all noninstitutionalised population, from Current Population
         Survey, Series P-20, no 428, table 1, p 10 for all and p 12 for
black males.
                                                                    29


               Table 3: Percentage of Young Men Self Reporting
                      Criminal Activity on three Surveys
                           Boston Youth      Inner City
                           Survey. 1989     Survey, 1980         NLSY, i980
                          All      Black       Black        All         Black
1. Jail                                         2.6%        4.2%          4.5%
                           7.3       5.9
2. Probation                                    7.9        11.0          11.4

3. Convicted               9.4       6.5                   13.8          13.1

4. Arrested/Booked        13.7       8.8                   18.7          17.6

5. Stopped                                                 35.5          35.2

6. Committed crime        23.0      17.0        22.4       40.9          40.9
     last yr


Sample size               655       303        2358         5332         1383




Note: The column percents are cumulative.
Source: Authors calculations from the various surveys.
a -- Crimes included were: thefts over $50; using force, attack with
attempt to kill; selling pot; selling other drugs; auto theft; breaking
in; fencing stolen goods; participation in gambling. If shoplifting and
theft of less than $50 and vandalism are included, the percentages rise
to 58.1% for all and to 57.8% for blacks
                                                                                                                                     30
TABLE 4: Regression Coefficients and Standard Errors for Effects of
   Crimin1 Activities on Out, of School Young Men: 1980-1988, NLSY

                                   A.     11T V,R1A.E b( Th JRVEY W
                                                                                                                       R
                                               pob
    1980        .72           —.24                 —.05          —.35          —.06                —.01        /      .10    4002
                                   .03)            ( .03)       ( .04)        ) .03)           C .02)

    1981        .77           —.28                  —.14         —.08          —.10                —.05        /      .11    (164
                                   .03)            ( .03)         .04)             .03)        ( .02)

                .73           —.22                 —.08          —.03          - .04               —.02        /      .09    4187
   1982
                                   .03)              .03)       ( .04)        ( .03)           ( .02)

   1983         .73           —.24                 —.10          —.05          —.02              .00           /      .12    3665
                                   .03)              .03)       ( .04)        ) .03)           C .02)

   1964         .78           —.25                 —.11           .00          —.02              .00           /      .12    4109
                                   .05         ( .02)           ( .0))        ( .0))           ( .02)

   1985         .81           —.24                 —.08          —.01           .04              .01           /      .10    2957
                                   .03)        ( .02)           ( .04)        C .03)           ( .02)

   1986         .84           —.18                 —.09          —.03          —.02                 .00        /      .10    4120
                                   .03)        ( .03)           ( .03)        ( .03)           ( .02)

   1987         .86           —.25                 —.10          —.03          —.02                —.0].       /      ..2    4193
                                   .02)            C .02)         .03)             .02)        C .0].)


   1986         .67           —.19                 —.10          —.02             —.05           .00           /       12.   4454
                                   .62)            ( .02)       ( .03)        ( .02)           C .01)



                      Pr OF YEA %*                                       fl .JVZY                          1980-68

   All          .81           —.21                  —.09         —.03             —.01             —.01           /    .30    1980
                                   .02)            ( .02)         .02)        ( .02)           ( .01)

   Slac)4s      .70           —.25                 —.08          -.06             —.02          —.02              /    .28     (46
                                   .06)            ( .04)       ( .07)        ( .05)           ( .03)




                              3.    D,r RiA&Z: h                                               4 A E..R
   1980       25.7        —13.3                    —5.0          —4.5          —2.7                —1.7        /      .16    3695
                               1.3)            C 1.2.)          1 1.0)        C 1.6)           1 1.2)

   1981       36.3        —12.3                    —5.3          —2.5          —3.1                —.23                      4084
                                                                                                               /      .17
                               1.3)            C 1.0)           C 1.5)            1.2)         C .7

   1982       36.7        —12.2
                          C    1.3)
                                                   —4.8
                                               C 1.1)
                                                                 —3.6
                                                                ( 1.6)
                                                                               —2.7
                                                                              C 1.2)
                                                                                                   —.7
                                                                                               C 1.0)
                                                                                                               /      .14    4129

   1983       23.2        —12.8                    —5.6          —2.7         —2.3                  .31        /      .1 3865
                          C    1.2)            1 1.0)           ( 1.6)        1 1.2)           C    .7

   1984       40.8        —1.2.5                   —3.          —1.2          —1.2                 —.1         /      .2.5   3980
                               1.2)            C    1.0)        C 1.5)        C 1.1)           C .7)

   1985       42.4        —11.8
                          C    1.2)            C
                                                   —3.5
                                                    1.0>
                                                                —1.8
                                                                ( 1.5)
                                                                              —2.1
                                                                              C 1.1)
                                                                                                   —.3
                                                                                               ( .6)
                                                                                                               /      .14    3957

   1986       42.1    —12.1
                          C    1.2)
                                                   —5.
                                               ( 1.0)       (
                                                                —1.8
                                                                 1.4)     (
                                                                              —1.0
                                                                                  1.1)      ( .6)
                                                                                                    .7         /      .14    3915

              43.7

                                        Pt                                                                     /
   1967               —11.6                        —4.9         —3.0          —2.1             —.3                    .14    4193
                          C 1.1)           (         .9)    (    1.))     ( 1.0)            ( .6)

                                                            OF W3                       1980-87
  Al).        .78         —.22                 —.09          —.04             —.03             —.01           /       .34    21.28
                      C       .02)         C       .01)     C .03)        C       .02)     (       .01)

  b1ac).s     .63         —.27
                              .05)
                                               —.07
                                           1 .04)           (
                                                                —.05
                                                                 .07)
                                                                              -
                                                                         ( .05)
                                                                                  .06
                                                                                           C
                                                                                               —.C2
                                                                                                   .03)
                                                                                                              /       .29    490


  Note: All ress10ns                    j-t1e the fcfljx ntrois,                           fr 1980; 63s, aoe
 suar b1ac, r.a-rie. relan &.es, gde          ur2J. ur.io.                                                            hiç ar
     1oye.it i.n 1aor arat area d.ani fran 1982: Kii
 1984:    1ier.rc z use, re..-t t use. !itetie caj.ne                                              use, rUTt iX use.
                                                                 3 I




          Table 5: Estimates of the Effect of Criminal Activity on
           Employment and Earnings in the Boston Youth Survey. 1989
                 (each line represents a separate regression)

Dependent Variable: Work in Survey Week (mean=.55, obs=421)

Measure of Crime (mean)         Coe f f.
                              (std error)
                                 OLS Estimates

1. Committed Crime (.24)       —.19 (.06)     .09

2. Crime Vector:
     jail         (.10)        —.26   (.09)   .13
     convict only (.02)        —.01   (.16)
     arrest only (.03)         —.26   (.14)
     not caught      (.09)     —.14   (.09)

3. Jail              (.09)     —.21 (.09).    .09

                        Instrumental Variable Estimates

4. Committed Crime             —.56 (.22)

5. Jail                        —.87 (.34)




Note: All regressions included the following controls: age, age squared,
black, highest grade completed, good grades in school (A's & B's), lived
with mother when 14 years old, live in public housing, single, atttend
church, household size, high alcohol use, high pot use, use other drugs,
get high at work, and gang membership. Also these are all out of school
youths.
     The instruments include: friends sell drugs, know people who have
gone to jail, friends use cocaine, friends in gangs.
                                                               32



         Table 6: Estimates of the Effect of Crime on Employment
                 in the NBER 1980 Inner City Youth Survey
               (each line represents a separate regression)

Dependent Variable: Work (mean.43)
Definition of Crime:       Coeft. (std error)

1. Any crime involvement       -.11   (.03)      .13

2 Nunther crimes conunitted:
     last year                 -.06   (.01)     .14

3. Earnings from crime last year:               .14
                                 0
     <=1000                    —.08   (.04)
     >1000                     —.26   (.05)

4. Vector of Crime Variables:                   .14
     in jail last year       —.24     (.07)
     only probation          -.08     (.05)
     conunitted last month   -.10     (.04)
     committed last year     -.04     (.07)


Note: All regression include the following control variables: age,
highest grade completed, good grades (A's and B's), live with mothr at
age 14, live in public housing, single, attend church, city dummies, gang
membership, get high at work, high alcohol use, high pot use, high drug
use. These regressions are also only for Out of school youth.
                                                              33




  Table 7 -- Coefficients and Standard Errors on Jail and Previous Work
Experience from Longitudinal IV Model and OLS Model of the Effect of Jj
                     on 1987-88 Work Experience. NLSY

                       (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)
                       OLS        IV       OLS          IV
A) Dependent Variable is Weeks Worked 1987

Jail in 1980          —20.4     —16.4
                       (2.6)     (2.6>

Weeks Worked 1979       --        .27
                                 (.03)

Jail in 1983                             —18.8    —7.8
                                          (1.9)   (2.0)

Weeks Worked 1982                                  .43
                                                  (.03)

sample size            2696      2696    2577      2577

B) Dependent Variable is Working in Survey Week 1988

Jail in 1980           —.30      — .24
                       (.05)     (.05)

Work 1979                         .24
                                 (.04)

Jail in 1983                             —.30     —.15
                                         (,05)    (.05)

Work 1982                                          .41
                                                  (.04)

sample size           2667       2667    2382          2382



Note: All regressions include the following controls, from 1980: age,
age squared, black, married, region dummies, grade completed, urban,from
union, high and medium unemployment in labor market area dummies ;
1982: high drinking; from 1984: lifetime pot use, recent pot use,
lifetime cocaine use, recent cocaine use. Instruments include: charged
with Illegal activity, number of charges, ever convicted, number of
Convictions and ever on probation. All regressions are for out of school
youths.
      In panel A the instrument in column 2 was weeks worked in 1988; the
intstruments in column 4 were weeks worked in 1981 and 1980.
      In panel B the instrument in column 2 was weeks worked in 1988; the
instruments in column 4 were working in survey week in 1981, 1980, 1979.
                                                                               34




       Table 8: Ftijites of Eaimijxs frt Q:-ijne fttii Djverse Surve

                                                     nth1y/ Estimat
Survey, (sa1e size)                         Annual    Weekly       )-c*irly
Boston Youth, 1989
    16—24 who report cis incxziie (112)      $3008
    Catuittx1 Crin Ore                         752                  $88.00
    A few tin/Ab*xt or a nonth                2127                   45.00
    Once a week                               5376                    9.75
    Perceiv1 Eanüngs frtu t)r Sales (382)
        Few cçpzrtunities                              $2346/no
        Sare cçx)rt1inites                              2778/no
         Mai-iy ccrtizLities                            3587/no
Oakland, 1990
    Farni.rs fttxi runners (7)                           444/wk        7.92
Inner city Youth, 1980
    16—24 who report crino irxzre (370)       1607
          (in 1980 dollars)
Reuter, et.a1. 1990
    All, net earnins (186)                               2015/no       30.00
    18—24, net earni.rs (69)                             1234/no       18.00
Prisoners Survey, 1986
    Esrted by regressions a                  12243
    Incrtre of Prisoners With
         Cimina1 Incine Only (307)           24775                     12.00


§c*lrce: Tal1ated fron Surveys/reports as describi in text/
  Basei on reression of inccne on saur for a sauple of 5857    iren.   The
rean inare was 13725.
                                                                                                      35

               Fig 1A: Index Crime Rate, 1960—1989
                                                per I



'a
      6


                                                                          \-,     a,
                                                                                           '-a




      2




          6061626364 65 666768697071 727) 74 75 767778798081 8283848386878889

 Source U.S. Dep.rwsent o( Joike Sourcebook o Ci'imtnl Jutioce Ssao.• 1909




                Fig 16: Tota Arrest Rate, 1960—1989
                                                per l3.t




                                                                         /\./
 45

                                /
                                  jJ V             A


 353


 30c0
          606162636.46566676869707172737475767778798881828)848586878889
                                                   yean
     Source: u.S. Dcpann,cnt oC Justice. Crimes in the Untcd SucC vanous editions.




          Fig 1C: Homicides per 100,000: 1960—1989
     12


     II
     l0

      9

      8

      7

      6
                                 /   /       ,//\                         \\\,


      4
          60 61 62 63 6.4 65 6667 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 83 86 87 68 89
                                                    ye.rs
      Source: U.S. Bureau o(the Census, Statisucal AbstracC 1990
                                                                               36




        Fig 1 D: Inmates in State & Federal Prisons
                                      I9.0— I9Mr     IClI1.
 J)

 150




 50




so
       6061 616364656676869707I 727374             7576fl7?9C81283538$668788
 So,r:U.                  .( i..,,uk. So.,rbook o( C.ininI i,,w Suu,ii.
                                                                   I69



                       Fig 1 E: Victimization per 1,000
                                           1973— I6$



210


230             ____      — _• —
220
                                          \.
210


203




ISO


170


160
       73741576777879808182836485868788
         U.S.   Dprunc ol Jtic. CnmoI Vtmizauo. 1988
                                                                                       31



         Figure 2a: Percentage ol Young Men Incarcerated by Education and Race, 1986
                                    Ages 25-34
    30

    25
p
e   20
r
C   15
e
n   10

     5

     0
               <12                              12                         >12
                                        education level

                                      Rail           Eback



         Figure 2b: Percentage of Young Men incarcerated by Education and Race, 1986
                                   Ages 18-24
    30

    25

p
e   20
r
C   15
e
n   10


     5

     0
               <12                              12                         >12
                                        education level

                                     Rali        Liblack
                                                                Jr.



Source: Number of prisoners by education estimated by applying percentage
distributions of prisoners by education to the number of men in state and
federal prisons and in jails in 1986. I took the number of male prisoners
in state and federal prisons (518,478) from U.S. Bureau of the Census
Statistical Abstract 1990, table 328, p 189 and the number of males in
jail (251,235) from table 323, p 187. To estimate the number of black
prisoners I multiplied the number in state and federal prisons by .47, the
prc'portion black reported for state prison inmates from table 321, p 187.
Rounding, this gave me 244,000 blacks in prison. In 1986 41% of jail
inmates were black (in 1989 47% were black) according to table 323 p 187.
so that there were 103,000 black men in jail. Thus I estimate 770,000 men
in jail/prison and 347,000 black men in jail! prison. Using the prison
survey, I estimate that 27.1% of all male prisoners were 18—24 and 45.7'
were 25—34; and that 27.5% of black male prisoners were 18—24 and 48.7%
were 25—34. This gives 209,000 male prisoners aged 18—24 and 352,000 male
prisoners 25—34. For blacks, I estimate that there were 95,000 prisoners
18—24 and 169,000 prisoners 25—34. Applying the distribution of prison
inmates by age and education to these data yields the figures under
inmates. From U.S. Bureau of the Census, Current Population Reports
Series P—20, no 428, table 1, p 3 and 10 I obtain numbers of all and black
men aged 18—24 and 25—34 by education. This yields the numbers under TOT.
Dividing gives me an estimate of the proportion

                                     ALL 4ALES
                       18—24                        25—34
years schi    INMATES TOT    %            INMATES TOT
                     (000s)                 (000s)
<12           156 3060 .051               209 2829    .074
12                47 5812      .008       104 8359     .012
                    7 4463 .002             39 9789    .004

                              BLACK MALES

<12           75       532 .141           108 421     .257
12             17      755 .023             45 1107   .041
>12           3        433    .007          16 828    .019
                                                                                                            39


                 Figure 3a: Percentage of Youths Who Regard Statement About Their Neighborhood
                                       as Twe; Boston Youth Survey. 1989

     80
     70
p60
50
C    40
e
n
120
     10
      0
            many young men find dealing many adults in neighborhood.              crime and vilolence are
            dwgs is a good way to make           seU drugs                           serious problems
                       money                            _______
                                                 • blacks 0 whites




                               Figure 3b: Characteristics of Neighbodiood Contacts:
                               Percentage 01 youths who know very welt persons who:

     45
     40
     35
p
e 30
r25
C
e20
fl   15
     10
      5

      C
                  sell drugs          do other Illegal acts ae in jail, or in trouble      are in gangs
                                                                    with police

                                                     blacks 0 whites
          Boston Youth Survey. 1989
                           Fig 4: Proportion of Men Who Woriced Dunog 002 Month (Or more), by
                                 Incarceration Slatus. from NBER Inner Cay Survey, 1980
                                                                                                              40
         70

             60


    p    50
    e
         40
    C
    e    30
    n
         20

         10

             0
                  before               after                                 11(51 6mo.       after 9.5 mo.

                  Men with jail/Probation                                     Men with no Criminal Ac1ivty

                             Figure 5: Perceptions of Criminal Opportunities. 1980 and 1989

         70

        60

p       50
e
        40
C
e       30
0


        10

         0
                            more $ 00 Street                       chance illegal several times/day

                                All Cities. 1960 0 Bosiort.1980              Boston. 989
                                                                                           ]
                     Figure 6: Assessments of the Risks of Committing Crime. 1980 and 1989

        GO



        50

p
        40
e

C       30
e
0
        20




         0
                  arrest                    Convict                 P11500                 hurViIled

                           [rtoCsirne. 1989 0 cnme.1989               I cnme,1980
