NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES

FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENT, THE TRADE REGIME, AND ECONOMIC GROWTH

Nouriel Roubini
Xavier Sala-i-Martin

Working Paper No. 3876

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1991

First draft: February 1991; this revision: October 1, 1991.
Prepared for the fourth annual InterAmerican Seminar on
Economics, Santiago, Chile, March 15-16, 1991. We thank Geoff
Carliner, Jose De Gregorio and Al Fishlow for helpful comments.
Ye thank Margaret Hwang for excellent research assistance and the
Yale University Social Science Research Fund for financial
support. This paper is part of NBER's research program in
Growth. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3876
October 1991

FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENT, THE TRADE REGIME, AND ECONOMIC GROWTH

ABSTRACT
We survey the literatures that study the relation between
the trade regime and growth and financial development, financial
repression, and growth.

We analyze the relation between the trade regime, the degree
of financial development and the growth performance of a large

cross section of countries. The systematic finding is that there
is a negative relation between trade distortions and growth. We
also present some variables that capture the degree to which the

financial sector is distorted. We find that financial repression
has negative consequences for growth. We also find that
inflation- is negatively related to growth. We interpret this
relation, however, as symptomatic rather than causal.

We show that once we hold constant measures of the trade
regime and financial repression, the regional dummies for Latin

America are no longer significant. Thus, the poor performance of
the Latin American countries over the last few decades is related
to the trade and financial policies pursued by their governments.

Nouriel Roubini
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER

Xavier Sala-i-Martin
Department of Economics
Yale University
28 Hillhouse Avenue

New Haven, CT 06520-1972
and NBER

Introduction.

The ohjective of this paper is to analyze the effects of economic

distortions on the rate of economic growth. In particular, we will study the
role of trade policy distortions and the role of financial repression. Do
tariff and other restrictive trade policies negatively affect economic growth?
Is the growth performance of outward—oriented countries better than the one of
inward—oriented countries ? That is the role of financial development in the

process of economic growth ? Is financial repression harmful to growth ?
Our interest in these issues was originally stimulated by the observation
that the growth experience of Latin American countries has been different from

the rest of the countries of the world. It is by now a well known fact that
the cross sectional empirical studies by Barro (1991) and others do not
explain the Latin America experience very well given that a zero/one dummy for
this group of countries is significantly negative.
Among the many explanations given in the latin american literature we
find that policies that systematically repress the financial sector and

policies that restrict trade are among the most convincing. Along tbese
lines, an additional goal of this paper is the investigation of the extent to
which such repressive policies have had an impact in the economic growth
performance of a large cross section of countries during the last quarter of a
century. Our analysis, therefore, is not confined to the small sample of
Latin American nations.

In order to link the empirical findings to some theory, in section 2 we
survey the theoretical literature on the relation between growth and openness.

We find that there are arguments both in favor and against the introduction of

—2—-

trade restrictions. Therefore, from a theoretical point of view it is not
clear whether tariffs and other trade restrictions negatively affect the rate
of economic growth.
In section 3 we first survey the literature on the relation between
financial development and economic growth and then present the main results
and implications of the simple model of growth, financial development and

seigniorage presented in Rouhini and Sala—i—Martin (1991). We think that the
model captures some of the most important elements of the problem:

governments may choose not to allow full financial development (ie, choose to
repress the financial sector) in order to collect easy revenue. We model this
revenue in the form of inflation tax, hut it is clear that measures of
financial repression imply various other forms of implicit subsidization of
the public sector (such as cheaper credit to the government and public

enterprises). Furthermore, we find that such repressive policies hurt
economic growth given that financial intermediation is an important component

o the aggregate production function (that is given that financial development
increases the the aggregate marginal product of capital of an economy). A
number of arguments of why this may be the case are also exposed in section 3.
For instance, financially developed economies can allocate their inputs better
than less developed ones so for any stock of inputs the aggregate output is
larger the more financially developed the economy.
In section 4 we explere the empirical relation between economic growth

and a variety of measures of openness and financial repression. We
systematically find that the trade regime is important for growth: countries
that are inward oriented, closed to foreign trade or that impose other kinds
of trade restrictions tend to grow less than countries that don't, even after
we control for the other determinants of growth used by Barro (1991) such as

—3--

initial income, initial investment in education, government consumption, price
distortions for investment goods, or measures of social unrest such number of
assassinations and military coups.

The results for the relation between financial repression and growth are

also encouraging. As the theoretical arguments presented suggest, we find a
systematic inverse relation between growth and several measures of financial
repression as well as a negative relation between growth and inflation rates.

Furthermore
repression

we find that a combination of trade distortions and financial

explain the

different behavior of Latin American countries: that

is, a regional dummy for these countries is no longer significant after we
control for the the effects of these policy variables.
In the final section we present some concluding remarks.

1. The relation between openness, the trade regime and economic growth.

The

relation between the degree of openness, the orientation of the trade

regime and the rate of economic growth has interested economists for a long
time.

What is the effect of tariffs and other restrictive trade policies on

growth

? Do countries with outward—oriented trade regimes grow faster than

inward—oriented ones? Can infant industry protection promote economic growth?

There is a growing empirical literature suggesting that trade

restrictions

lead not only to static level effects on output but also dynamic

growth effects. This empirical evidence includes detailed multicountry
studies of the trade regime (such as those of Balassa (1971), Krueger (1978),
Bhagwati (1978) and the World Bank (1987)) and cross country studies of the
effects of exports on productivity growth (such as those of Tyler (1981),

—4—

Feder (1983) and Balassa (1985))2. Thile it is true that many of these
empirical studies might suffer of specific methodological or econometric
shortcomings, the majority of them finds evidence that trade restrictions
might have negative growth effects.

Given the growing empirical evidence in favor of "outward—oriented" trade
policies, many researchers have recently developed theoretical models where
trade policy might affect the long run growth rate of the economy. The
endogenous growth approach started by Romer (1986) has provided a fertile
analytical ground on which to build models where tariffs and other trade

policies affect long run growth. Theoretical analyses of the relation between
trade and growth include work by Grossman and Eelpman (1991), Lucas (1988),

Stokey (1990), Young (1989), Edwards (1989), Easterly (1990), Quáh and Rauch
(1990), Boldrin and Scheinkman (1988), homer (1990), Rivera—Datiz and homer
(1990, 1991), to name only a few.

Vhile
provide

it might have been hoped that these theoretical approaches would

unambiguous results

on the relation between trade policy and growth,

the reverse has occurred. In fact, this now ample literature suggests that no
general conclusion can be drawn on the relation between these variables.
Grossman and Belpman (1991) develop two—country models with three

sectors: a R&D sector, a sector that produces intermediate inputs and a final
goods sector; resources invested in the R&D process contribute to the

increased productivity in the production of final goods and to the stock of

scientific knowledge which in torn reduces R&D costs. In these models the
effects of trade policy (such as a tariff on the imports of final goods) on
growth is ambiguous because of the different comparative advantage that

2See Edwards (1989) for a very systematic survey of these and other
studies on the relation between openness and growth.

—5—

countries have in R&D activities versus the production of final manufactured

goods. A trade policy that protects the final good produced by the country
with comparative disadvantage (advantage) in R&D will cause a increase

(decrease) in world growth rates. The growth effects are even more ambiguous
when one considers that comparative advantage is acquired as well as natural.
Grossman and llelpman (1991) also show that an increase in the growth rate is

neither necessary nor sufficient for a trade policy to improve welfare. In
fact, a trade policy that increases growth might reduce welfare if it causes
a reduction in the production of intermediate goods that are under—supplied
because of the oligopolistic structure of this industry.
Rivera—Batiz and Romer (1990, 1991) argue that the Grossman and Helpman

results suggesting that trade protection might increase growth depend on the
"allocative" effects of trade policy: given the differences in static

comparative advantage, tariffs shift resources between sectors and might lead
a country to invest too many or too little resources in the R&D sector.
Rivera—Batiz and Romer suggest that trade restriction have two other effects

that are unambiguously harmful to worldwide growth: an integration effect and
a redundancy effect. Free trade leads to integration effects if a sector's

production exhibits increasing returns. These sectoral increasing retuns
arise from "knowledge spillovers or with monopolistic competition between
firms that supply a diverse set of specialized inputs... If they are present,

worldwide output from this sector will be larger when the two national
sectors

are integrated". The redundancy effect derives from the redundancy of

research efforts in the presence of trade restrictions; these restrictions
lead

to wasteful replication of research in both countries. In the trade

between regions with similar endowments the allocative effects (that may
enhance growth) are likely to be small while the integration and redundancy

—6—

effects will dominate; therefore, trade restrictions are likely to reduce
world growth.
Krugman (1985), Lucas (1988), and Quah and Rauch (1990) use models with
learning—by--doing externalities and essential intermediate inputs in

production. Under autarky, a country will have to produce all of its
intermediate inputs and the productton bottlenecks deriving from slowly

developing intermediate goods will negatively affect growth. Conversely, free
trade allows to acquire from abroad part of these inputs and will lead to an
increase in the steady state growth rate. Openness is therefore shown to
positively affect growth.
In Young (i989), endogenous growth derives from learning by doing that
exhibits spillovers across goods.

lie shows that, if the developed country has

a higher initial level of knowledge relative to the developing one, under free
trade the rate of technical progress and growth of the developing country will

be lower than under autarky. In fact, the developing country will get stuck
in the production of goods that have already exhausted learning by doing,

while the developed one will specialize in the production of goods with rapid

learning by doing. Stokey (1990) presents a model where the engine of grovth
is the existence of externalities in the human capital sector; it is shown

that, for a small economy, the rate of investment in human capital is lower
under free trade than under autarky if the economy is very advanced or very
backward relative to the rest of the world. It follows that openness might be
harmful to economic growth.
An additional link between trade policy and growth is given by the
existence of rent—seeking activities associated with restrictive trade

policies. The literature on rent—seeking activities, starting with the work
of Krueger (1974), suggests that the negative effects of trade restrictions on

—7—

the level of output are increased by the wasteful use of resources in the

pursuit of the rents associated with quotas and other trade restrictions. In
endogenous growth models, the resources used in rent—seeking are detracted
from productive uses and might lead to a reduction in the rate of economic
growth. A number of authors, among them, Murphy, Shleifer and Vishny (1990),
have analyzed these rent—seeking activities and shown their negative effects
on the rate of growth.
The main conclusion that can be derived from the above studies is that

the relation between the trade regime and economic growth is theoretically
very ambiguous. Depending on the structure of the model, the origin of growth
and the initial endowments and conditions of the various economies, trade

restrictions may or may not reduce economic growth. Given these theoretical
ambiguities, we will move in section 3 to an empirical analysis of the effects

of trade restrictions on economic growth. Ve will there present evidence
that, while the implications of theory might be ambiguous, the empirical

evidence is supportive of the hypothesis that trade restrictions have negative
effects on the rate of economic growth.

2.

Financial

Intermediation

and Econo.ic Growth: A Literature Survey and a

New Model.

In this

section we first present a survey the literature on the relation

between financial development and economic growth and then present the main
results and implications of the simple model of growth, financial development
and seigniorage in Roubini and Sala—i--Martin (1991).

The literature on the relation between financial development and economic
growth evolved in a way similar to the one on openness and growth. In

—8--

particular, the work in the 1970's showed a strong positive empirical
relation between the degree of development of financial markets and the rate
of economic growth (and a negative relation between financial repression and
growth) but failed to give theoretical foundation to such a relation .

In

the period before the emergence of the endogenous growth literature, models of
the relation between financial intermediation and economic activity were able
to analytically relate the development of financial markets to the level of

productivity but not to its rate of growth.4 More recently, a number of
authors have developed models in the endogenous literature line that derive a
formal link between financial intermediation and growth5. This literature

considers two interrelated issue: first, starting from an exogenously given
financial system, it analyzes how financial intermediation affects economic
growth; second, it studies how economic growth might itself affect the

evolution and growth of financial intermediation. These two issues are
important because the observed empirical correlation between financial
development and economic growth could be interpreted in two different ways:

either as implying that high financial development increases growth or, vice
versa, that high growth leads to the emergence of more developed financial
systems with a wider range of financial intermediaries, new financial assets
and transactions.

Part of this literature concentrates on the causal links going from the
financial system to economic growth°; in particular, these papers study in

3See Goldsmith (1969), MeKinnon (1973, 1986), Sbaw (1973), Fry (1982,
1988), Mc Kinnon and Mathieson (1981), the World Bank (1989) and Gelb (1989).
4See McKinnon (1973), Shaw (1973) and Fry (1982, 1988).

5See Greeenwood and Jovanovic (1991), Bencivenga and Smith (1991), Levine
(199la, l991b), Be Gregorio (1991), Itoubini and Sala—i—Martin (1991) and
Greenwald and Stiglitz (1989).
°See Levine (1991a, 1991b) and Roubini and Sala—i—Martin (1991).

—9—

detail the effects of policies of repression of the financial system (in the
form of taxes, restrictions and regulations of various sorts) on the rate of

economic growth. Some recent papers also present optimal taxation analyses
and study the reasons why government might find optimal to repress the
financial system even if this leads to a slowdown of the rate of economic
growth.7
Other contributions analyze the endogenous emergence of financial

intermediaries, their effects on growth and their evolution as a consequence
of economic growth. In Greenwood and .Jovanovic (1991), it is assumed that the

economy is subject to an unobserved aggregate shocks. The financial
intermediary is modeled as an agency that does research on this shock and
sells, for a fee, the information on the shock to private agents. Therefore,
the financial intermediary allows a better allocation of resources in the

economy and therefore stimulates capital accumulation and growth. On the
other side, as a consequence of economic grovth, the investors increase their
participation in financial markets: investment projects that were

self—financed are now financed by financial intermediaries. This model
therefore implies that the observed empirical correlation between size of
financial

intermediation and growth can be interpreted as a two—way causal

relation.
In

Bencivenga and Smith (i991), the source of uncertainty in the economy

(that leads to the emergence of financial intermediation) derives from the

existence of an idiosyncratic liquidity shock. The emergence of financial
intermediaries, in the form of commercial banks who create deposits, allows

depositors to pool this liquidity risk. Therefore, the existence of banks

'See Be Gregorio (1991) and

Roubini

and Sala—i—Martin (1991).

— 10

allows a better allocation of savings since agents can now invest both in
risky investments projects that are highly illiquid and in liquid bank
deposits that yields a lower expected return.

The work of Levine (1990a, b) belongs to the literature studying the one

way causality from financial intermediation to growth. The source of
eodogenous growth in those papers are production externalities as in Romer
(1990) and Lucas (1988). The need for financial intermediation derives from
the existence of a idiosyncratic liquidity risk, as in Diamond and Dybvig
(1983). Then, different types of financial structures might emerge that will
reduce this liquidity risk. Levine considers stock markets, banks and mutual

funds as mechanisms that allow this reduction in liquidity risk. In each of
these cases the existence of financial intermediaries and contracts leads to a
better allocation of savings to investment, increases the rate of capital
accumulation and increase the growth rate of the economy.
The policy implications of Levine's analysis is that policies of

repression of the financial sector (in the form of taxation of the financial
intermediaries and their transactions) will lead to a reduction in the rate of

growth of the economy. This, however, leaves open an important issue. If
financial repression leads to lower growth, why would optimizing agents who
care about the welfare of private agents, decide to repress the financial
sector. It is, in fact, a widely documented fact that a lot of governments in
less developed nations have introduced all kinds of distortions in that
particular sector.

Saint—Paul (1990) argues that financial development allows economies to

use more specialized and riskier technologies. Thus, not only financial
development allows for economic growth but economic growth increases the

iocentive for financial development. The model displays multiple equilibria

— 11

in the

—

sense that poor countries may be stuck with low levels of growth and

low levels of financial development which stop growth even further.
Before and during the 1970s, many development economists favored such
policies of financial repression on several grounds8 but the traditional

explanations in the literature are not fully satisfactory. First, it was
argued that the government needed to impose anti usury laws thereby

intervening in the free determination of interest rates. Second, it was

argued

that a strict control and regulation of the banking system would give

the monetary authorities a better control over the money supply. Third, it
was thought that governments knew better than markets (or private banks) what

the optimal allocation of savings was or what kind of investments were more or

less

desirable from a social perspective. Fourth, financial repression was

identified with interest rates below market rates which reduced the costs of

servicing government debts. The explanations are quite weak in light of the
recent literature showing that financial repression might lower the growth
rate of the economy.
In a recent paper (Roubini and Sala—i--Martin (1991)), we built a model of

financial intermediation and growth that studies the effects of policies of

financial repression on long term growth. The model is able to explain why
optimizing governments might want to repress the financial sector in spite of

the fact that this repression leads to lower steady state growth rates. Our
view is that the main reason why government stay in the way of private
financial evolution is that the financial sector is the potential source of
"easy" resources for the public budget. In the model, the government has the
option and capability of not allowing the financial sector to operate at its

8See for instance Shaw (1973), Mackinnon (1973), and Fry (1988) for an
extensive analysis on this subject.

— 12

full

—

potential by introducing all kinds of regulations, laws, other non—market

restrictions to the behavior of private banks and other financial

intermediaries. The source of public income stemming from this intervention
is modeled through inflation tax .

Our model, as most models of money demand

has the implication that more financial development (which can be interpreted
as a reduction in the transaction costs of converting non liquid to liquid
assets) reduces the need for people to carry money to.

lience, if the

government allows for financial development, it will also see the inflation
tax base, and therefore the chance to collect seigniorage, reduced. To -the
extent that the financial sector increases the efficiency of the economy (ie
increases

the amount of overall output given the total amount of inputs), the

choice of the degree of financial sophistication will have real effects on the
level of

GOP and on the marginal product of capital. If the production

function is sufficiently non—concave there will be effects on the steady
state growth rate or in the growth rate for a large period of time.

We model the production side of the economy with a simple ç(A)X linear

technology as in Rebelo (1991). The parameter A is assumed to be related to
the level of financial development. We think of the financial sector as
increasing the microeconomic efficiency of the whole macroeconomy: it
improves the link between savings and investment, it contributes to

efficiently allocate the capital stock to its best use, it also helps collect
and screen information (in a world of imperfect or costly information,

°Clearly this is not the only source of income the government gets from
repressing the financial sector. Mandatory purchases of government debt and
below market interest rates are other important sources of public income. The
regulation of the reserve requirement plays an important role hut we think of
it as a part of the overall inflation tax or seigniorage (see Brock (1989)).
'°Money is introduced in the model via a money—in—the—utility function
specification.

— 13

individuals

—

may not how who wants to borrow or lend). Further, if financial

intermediation is very costly, private entrepreneurs are forced to self
finance their investment projects. From a macroeconomic or aggregate
production function point of view, all this means that economies more

financially developed are able to transform a given amount of inputs, K, into
a larger amount

of

output, Y.

Firms behave competitively and maximize the present value of all future
cash flows. Solving for the steady state growth rate of this economy, we find
another form of what some people call "Superneutrality result" first derived
by Sidrauski: changes in the rate of growth of money do not affect the steady
state rate of consumption growth. Conversely, a reduction in the degree of
financial development (an increase in financial repression through a fall in
the parameter A) leads to a steady state reduction in the rate of growth of
the economy since it reduces the marginal productivity of capital.

To consider why governments might want to repress the financial sector
in spite of the negative effects on growth, we consider the government

behavior. The government budget constraint implies that public spending and

transfers are financed vith income taxes (with constant tax rate r) and

seigniorage. Ve incorporate the possibility of tax evasion; suppose for
instance that the income tax collection is not rrk but, rather r4(rk,r), where
is a nonlinear function of income and tax rates that reflects tax evasion.

Ve can think of () as income that is actually reported to the government
which is a positive function of income but a negative function of the tax

rate. Different countries may have different functions () which possibly due
to different efficiencies in collecting income taxes and different private
attitudes with respect to reporting private income.
Seigniorage in this model clearly depends on the degree of financial

— 14 -

development, A, through different channels. Under quite general conditions,
it can

be

shown that per capita stock of real money is a decreasing function

of the level of financial development, i.e. financial repression leads to an
increase in seigniorage.

Let

us now assume that the government, through regulation and other non

market interventions, can control the degree of financial development, A.
Given the money growth rate, the income tax rate

,

the

and the tax

evasion

function

government faces a trade off between inflation and income taxes: on

the one hand, financial development increases income and therefore increases
the income tax base.

therefore

On the other hand, it

decreases

real money demand and

the inflation tax base. It can be shown that, countries with '()

close to zero, that is countries vhere changes in income do not lead to large
changes in reported income (ie, where tax evasion is large) will optimally
choose to repress the financial sector in order to expand money demand and
increase the tax rate on money.

Summarizing, in order to increase the revenue from money creation,
governments subject to large tax evasion choose to increases per capita real

money demand by repressing the financial sector. This policy will tend to
reduce the amount of services the financial sector provides to the whole
economy and, given the total stock of inputs, the total amount of output will

be reduced. This will reduce the marginal product of capital and,
consequently, the steady state rate of growth.

The story we just explained has the following empirical implications.
Countries that are financially repressed will have higher inflation rates,
lower (before tax) real interest rates, higher base money per capita and lower

per capita growth than countries that are financially developed. Ve will test
some of these implications in the empirical section of the paper. Note that

— 15 —

the

negative correlation between inflation and growth is mainly symptomatic in

the sense that it reflects the larger degree of financial repression —

ie,

inflation has no direct effect on the growth rate in this model.

Ve should finally mention that De Cregorio (1991) considers model where

there is a direct effect of inflation on growth through two channels: first
because he assumes that money is required to buy investment goods, money is

effectively an input in the production function. Inflation increases the
relative cost of capital goods, thereby reducing capital accumulation and
growth. Second, inflation affects the household labor supply decision: high
inflation leads to lower labor supply, a reduction in the marginal

productivity of capital and and a fall in growth. He also allows for tax
evasion in order to study optimal taxation problems. As in Roubini and
Sala—i—Iartin (1991), a decline in the efficiency of the tax system (an
increase in tax evasion) will lead optimizing governments to increase

seigniorage, the inflation rate and therefore reduce growth. The implications
partly differ from those of Roubini and Sala—i—Martin (1991) since in the
latter a more inefficient tax system leads to the choice of a high inflation
a high level of financial repression, and it is financial repression (not
inflation) the one that matters for growth.

3. Trade regime, financial repression and growth: the empirical evidence.

The

survey

of the theoretical literature on the relation between

openness, the trade regime and economic growth suggested that there is no

obvious relation between the trade regime and economic growth. Depending on
the assumptions of the model, a more open trade regime may lead to higher or

lower economic growth. This theoretical ambiguity is in contrast with the

—16—

growing empirical evidence that openness affects growth positively (see World
Bank (1987) for example).
As far as the relation between financial development and economic growth
is concerned, the theoretical models discussed in the previous section suggest
an important relation between financial repression, inflation and economic
growth: in particular financial underdevelopment and financial repression
might be harmful to economic growth.

The objectives of this section are twofold. First, we will present some
further econometric evidence on the relation between the trade regime, the

degree of financial development and economic growth. Second, we will test
whether the orientation of the trade regime and the degree of financial
repression might account for the evidence that, after controlling for the
usual determinants of growth, the Latin American region appear to be growing

more slowly than the rest of the world. The empirical strategy that we follow
is similar to the one used in a number of empirical studies on growth. We
start from the results obtained in Barro (1991) on the determinants of
economic growth in large cross section of countries and add measures of the
orientation of the trade regime and of financial development (repression) to

these basic equations tI The objective is to test whether, after controlling
for the usual determinants of growth used in these studies (such as initial

liThe testing approach that we follow implies that we are testing the
transition to the steady state rather than the steady state itself. In
particular we are not testing endogenous growth models versus neoclassical
models like Quah and Rauch (1990) or Bernard and Durlauf (1990) try to do. We
believe that such a question cannot be addressed with a short sample period of
only 30 years. This is why we take Barro's approach rather than the steady
state analysis of Quah and Rauch. Furthermore, it is hard to believe that the
countries in the sample were in the steady state during the period considered
(for example many of them were coming out of a major war at the beginning of

the period). The analysis of Quah and Rauch, instead relies heavily on the
unlikely assumption that the countries are in the steady state all the time.

— 17 —

income, measures of human

capital,

size of the government, political and

institutional variahles), the trade regime and the degree of financial
repression contrihute to explain the cross country differentials in rates of
economic growth.

Because of our interest on the latin american experience, we will also
test

whether the significant regional dummies for Latin American growth found

by Barro (1991) are explained by the orientation of the trade regime and
aeasures of

financial repression in that region.

3.1 The role of the trade regime
In order to test the hypothesis that the trade regime affects economic
growth, it is necessary to obtain proxies of orientation of the trade regime.
Given the theoretical ambiguities on the concepts of outward—oriented,

non—distorted, liberal trade regime (see Edwards (1989) for a discussion of
these concepts), in our empirical analysis we will look at a number of

alternative measures of the orientation of the trade regime. We use several
different proxies of the trade regime in order to test for the robustness of
the results that we obtain: if the results on the relation betveen growth and
trade are independent of the particular measure or sample of countries used we
can be more confident of the robustness of our results.
As a starting point we replicate in table 1 the basic growth equations

estimated by Barro (1991). We regress the average growth of per—capita income
of 98 countries in the 1960—1985 period (G1t6085) on the following regressors:
the initial value of COP (GDP6O), the initial amount of human capital as
proxied

by primary and secondary school enrollment rates in 1960 (Pt1160 and

SEC6O), the amount

average

of

"non—productive" government spending as proxied the

ratio of real government consumption (exclusive of defense and

— 18

—

to real COP (CDV); the distortion in the price of investment goods
education)
as proxied by the deviation of the 1960 PPP price of investment goods from the
sample mean (PPPI600EV); the degree of political instability as proxied by the
number of revolutions and coups per year (REYCOUP) and the number of

assassinations (ASSASS). The results of this basic regression (presented in
column (1) of table 1) are familiar: the initial level of income is negatively
correlated with growth consistent with the hypothesis of conditional
convergence of growth rates (see also Barro and Sala—i—Martin (1990b)); the
measures of human capital accumulation positively affect growth;
non—productive government spending and political instability are harmful to
economic growth; and distortions in the price of investment goods are
negatively related with growth.
In column (2) regional dummies for Latin America and Africa are added to

the basic regression. As first observed by Barro (1991), per—capita income
growth in Latin America and Africa appears to be lower than the rest of the
world even after controlling for the other determinants of economic growth.
In particular, the parameter estimate for the Latin American dummy implies
that the per capita growth rate in that region is 1.17. lower than the rest of

the world after holding constant the other variables. While one
interpretation of these results is that there are regional differences in
economic growth, the interpretation that we will pursue in this section is
that these regional dummies proxy for other omitted variables that are the

actual determinants of the lower economic growth in these two regions. In
particular, we will present evidence that the trade regime and the degree of
financial development are important omitted variables that explain the lower

economic growth observed in these regions. Columns (3) and (4) in table 1
replace the initial level of GDP in 1960 with its logarithmic value (CDP6OL):

— 19

the

—

results are essentially the same as before. The only difference is that

the coefficient on GDI'60L is now interpreted as an elasticity: its value of
4

—0.014 implies that for each country the convergence to its steady state
growth rate is achieved at at 1.47. rate per year. This steady state growth
rate is in turn determined by values of the other explanatory variables in the
regression.

We now want to expand the Barro regression by introducing a number of
measures of the trade regime. Our first measure of the orientation of the
trade regime is based on the well—known World Bank study of the trade
orientation of a sample of developing countries (World Bank (1987)). This
study distinguishes countries between strongly outward—oriented, moderately
outward—oriented, moderately inward—oriented and strongly inward—oriented t2
It should be observed that while a lot of analytical effort has been made in
deriving this classification, it might suffer of the criticism that it is a
subjective measure of the orientation of the trade regime 13• For this reason,
we will test the robustness of our results to different measures of the trade
regime.

With the above caveat in mind, we create two dummy variables (PILOTG3—73
and

PROT73—85) that take values one through four (from one for strongly

outward-oriented countries to four for strongly inward—oriented). The first

(second) of these variables represents the trade orientation of each country
in the

1963—1973 (1973—85) period (according to the World Bank

'2The classification of a country as being outward or inward oriented is
made by the World Bank on the basis of various measures of trade policy,
tariffs, subsidies and quantitative restrictions.
131.e. it might not be robust to the ex ante biases or priors of the
researcher.

— 20 —

classification)'4.

It should he observed that the introduction of the

variables for the trade orientation (PROT) reduces the sample from 98 to 59
countries. Therefore, in table 2 (and all the subsequent tables) we first
present, as an initial reference regression, the results of the basic Barro

regression for the smaller subset of countries. We do so because, when
discussing the role and effects of new and additional variables, it is
important

to use the same sample of countries: in fact, the changed parameter

estimates and

significance levels of particular variables might be due to the

changed sample rather than the introduction of additional explanatory

variables 15

As can be seen by comparing this reference equation with the

corresponding one in table 1, the reduction of the sample from 98 to 59

countries does not significantly affect the reference equation. The principal
differences in the 59—country regression are two: the coefficient on secondary
enrollment (SEC6O) is now statistically significant; the coefficient on tbe
distortion in the price of investment goods (PPI6ODEV) is now insignificant;

The results of the basic regression with the addition of our proxies for
the trade regime (PROT63—73 and PROT73—85) are presented in column (l)—(4) in
table 2. The results in column (1) and (3) in the table show the the trade

orientation variable significantly affects the growth rate: a country with a

'We extend the World Bank sample of 38 countries by adding values for
other 21 countries that, on the basis of effective rates of protection and
other proxies of the trade regime can be classified as having strongly
outward—oriented trade regimes (see Kelly (1988) for statistical evidence on
the outward orientation of these countries). These are Taiwan and twenty
advanced industrial countries (Japan, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland,
France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, U.K., Canada, 1J.S., Australia and New Zealand).

'5In many studies (for example Zasterly (1990) amd Levine and Renelt
the results of regressions with additional variables are compared with
those of regressions based on very different samples. Such a procedure
obscures the reason for the change in significance of particular regressors:
i.e. whether it is driven by the addition of omitted variables or the change
in sample.

(1990))

— 21

—

more inward—oriented trade regime grows more slowly than an outward—oriented
country after controlling for the other determinants of economic growth. t6

The reduction in per—capita growth is not only statistically significant'7
but also economically significant: a move from a strongly outward—oriented to
a strongly—inward trade regime is associated with a reduction in per—capita
growth of 2.57. per year! The columns (2) and (4) in table 2 also show that
the results for the PROT variables are robust to the addition of regional

dummies for Latin America and Africa. More importantly, the introduction of
the PROT variables significantly reduces the coefficient estimates and the

statistical significance of the regional dummies. In particular, when
PItOT73—85 is introduced in the regression notably the Latin American dummy

statistically insignificant (compare column (6) with column (4)) and
its point estimate is reduced by half . The results suggest an important

becomes

implication:

the reason why Latin America appears to be growing slower than

the rest of the world appears to be mostly explained by the inward-oriented
import—substitution policies followed by many countries in the region during

161t

should

be observed that the variable PRUT73—85 might suffer of a

endogeneity problem. It might be that low economic growth leads to
the choice of a protected (inward—oriented) trade regime rather than the other
way around. This problem is partially mitigated by the use of PROT63—73 that
partial

refers to the initial time period and is therefore less subject to an
endogeneity

problem. It could of course be argned that even the initial
choice of the trade regime might be endogenous and induced by a persistently
low level of economic growth. In response to this, we suggest two
counterarguments. From a historical point of view, the move to
import—substitution policies in the 1950's appears to be driven by the then
prevailing "export pessismism" view of the Prebisch school rather than weak
economic growth. From an empirical point of view, instrumental variable
regression that control for the endogeneity of PROT show a still strong and
significant value for the trade regime variable. These regression, not
reported here, are available upon request.
"In the following We consider a coefficient as being statistically
significant if it is significant at the 57. confidence level.

— 22

the

period considered I.

It

—

is also interesting to observe that, for the

African continent dummy, the introduction of the trade regime dummy does not

appear

to significantly affect the parameter estimate and the statistical

significance of the African dummy. This suggest that factors, other than the
trade regime might account for the poor growth performance of this region.

One of the potential
that
In

shortcoming of the PROT index used in table 2 is

it imposes a particular functional form for the trade orientation effect.

particular, it

growth

implies

that the effect of a strongly inward regime on

is three time larger than the one of a strongly outward regime.

Moreover, some critics of the Vorld Bank (1987) study on outward orientation
and growth have argued that, while the growth experience of strongly
outward—oriented countries might be different from the one of strongly
inward—oriented countries, the growth experience of moderately inward—oriented
countries does not appear to differ significantly from the one of moderately
outward oriented countries.
In order to study the sensitivity of the regressions results to this
specification, in table 3 we present the estimates of the model with a
separate dummy variable for each trade regime (SO stands for strongly

outward—oriented, SI for strongly inward-oriented and MI for moderately
inward-oriented); each dummy variable takes value one for the country in that

trade regime in the period considered and zero otherwise. It then follows
that, residually, the constant on the reference equation represents the result
for the moderately outward-oriented regime and the coefficients on SI, SO and
MI show how these countries did relative to moderately outward-oriented ones.

'8The Latin American dummy is still significant when we use PROT63—73 but,
as table 3 below will show, this might be due to the peculiar fuunctional form
chosen for the PROT variable.

— 23

—

Separate regressions are presented for the classification of the trade regime
in the 1963—73 and 1973—1985 periods (S063—73, 8163—73, 1163—73; 8073—85,
8173—85, 1173—85).

The results in tahle 3 confirm those obtained in table 2. Strong
outward—orientation leads to significantly higher growth rates; strong
inward—orientation leads to significantly lower growth rates. Moreover, as in
table 2, the introduction of the trade regime dummies turns the Latin American
dummy to values that are statistically insignificant (t—statistics of 1.4) and
leads to a drop in its point estimate by over a half. This insignificance of
the Latin American dummy is robust to the use of both PROT63—73 and P110773—85:

this confirms the potential importance of the policies of import substitution
in explaining the growth differential between Latin America and other regions.

As far as the the comparison between moderately inward—oriented and moderately

outward-oriented countries is concerned, the results are more ambiguous. In
the 1963—1973 period, the dummy for the moderately inward countries (II) is
negative and statistically significant; this would suggest that moderately
inward countries grow significantly less than moderately outward—oriented
countries (at 17. less per year in per capita terms). However, in the
1973—1985 period the sign on II is negative but statistically significant only
at the 107. confidence level. This would suggests that for the most recent
period

the growth performance of moderately inward and outward countries might

not be significantly different.
Next,

table 4 presents the results of regressions with a different

classification of the trade orientation dummy. A single trade regime dummy
(TDUI) is used taking value zero for (strongly and moderately)
outward—oriented countries and value one for (strongly and moderately)
inward—oriented

countries; we distinguish again between the two sub—periods

— 24

classified

—

by the World Bank (T0U163—73 and TDUII73—85) 1.

The previous

results are confirmed: outward—oriented countries grow faster than
inward—oriented ones (on average 1.67. more per year in per capita terms).

Here, however, the Latin American dummy remains significant even if its point
estimate is marginally reduced.

To test the robustness of the above results, we move next to a different

classification of the trade regime. Agarwala (1983) measured the degree of
price distortions in various markets for a sample of 31 developing countries.

The level of distortions was distinguished between low, medium and high. In
particular, a country is defined as having a high distortion level for trade
in the manufacturing sector if the effective rate of protection is above 807.;

a low level is represented by effective protection below 40% and a medium
level by protection in the 40—807. range. The same study classifies the 31
countries on the basis of the distortions (misalignments) of the real exchange
rate distinguishing between high medium and low levels of misalignment.
Following Agarwala's (1983) classification, we create two dummy variables: ERI'
f or the degree of Effective Rate of Protection in manufacturing and EXCURATE

for the distortions in the real exchange rate. These dummy variables take
values 1 to 3 depending on whether the distortion measure is low, medium or

high. We add 23 countries to the 30 countries in the Agarwala sample that
appear in our data set 2O

'°Easterly (1990) uses a similar dummy TDUM but takes a weigted average of
the two subperiods instead of considering them separately; moreover, his
sample is limited to the original 39 countries in the World Bank study. Given
that a number of countries changed their trade regimes between the two
periods, it might be better to consider separately the two subperiods.
20These additional countries are the 21 listed in page 28 plus Singapore
and Hong Kong. They are all characterized by a low level of effective
protection of manufacturing (below 40%) and a low level of distortion of the
real exchange rate. For statistical evidence on the trade policies of these
countries see the 11fF study of Kelly et al. (1988).

— 25 —

The results of the regressions using the Elil' and EXCIII&ATE measures of
price distortions in trade are presented in table 5. Considering first the
reference BarrO regression, we observe that the reduction in sample size from

98 to 53 countries implies two main differences: the African dummy and the
REVCOUP (proxying for political instability) are now statistically not

significant. The remaining variables are not significantly affected by tbe
change in sample size. Column (1) to (3) show the results obtained by adding
ERP and EXCHIL&TE, first separately and next jointly, in the basic Barro

regression. The results imply that higher degrees of price distortions in
trade (high effective protection) and misalignments in the real exchange rate
are significantly associated with lower rates of economic growth. These
results are confirmed when we add the regional dummies to the regressions as

in columns (5) and (6) and when we drop the political variables REYCOUP and
ASSASS (in column (6)) because of their insignificant coefficients in the

other regressions in table 5. One can observe that, while the Latin American
dummy is significant in these regressions, its point estimate drops

substantially (from —0.0145 to —0.0085). As far as tbe economic significance
of the variables ERP and EXCBRATE is concerned, the parameters estimate imply
that the move from a low to a high level of effective protection in
manufacturing leads to a reduction in the growth rate of 1.6% per year.

Similarly, a high level of misalignment in the real exchange rate implies a

reduction of the growth rate of 15%—1.2% per year.
In table 6 we obtain similar results when we replace the variable ELI'

with ERP4O: this is a dummy variable that takes value 1 wben the effective
rate of protection in our extended Agarwala sample is above 407. and zero

otherwise. In particular, column (3) and (4) sbow that tbe variables ERP4O
and EXCHRATE are both significant; moreover, the regional dummy for Latin

— 26

America is not significant and

its

control for EItP4O and EXCHRATE 21

—

point estimate is much smaller once we

The

economic significance of these

variables is similar to the one found in table 5:

a

reduction of 1.4% in

growth rates in countries with high rates of effective protection and a
reduction in growth of 1.0% to 1.3% in countries with highly misaligned real

exchange rates. The results on the Latin American dummy confirm that the
lower growth rate of Latin America is substantially explained by the
orientation of the trade regime (and exchange rate misalignment) in that
region.

As a next step we want to test the potential effect of different types of
restrictions to international transactions on the rate of economic growth. It
is usual to distinguish conceptually between restrictions to current account

transaction and restrictions to capital account transaction. Do these
restrictions affect the rate of economic growth ? And are current account
restrictions more harmful than capital account restrictions ? These questions
are interesting given the recent theoretical and empirical debate on the
correct "order of liberalization of the balance of payments" 22•

This

literature on the timing of liberalization does not deal directly with the

growth consequences of the sequencing of liberalization. It is therefore
interesting to consider empirically the growth consequences of restriction to
current and capital transactions.

In order to test empirically the above issues, we constructed two dummy

variables for current and capital account restrictions. The source of the

21Jones (1990) uses a similar measure of effective protection (ERP4O) but
finds it not to be significant. However, his sanple is different from the one
used here; in particular it does not include industrial countries.
22The main contributions to this literature include work by Edwards (1984),
Frenlcel (1982), McXinnon (1982) and Michaely (1982).

p

— 27

—

data is the International Monetary Fund annual report on Exchange Rate

Arrangements and Restrictions. These data have one major advantage and
disadvantage.

On the plus side, the survey is quite comprehensive in terms

the number of countries covered; we can therefore

the

of

obtain information on 84 of

98 countries in our original sample. On the minus side, the summary

tables in the survey report only the existence of restrictions without

considering their extent and intensity. Countries with widespread and
significant restrictions are therefore lumped together with countries with
minor

restrictions.
Subject

to this caveat, we constructed two dummy variables; CURCONT

taking value one if the IN! reports restrictions to current account
transactions and zero otherwise; and CAPCONT taking value one if the [IF

reports restrictions to capital account transactions and zero otherwise. The
results of the regressions including these variables are presented in table 7.

The table shows that, in the reference Barro regression, the reduction of the
sample size from 98 to 84 is of no consequence for the parameter estimates.

Regarding the role of current account transaction restrictions, column (1)
show that the coefficient on CURCONT is of the right sign and statistically
significant; current account restrictions are associated with lower per capita

growth. In particular, a literal interpretation of the coefficient estimate
would imply that the existence of these restriction leads to a 1.07, lower rate

of growth of per capita GOP per year. One can also observe that the presence
of the CURCONT variable is not sufficient to drive away the significance of

the regional dummy for Latin America. It is likely that the generic nature of
the CURCONT dummy (that lumps countries with major restrictions together with
countries with minor restrictions) accounts for its inability to attribute
most of the low growth in Latin America to the significant trade restrictions

— 28 —

in

the region.

As far as the role of restrictions to capital account transactions is
concerned, column (2) in table 7 shows that the coefficient on CAPCONT is

negative but statistically not significant (even though the point estimate is

similar to that of CURCONT). This result would suggest that the growth
consequences of capital account restrictions might not be as important as

those the current account ones. This interpretation is also consistent with
the implications of many studies in the "timing of liberalization" literature
that suggest the importance of liberalizing the current account first 23
is also consistent with the empirical evidence from most OECD countries where
the liberalization of the capital account occurred much later than the one of

the current account 24
The

trade

results obtained with the various measures of the orientation of the

regime used above are consistent with the hypothesis that highly

restrictive trade policies are harmful to long term growth. It should be
observed that the various proxies of the trade regime, while obtained through
different sources, studies and while covering different countries and time

periods, are all highly correlated with each other. This is evident from
table 8 where we present the correlation coefficients between these various
trade regime proxies. Given the potential criticism that some of the measures

might be biased bcause of their "subjective" nature, the evidence on the high
relation between them reduces the concern that the classification of a country
as being inward or outward oriented might be strongly biased by the priors of

23More strongly, authors like Piaz—Alejandro (1985) and IcKinnon (1982)
have pointed out the risks associated with an early liberalization of the
capital account.
24For example, it is only recently that capital controls have been
eliminated in advanced industrial countries such as France and

Italy.

— 29

the

—

specific researcher.

Our final proposed proxy for the trade regime is given by the degree of

openness of the country (as measured for example by the share of exports in

GOP) 25 This measure is problematic for a number of reasons. First, a
country might be very open or not for reasons not related to the trade regime;
for example large countries tend to have a lot of interregional trade rather

than international trade so that

they

appear more closed than smaller open

economies. Second, there might be a serious endogeneity problem: if we take
the average degree of openness over the sample period, this might be affected

by growth rather than the other way around. This endogeneity problem can be
partly mitigated by considering openness at the beginning of the sample
period. Subject to these caveats, we take the export to GDP ratio in 1965 as

proxy for the degree of openness 26 The results of the regressions including
the export to GOP ratio are presented in table 9. The coefficient on the
export to GDP ratio is positive and statistically significant: a higher
degree of openness is associated with a higher rate of economic growth. It
can be observed

that the Latin American dummy is still significant in these

regressions. However, this result is not surprising if we consider that the
export to GOP ratio does not control for the actual orientation of the trade
regime and is therefore a quite imprecise measure of the trade regime bias.
In summary, the results presented
of

in this section confirm the importance

the trade regime for the rate of economic growth. Thile the theoretical

25A number of studies have considered the relation between export
performance and economic growth via the estimation of a neoclassical
production function. Among these Tyler (1981), Feder (1983), Kavoussi

(1984),
Balassa (1985), Jung and Marshall (1985). See Edwards (1989) for a survey of
these studies and a critical analysis of their results. For a recent study on
the relation between trade shares and growth see Quah and Rauch (1990).
25We choose 1965 to get a value as close as possible to the beginning of
the sample and for the largest sample of countries.

— 30 —

link

between openness, trade regime and growth is ambiguous, the empirical

evidence is for most measures consistent with the hypothesis that trade
barriers and inward—oriented trade regimes are harmful to long term growth.

The evidence on a large cross—section of countries is therefore consistent
with the results of numerous multicountry projects on the relation between
trade regime, export growth and economic performance (Krueger (1978), Bhagwati
(1978), Balassa (1971, 1982) and Vorld Bank (1987)). The results also suggest
that an important reason why, after controlling for a set of other variables,

Latin America appears to be growing slower than the rest of the world appears
to be the inward-oriented import—substitution policies followed by many

countries in the region during the period considered. In particular, the
regional

dummy for Latin American appears as insignificant when most of the

measures of trade restrictions are added to the reference regression and its
point

estimate is significantly reduced as well.

3.2. The role of financial development and financial repression.

The theoretical models surveyed in section 2 imply that there might be an
important relation between financial development, inflation and economic
growth. In particular, the models in Roubini and Sala—i--Martin (1991) and
Levine

(1990a, b) suggest that financial underdevelopment and financial

repression may

be harmful to economic growth. The empirical literature on

financial repression also suggests that financial repression is associated
with negative real interest rates, high required reserve ratios and the choice
of a high inflation tax 27• In this section we would like to test empirically

2TSee IcKinnon (1973, 1986), Shaw (1983), Fry (1982, 1988), IcKinnon and
Mathieson (1981).

— 31

—

the

—

hypothesis that distortions in financial markets and the degree of

financial development are important determinants of the rate of economic
growth.

In order to test empirically the relation between financial factors and
economic growth, it is necessary to obtain measures of the degree of financial

development or financial repression. The approach that we take here is to
derive alternative proxies for the financial characteristics of a country and
test their explanatory power in our growth regressions.

The literature on financial repression suggests that economies that are
financially repressed are characterized by credit rationing and artificially
low real interest rates. Governments in financially repressed economies tend
to control deposit and lending rates below the level of the inflation rates so
that real interest rates will tend to be low and/or negative. Agarwala (1983)
and Gelb (1988) present strong evidence on the negative relation between
financial repression and real interest rates in a sample of over thirty
developing countries; they also show that the simple bivariate relation
between economic growth and financial repression (as proxied by real interest
rates) is negative: low real interest rates are correlated with low economic

growth. Easterly (1990) presents evidence that a proxy for financial
repression based on Geib's data significantly affects the growth rate in a
cross—country sample of 32 developing countries.

Agarwala (1983) classifies the 31 countries in its sample according to
their degree of distortions in the financial markets. The degree of
distortion is defined as being high when real interest rates during the 1970's
were less than minus 57.; low when real interest rates were positive and medium

when they were in the 0 to minus 57. range. Starting from the Agarwala sample
we collected additional information on a sample of economically advanced

— 32 —

countries

and added

FINREP for 53

them to the sample. We thus create a dummy variable

countries that

takes value one when real interest rates are

positive; two when real interest

and

rate

are negative but higher than minus 5%;

3 when real interest rates are lower than minus 5%. 28
In column (1) in table 10 we include the proxy FINREP for financial

repression in the basic growth regression. This variable appears to have the
right sign and is statistically significant: a higher degree of financial

repression leads to lower economic growth. We can also observe that, once we
control for financial repression, the Latin American dummy in column (2) not

only loses its statistical significance but its point estimate drops by more
than half. This suggests that one of the reasons for the significant regional
dummy in the original Barro regressions might be the high degree of financial

repression in Latin America 25 From the economic point of view, the
coefficient estimate on the FINREP variable implies that the move from an
economic with a low level of financial repression to one with a high level of
financial repression implies a lowering of the growth rate around 1.3% per
year (see column (4)).

In columns

(3)

and

(4) of table 10 we also present the results of

regressions where two of the Agarwala measures of financial and trade
distortions are jointly added to the basic trade regressions: the FINREP
measure

of financial repression and the EXCBRATE measure of real exchange rate

28The sample of countries is identical to the one derived for the variables

REP and EIC}IIUTE above. The reference Barro regression is therefore the same
as the one discussed in table 5 above.
280f the nine Latin American countries in the Agarwala sample, eight are
characterized by a high degree of financial repression in the 1970's. These
are: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Jamaica, Nexico, Uruguay, Bolivia and Pen.
The FINREP variable, however, is not a simple dummy for Latin America since
several other countries in the sample are characterized by a high level of
financial repression.

— 33

distortion;

—

as can be seen from the table they both enter significantly in the

regression. The Latin American dummy is again statistically not significant
and its point estimate is significantly lower.
Next, table 11 presents the results of regressions where a composite
index of distortions in financial markets, factors markets and trade is

introduced in the growth regression. This composite index (DISTORT) is
derived from Agarwala as a weighted average different distortion measures 30
This dummy variable takes value one when the overall distortions degree is

low; two when the distortion level is medium; and three when it is high. The
coefficient estimate of DISTORT has the expected sign and is statistically
significant: a higher degree of overall financial, trade and other distortions

is associated with lower per—capita growth. Consistent with previous results,
the regional dummy for Latin America appears to be statistically insignificant
when we introduce this composite measure of distortions. The coefficient
estimate of the DISTORT variable implies that the move from an overall low
level of economic distortions to a high level of economic distortions implies
a reduction in the growth rate of 3.1% per year.
Next, in table 12 we present the results of regressions where the

Agarwala measure of real interest rate distortions is substituted with the one
created by Gelb (1988) and used by Easterly (1990). The Gelb measure differs
from the one in Agarwala by considering a different sanple of countries and
measuring real interest rates in the 1980's.

When the distortion dunmy is

defined as a zero/one variable taking value one when real interest rates are
negative (FINREP1), the sign of the coefficient is correct but statistically

not significant (see column (1)). However, when the variable is defined as

30See Agarwala (1983) for a detailed description of the construction of
this variable.

— 34 —

taking

value one when real interest rates are strongly negative (less than

minus five percent), table 12 shows the corresponding dummy (FINREP2) is
significantly negative (columns (2)—(3)): strongly negative real interest rate
lead to low real growth 31 These results suggest that, while a moderate degree
of financial repression may not affect excessively economic growth, a strong
degree of financial repression is associated with significantly lower economic
growth (around 1.17. of per capita growth per year). In these regressions, the
point estimate of the Latin American dummy is reduced but the variable remains
significant.

As discussed in the section one, one of the reasons why government follow
policies of financial repressions is to expand the tax base on which

seigniorage is collected. In particular, a high coefficient of required
reserve for commercial banks will force them to hold a greater amount of
non—interest bearing monetary reserves; this represents an important source of

seigniorage for the government in many developing countries. As argued by
MclCinnon (1984), a high reserve ratio proxies for the degree of financial

underdevelopment and/or repression; therefore, we expect economic growth to be
lower in countries with a high ratio of reserves to money. lie define the
reserve ratio (RESERVE) as the ratio of commercial bank reserves to the money
supply (Ml and quasi money) and we compute the average ratio for the 1960—1984
period;

the maximum sample we get is 58 countries. In table 13 we present the

regressions with the RESERVE variable; since the variables REVCOUP and ASSASS

are

insignificant in this 58—country sample they are dropped from the

regressions in columns (1) and (2). In the regression in column (1) the

31The results that we obtain with FINSNEG are similar to those in Easterly
(1990). However, we consider a larger sample of countries (52 instead of 32)
that includes the industrial countries.

— 35

reservevariable

—

is statistically significant while in column (2) (where the

regional dummies are included in the regression), the reserve variable is

marginally significant. We also observe that the RESERVE variable is not
sufficient, by itself, to drive away the regional dummies. The results in
table 13 are consistent with the theoretical model in Roubini and
Sala—i--Martin (1991), where a high degree of financial repression is achieved,

among other means, through high required reserves for commercial banks and
leads to a lowering of economic growth.
The model also suggests that countries characterized by a high degree of

financial repression will witness higher rates of inflation. Financial
repression and underdevelopment, hy expanding the tax base for seigniorage
(through high required reserve ratios and increased money demand) will also

lead the government to choose a higher level of the seigniorage tax, i.e. a
higher inflation rate. In order to test such a hypothesis, we add to the
basic growth regression the average inflation rate in the 1960—1985 period.

The results are presented column (1)—(3) in table 14. The inflation rate
enters with the right sign and is statistically significant: a higher

inflation rate is correlated with lower economic growth 2. More specifically,
the coefficient estimate implies that a 107, inflation rate per year is

associated with a lower per capita growth rate of 0.5% per year.
It should be observed that the empirical association of inflation with

growth does not imply a causal relation between inflation and growth. The
model presented in the previous section rather suggest that financial

repression leads to negative real interest rates, high required reserve ratios
and the the choice of a high inflation tax. This high relation between

32Kornendi and McCuire (1985) find a similar effect of inflation on
economic growth.

— 36

different

—

measures of financial repression is evident from table 15 where we

report the correlation coefficients between inflation rates, reserve ratios
and measures of financial repression. Low real interest rates (high values of

FINREP) and high required reserve ratios are high correlated with inflation
rates; high required reserve ratios are positively associated with high
distortions in financial markets.

The results of this section are consistent with the implications of the

theories dicussed in section one. Controlling for other determinants of
growth, a high degree of financial underdevelopment and/or financial

repression will lead to lower economic growth. The result is robust to the
alternative measures of financial repression derived and used in the
econometric analysis in this section.
4. Concluding Remarks.

We analyzed the relation between the trade regime, the degree of
financial development and the growth performance of a large cross section of

countries at the theoretical and empirical levels. We argued that the open
economy growth literature does not give clear answers to the question of what
is the relation between openness, the trade regime and economic growth.

We also argued that one of the reasons why some governments may choose to
repress the financial sector is that it delivers easy inflationary revenue
since financial repression induces private agents to carry a larger stock of

nominal money, the base for the inflation tax. This financial repression
reduces the growth rate of the economy.

In the third section we presented some empirical evidence on the relation
between the trade regime, financial repression and growth for a large sample
of countries. We presented a number of variables that measure different

aspects of the trade regime and the trade orientation of countries. The

4

— 37

systematic

—

finding was that there is a negative relation between trade

distortions and growth. We then presented some variables that capture the
degree to which the financial sector is distorted. We confirmed the
predictions of the theory in that financial repression affects growth

negatively, inflation rates and growth rates are positively related and
reserve ratios and growth are negatively related.

As we proceeded

Latin

along, we tested the significance of a regional dummy for

American countries. We found that, unlike the variables used in

Barro (1991), our variables tend to make the Latin American dummy disappear.
This suggests that a large fraction of the negative growth experience of the

sample of Latin American countries is explained by distortionary policies both
in the trade and in the financial sectors.

— 38

—

References

(1983), "Price Distortions and Growth in Developing
Agarwala, R.
Countries," Washington, DC: World Bank.
(1971), The Structure of Protection in Developing Countries,
Balassa, B.
Baltimore: Jobn Bopkins University Press.
________ (1985), "Exports, Policy Choices and Economic Growth in
Developing Countries After the 1973 Oil Shock," Journal of Development
Economics, 18: 23—35.
Barro, R. and I. Sala—i—Martin, (1990), "Public Finance Models of
Economic Growth," NBER VP No. 3362.
_______________________________ (1990b), "Economic Growth and Convergence
across the United States," NBER Working Paper, April.
Barro, R. (1990a), "Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries,"
Cambridge, MA: unpublished NBER working paper.
_______ (1991), "Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries,"
forthcoming, Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Bencivenga, V. R., and B. D. Smith, (1988) "Financial Intermediation and
Endogenous Growth", Rochester Center for Economic Research VP, 159, March.
Bernard, A. and S. Durlauf (1990) "Convergence in International Output
Movements," mimeo, Stanford University.
(1978), Anatomy and Consequences of Exchange Control
Bhagvati, J.
Regimes, Cambridge, MA: Ballinger Publishing Co. for NBER.
Boldrin, M. and J.A. Scheinkman (1988), "Learning—By—Doing,
International Trade and Growth: A Note," The Economy as an Evolving Complex
System, SF1 Studies in the Sciences of Complexity, Addison—Wesley.
Brock, P.L. (1989), "Reserve Requirements and the Inflation Tax," Journal
of Money, Credit and Banking, February, pp.106—121.
De Gregorio, 3. (1991), "Inflation, Taxation, and Long Run Growth", mimeo
IMF, July.
Easterly, W. (1990), "Endoenous Growth in Developing Countries With
Government—Induced Distortions, World Bank mimeo, (revised NBER VP No. 3214.)
Edwards, 5. (1984), "The Order of Liberalization of the external sector
in developing countries," Essays in International Finance, No. 156, Department
of Economics, Princeton University.
Edwards, 5. (1989), "Openness, Outward Orientation, Trade Liberalization
and Economic Performance in Developing Countries," NBER VP No. 2908, March.
Feder, G. (1983), "On Exports and Economic Growth," Journal of
Development Economics, 12: 59—74.
Feenstra, R.C. (1986?, "Functional Equivalence Between Liquidity Costs
and the Utility of Money, ' Journal of Monetary Economics, pp.271—291.
Fischer, 5. (1991), "Grovth, Macroeconomics, and Development", in 0. 3.
Blanchard and S. Fischer eds., "NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1991", MIT press.
Fry, M.J. (1982), "Models of Financially Repressed Developing Economies,"
World Development, Vol.10, September.
Fry, M.J. (1988) Money, Interest and Banking in Economic Development, The
Johns Bopkins University Press.
Gelb, A. (1988), "Financial Policies, Efficiency, and Growth: An Analysis
of Broad Cross—Section Relationships," World Bank.
Goldsmith, R. V., (1969), "Financial Structure and Development", Yale
University Press, New Baven.

— 39 —

Greenwood and Jovanovic (1990), "Financial Development, Growth, and the
Distribution of Income," Journal of Political Economy, 98, October,
pp.1076—1107.
Grossman, G. and E. Belpman (1991), "Innovation and Growth in the Global
Economy", M.I.T. press, Cambridge, MA.
International Monetary Fund (1968), Nineteenth Annual Report on Exchange
Restrictions, Washington, DC.
International Monetary Fund (1978), Twenth Ninth Annual Report on
Exchange Eestrictions, Washington, DC.
Jones, C.I. (1990) "Economic Growth and the Relative Price of Capital,"
Unpublished, M.I.T., October.
Jones, L. and R. Manuelli (1988), "A Model of Optimal Equilibrium
Growth," unpublished mimeo, Northwestern University, April.
Jung, V. and P.Marshall (1985), "Exports, Growth and Causality in
Developing Countries," Journal of Development Economics, 18: 1—12.
Kelly, M., N.Kirmani, M.Xafa, C.Bonnekainp and P.Winglee, ed. (1988),
Issues and Development in International Trade Policy, International Monetary
Fund, Washington, DC., March.
Kavoussi, R. çl984), "Export Expansion and Economic Growth: Further
Empirical Evidence,' Journal of Development Economics, 14: 241—50.
Krueger, A.O. (1974), "The Political Economy of the Rent Seeking
Society," merican Economic Review, 64, pp. 292—303.
Krueger, A.
(1978), Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development:
Liberalization Attempts and Consequences, Cambridge, MA: Ballinger Publishing
Co. for NBER.
Krngman, P.
(1985), "The Narrow Moving Band, the Dutch Disease and the
Competitive Consequences of Ms. Thatcher", working paper, MIT. r
Levine, R., (1990), "Financial Structure and Economic Development",
manuscript, Federal Reserve Board.
(i990b), "Stock Markets, Growth,a nd Policy", mimeo World
Bank, February.
Levine, R. and 0. Renelt (1990), "A Sensitivity Analysis of Cross—Country
Growth Regressions," unpublished mimeo, December.
Lucas, R. (1988), "The Mechanics of Economic Growth," Journal of Monetary
Economics
McKinnon, R.I. (1973), Money and Capital in Economic Development.
Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.
McKiunon, R. (1982), "The Order of Economic Liberalization: Lessons from
Chile and Argentina," in K. Brunner and A.B. Meltzer (ed.), Economic Policy in
a World of Change.
McKinnon, R.I. and 0. Mathieson (1981), "Row to Manage a Repressed
Economy," Princeton Essays in International Finance, No.145.
Michaely, M. (1977), "Exports and Growth: An Empirical Investigation,"
Journal of Development Economics, 1: 49—53.
(1982), "The Sequencing of a Liberalization Policy: A
Preliminary Statement of Issues," unpublished paper.
Murphy, K., A. Schleifer and R.W.Vishny (1990), "The Allocation of
Talent: Implications for Growth," unpublished mimeo, University of Chicago,
March.
Persson, T. and G. Tabellini (1990) Macroeconomic Policy: Credibility and
Politics, North Bolland.
quali, 0. and J.E. Rauch (1990), "Openness and the Rate of Economic
Growth," unpublished mimeo, MIT, October.

— 40

—

Rebelo (1990), "Long—Run Policy Analysis and Long Run Growth," NBER VP,
April.
Rivera—Batiz, L.A. and P.A.Romer (1990), "Economic Integration and
Endogenous Growth," NBER VP No.3528, December.
____________________________ (1991), "International Trade with
Endogenous Technological Change," NBER VP No. 3594, January.
Romer, P.A. (1986a), "Increasing Returns and Long Run Growth," Journal of
Political Economy, 94: 1002—37.
_________ (1990), "Endogenous Technological Change," Journal of
Political Economy, XCXXVIII, October, 571—5102.
Saint—Paul, G., (1990), "Technological Choice, Financial markets and
Economic Development", DELTA working paper 90—30, Paris.
Shaw, E.S. (1973), Financial Deepening in Economic Development, Oxford
University Press, New York.
Sidrauski,M.

(1967), "Rational Choice and Patterns of Growth in a Monetary

Economy," American Economic Review, 57, pp.534—S44.

Solow, ft. (1957), "Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function,"
Review of Economics and Statistics, 39: 312—20.

Stokey, N.L., (1990), "Human Capital, Product Quality and Growth," NBER
WP No. 3413, August.
Summers, R. and A. Heston, "A New Set of International Comparisons of Real
Product and Prices: Estimates for 130 Countries," Review of Income and Wealth, 34:
1—25.

Tyler, W. (1981), "Growth and Export Expansion in Developing Countries,"
Journal of Development Economics, 9: 121—30.

Warner, A. (1990), "Debt, Trade, and Investment," Unpublished PhD
dissertation, Harvard University.
World Bank, (1987), World Development Report 1987, New York: Oxford
University Press.

__________ (1989), World Development Report 1989, New York: Oxford
University Press.
Young, Alwyn (1989), "Learning By Doing and the Dynamic Effects of
International Trade," Columbia University.

— 41

—

Data Appendix
Variable Definitions

Taken from the Barro—Woif Data Set:
GR6085
Annual growth rate of per capita GDP 1960—1985
GDP6O
GDP in 1960
P1UM6O
Primary school enrollment Rate, 1960
SEC6O
Secondary school enrollment rate, 1960
GOV
Average of the real government consumption (exclusive of defense

and education) to real GDP
PPI6ODEV Deviation of the 1960 PPP value of the investment deflator from
the sample mean
REVCOUP Number of revolutions and coups per year (1960—85 or sub-sample)
ASSASS
Number of assassinations per million population per year
LAT.AMER.
(0, 1) dummy variable for Latin America
AFRICA
(0, 1) dummy variable for sub—Saharan Africa
Other Variables:

PROTxx
(1, 2,3,4) index of outward/inward orientation of the trade regime based
on 1987 World Development Report of the World Bank and on additional
information on 21 other countries
SOxx

(0, 1) dummy variable for strongly outward—oriented countries. Source:

same as for PROT

SIrx
(0, 1) dummy variable for strongly inward—oriented countries. Source:
same as for PROT
Mlxx

(0, 1) dummy variable for moderately inward—oriented countries. Source:

same as for PROT

TDUMXX (0, 1) dummy for outward/inward orientation of the trade regime Source:
same as for PROT

ERP
(1, 2, 3) index of degree effective protection in manufacturing based on
Agarwala (1983) and additional information on 23 other countries
ERP4O

(0, 1) dummy for ERP> 0.4

EXCHRATE

same as for ERP

(1, 2, 3) index of degree real exchange rate misalignment. Source:

DISTORT (1, 2, 3) index of overall price distortions. Source: same as for ERP
CURCONT (0, 1) dummy for restrictions to current account transactions, 1978.
Source: IMF report on Exchange Rate Arrangements and Restrictions
CAPCONT (0, 1) dummy for restrictions to capital account transactions, 1978.
Source: IMF report on Exchange Rate Arrangements and Restrictions
EXPGDP65 Export to GDP ratio, 1965. Source: 1989 World Development Report of

— 42

—

the World Bank

FINREP
for ERP

(1, 2, 3) index of degree of real interest rate distortions. Source: same as

FINREP1 (1, 2, 3) index of degree of real interest rate distortions. Source: Geib
(1988) and information on additional 23 countries
FINREP2 (0, 1) index of degree of real interest rate distortions. Source: Gelb
(1988) and information on additional 23 countries
RESERVE Ratio of commercial banks' reserves to money. Source: International
Financial Statistics of the IMF
1NF6085

Average CPI inflation rate, 1960—1985. Source: International Financial

Statistics of the IMF

Table 1:
(1)

dep. var.

no. obs.

constant

98
0.0320

—0.0072

(0.0011)

I0gGDP6

(2)

(3)

——

98

98

0.0354
0.0171
(0.0073) (0.0079)
—0.0066

——

0.0287
(0.0088)

PRIM6O

0.0238
(0.0062)

GOV

—0.1300

(0.0323)
PPI6ODEV

—0.0142

(0.0056)

REVCOUP

—0.0201

(0.0069)
ASSASS

—0.0032

(0.0019)

LAT.AMER

——

——

—0.0149

——

0.0242
(0.0079)
——

—0.0140

(0.0027)

0.0113
0.0222
(0.0081) (0.0092)

(0.0100)

0.0262
0.0324
(0.0065) (0.0073)

(0.0070)

—0.0998

(0.0284)
—0.0142

(0.0049)
—0.0161

(0.0070)
—0.0024

(0.0018)
—0.0140

—0.1312

(0.0336)
—0.0177

(0.0058)
—0.0220

(0.0080)
—0.0005

(0.0022)
——

(0.0032)

AFRICA

98

(0.0010)

(0.0029)

SC60

(4)

GR6085 GR6085 GR6085 GR6085

(0.0073)
GDP6O

Barro Growth Regressions

—0.0115

0.0057

0.0303

—0.1010

(0.0290)
—0.0166

(0.0049)
—0.0193

(0.0078)
—0.0008

(0.0021)
—0.0112

(0.0035)
——

(0.0042)

—0.0147

(0.0043)

adj.R—sq.

0.5032

0.5806

0.4787

0.5525

std.err.

0.0131

0.0120

0.0134

0.0124

Table 2:

reference

dep. var.
no. obs.

constant

59
0.0415

—0.0072

(0.0011)
SEC6O

0.0175
(0.0065)

PRIM6O

0.0222
(0.0084)

GOV

—0.1081

(0.0392)
PPI6ODEV

—0.0237

(0.0141)

REVCOUP

—0.0130

(0.0066)
ASSASS

—0.0029

(0.0019)
PROT63—73

(2)

(1)

——

59
0.0511

(0.0081)

(4)

—-

59

59

(0.0009)

(0.0007)

(0.0060)

0.0128
(0.0060)

(0.0059)

0.0229
(0.0064)

0.0149
(0.0074)

(0.0062)

0.0236

—0.1037

(0.0338)
—0.0158

(0.0157)

—0.0817

(0.0365)
—0.0129

(0.0142)

0.0176

0.0106

(0.0046)

—0.0131

(0.0151)

(0.0059)

—0.01 42

(0.0019)

—0.0086 —0.0074

——

——

(0.0017)
——

—0.0172

0.0046
(0.0081)

—0.0110

(0.0140)
—0.0031

(0.0053)

——

——

—0.0128

—0.0083

——

——

—0.01 49

—0.0114

(0.0022)
—0.0063

(0.0039)
——

(0.0062)

(0.0074)

(0.0019)

(0.0015)

(0.0032)

(0.0043)

AFRICA

0.0097
(0.0061)

—0.0032 —0.0032 —0.0030 —0.0032
(0.0019)

(0.0022)
LAT.AMER.

—0.0076

(0.0008)

—0.1077 —0.0896
(0.0328) (0.0331)

—0.0053 —0.0076 —0.0003
(0.0049)

59

0.0590
0.0715
0.0763
(0.0083) (0.0083) (0.0105)

—0.0083 —0.0076 —0.0083
(0.0008)

(0.0016)
PROT73—85

(3)

GR6085 GR6085 GR6085 GR6085 GR6085

(0.0081)
GOP6O

Role of the Trade Regime (I)

—0.0128

(0.0048)

adj.R—sq.

0.6787

0.7237

0.7565

0.7617

0.7817

sfd.err.

0.0108

0.0100

0.0094

0.0093

0.0089

Table 3:

(1)
dep. var.

no. cbs.
constant

00P60

SEC6O

PRIM6O

GOV

59
0.0335
(0.0074)
—0.0087

—0.0086

0.0125
0.0051
(0.0059) (0.0092)

—0.1016

—0.0129

—0.0065

—0.0031

0.0138

—0.0136

—0.01 04

——

—0.0817

(0.0384)
—0.0092

(0.0153)
—0.0097

(0.0051)
—0.0036

(0.0020)

0.0136
(0.0048)

0.01 67

—0.1115

(0.0354)
—0.0102

(0.0161)

—0.0034

(0.0020)

0.0186
(0.0048)

—0.0123 —0.0214
(0.0036)
—0.0096

(0.0051)
—0.0050

—-

—0.0150

std.err.

0.7280
0.0099

0.7586
0.0093

(0.0008)
0.0088
(0.0066)

—0.0931

(0.0361)
—0.0079

(0.0147)

0.0003 —0.0038
(0.0075) (0.0067)

(0.0056)
—0.0071

(0.0043)
——

—0.0034

(0.0021)
0.0171

(0.0045)
—0.0191

(0.0053)
—0.0077

(0.0051)
—0.0049

(0.0035)
——

(0.0065)
adj.R—sq,

—0.0080

0.0115
(0.0081)

0.0101

(0.0008)

(0.0034)
AFRICA

0.0499
(0.0089)

0.0224
(0.0065)

(0.0051)
LAT.AMER.

—0.0080

0.0405
(0.0065)

59

(0.0062)

(0.0040)
M163—73

0.0453
(0.0077)

59

(0.0068)

(0.0044)
S163—73

59

0.0192
(0.0063)

(0.0016)
S063—73

(4)

(0.0009)

(0.0055)
ASSASS

(3)

(0.0009)

(0.0172)
REVCOUP

(2)

GR6085 GR6085 GR6085 GR6085

(0.0364)
PPI6ODEV

Role of the Trade Regime (II)

-0.0125
(0.0052)

0.7623
0.0093

0.7797
0.0089

Table 4: Role of the Trade Regime (Ill)

(2)

(1)

dep. var.
no. cbs.
constant

59

00373

—0.0080

(0.0009)
SEC6O

0.0269

(0.0068)
PRIM6O

0.0247
(0.0071)

GOV

—0.1004

(0.0389)

PPI600EV

—0.0223

(0.0146)
REVCOUP

—0.0060

(0.0066)

ASSASS

—0.0041

(0.0022)
TDUM63—73

—0.0165

(0.0043)
TDUM73—85

(4)

GR6085 GR6085 GR6085 GR6085

(0.0083)
GDP6O

(3)

——

59
0.0469
(0.0084)
—0.0073

(0.0010)
0.0149

59
0.0455
(0.0077)

0.0553
(0.0094)

—0.0079
(0.0009)

(0.0010)

0.0258

-—

-—

0.01 23

(0.0071)

(0.0068)

0.0169
(0.0084)

0.0179
(0.0070)

0.0100
(0.0097)

—0.0782 —0.1206 —0.0915
(0.0405)
—0.0185

(0.0133)
—0.0081

(0.0065)

(0.0392)

(0.0362)

—0.0243 —0.0196
(0.0150)
—0.0110

(0.0062)

(0.0139)
—0.0125

(0.0063)

—0.0039 —0.0022 —0.0022
(0.0020)
—0.0140

(0.0017)
——

(0.001 8)
——

(0.0040)
——

-0.0157

—0.0092

——

—0.0153

—0.0133

(0.0059)
—0.0103

(0.0050)

(0.0032)
AFRICA

—0.0071

(0.0067)

(0.0046)
LAT.AMER.

59

——

—0.0173

(0.0067)

(0.0065)
adj.R—sq.

0.7013

0.7378

0.6616

0.7111

sld.err.

0.0104

0.0097

0.0110

0.0102

Table 5: Role of the Trade Regime (IV)

reference
dep. var.

no. obs.

constant

53

0.0473

—0.0068

(0.0012)
SEC6O

PRIM6O

GOV

0.0120

—0.0076

(0.0012)

0.0222

0.0493
(0.0088)
—0.0069

—0.0072

(0.0011)

0.0213
(0.0091)

0.0135
0.0222
(0.0089) (0.0078)

(0.0077)

—0.1339

—0.0316

—0.0132

—0.0048

——

—0.1460

(0.0359)
—0.0321

(0.0128)
—0.0111

(0.0056)
—0.0045

(0.0024)
—0.0083

—0.1494

(0.0363)
—0.0240

(0.0128)
—0.0033

(0.0092)
—0.0049

(0.0028)
——

——

——

—0.0145

——

0.0221

0.01 32

—0.1367

(0.0363)
—0.0198

(0.0118)
—0.0007

(0.0067)
—0.0039

(0.0020)
—0.0077

(0.0026)
—0.0092

(0.0031)
LAT.AMER.

0.0674
(0.0095)

(0.0012)

(0.0031)
EXCHRATE

53

(0.0071)

(0.0030)
ERP

0.0627
(0.0118)

53

0.0237
(0.0077)

(0.0086)
ASSASS

53

(0.0086)

(0.0134)

REVCOUP

(3)

(0.0089)

(0.0382)
PPI6ODEV

(2)

—

—0.0087

(0.0027)
——

—0.0111

53
0.0739

(0.0100)

(5)

—0.0068

——

——

——

(0.0060)

53

0.0730
(0.0108)
—0.0066

(0.0011)

(0.0011)

0.0116
(0.0075)

(0.0071)

0.0069
(0.0087)

0.0075
(0.0091)

—0.1156

(0.0356)
—0.0199

(0.0116)
—0.0056

0.0127

—0.1104

(0.0345)
—0.0206

(0.0122)
——

(0.0069)
—0.0038

——

(0.0023)
—0.0083

(0.0022)
—0.0052

(0.0029)
—0.0083

(0.0041)

(0.0050)

AFRICA

(4)

GR6085 GR6085 GR6085 GR6085 GR6085 GR6085

(0.0094)
GDP6O

(1)

—0.0123

(0.0057)

—0.0087

(0.0024)
—0.0068

(0.0024)
—0.0085

(0.0040)
—0.0103

(0.0059)

adj.R—sq.

0.6622

0.6428

0.6554

0.71 02

0.7402

0.7362

sld.err.

0.0102

0.01 04

0.01 03

0.0094

0.0089

0.0090

Table 6: Role of the Trade Regime (V)

(2)

(1)

dep. var.

no. obs.

constant

53
0.0534

—0.0080

(0.0010)
SEC6O

0.0217
(0.0082)

PRIM6O

0.0162
(0.0080)

GOV

—0.1448

(0.0354)
PPI6ODEV

—0.0291

(0.0159)
REVCOUP

—0.0094

(0.0064)
ASSASS

-0.0043
(0.0023)

ERP4O

—0.0140

(0.0053)
EXCHRATE

(4)

GR6085 GR6085 GR6085 GR6085

(0.0089)
GDP6O

(3)

——

53

0.0604
(0.0094)
—0.0073

53
0.0630
(0.0104)
—0.0072

——

——

—0.0071

(0.0010)

0.0095
(0.0082)

(0.0074)

0.0135
(0.0070)

0.0107
(0.0089)

0.0108
(0.0092)

(0.0096)

—0.1177

(0.0367)

0.01 27

—0.1186

(0.0349)

(0.0010)

0.0106

—0.1141

(0.0336)

—0.0243 —0.0179 —0.0180
(0.0133)
—0.0104

(0.0075)
—0.0039

(0.0027)
—0.0129

(0.0042)
——

—0.0114

(0.0040)

AFRICA

0.0625
(0.0107)

(0.0010)

(0.0123)
—0.0039

—0.01 39

(0.0066)

(0.0122)
——

(0.0078)
—0.0037

——

(0.0027)

—0.0128 —0.0138
(0.0038) (0.0038)
—0.0056

(0.0029)
LAT.AMER

53

—0.0074

(0.0047)

—0.0069

(0.0026)
—00070
(0.0046)

—0.01 07 —0.0093
(0.0065) (0.0068)

ad.R-sq.

0.6477

0.71 32

0.7309

0.7309

std.err.

0.01 04

0.0094

0.0091

0.0091

Table 7: Role of the Trade Regime (VI)
reference

dep. var.
no. obs.

constant

GDP6O

SEC6O

PRIM6O

GOV

PPI6ODEV

REVCOUP

ASSASS

CURCONT

(1)

(2)

GR6085 GR6085 GR6085
84

84

84

0.0357
0.0074

0.0396
0.0073

0.0378
0.0069

-0.0065

—0.0074

—0.0070

0.0011

0.0011

0.0013

0.0081
0.0089

0.0095
0.0079

0.01 08

0.0289
0.0071

0.0285
0.0067

0.0302
0.0071

—0.1195

—0.1163

—0.1151

0.0320

0.0307

0.0318

—0.0155

—0.0133

—0.0154

0.0052

0.0053

0.0052

—0.0109

—0.0112

—0.0115

0.0063

0.0057

0.0058

—0.0029

—0.0028

—0.0025

0.0018

0.0016

0.0016

--

-0.0052

0.0096

--

0.0026

CAPCONT

--

--

-0.0044
0.0029

LAT.AMER.

—0.0157

—0.0167

—0.0165

0.0034

0.0033

0.0034

—0.0115

—0.0126

—0.0103

0.0047

0.0045

0.0047

adj.R—sq.

0.6801

0.6902

0.6846

std.err.

0.0106

0.0104

0.0105

AFRICA

Table 8: Correlation Matrix

PROT63 PROT73 TDUM63 TDUM73 EXCHRAT EAP
PROT63
PROT73
TDUM63
TDUM73
EXCHRATE
ERP
ERP4O

10000

0.8651
1.0000

0.9286
0.7822
1.0000

0.6836
0.9251
0.6487
1.0000

0.5617
0.5057
0.5664
0.3802
1.0000

(i.8365
0.8230
0.7610
0.7066
0.3928
1.0000

ERP4O

0.7940
0.8252
0.7088
0.7088
0.4321
0.9091
1.0000

Table 9: Role of the Trade RegIme (VII)

reference
dep. var.

85
0.0035
(0.0073)

GDP6O

—0.0065

(0.0011)
SEC6O

PPI6ODEV

0.0229
(0.0054)

(0.0065)

—0.0938
—0.1201
(0.0284) (0.0275)

(0.0265)

0.0267

—0.0132

—0.0160

—0.0022

(0.0017)
EXPGOP65

—0.0065

(0.0098)

(0.0068)
ASSASS

—0.0072

0.0339
(0.0096)

0.0124

(0.0050)
REVCOUP

0.0263
0.0302
(0.0065) (0.0070)

(0.0010)

(0.0069)
GOV

85

(0.0011)

(0.0091)
PRIM6O

(2)

GR6085 GR6085 GR6085

no. obs.

constant

(1)

——

—0.0131

(0.0060)
—0.0182

(0.0067)
—0.0014

(0.0021)
0.00014

0.0137

0.0245

—0.0910

—0.01 30

(0.0053)
—0.0139

(0.0066)
—0.0012

(0.0017)

0.00017

(0.00007) (.00006)
LAT.AMER.

-0.0127 ——
(0.0034)

AFRICA

—0.0116

—0.0130

(0.0034)
——

(0.0044)

—0.0128

(0.0044)

adj.R—sq.

0.5905

0.5408

0.6091

std.err.

0.0117

0.0124

0.0115

Table 10: Role of Financial Repression (I)
reference

dep. var.

no. obs.
Constant

GDP6O

53
0.0473
(0.0094)
—0.0068

0.0120
(0.0089)

PRIM6O

0.0213
(0.0091)

GOV

—0.1339

(0.0382)
PPI6ODEV

—0,0316

(0.0134)

REVCOUP

—0.0132

(0.0086)
ASSASS

—0.0048

(0.0030)
FINREP

(2)

—-

53
0.0548
(0.0098)

(4)

—-

53
0.0592
(0.0103)

53
0.0563
(0.0095)

—0.0080 —0.0073 —0.0076

(0.0012)

0.0143
(0.0079)

0.0079
(0.0086)

0.0163
(0.0071)

(0.0073)

0.0265

(0.0092)

0.0200
(0.0091)

0.0251

(0.0087)

—0.1330 —0.1188 —0.1320
(0.0334)
—0.0278

(0.0143)
—0.0079

(0.0069)
—0.0053

(0.0023)

(0.0356)
—0.0261

(0.0132)
—0.0104

(0.0074)
—0.0051

(0.0028)

(0.0337)
—0.0211

(0.0127)
—0.0019

——

(0.0033)
——

—0.0061

——

—0.0105

0.0211

(0.0096)
—0.1163

(0.0348)
—0.0221

(0.0125)
——

—0.0049

——

(0.0024)

(0.0027)
—0.0061

——

(0.0055)

—0.0066

(0.0036)

-0.0065
(0.0026)
—0.0032

(0.0055)
——

(0.0052)

(0.0060)

0.0123

(0.0079)

—0.0089 —0.0072 —0.0069

—0,0145 —

—0.0111

—0.0070

(0.0011)

(0.0050)

AFRICA

0.0583
(0.0115)

(0.0012)

(0.0029)
LAT.AMER.

53

(0.0012)

(0.0028)
EXCHRATE

(3)

GR6085 GR6085 GR6085 GR6085 GR6085

(0.0012)
SEC6O

(1)

—0.0055

(0.0055)

adj.R—sq.

0.6622

0.6787

0.6931

0.7030

0.6936

std.err.

0.0102

0.0099

0.0097

0.0095

0.0097

dep. var.
no. obs.

constant

Table 11:

Role of Financial Repression (II)

reference

(1)

GR6085 GR6085 GR6085
53

0.0473
(0.0094)

GDP6O

SEC6O

PRIM6O

GOV

—0.0068

(0.0075)

0.0213
(0.0091)

(0.0087)

—0.1339

—0.0316

0.0153

0.0154

—0.1318

(0.0345)
—0.0210

(0.0132)

—0.01 32 —0.0041

—0.0048

(0.0030)

DISTORT

—0.0078

0.0120
(0.0089)

(0.0086)
ASSASS

0.0728
(0.0113)

(0.0011)

(0.0134)
REVCOUP

53

(0.0012)

(0.0382)
PPI6ODEV

-—

(0.0053)
—0.0048

(0.0020)

—0.0145

——

(0.0050)
AFRICA

—0.0111

53

0.0778
(0.0116)
—0.0071

(0.0011)
0.0072
(0.0074)
0.0092
(0.0088)
—0.1133

(0.0339)
—0.01 89

(0.0129)
—0.0068

(0.0057)
—0.0047

(0.0026)

—0.0173 —0.0156
(0.0044)

LAT.AMER.

(2)

(0.0045)
—0.0059

(0.0040)
—-

(0.0060)

—0.0117

(0.0047)

adj.R—sq.

0.6622

0.7152

0.7393

std.err.

0.0102

0.0093

0.0089

Table 12: Role of Financial Repression (lii)
reference

dep. var.
no. obs.

constant

0.0495

—0.0067

0.0160
(0.008)

PRIM6O

0.0153
(0.0078)

GOV

-0.1377
(0.0440)

PPI600EV

0.0483
(0.0101)
—0.0063

(0.0012)

0.0143

—0.0048

(0.008)

—0.1214

(0.0467)

--

——

0.0107

—0.1716

(0.0431)
—0.0221

(0.0059)

-0.0058

0.0525
(0.0087)
—0.0060

(0.0012)

0.0158
(0.0064)
0.0084
(0.0082)
—0.1358

(0.0470)
—0.0214

(0.0053)
——

(0.0108)
——

—0.0052

——

(0.0035)

(0.0034)

FINREPI

0.0236

0.0134
(0.0086)

(0.0110)
ASSASS

—0.0067

(0.0012)

(0.0074)

—0.01 82 —0.0218
(0.0057)

-0.0143

0.0525
(0.0088)

(0.0076)

(C.0054)

REVCOIJP

52

52

52

52

(0.0012)
SEC6O

(3)

(2)

GR6085 GR6085 GR6085 GR6085

(0.0081)
GDP6O

(1)

—0.0040

——

(0.0055)
FINREP2

——

-—

—0.0142 —0.0108
(0.0046)

LAT.AMER

—0.0149

(0.0050)

AFRICA

—0.0149

(0.0068)

-0.0154

——

—0.0115

(0.0051)

(0.0053)
—0.0134

(0.0046)

——

—0.0112

(0.0065)

(0.0083)

adj.R—sq.

0.6367

0.5988

0.6111

0.6385

std.err.

0.0107

0.0113

0.0111

0.0107

Table 13:

reference
dep. var.
no. obs.
Constant

58
0.0375

—0.0065

(0.0017)
SEC6O

0.0105
(0.0136)

PRIM6O

0.0244
(0.0082)

GOV

—0.1279

(0.0458)
PPI6ODEV

—0.0174

(0.0057)

REVCOUP

(1)

(2)

GR6085 GR6085 GR6085

(0.0092)
GDP6O

Role of Financial Repression (IV)

-0.0096

58
0.0322
(0.0071)
—0.0087

58

0.0353
(0.0072)
—0.0068

(0.0016)

(0.0017)

0.0315
(0.0120)

(0.0120)

0.0294
(0.0048)

(0.0067)

—0.1500

(0.0368)
—0.0148

(0.0065)

0.0114

0.0265

—0.1068

(0.0407)
—0.0141

(0.0053)

-—

-—

--

--

(0.0067)

ASSASS

-0.0032
(0.0019)

RESERVE

——

—0.0387

(0.0159)

LAT.AMER.

—0.0123

——

—0.0135

—0.0103

(0.0044)

(0.0040)

AFRICA

—0.0301

(0.0161)

——

(0.0058)

—0.0140

(0.0056)

adj.R—sq.

0.6352

0.5854

0.6370

sfd.err.

0.0113

0.0120

0.0112

dep. var.
no. obs.

constant

Table 14:

Role of Financial Repression (V)

reference

(1)

65
0.0423

—0.0068

(0.0010)
SEC6O

0.0171

(0.0082)
PRIM6O

0.0198
(0.0067)

GOV

—0.1396

(0.0370)
PPI6ODEV

—0.0064

(0.0066)
REVCOUP

—0.0167

(0.0086)
ASSASS

—0.0023

(0.0018)
1NF6085

——

65
0.0393
(0.0094)
—0.0077

(0.0012)
0.0348
(0.0087)

0.0246
(0.0078)
—0.1765

(0.0393)

—0.0152

—0.0144

(0.0089)
—0.0026

(0.0024)
—0.0690

——

-0.0163

0.0469
(0.0079)
—0.0069

(0.0010)

65
0.0396
(0.0074)
—0.0066

(0.0011)

(0.0082)

0.0204
(0.0076)

0.0194
(0.0065)

0.0229
(0.0067)

0.01 79

—0.1441

(0.0353)

(0.0067)

—0.1370

(0.0364)

—0.0142

——

(0.0048)

(0.0069)
——

(0.0083)
—0.0027

——

(0.0019)
—0.0453

(0.0231)
—0.0142

(0.0039)

(0.0037)

AFRICA

65

—0.0089 —0.0076 —0.0092
(0.0081)

(0.0236)
LAT.AMER.

(3)

GR6085 GR6085 GR6085 GR6085

(0.0076)
GDP6O

(2)

—0.0155

(0.0046)

—0.0527

(0.0264)
—0.0146

(0.0039)
—0.0141

(0.0052)

adjR—sq.

0.6612

0.5678

0.6695

0.6508

std.err.

0,0101

0,0114

0.0100

0.0103

Table 15: Role of Financial Repression

1NF6085 FINREP FINREP2 RESERVE
1NF6085

FINREP

FINREP2

RESERVE

1.0000

0.6609

0.7061

0.5105

1.0000

0.7119

0.6248

1.0000

0.4717
1.0000

