                  NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




        DO LABOR MARKETS PROVIDE ENOUGH SHORT HOUR JOBS?
         AN ANALYSIS OF WORK HOURS AND WORK INCENTIVES




                       James B. Rebitzer

                        Lowell J. Taylor




                     Working Paper No. 3883




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           October 1991




September 22, 1991.  This paper is part of NBER's research
program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                         NBER Working Paper #3883
                                         October 1991


        DO LABOR MARKETS PROVIDE ENOUGH SHORT HOUR JOBS?
         AN ANALYSIS OF WORK HOURS AND WORK INCENTIVES


                              ABSTRACT


     This   paper examines the role that work incentives play in
the determination of work hours.   Following previous research by

Lang (1989), we use a conventional efficiency wage model to

analyze how firms respond to worker preferences regarding

wage-hours packages.   We find that when workers are homogeneous,

the role of worker preferences in determining work hours is

similar to the simple neoclassical model of labor supply.    For

instance, if worker preferences shift in favor of shorter hours,
firms will respond by of fering jobs entailing shorter hours.

     When workers have heterogeneous preferences, however,

employers will want to use a worker's hours preferences as a

signal for the responsiveness of the worker to the work

incentives used by the firm, and workers in turn may not reveal
their hours preferences.   Our key finding in this instance is

that the labor market equilibrium may be characterized by a

sub-optimal number of short-hour jobs.   This shortage of

short-hour jobs is likely to be found in high wage labor markets.



James B. Rebitzer                        Lowell J. Taylor
Sloan School of Management               School of Urban and
Massachusetts Institute of Technology     Public Affairs
Cambridge, MA 02139                      Carnegie Mellon
and NBER                                  University
                                         Pittsburgh, PA 15213
                                       1.   Introduction

    Female labor force participation has increased dramatically over the past three dec-

ades. Much of this change is due to the increased participation of married women and
women with children.1 In households where both adults participate in the labor force, or
where there is a single working parent, individualswill often have greater demands on
their time   at home and may therefore desire patterns of work hours that differ from other
workers. Given the gender based division of labor in most American households, many

of the women entering    the labor force may prefer shorter (and perhaps more flexible)
work weeks.2    Furthermore, as sex roles adjust to accommodate the changing work and
career aspirations of women,    it is reasonable to expect that increasing numbers of men
will also prefer shorter work weeks. The prospects for equality of economic opportunity

betweenmen and women rest in large measureon how well and how rapidly labor markets
accommodatethe hours preferences of workers who desire this flexibility.
    In this paper we ask whether labor markets will provide the optimal number of short-

hour jobs in response to an increase in demand for short hours on the part of employees.
According  to the simple textbook model of the determinants of work hours, the answer to
this question is clearly yes. Firms have an incentive to elicit information about their hours

preferences because this allows them to offer labor contracts that minimizecost. Similarly,
workers have sn incentive to reveal their preferences to firms because this information is
used to construct wage end hours packages in whichworkers are asked to work the utility

maximizing number of hours at the market-clearingwage.
    In this paper we suggest that labor market outcomes may be considerablymore com-
plex ina setting where firms rely on work incentives to regulate the effort exerted by
employees.3 We find that in a simple efficiency wage model (along the lines of Shapiro and
Stiglitz J1984J and Bowles [1985J, but with a heterogeneous work force) workers' hours pref-
erences may provide an indicator of their responsivenessto the work incentives. In this

setting employers will in general not be able to elicit accurate information about hours
preferences from employees. We show that this market fallure may lead in turn to labor
market equilibriawhich are characterized by an underprovisionof short-hour jobs. We find
further that the shortage of short-hour jobs most likely uccurs in high wagelabor markets.
    Our model suggests that the simple textbook analysis of hours determination relies
upon the wrong market metaphor. The conventionalapproach presumes that the deter-
mination of work hours is similar to the determination of car colors. Workers have an
incentive to reveal their true hours preferences and employers have an incentive to solicit
these preferences for the same reason that consumers have an incentive to reveal their color
preferences   and car makers have   an incentive to solicit these preferences.

    In our view, a more appropriate market metaphor for hours determination is the
market for health insurance. Employeeshave an incentive to portray themselvesas desiring

long hours for the same reasons that purchasers of health insurance will want    to portray
themselvesas having no health problems. Insurance providers must be concerned about
the unobservable characteristics of individuals who are attracted to the various insurance
contracts they offer. We suggest that employers face similar concerns when offering wage
and hours packages.

    The paperproceeds as follows; In the next section (section2), we analyze the determi-
nation of wages and work hours when firmsuse dismissal threats to motivate a homogeneous

                                               2
group of workers. Section 3 examines the case where workershave heterogeneousprefer-
ences with respect to hours of work. In Section 4, we consider whether our argument about

a shortage of short-hour jobs can be reconciled with the rapid growth of part-time work
observed in the United States since the 1950's. Section 5 provides concluding remarks.


                       2. Wages and Hours with Homogeneous Workers

2.1.   A Simple Model   of Work IncenUve3
       In this section, we develop a model in which firms uses dismissai threats to regulate
the intensity with which their employees work. Models based on dismissal threats are
analytically convenient and match nicely with the employment-at-will legal doctrine that
governs labor law in the United States. However, the logic of our argument would not
be appreciably altered    if incentives revolved around promotion probabilities rather than
separation probabilities.
   The setup is quite simple. The economy is composed of a large number of firms each
making use of the same concaveproduction technology, such that the demand for labor is
an inverse function of unit labor cost.
       In each period there is a flow of identical workersinto the labor market. These workers
form queues at the firms, which in turn select workersfrom their own queue. Worker who
are hired remain with the firm until they retire or are dismissed for workingat lowintensity.
We assume that workers who are not hired when they first join the labor force will drop
out of the market, and we similarly assume that workers who retire or are dismissed do
not seek re-employmentwith other firms.4
       Workers in any period derive utility from income, the level of work effort, and leisure.
Workers can     adopt two levels of intensity, "high" or "low". A worker providing the lower
level of   effort is said to be "shirking." Let U(y,N) be the utility in any period of a
worker who is shirking     at a job   paying income p with   N hours of work.    Similarly, let

U"(y,N) be the utility of a worker      who is not shirking. Incentive problems arise because

                                                3
UQ,,N) > U11(y,N).
     Firms will attempt to get employees to work at the high level of work intensity by

dismissing those workers found to be providing the low level of intensity. These shirking
workers are detected and dismissed in any period with probability        J1 Under the assump-
tion that employers lesrn about employee behavior by observing them on the job, D is a
function of N, with D(O) = 0 and D' > 0.
    For convenience, we abstract from issues relating to pensions and rising wage-tenure
profiles by stipulating that workers are infinitely lived and that wages in each period are
the same.6 We also assume that the probability a worker retires, q, is the same each period.
Under these conditions,the discounted present value of employmentfor a worker producing
at the high level of work intensity is

                                   =       +             +                                   (1)

where r is the discount rate and V" is the discountedpresent value of leaving the current

job (i.e., Vt is the present value of the flow of utility when both p and N are 0).
    In contrast to non-shirkers,shirking workers can be dismissedwhen they are discovered
working at the low level of work intensity. The expecteddiscounted present value of lifetime

utility for a shirking worker is

                     = + (1 — q)(l—D)V' + [1 —(1 —cRi— D)]V"                                 (2)

    A rational worker will not shirk when V"            V'. Let Ut be the utility derived from a
single period of full time leisure. Using equations (1) and (2) we notice that workers will
not shirk as long as,7
                                               —   Ut   r,
where
                                       - (U (I-q)D
                                       —      Ut)(r+q)
                                               —
                                                                                             (3)

                                                   4
The term    r is the minimum value of the difference between current utility of employment
and unemploymentthat is required to assure no-shirking. Since this "employment rent"              is

always positive, the utility of employment at the high level          of work intensity exceeds the
utility of not working for the marginal worker. Assuming that the no-shirking condition
represents a binding constraint in the market, there will be workers who cannot find
employment.8

2.2. Determining H0ur3 of Work

       In the absence of fixed employment costs, cost minimizing firms will set hours, N, so
as   to minimize the wage that assures no-shirking. Consider the case where utility from
working   N hours at wage w for a shirking and non-shirkingworker is given, respectively,
by the following simple quasi-linear form:

                                   U' = wN — e(N) + pg(N),

and
                                   U"   = wN — e(N) + ug(N),                                    (4)

where wN is the utility of income, g(N) is the utility derivedfrom leisure (g' < 0, g" < 0),
,u is a positive parameter, and e(N) is the disutility of work effort. For both shirking and

non-shirkingworkers, e(0) = 0, e'(N) > 0 and e"(N)                0, and since working at the higher
level of effort is distasteful,   c(N) > e,(N).      With this utility function, the no-shirking
condition becomes
                             wN — c(N) + g(N)             —
                                                              jg(0)   r,                        (5)

with
                                          r= (r+q)E
                                            —
                                                (1-.-q)D'
and
                                        E = e(N)     —
                                                         e,(N).
                                                 5
    By examining the derivative of equation (5) we find that firms will be paying the
minimumwage consistent with no-shirkingwhen they set hourssuch that

                                                                                          (6)

where
                              rN= (r + q)E' I        D'/D
                                     (1—q)D
The terms on the left-hand side of equation (6) represent the utility of income generated
from an additional hour of work (w) adjusted for the disutility of work effort (—4), and
the utility lost from giving up an hour leisure (jig'). For any given wage, the worker will he
maximizing utility when   he or she works the number of hours for which the sum of these
terms is zero.
      The wage and hours packageoffered by firmswill entail the utilitymaximizingnumber
of hours only when the employment rent is invariant with respect to hours, i.e., when
    = o. While it is in principle possible that rN will be zero, it also possible for rN > o.
When this happens, the employment rent increases with work hours and firms offer a

wage and hours package such that the effort-adjusted marginal utility of income exceeds
the marginal loss of utility from giving up leisure. Employeesaccepting this wage-hours

package will therefore perceive themselves to be hours constrained.'0
      For our purposes, the central question is how labor markets will respond when worker

preferences shift in favor of shorter working hours. Let (ova, Ns)   be the cost minimizing
wage  and hours package. Differentiating the no-shirking condition (5) and first order
condition for cost minimization (6), and assuming that the second order condition holds

for the minimization problem, it is easy to demonstrate that

                                   dwsg(O)—g(Ne)0'                                         (7)
                                   dp     N5

and
                                        cPu'
                                               '
                             —=
                             dN5                    , don0
                                                   g—-1- <0.                               (8)

                                               6
The result given by expression (8) is not surprising. As increases so does employees'
marginal utility of leisure relative to income. Since firms prevent shirking by offering a
wage-hours package that is   attractiveto     workers, firms will want to respond to this shift
in preferences by offering jobs entailing shorter hours. The result that dwo/d,a is positive
(equation (7)) also has   a strong intuitive appeal. The effectiveness of dismissal threats
rests on denying shirking workers access to high future income streams. Since an increase
in   corresponds to an increase in the value workers place on leisure relative to income, a
higher income stream (and therefore a higher wage) is required to assure no-shirking."
     Our findings suggest that when the work force is homogeneous, firms using efficiency
wage incentive schemes will respond to a change in employee preferences favoring shorter
hours by offering wage-hours packages entailing both shorter hours and higher wages.
Nonetheless,jobs may be characterized by hours constraints, and individual workers may
not perceive themselvesto be working optimal hours.


                     3. Wages     and Hours   with Heterogeneous Workers

3.1. Work Hours as a Signal

     We turn next to the analysis of incentive schemes firms use when employees have
heterogeneous preferences. We focus our attention on the wage-hourspackages firms of-
fer when individual workers have different values of t, i.e., differing marginal rates of
substitution between leisure and income.
     In the preceding section, we notice that workers desiring short hours (i.e., workers with

high values of ji) will require   a higher wage to assure no shirking. If worker preferences
are known to firms, firms will clearly choose not to hire the more expensive short-hour
workers. If worker preferences are not apparent to firms, however,       this simple outcome
may not be possible. Employees, fearing the consequences of the signal they are sending
by asking to work a given number of hours, will not reveal their true hours preferences to
their employers.'2

                                                7
      In sections 3.2 and 3.3 below we explore the   implications this market failure has for
the ability of markets to respond to the     preferences of workers desiring short hours. To

highlight the role playedby the unobservable(to the firm) worker heterogeneity, we assume
in what follows that the probability of dismissal, D, and the single period utility gain from
shirking, E, are hnear functione of N such that D        = dN and £ =         eN. As noted in

footnote 9,     rN = 0 in this case, and thus no hours restrictions would emerge if workers
were homogeneous.

£2.   Fooling and Separating Contracts

      We considera labor force with two types of workers, type S and type L. These workers
are identical in all respects except that   p>   PL. Note that type   S workers will, at any
wage, prefer shorter hours than type     L workers; we refer to type S and L workers as,
respectively,    short- and long-hour workers. Let B represent the proportion of short-hour
workers in the population.
      We suppose that firms independently name contracts that they always proceed to
honor. These contracts specify wages and hours available to employees,and always stipu-
late that workers who provide the low level of effort will be dismissed if detected. As we

proceed, we will assume, for simplicity, that shirking workers produce zero output.
      The presence of two types of workers leads firms to offer one of two types of employ-
ment contracts, "pooling contracts" or "separatingcontracts." Under apooling contract,       a
firm offers a single wage-hours package to all workers. In principle, this contract could be a

"long-hour"or "short-hour" poolingcontract — formed to meet the no-shirking conditions
of either long- or short-hour workers.   In the long-hour pooling contract,   a firm would offer
to all employees the minimum cost wage-hours package necessary to elicit the high level
of work effort from long-hour workers.      the short-hour pooling contract, a finn would
                                            In

offer employees     the minimum cost wage-hourspackage necessary to elicit the high level of
work effort from short-hour workers. However, short-hour pooling contractswill always

be   at least as expensiveas the separating contracts we discuss in the   following paragraph.
    In analyzing pooling employment contracts we therefore need only concern ourselves      with
    long-hour pooling contracts.
          Under long-hourpooling contracts (henceforth, simply "pooling cootracts"), long-hour
S
    workers provide high levels of work effort, while short-hour workers shirk. For a firm that

    wants to prevent shirking among both types of workers, the cost minimizing strategy is to
    specify   a contract allowingworkersto select either a long-or short-hour option. We refer to
    such contracts as "separating contracts." Under a separating contract, the firm's objective

    is to offer the minimum cost wage-hourspackages subject to the constraints imposed by
    the no-shirking conditions.
          A final type   of contract that could arise might be termed a     "screening contract."
    Under this contract a firm would offer     a wage and hours package with very long hours,
    so that short-hour workers would find the positions less attractive than the alternative
    of unemployment. These workers would thus be effectively screened out of the labor
    force. For    a screening contract to be effective, the wage and hours package must not
    only be sufficiently unattractive to short-hour workers, but must also meet the no shirking
    condition for long hour workers. Screeningcontracts will not always be feasible, and where

    they are feasible they may be more expensive than the pooling or separating contracts.
    In   the present analysis we   will assume that screening contracts   are not a viable option
    to firms. Thus firms will restrict attention to    two types of contract — pooling contracts
    and separating contracts. We procede by describing first the pooling contracts, then the

    separating contracts.
          Pooling Contracts: With a pooling contract,anemployeroffersall workers       the wage-
    honrs package designed to prevent long-hour workers from shirking. Short-hour workers
    hired under this contract shirk, and the resulting dismissalsincrease the exit rate of short-
    hour workers. Thus, the proportion of short-hour workers in the population, 9, exceedsthe
    proportion of short-hour workers who are employed in firms offering a pooling contract,
    ep.

                                                   9
     It is straight forward to demonstrate that           in a steady state the following relationship
holds:

                                   P                                                                    (9)
                                         q+(1—O1—q)D
It is clear that   Op   0, with the equality holding only when 0 equals zero or one. For
future reference it is also worth noting that        Op is a monotonically        increasing function of 0.
     Due to shirking, the average productivity of the short-hour workers is less than the

long-hour workers. Here we are assuming shirkers produce zero output. Thus, in an
equilibrium in which all firms offer pooling contracts, the per unit labor cost will be
ws/(1 — Op), where We is the minimum wage consistent with no-shirking on the part of
long-hour workers. Using (9) we can express unit costs in this case, C", as                  a function of
the proportion of short-hour workers in the population, 0:

                         C"(O) =   w         —
                                                     + (1—    (1— q)D]
                                                                               •                      (10)
                                        [i       q

Notice that unit labor cost in the pooling equilibriumis              an increasing function of 0.
    Separating Contracts: Firmsmay alternativelyoffer a separating contract in response
to worker heterogeneity. The problem for the firm is to construct wage-hours packages,
(Ws, Ns) and (wL, NL), such that the package taken by any worker will meet                   that worker's
no-shirking condition. Suppose that for a firm offering this separating contract, 0s is the
proportion of the short-hour workers. Then the formal cost minimization problem is,

                                       OSWSNS + (1 — OS)WLNL
                             mm                                            ,                           (11)
                                         OsTVs + (1 — OS)NL


subject to binding no-shirking condition for the type S worker,'3

                          WSNS — eN5 + psg(Ns)                  17   + ,isg(O),                        (12)
                                                                                                              a
and the constraint that type L workers prefer the (WL,NL) package,

                    WLNL — eNL     + /4Lg(NL) wsNs — eNs + ,zg(Ns).                                    (13)

                                                     10
      For a concrete example, supposethat the utility for leisure is a simple quadratic term,

g(N)     = —N'. For easeof notation we let 4J =            1   and note that       us must then   exceed

unity. After several algebraic steps, we find that     a firm's minimum unit labor cost when
offering a separating contract is

                                                  s
                       C'(Os) = e + 2r4 [ 9s + (1 —
                                                       —
                                                           (1 — 6s)
                                                                    —
                                                                        1) ]
                                                                               •                    (14)


The hours offered to short- and long-hoursworkers respectively are

                                    N   —
                                            2
                                                [1+ I9ffl]
and
                                                       C
                                            =                                                       (15)
                                                 C;_
    Figure 1 illustrates such a separating contract. In this figure, NSC5 and NSCL
represent the no shriking conditions for short- and long-hourworkers, respectively. Firms
offer a wage-hours package, (ws,Ns), that attracts short-hour workers, and meets their

no shirking constraint. Also offered is a package, (wL, NL), with hours and wages that are
as attractive to long-hour workers as the short-hour Package.'4
      An important feature of the separating contract is that the labor cost for a firm
adopting the separating equilibrium, C'(Gs), depends crucially on the mix of the two
types of workers. As the proportion of type S workers (Os) approaches 0, the labor cost
approaches
                                      C(0)=e+2T4,                                                   (16)

which, it can be shown, is simply the minimumno-shirkingwage for the long-hour workers,
wo. Unit labor cost is strictly increasingin 9s, and as 9s approaches 1, labor cost converges
to the   minimum wage that solves the no-shirkingconstraint for short-hour workers,


                                    C'(l) = e + 2(isr).                                             (17)

                                                11
                dd5 \
                            cr
9fOm4-oy
  3'8C C9dO$I           \
                  SN
3.3. The Provision of 5hor Hour Jobs

    Our central concern in this paper is analyzing the response of labor markets to an
influx of workers desiring short hours. Beginning with a labor market composedentirely

of long-hour workers, we explore how the wage-hours packages offered by firms change as

we increase the number of short-hour workers. Our focus will be on steady states.
    As outlined above, all firms must choose between naming pooling contracts in which

somefraction of employees will shirk, or separating contracts in which all workers are given
wage-hourspackages that induce no-shirking. In deciding which strategy to pursue, firms
will compare the costs of pooling and separating contracts. The cost   of each contract for
any firm depends in turn on the composition of workers in that firm's job queue.
    Recall that we have assumed that workers who enter the labor force form queues at
each firm, and when hiring, a firm selects at random workers from its own queue. A worker
cannot at any time be in more than one queue. We assume that workers choose which

queue to join based on the contracts named by the prospective employers. More precisely,
under our assumption that individuals maximize expected utility, a worker's decision to
join a job queue is based upon the expected utility of the job and the probability of being
hired into the job out of the queue. This latter probability is determined by the number
of vacancies to be filled and the number of workers in the queue.

    With this in mind, suppose a firm is considering a switch from offering the pooling
labor contract to   a separating labor contract. As we have seen, the cost of labor in the
separating contract will hinge on the mix of workers the firm attracts, 9s In turn, the
proportion of short-hour workers in any firm depends on the actions of other arms in the
market. In a market in whichall firms are offering only long-hourjobs, a firm that deviates
from the market by offering   a mix of short- and long-hoursjobs will generally attract a
disproportionate number of workers who prefer short-hour work. Indeed, such a firm may
well attract only short-hour workers.

    The process we describe can easily lead to     a sub-optimal market equilibrium. In
                                             12
particular, an equilibrium can persist in whichindividually optimizing firms offer pooling
contracts, even though switch by all firms to separating contracts would (i) reduce unit
labor cost and thus lead to higher labor utilization, and (ii) increase wages and utility of

employment for all workers.
    To establish this result, we examine first the decision of a firm consideringthe shift
from a pooling contract to a separating contract. The firm will pursue this option only
if the shift reduces unit labor cost, i.e., if C'(9s) < CP(6). Suppose that a firm offering
a separating contract attracts exclusivelyshort-hour workers.15 In this case, the firm will
prefer the separating contract if
                                        C(l) cc C(9).                                    (18)

Using (10) and (17), expression (18) can be rewritten to show that the firm will offer    the
separating contract only when 9 is such that
                 + 2(psr)'12 <(e + 2F"2)              —
                                                   + (1 —(1 — q)D]                      (19)
                                                 [1       q
    The right-hand side of (19), the unit cost of offering a pooling contract, is increasing
in 9, and approaches infinity as 9 tends toward one. Thus, when the workers who prefer
short hours constitute a large enough group in the labor force, the firm nill always find
it profitable to offer short-hour positions. On the other hand, if the fraction of type S
workersin the population is small enough (i.e., 6 close to 0), inequality (19) cannot hold.
In this case, no firm will   be inclined to   deviate from the norm of offering only long-hour

positions.
    Notice, however, that if all firms in the market were to switch from offering pooling to
separating contracts, each would attract the pepulattoss proportion of short-hour workers
to its queue. Such a switch would reduce labor cost if 9 were such that

                                        C'(9) c C(9),                                    (20)

or, using (10) and (14),

    e +2H
             {9+:(;               1;]
                                        c(e+2F"2)                           -
                                                              [1_ q+ (1 -9)(l q)D]
                                                                                     .   (21)


                                                 13
    The term in brackets on the left-hand side of (21) is always less than      ps. Thus by
comparing inequalities (19) and (21), we observea key feature of our model — that there
is a range for the value of 9 for which unit labor cost declines when all firms switch to
separating contracts, but for which any individuallymaximizing firm nonetheless continues
to offer the pooling contracts. That is, there are   values of 9 for wbich


                                  C'(9) c C(9) < C'(l).                                  (22)


Figure 2 illustrates this point. When 9 exceeds 9', labor cost will be lower in the separating
equilibriumthan in the pooling equilibrium. Equation (18) suggests,however, that no firm
will have the incentive to offer a separating contract unless 9 exceed 9". Thus we have

the result that for any mix of worker such that       (22) holds, unit labor cost will decline
and output will increase if firms collectively adopt separating contracts. Nonetheless, no
one firm finds it advantageous to abandon its practice of offering pooling contracts. As
compared with the pooling equilibrium,the separatingequilibriumis characterized bylower
labor cost, even though the wages received by both types of workers are higher. In the

separating equilibrium, the quantity of labor utilized and market output are higher. Both
short-hour and long-hour workers gain higher utility from employment in the separating

equilibrium than in the pooling equilibrium.
     It is tempting to suggest that the coordination problem highlighted above might be
circumventedif, by collective agreement, all firmswere to agree to offer separating employ-
ment contracts. However, each firm will have an incentive to defect from this agreement

by offering a pooling contract. The defecting firm would in this way attract a dispropor-
tionately large number of relatively inexpensive long-hourworkers. If other firms were to
follow suit, the separating equilibriumwould unravel and the market would once again be

characterizedby a sub-optimal pooling equilibrium.
     An important implication of our model    is   that extra-market intervention can improve
welfare in this labor market. Consider, for instance, a law      that eliminated the pooling

                                              14
                                       9   dO N01a3t'iAd
                                 SW   O)          •t 9cOJ
            3b'SOd   J°91
9>a ao                  SW
s-n,tom   WOO)4..jOHS
                                  he                       16
                        '
              wnrs ,inba
                            oP
               &co '(9),)
                                                                ('), D
             wnI'tJvi-1nba
               tNP,OOd 01
               sco,
    equilibrium by mandating that (i) all employees must he offered the option of working
    at short or long hours, and (ii) dismissals must be for just cause, If the dismissal of
    short-hour workersin high proportion were taken as evidence of violation of the law, firms
    would be induced to offer short-hour jobs by providing separating contracts. As we have
    demonstrated, it is possible that such a law will result in lower labor cost to firms and
    higher wages to workers. While it may seem paradoxical that by restricting the actions of
    parties to an exchange one could improve the welfare of the parties, this conclusion has
    been reached in a number of other models where information is imperfect.'6

                         4. Labor Market Segmentationand Part-Time Work


        Prior to 1950, part-time   work was virtually non-existent in the United States economy.

    During the 1950's employers began offering jobs having less than 35 hours per week as a
    means of attracting older, married women into the labor force (Goldin [1990], p. 180-183).
    Over the past twenty years, the percentage of women working part-time has remained
    roughly constant at about 25 percent (Blank [1990]). Consideringthe rapid growth of the
    female labor force,this figure suggests a significant rate of growth of part-time employment.
        Can the rapid growth of part-time work be reconciled with our claim that work incen-
    tives inhibit   the introduction of short-hour jobs?   To answer this question we enrich our

    model slightly by introducing two different labor markets—primaryand secondary. The

    primary labor market is composed of firms making use of the dismissal based incentive
    schemes described in the preceding sections. Firms in the secondary labor market produce
    different goods than those in the primary labor market. Most importantly for our pur-

    poses, the technologyused in secondary labor markets makes it easy to observe the work
    activities of employees. It follows then that secondary labor markets pay a market clearing

    wage. Workers who are not      fortunateenough to get   selected out   of the queue for primary
    jobs, and workers who are dismissed from primary jobs can always secure employmentin
4
    the lower paying secondary sector. Notice that in equilibrium there will typically be an

                                                  15
excess supply of workers   to the primary market.17

     In the secondary labor market, firms do not use dismissal based work incentives and
wili therefore allow employees to choose the hours of work that maximize utility. This
stands in contrast to the primary labor market wherefirms offer the minimum cost wage
and hours package that satisfies the no-shirking condition. On the basis of our model, we
would expect that most part-time jobs are found in the secondary sector. The examination
of separating contracts presented in the preceding section suggests that where part-time

jobs do exist in the primary sector, part-time employees may receive a higher wage than
full-timers.

    Consistent with the hypothesis that part-time jobs are generally found in the sec-
ondary labor market, Rebitzer and Taylor (1991) find that industries with high concen-
trations of part-time workers tend to be low wage industries. In a study of labor market
segmentationamoug non-union men, Rebitzer and Robinson (forthcoming) find that 4.9
percent of the men in the primary sector work part-time. In contrast,      31   percent of the
men in the secondary sector are part-timers.

     Blank (1990) offers an extensive analysis of wage differencesbetween part-time and
fuil-time workers. The data she presents indicate that more than 70 percent of part-time
workers are found in the generally low wage sales, clerical and service occupations and only

22 percent are found in the relatively high wage professional, managerial and technical oc-

cupations (Blank [1990], p. 129). After controlling for selection effects, Blank reports that
within occupations the effect of part-time work on wages is generally positive although
not always statistically significant. However, she emphasizes that part-time workers in

"professional and managerial positions show particularly large and positive wage differen-
tials, holding all other variables constant" (p. 143).' These results are consistent with our
expectation that within the primary sector, employees having short-hour jobs may receive
higher wages than other employees.

                                             16
                                      5. Conclusion

    Firms look for workerswhose attitudes and preferences make them responsive to the
work incentives prevalent in the firm. These incentives often involve promises to provide

(and threats not to provide) income in the future. Thus preferences towards income and
leisure will be important to firms in deciding whom to hire.
    This paper has presented a model of wage and hours determination in which firms
use dismissal threats to elicit high levels of work effort. In our model workers who prefer

long hours will be more responsive to dismissal based incentive schemesthan other workers.

Employerswill therefore wheneverpossible put job seekers with preferencesfor short hours
at the bottom of the queue of workers seeking jobs.
    In order to avoid unemploymentor employment in low wage positions,job seekers will
not reveal their trite preferences for income and leisure. We demonstrate that the response
by employers may result in the provision of fewer short-hour jobs than is optimal. In the
context of a model of labor market segmentation, the shortageof short-hour jobs will occur
in the high wage, primary sector.
    The logic of the model we present suggests that labor markets will not adjust smoothly
to the changesbrought about by the rise in female labor force participation. In the absence
of some intervention in the market, firms will find   it difficult to provide the optimum
number of short-hour jobs in response to the increasingnumbers of female and male workers

seeking to balance job and family responsibilities.




                                            17
                                         End Notes
1. In 1950 the labor force participation rate of married women was 29.5 percent compared
to 51.1 percent in 1980 (Goldin [1990], p. 17). The 1950 figure includes women over age
14, while the 1980 figure includes only women over 15 years old. In 1970 the labor force
participation rate of women with children under 18 was 42.1 percent. By 1985 this figure
was 62.1 percent (Bergmann [1986], p. 2).
2. Fuchs (1986) estimates that in 1979 women spent 1,497 hours per year on non-market
work compared to 595 hours for men. Non-market work includes activities like shopping,
yard work and child care. Leete-Guy and Schor(1990) estimate that on average women in
1979 spent 1514 hours per year on non-market work. This figure declined to 1442 in 1987.
The comparablefigures for men were 860 and 853 respectively (Leete-Guy and Schor, 1990,
Table 2).
3. A number of previous studies have concludedthat work incentives may influence the
determination hours of work. Lang (1989) and La.zear (1981) argue that work incentives
may cause employers to offer wage-hourspackages under which employees do not perceive
themselves to be working optimal hours. Bulow and Summers (1986) argue that reliance
upon work incentives may cause employers to seek to avoid hiring employees having pref-
erences for abort hours. Bulow and Summers' consideration of heterogeneous workers
focuses primarily on the case where differenthours preferences (and turnover propensities)
are known to the employer because they vary by an observablecharacteristic, gender. For
a discussion of the effects of worker heterogeneityon unemploymentand wages, see Weiss
(1990).
4. In an earlier version of this paper, we set up our model using an alternative assumption
that workers who quit or are fired may subsequentlyre-enter the labor force. This alter-
native set-up leads to similar results as those presented here, but the derivations are much
more cumbersome.
5. We assume that firms always correctly identify shirkers. It is straight forward, however,
to introduce erroneous dismissalsinto the model. For a discussionof the implications that
erroneous dismissalshave on labor market outcomes see Levine (1989).
6. For a discussion of these issues in a closely related model see Larear (1981) and Akerlof
and Katz (1990).
7. To highlight the central point of the model, we do not allowworkers to post performance
bonds. (Dickens, Katz, Lang and Summers [1989] provide a discussion of this issue.)
Further, we stipulate that workers in each period are paid prior to the observation of their
work activities in the period. Thus the discipline effect of dismissal is derived entirely from
lost future earnings.
8. The finding that labor market equilibria may be characterized by unemployment is
common to many effort regulation models. See Bowles (1985) and Stiglitz (1987).


                                             18
9. For example, rN will be equal to zero when both E and D are linear functions of N.
In this case D'/D = E'/E = 1/N, since D(0) E(0) = 0. rN may also be zero if E' = 0.
10. This is the case analyzed in Lang (1989). Lang ensures that FN > 0 by assuming D
                   e
to be concave and to be zero. In theory, it is also possible for FN to be negative. In
this situation workers will be required to work more than the optimal number of hours.
Empirically, however, one finds that the incidence of "excess hours" is small compared
to the number of workers reporting they worked optimal hours or were hours constrained
(see Kahn and Lang 11987, 1988a, 1988b], Altonji and Pa.xson [1986, 1988], Best [1978,
Dickens and Lundberg [1985], and Shank [1986]).
11. Bulow and Summers (1986) express this point vividly by noting, "Firms prefer to give
jobs to workers who 'really need them' than to workers who gain less surplus from holding
them" (p. 400).
12. In order to eliminate short-hour workersfrom their job queues, firms may discriminate
in hiring against groups known to have, on average, a preferencefor shorter hours. Such
discriminationmay be important in many labor markets. In this paper we abstract from
statistical discriminationbecause it not essential to our argument.
13. Note that because the no-shirking wage is lower for long-hour than for short-hour
workers at any N, only the no-shirking condition for short-hour workers will be binding in
this problem.
14. As shown in Figure 1, hours constraints can arise due to the nature of the separating
contract. For instance, short-hour workers are asked to work fewer hours than they would
choose given their wage, ws. This occurs because firms do not find it optimal to provide
short-hour jobs lying at the minimum point of these workers' no-shirking curve, NSCs. In
comparisonwith this minimumpoint, a moveby the firm to the left alongthe no-shirking
curve has only a small adverse effect on the wage, ws. This effect is more than offset by
the reduction in cost associated with the decline in the use of the relatively expensivetype
S workers and the drop in the wagethat must be paid type L workers.
15. All we need to establish the results that follow is that there be .oms adverse selection
at work, i.e., that the proportion of type S workers the firm attracts be greater than the
population 8. The presentation of the case where 8s = 1 simplifies the exposition.
16. See, for example, Levine (1990)   and Aghion and Hermalin (1990).
17. This dual labor market model is essentially the same as that presented in Bulow
and Summers (1986). The theory of dual labor markets has generated a large body of
qualitative and quantitative research. For surveys see Rebitzer (1989) and Dickens and
Lang (1988).
18. Blank also found that part-time workers were in all occupations less likely to receive
health insurance and pension benefits. However, Blank's data does not allow us to estimate
the discounted present value of these benefits and we therefore cannot compare the total


                                            19
hourly compensation of part-time and full-time employees.




                                          20
                                     References

Akerlof, George A., and Katz, Lawrence F., "Workers' Trust Funds and the Logic of
    Wage Profiles," Quarterly Journal ofEconomics,August 1989, 525—536.

Aghion, Philippe, and Hermalin, Benjamin, "Legal Restrictions on Private Contracts
    Can Enhance Eciency," Journal of Law, Economicsand Organization, Fail 1990,
   6:2, 381—410.

Altonji, Joeseph G., and Paxson, Christina H., "Labor Supply Preferences, Hours Con-
    straints, and Hours-Wage Trade-offs," Journal of Labor Economics,April 1988, 6:2,
    229—253.


Altonji, Joseph G., and Paxson, Christina H., "Job Characteristics and Hours of Work,"
    Research in Labor Economics(ed, Ronald G. Ehrenberg), JAI Press 1986, Part A,
    1—55.


Bergmarm,Barbara, The Economic Emergence of Women (New York: Basic Books,
    1986).

Best, Fred, "Preferences on Worklife Scheduling and Work-LeisureTradeoffs," Monthly
    Labor Review, June 1978, 31—37.

Blank, Rebecca, "Are Part-Time Jobs Bad Jobs?" in A Future ofLousy Jobs? Gary
    Burtless, ed., (Washington,D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1990).

Bowles, Samuel, "The Production Process in a Competitive Economy: Wairasian, Neo-
   Hobbesian, and Marxian Models," American Economic Review, March 1985, 75:1,
    16—36.


Bulow, Jeremy I., and Summers, Lawrence H., "A Theory of Dual Labor Markets with
    Application to Industrial Policy, Discrimination,and Keynesian Unemployment,"
    Journal of Labor Economics,July 1986, 4:3, Part 1, 376—414.

Dickens, William T., Lawrence Katz, Kevin Lang, and Lawrence Summers, "Employee
    Crime and the MonitoringPuzzle," Journal of Labor Economics, July 1989, 7:3,
    331—347.


Dickens, William, and Lang, Kevin, "Neo-Classical and Sociological Perspectives on Seg-
    mented Labor Markets," in Industries, Finns and Jobs: Sociological and Economic
    Approaches, George Farkas and Paula England, eds. (New York: Plenum Press,
    1988).

                                          21
Dickens, William T., and Lundberg, Shelly J., "Hours Restrictions and Labor Supply,"
    NBER WorkingPaper No. 1638, June 1985.

Fuchs, Victor, "His and Hers: Gender Differences in Work and Income, 1969-1979," Jour-
    nal of Labor Economics, July 1986, 4:3, pt. 2, S245—S272.

Goldin, Claudia, Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History of American
    Women (New York: Oxford University Press, 1990).

Kahn, Shulamit, and Lang, Kevin, "The Effects of Hours Constraints on Labor Supply
   Estimates," NBER Working Paper No. 2647, July 1988.

Kahn, Shulamit, and Lang, Kevin, "Constraints on the Cboice of Work Hours: Agency
   vs. Specific Capital," mimeo, 1987.

Kahn, Shulamit, and Lang, Kevin, "The Causes of Hours Constraints: Evidence from
   Canada," mimeo, October, 1988.

Lang, Kevin, "Why Was There Mandatory Retirement?" Journal of Public Economics,
    1989, 127—36.

Lazear, Edward P., "Agency, Earnings Profiles, Productivity, and Hours Restrictions,"
    American EconomicReview, September 1981, 71:4, 606—20.

Leet-Cuy, Laura, and Schor, Juliet, "Assessing the Time Squeeze Hypotbesis:, Estimates
    of Market and Non-Market Hours in the United States, 1969-1987," mimeo, Harvard
    Department of Economics, 1990.

Levine, David I., "Just-Cause Employment Policies When Unemploymentis a Worker
    DisciplineDevice," American EconomicReview, September 1989, 79:4, 902—905.

Levine, David I., "Just-Cuase Employment Policies in the Presence of Worker Adverse
    Selection," mimeo, University of California, 1990.

Rebitzer, James, "Efficiency Wages and Implicit Contracts: An Institutional Evalua-
    tion," in Microeconomic Issues in Labor Economics, Robert Drago and Richard
    Perlman, eds. (Sussex, U.K.: Wheatsheaf Books, 1989).

Rebitzer, James, and Robinson,Michael, "Plant Size and Dual Labor Markets," Review
    ofEconomics and Statistics, forthcoming.

Rebitzer, James, and Taylor, Lowell, "Work kicentives and the Demand for Primary and
    Contingent Labor," NBER working paper 3647, 1991.
                                           22
Shank, Susan E., "Preferred Hours of Work and CorrespondingEarnings," Monthly La-
    bor Review, November 1986, 109:11, 40—44.

Shapiro, Carl, and Stiglitz, Joseph E., "EquilibriumUnemploymentas a Worker Disci-
    pline Device," American Economic Review, June 1984, 74:3, 433—44.

Stiglitz, Joseph E., "The Causes and Consequences of the Dependence of Quality on
     Price," Journal of EconomicLiterature, March 1987, 25:1, 1-48.

Weiss, Andrew, Eciency Wages: Models of Unemployment, Layoffs, and Wage Disper-
   sion (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1990).




                                         23
