NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES

THE MARSHALL PLAN: HISTORY'S MOST SUCCESSFUL
STRUCTURAL ADJUSTMENT PROGRAM

J.

Bradford De Long

Barry Eichengreen

Working Paper No. 3899

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 1991
Prepared for the Centre for Performance and Landeszentralbank
Hamburg conference on Post-World War II European Reconstruction,
Hamburg, September 5-7, 1991. We thank Marco Becht for research
assistance, and Marc Uzan, Lawrence Summers, Steven Schran,
Richard Layard, Charles Kindleberger, Rudiger Dornbusch,
Alessandra Casella, and Geoffrey Carliner for helpful comments.
Barry Eichengreens research was supported by the Center for
German and European Studies of the University of California at
Berkeley. Bradford De Long's was supported by the NBER, and by
the National Science and Olin Foundations. This paper is part of
NBER's research program in International Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3899
November 1991

THE MARSHALL PLAN: HISTORY'S MOST SUCCESSFUL
STRUCTURAL ADJUSTMENT PROGRAN

ABSTRACT

The post-World War II reconstruction

of Western Europe was

one of the greatest economic policy and foreign policy successes

of this century. "Folk wisdom" assigns a major role in
successful reconstruction to the Marshall Plan: the program that

transferred some $13 billion to Europe in the years 1948-51. We
examine the economic effects of the Marshall Plan, and find that
it was not large enough to have significantly accelerated
recovery by financing investment, aiding the reconstruction of

damaged infrastructure, or easing commodity bottlenecks. We
argue, however, that the Marshall Plan did

play

a major role in

setting the stage for post-World War II Western Europe's rapid

growth. The conditions attached to Marshall Plan aid pushed
European political economy in a direction that left its post
World War II "mixed economies" with more "market" and less
"controls" in the mix.

J. Bradford De Long
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138

Barry J. Eichengreen
Department of Economics
University of California
at Berkeley

Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER

[T]he world of suffering people looks to us for

leadership. Their thoughts, however, are not
concentrated alone on this problem. They have more
immediate and terribly pressing concerns where the
mouthful of food will come from, where they will find
shelter tonight, and where they will find warmth. Along
with the great problem of maintaining the peace we must
solve the problem of the pittance of food, of clothing
and coal and homes. Neither of these problems can be
solved alone.
-George C. Marshall, November 1945

Can you imagine [the plan's] chances of passage in an
election year in a Republican congress if it is named for
Truman and not Marshall?
-Harry S. Truman, October 1947

2

I.

Introduction
The post-World War 11 reconstruction of the economies and

polities of Western Europe was an extraordinary success. Growth was
fast, distributional conflicts in large part finessed, world trade booming.
The stability of representative democracies in Western Europe made its
political institutions the envy of much of the world. The politicians who
in the post- World War II years laid the foundations of the postwar order

had good warrant to be proud. They were, as Trunian's Secretary of
State Dean Acheson put it in the title of his memoirs, Present at the
Creation of an extraordinarily successful set of political and economic
institutions.
Perhaps the greatest success of the post-World War II period was
the establishment of representative institutions and "mixed economies"
in that half of Europe not occupied by the Red Army. A similar
opportunity is open today in Eastern Europe, with the possibility of
replacing Stalinist systems with market-oriented industrial democracies.
The future will judge politicians today as extraordinarily farsighted if
they are only half as successful as Acheson and his peers.
Many argue that the West should seize this opportunity by
extending aid to the nations of Eastern Europe in exchange for a
commitment to reform. Advocates evoke as a precedent the Marshall
Plan—the program that transferred $13 billion in aid from the United
States to Western Europe in the years from 1948 to 1951. They argue
that we should emulate the steps taken by the founders of the postwar
order half a century ago by extending aid to Eastern Europe.
Any such argument by analogy hinges on two links. First, that the

3

Marshall Plan in fact played a key role in inaugurating the postwar era
of prosperity and political stability in Western Europe. Second, that the
lessons of the postwar era translate to present-day Eastern Europe. In

this paper we examine both propositions. The bulk of this paper
evaluates the Marshall Plan. The conclusion steps back and weighs tthe
extent to which the lessons of the post-World War II period can be
applied to Eastern Europe including the regions of the Soviet Union
today.
A. Summary of Conclusions
Our central conclusion is that the Marshall Plan did matter. But it
did not matter in the way that the "folk wisdom" of international

relations assumes. Milward (1984) is correct in arguing that Marshall
Plan aid was simply not large enough to significantly stimulate Western
European growth by accelerating the replacement and expansion of its
capital stock. Nor did the Marshall Plan matter by financing the
reconstruction of devastated infrastructure, for as we show below,
reconstruction was largely complete before the program came on
stream.2

The Marshall Plan did play a role in alleviating resource shortages.
But this channel was not strong enough to justify the regard in which the
program is held. By 1948 and the beginning of Marshall Plan aid
bottlenecks were scarce, and markets were good at alleviating their
2Wartime relief, post-World War II UNRRA aid, and pre-Marshall Plan "interim aid" may well
have significantly speeded up the reconstruction process. Although we do not address the
question of the role of pre-Marshall Plan aid in this paper, we hope to examine its effects in
future work.

4
impact.
Rather, the Marshall Plan significantly sped Western European
growth by altering the environment in which economic policy was
made. In the immediate aftermath of World War II politicians who

recalled the disasters of the Great Depression were ill-disposed to "trust
the market," and eager to embrace regulation and government control.
Had European political economy taken a different turn, post-World War
II European recovery might have been hobbled by clumsy allocative
bureaucracies that rationed scarce foreign exchange and placed ceiling
prices on exportables to protect the consumption of urban working
classes.
Yet in fact the Marshall Plan era saw a rapid dismantling of
controls over product and factor markets in Western Europe. It saw the
restoration of price and exchange rate stability. To some degree this
came about because underlying political-economic conditions were
favorable (and no one in Europe wanted a repeat of interwar
experience). To some degree it came about because the governments in
power believed that the "mixed economies" they were building should
have a strong pro-market orientation. Marshall Plan aid gave them room
to maneuver in order to carry out their intentions: without such aid, they
would have soon faced a harsh choice between contraction to balance
their international payments and severe controls on admissible imports.
To some degree it came about because Marshall Plan administrators it
pressured European governments to decontrol and liberalize even when
they wished to do otherwise.
In post-World War II Western Europe the conditions imposed,

formally and informally, for the receipt of U.S. aid encouraged the

5

reductions in spending needed for financial stability, the relaxation of
controls that prevented markets from allocating resources, and the
opening of economies to trade. Marshall Plan "conditiotiality" pushed
governments toward versions of the "mixed economy" that had more
market orientation and less directive planning in the mix. While postWorld War II European welfare states and governments are among the
most extensive in proportion to economic life in history, they are built
on top of, and do not supplant or bypass, the market allocation of goods
and factors of production. The Marshall Plan should thus be thought of
as a large and highly successful structural adjustment program.3
The experience of the Marshall Plan therefore suggests lessons for
the role the West can play today. Although the yield of a Marshall Plan
for Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union might well be high, the benefits
would not not direct increases in productive capacity made possible by
aid. Aid to Eastern Europe may accelerate growth in the manner of the
Marshall Plan if it leads to policies that accelerate the move toward

market organization, free trade, and financial stability. Aid might
perhaps help as an incentive and as a cushion to make reform possible.
But it is not a substitute for reform, or for the process of structural
adjustment.

3Without the Marshall Plan, the pattern of post-World War II European political economy might
might well have resembled the overregulation and relative economic stagnation of post-World
War U Argentina, a nation that has dropped from First to Third World status in two generations.
Or post-World War II Europe might have replicated the financial instability—alternate episodes
of inflation and deflation—experienced by much of Europe in the 1920's as interest groups and
social classes bitterly struggled over the distribution of wealth and in the process stalled
economic growth. This is not to say that post-World War II Western Europe was a laissezfaire
economy. Post World War II European welfare states are among the most extensive in history.

6

B. Organization of the Paper
After this introduction, section 11 of the paper develops the "folk
image" and contrasts it with the reality of the Marshall Plan. It is
followed by a series of sections that consider in turn alternative channels
through which the Marshall Plan could have accelerated economic
recovery. First, Marshall Plan aid might have quickened the pace of
private investment. Second, it might have supported public investment
in infrastructure. Third, it might have eliminated bottlenecks. Fourth, it
might have facilitated the negotiation of a pro-growth "social contract"
that provided the political stability and climate necessary to support the
postwar boom. We argue that the first two were of negligible
importance, that the third had some but not overwhelming significance
during the years of the Marshall Plan, and that the fourth was vital but is
difficult to quantify.
Throughout the paper we use two sets of comparisons to structure
and discipline the argument. The first comparison is with Europe after
World War I. In contrast to the post-World War II era, after World War 1
European reconstruction had been a failure. Alternating inflation and
deflation retarded recovery. Growth had been slow, distributional
conflicts had been bitter, and the network of trade fragile and stagnant.
Representative government had been tried and rejected by all save a
handful of European nations.4 The critical question from our perspective
4Among others, italy, Turkey, Portugal, Spain, Bulgaria. Greece, Rumania, Yugoslavia,
Hungary, Albania, Poland. Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania. Austria. Germany—not to speak of Japan,
China, and many Central and South American countries tried and then abandoned representative
governments in the interwar period. See John Lukacs (1991).

7

is to what degree the Marshall Plan was responsible for the different
outcomes of the two postwar periods. The comparison addresses this
issue and highlights features of the international environment besides the
Marshall Plan that must figure in an adequate analysis.
The second comparison is with the experience of Argentina.
Before the war, Argentina had been as rich as Continental Europe. In
1913 Buenos Aires was among the top 20 cities of the world in
telephones per capita. In 1929 Argentina had been perhaps fourth in
density of motor vehicles per capita, with approximately the same
number of vehicles per person as France or Germany. Argentina from
1870—1950 was a country in the same class as Canada or Australia.
Yet after World War II, Argentina grew very much more slowly
than France or Germany, rapidly falling from the ranks of the First
World to the Third (see figure 1). Features of the international economic
environment affecting Argentina as well as Europe—the rapid growth of
world trade under the Bretton Woods system, for example—are not

sufficient therefore to explain the latter's singular stability and rapid
growth. Again the comparison points to factors aside from the direct
effects of foreign aid that mattered, and factors in conjunction with
which foreign aid must work in order to unleash a period of rapid
growth.
The concluding section of the paper summarizes our argument, and
examines what light our analysis of the Marshall Plan sheds on the

current situation in Eastern Europe.

8
Figure 1
Very Long Run Economic Growth, 1880—1980

-1913 trend
Log of
GDP per

Capita

Log of
GOP per

Capita

Log of

GDP per
Capita

II
Source: Angus Maddison, Phases of Capilalist Development: Robefl Summers and Alan HeslOn. Penfl Wodd
Table V; Cados D(az Atejandro, Essays on the Econa'mc History of the Argentine Republic.

9

II.

The Marshall Plan: Image and Reality
This section reviews the state of the European economy on the eve

of the Marshall Plan. We first offer a conventional portrait of conditions
in Europe following World War II and survey the origins of the Marshall
Plan. We then use comparisons with the state of Europe's economy after
World War I to revise and extend that account. The first subsection
seeks to characterize the image of the Marshall Plan in the "folk
tradition" of analysts of international relations. The following
subsections evaluate and criticize various aspects of this traditional
picture.
A. The Folk Image
Western Europe's recovery from World War II had ground to a

halt by the end of l947. The first phase of postwar expansion and
recovery had come to an end. Reserves of foreign assets had been
depleted. Export earnings were insufficient to finance purchases of raw
materials and equipment from the only remaining functioning industrial
economy, the United States. Bankers in the United States recalled the
dismal returns on investments in Europe after World War I. Observing
Communist electoral strength, they were unwilling to loan capital to
Europe on any terms.6 Incomes were too low to provide savings needed
to finance reconstruction. Taxes were inadequate to balance government
5See for example Hogan (1987), van der Wee (1986), Mee (1984), Price (1955), and Tinbergen
(1954).
6See Block (1977) for a discussion of reasons U.S. private investors were unwilling to loan
money to Europe after World War II. Eichengreen and Portes (1989) describe the very different
post.World War I experience when U.S. private investment bankers were relatively eager to
channel capital for European reconstruction.

10

budgets. Inflation and financial chaos eroded Western Europe's ability
t.o reconstruct and reorganize its economy. Internal U.S. State

Department memoranda spoke of an approaching breakdown of the
division of labor between town and country, and between resource
extraction, manufacturing, and distribution sectors. Many feared an
economic collapse in Europe as soon as U.S. humanitarian aid ceased to
prop it up.
Figure 2
Economic Growth in European Nations During the Marshall Plan Years
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
France

t.ermany
Italy
Netherlands

Norway
Sweden
U.K.
0

4

8

12

Rate of Real GOP Growth, 1948—51

Such is the picture of Western Europe on the eve of the Marshall

Plan painted by biographers of statesmen and by historians of
international relations.7 The Marshall Plan, they allege, solved these
7For example, see Wexler (1983), Mee (1984), Mayne (1973), Gimbel (1976). andArkes (1972).
At variance with the folk image conveyed by these accounts is Mitward (1984), one of the few
who pays close attention to the quantitative dimensions of the American aid program. Milward's
revisionist downplaying of the importance of the Marshall Plan and his conclusion that the pace
of European recovery would not have been very different in its absence have recently colored

11

problems at a stroke. It provided funds to finance investment and public
expenditure. It allowed countries to import from the United States. It
eliminated bottlenecks that had obstructed economic growth. It set the

stage for prosperity. European growth was very rapid after 1948 and the
beginning of Marshall Plan aid, as figure 2 charts.
At the time, it was not even clear that post-World War II Western
Europe would utilize market mechanisms to coordinate economic
activity. Belief in the ability of the market to coordinate economic
activity and support economic growth had been severely shaken by the
Great Depression. Wartime controls and plans, while implemented as
extraordinary measures for extraordinary times, had created a
governmental habit of control and regulation. Seduced by the very high
economic growth rates reported by Stalin's Soviet Union and awed by
its war effort, many expected centrally-planned economies to reconstruct
faster and grow more rapidly than market economies. Memory of the
Great Depression was fresh, and countries relying on the market were
seen as likely to lapse into a period of underemployment and stagnation.
Communists predicted that post-World War II reconstruction would
dramatically reveal the superiority of central planning. Europe's East
would pull ahead of whatever regions in the West remained attached to
market organization and private property.8
discussions of policy toward Eastern Europe. See for example The Economist (15 June 1991), or
Collins and Rodrik (1991). As shall become apparent below, we believe that Milward's
revisionism is overstated.
8See Sweezy (1943) for an extreme but surprisingly widely held contemporary view. See Maier
(1987) for a historian's account of attitudes toward the market. In the immediate aftermath of
World War H. the remaining pillar of market economics was the United States, but its
performance during the Great Depression had been far from inspiring. Maier (1987) quotes

12

Moreover, it seemed at least an even bet that the United States
would withdraw from Western Europe. The U.S. government had done
so after World War I, when the cycles of U.S. politics had led to the
erosion of the internationalist Wilson administration and the rise to
dominance of a Republican isolationist Congress. The same pattern
appeared likely after World War II: Republican Congressional leader
Robert Taft, the dominant figure in the Senate after the election of 1946,
was extremely isolationist in temperament.
By all indications, the American commitment to relief and
reconstruction was limited. The end of hostilities against Japan had led
to the immediate cessation of lend-lease to Britain. Humanitarian aid
under the auspices of the United Nations was seen as limited and
transitional. The Truman administration was viewed as internationalist,
but weak. Congressional critics called for balanced budgets. The 1946
Congressional elections were a disaster for the Democratic Party.
Considerable economic aid had been extended to Europe from the
U.S. after World War I, first by the Herbert Hoover-led relief and
reconstruction effort and then by private capital speculating on a
restoration of monetary stability and pre-Worid War I exchange rates.
The very magnitude of U.S. private capital flows after World War I
militated against their repetition. Post-World War I reconstruction loans
had been sold as sound private investments. They did not turn out to be
so. Seymour Harris (1948) calculated that in present value terms nearly
half of American private investments in Europe between the wars had
British historian AJ.P. Taylor as speaking in late 1945 of how "nobody in Europe believes in the
American way of life—that is, in private enterprise: or rather those who believe in it are a
defeated party—a party which seems to have no more future."

13

been lost. Once burned, twice shy.9 With strong Communist parties in
italy and France, a nationalization-minded Labour government in

Britain, and a Germany once again pressed for reparations transfers,
capital flows from American investors gambling on European recovery
and political stability seemed unlikely.
Nevertheless, within two years after the end of the war it became

U.S. government policy to build up Western Europe politically,
economically, and militarily. The first milestone was the Truman
Doctrine: President Truman asked Congress to provide aid to Greece to
fill the gap left by the retreating British. The Truman Doctrine
inaugurated the policy of containment. Included in the Doctrine was a
declaration that containment required steps to quickly regenerate
economic prosperity in Western Europe. This policy extended beyond
Greece and Turkey to the rest of Western Europe as well. As columnist
Richard Strout summarized the informal conversations, leaks, and trial
balloons emanating from the government in early 1947, "State
Department strategists have now come around—to the point a good
many 'visionaries' have been urging all along—that one way of
combating Communism is to give western Europe a full dinner pail."°
Employing Secretary of State George C. Marshall's reputation as
the architect of military victory in World War 11, conservative fears of
9One of us has suggested previously that Harris's estimate of realized returns is overly
pessimistic. See Eichengreen and Portes (1989). But Han-is could not anticipate the settlement
negotiations between U.S. creditors and debtor governments that would occupy the first postwar
decade and return to American investors at least a portion of their principal. If Harris could not
anticipate this outcome, neither were contemporary investors likely to do so. Thus, from the
perspective of 1947, the returns on post-World War I loans to Europe appeared disappointing.
10TRB, The New Republic, May 5, 1947.

14

the further extension of Stalin's empire, and a political alliance with
influential Republican Senator Arthur Vandenberg, Truman and his
administration outflanked isolationist and anti-spending opposition and
maneuvered the Marshall Plan through Congress. In the first two postWorld War II years the U.S. contributed about four billion dollars a year
to relief and reconstruction through UNRRA and other programs." The
Marshall Plan continued these flows at comparable rates. But a
significant difference was that UNRRA aid could be, and was expected
to be, cut off at any time. Each additional quarter it was continued was a
windfall. Its continuation was not something upon which Europe could
count.
By contrast, the Marshall Plan was a multi-year commitment.
From 1948 to 1951, the U.S. contributed $13.2 billion to European
recovery. $3.2 billion went to the United Kingdom, $2.7 billion to
France, $1.5 billion to Italy, and $1.4 billion to the Western-occupied
zones of Germany that would become the post-World War II

Bundesrepublik.
In its first year, half of all Marshall aid was devoted to food.
Overall, 60 percent was spent on primary products and intermediate
inputs: food, feed, fertilizers, industrial materials, and semi-finished
products, divided evenly between agricultural goods and industrial
inputs. One-sixth was fuel. One-sixth was spent on machinery, vehicles,
and other commodities.12
The received image of the Marshall Plan sees it as the catalyst for
I 'Costs of the German occupation. however, were largely borne by Germany.
12The remaining seven percent was spent employing the U.S. merchant marine rather than lower

cost competitors.

15

Western European recovery. Before Marshall aid began to arrive, all was
stagnation and fear of collapse. After, all was growth and optimism.
Charles Mee's (1984) narrative is one of the most enthusiastic:
The ink was not dry before the first ships set
sail—[with] 19,000 tons of wheat—followed by
the SS Godrun Maersk with tractors, synthetic
resin, and cellulose acetate; the SS Gibbes Lykes
with 3,500 tons of sulfur; the SS Rhondda with
farm machines, chemicals, and oil; the SS
Geirulo, the SS Delmundo, and the SS Lapland
with cotton. When shipments of carbon black
began to reach Birmingham—Europe's largest tire
plant was put back into production and 10,000
workers returned to their jobs.
B. The Reality: The European Economy Following the Two Wars
Such is the "folk image" of the Marshall Plan. We now seek to
contrast that image with historical reality. In this section we reassess the

state of Europe's economy, turning in subsequent sections to our
reassessment of the Marshall Plan. This section brings out four points.
(1) World War II was more destructive than World War I. (2) Economic
recovery was significantly faster after World War II. (3) There is no
necessary relationship between the two preceding points. Rapid growth
after World War II was not mainly a "rubber band effect" (the reversal
of wartime output losses); rather, it was a sustained acceleration. (4) Nor
did rapid postwar growth simply reflect a favorable international

economic environment. Not all countries experienced comparable

16

accelerations despite all being exposed to the same favorable
international economic climate.

1. World War II was more destructive
When World War II ended, more than 40 million in Europe were
dead by violence or starvation. More than half of the dead were
inhabitants of the Soviet Union. Even west of the post-World War II
Soviet border, perhaps one in twenty were killed—close to one in twelve
in Central Europe. In World War I the overwhelming proportion of those
killed had been soldiers. During World War H fewer than half of those
killed were in the military.13
Figure 3
Production Immediately After World War II
Austria

—

Denmarl
France
Germany

ltal
Netherlands

I

Norway
Sweden
U.K.

_______________ _____
0

50%

100%

1946 GDP as a Percentage of 1938 Levets

Material damage in World War II was spread over a wider area

than in World War I. Destruction in the First World War was by and
'30n the consequences of World War [I and the situation at its end, see Milward (1984),
Calvocoressi and Wint (1972) and Halle (1967).

17

large confined to a narrow belt around a static trenchline. Although
material destruction along the trenchline was overwhelming, it extended
over only a small proportion of the European continent. World War Ii's
battle sites were scattered more widely. Weapons were a generation
more advanced and more destructive. World War Ii also saw the first
large-scale strategic bombing campaigns.14 Figure 3 plots relative levels
of national product in the year immediately after World War II, relative

to a prewar 1938 base.
Thus the aftermath of World War II saw many of Western
Europe's people dead, its capital stock damaged, and the web of market
relationships torn. Relief alone called for much more substantial
government expenditures than reduced tax bases could finance. The
post-World War I cycle of hyperinflation and depression seemed poised
to repeat itself. Prices rose in Italy to 35 times their prewar level. France
knocked four zeroes off the franc.
Industrial production recovered somewhat more rapidly than
agricultural output after 1945. But two years after the end of the war,
coal production in Western Europe was still below levels reached before
or during the war. German coal production in 1947 proceeded at little
more than half of the pre-Worid War II pace. Dutch and Belgian
production was 20 percent below, and British 10 percent below, preWorld War 111938 levels.'5 Demands for coal for heating reduced the
'4We do not pass judgement here on the economic implications of strategic bombing. See U.S.
Strategic Bombing Survey (1976) for a contemporary assessment. Also see Milward (1965,
1984), and Ellis (1990).
t5Although 1938 was a recession year in the United States, its use as a baseline for post-World
War II comparisons should not be misleading for Europe. The European slowdown in economic
activity in 1938 was relatively minor.

18

continent's capacity to produce energy for industry. During the cold
winter of 1946-47 coal earmarked for industrial uses had to be diverted
to heating. Coal shortages led to the shutdown of perhaps a fifth of
Britain's coal-burning and electricity-using industry in February 1947.
Western European industrial production in 1946 was only 60 percent,
and in 1947 only 70 percent, of the pre-Worid War II norm.16
Problems of agriculture were, if anything, more serious.
Denmark's 1945-46 crops were 93 percent of prewar averages, but those
in France, Belgium, Germany, and Italy were barely half. 1947's harvest
was a disaster. Fertilizer and machinery remained in short supply. A
fierce winter and a dry spring froze and withered trees and crops.
Financial chaos meant that a large part of the harvest was not marketed.
Farmers hoarded crops for barter and home consumption. Western
Europe in 1946-47 had four-fifths its 1938 supply of food. Its population
had increased by twenty million—more than a tenth—even after
accOunting for military and civilian deaths.
Europe's ability to draw resources and import commodities from
the rest of the world was heavily compromised by World War II.

Traditionally, Western Europe had exported industrial and imported
agricultural goods from Eastern Europe, the Far East, and the Americas.
Now there was little prospect of rapidly restoring this international
division of labor. Eastern European nations adopted Russian-style
central planning and looked to the Soviet Union for economic links.
Industry in the United States and Latin America had expanded during
16ttj industrial production had fallen to one-third of its pre-Worid War Il level. In the three
western-occupied zones of Germany (including the Saar). industrial production had fallen to onefifth of that of 1938.

19

the war to fill the void created by the cessation of Europe's exports.
Imports of food and consumer goods for relief diverted hard currency
from purchases of capital goods needed for long-term reconstruction.
Changes in net overseas asset positions reduced Western Europe's
annual earnings from net investments abroad. Britain had liquidated
almost its entire overseas portfolio in order to finance imports during the
war. The reduction in invisible earnings reduced Western Europe's
capacity to import by approximately 30 percent of 1938 imports. The
movement of the terms of trade against Western Europe gave it in 194748 32 percent fewer imports for export volumes themselves running 10
percent below pre-Worid War II levels; higher export volumes might
worsen the terms of trade further. The net effect of the inward shift in

demand for exports and the collapse of the net investment position was
to give Europe in 1947-8 only 40 percent of the capacity to import that it
had possessed in 1938.
By contrast, after World War I Europe's external position had
appeared more favorable. Europe emerged from the Great War with its
overseas investments still large.'7 European shipping still generated
substantial net revenues. Invisible receipts financed more than 20
percent of European imports in the years immediately after World War 1.
The shift in terms of trade against Europe was smaller after World War I
than after World War II.

More importantly, virtually every European nation quickly
regained access to the international capital markets after World War I.
1 7me existence of war debt liabilities to the United States complicates the picture. But typically
service of these obligations did not begin until the second half of the 1920's, facilitating
immediate post-World War I adjustment.

20
This was true even of reparations-burdened Germany until the spring of
1921, when the stage for hyperinflation was set.18 American private
investors were eager after World War I to make loans for European
recovery. In the decade after World War I, they loaned more than $1
billion a year overseas, primarily to European nations. Government
restrictions on foreign loans were rare, and by and large limited to cases
in which countries had unsettled war debts owing to the United States.'9

Table

1

European Balance of Payments PositIon, 1946-47 and 1919-20
(Billions of 1946-47 Dollars at Annual Rates)

European Imports
European Exports
Trade Account

1946-47

1919-20

11.2

11.8

-6.0

-7.2

0.4

1 .1

Net Income from Investments
Other Current Account
Total Current Account

-6.7

-4.8

Reduction in European Assets
Total Loans and Grants from U.S.

-1.8
4.9

-2.0
2.8

_tJ..

Source: authors' calculations based on United Nations (1948) and United Nations (various years).

18Holtfrerich (1986) analyzes the massive flow of short-term capital from the U.S. to Germany

in 1919-21.
'9A strict loan embargo was imposed against the Soviet Union, the absence of a war-debt
funding agreement led to the disapproval of a Romanian loan in 1922. and refunding issues for
France were delayed. But Eichengreen (1989a) concludes that U.S. government restrictions were
more bark than bite, and that "in almost all cases where the governmententered an objection,
(they) could be gotten round." Eichengreen (1989a), quoting Feis (1950).

21

Table 1 summarizes Europe's balance-of-payments position after
the two wars. Even though United States-provided UNRRA and other
government-provided assistance in the pre-Marshall Plan years was
much larger in real terms than all sources of financing—public and
private loans and public and private grants—had been in the equivalent
period after World War 1, the higher volume of financing did not allow
Europe to import more from the rest of the world. Real imports were in
fact a hair higher after World War I than after World War 11 because of
the substantial deterioration in Europe's invisibles balance in the latter
instance.
Thus Europe after World War II was in at least as bad economic
shape as it had been after World War I. Rapid reconstruction and a
return to prosperity did not seem inevitable. Another episode of financial
and political chaos like that which had plagued the Continent following
World War I appeared likely. U.S. State Department officials wondered
whether Europe might be dying—like a wounded soldier who bleeds to
death after the fighting. State Department menioranda in 1946-7
presented an apocalyptic vision of a complete breakdown in Europe of
the division of labor—between city and country, industry and
agriculture, and between different industries themselves.20 In the
aftermath a Communist triumph was seen as a distinct possibility.

20William Clayton, Undersecretary of State for Economic Affairs, was the strongest voice. See
Mayne (1973). The influential Harriman Report (1947). European Recovery and American Aid,
a key piece of the administration's lobbying effort, took the same perspective. On U.S. State
Department thinking before the Marshall Plan, see Acheson (1966). Bohlen (1973) and Pogue
(1990).

22

2. Recovery from World War II was faster
In 1946, the year after the end of World War II, national product
per capita in the three largest Western European economies had fallen at
least 25 per cent below its 1938 level. This was half again as much as
production per capita in 1919 had fallen below its pre-war (1913) level.
Yet the pace of post-World War II recovery soon surpassed that which
followed World War 1. As figure 4 shows, by 1949 national income per
capita in Britain, France, and Germany had recovered to within a hair of
pre-war levels.
Figure 4
Post-WWI and Post-WWI1 Recoveries of GDP per Capita
Average of Britain, France, and Germany*
S Post-World War II

0 Post-World War I

Prewar

i:uy
0

2

6

10

20

Years after the end of the war

West Germany after World War II.
Source: Angus Maddison, Phases of Capitalist Development;
Robert Summers and Alan Heston, Penn World Table V.

Recovery at that date was some two years ahead of its post-World

23

War I pace. By 1951, six years after the war and at the effective end of
the Marshall Plan, national incomes per capita were more than 10
percent above pre-war levels. Measured by the yardstick of the
admittedly imperfect national product estimates, the three major
economies of Western Europe had achieved a degree of recovery that
post-World War I Europe had not reached in the 11 years separating
World War I years from the Great Depression. Post-World War II
Europe accomplished in six years what took post-World War I Europe
sixteen.
Post-World War II recovery dominated post-World War I recovery
by other economic indicators as well. Figures 5 through 7 plot the
comparative pace of post-World War I and post-World War II recoveries

of Western European steel, cement, and coal production. Since all three
are measured in physical units, these indices are not vulnerable to the
potential sources of error afflicting national income and product
accounts. Figure 5 shows that by 1950—five years after the end of the
Second World War—Western European steel production had surpassed
its prewar level. After World War I, in contrast, steel production did not
exceed its 1913 level until nine years after the fighting ended. Figure 6
shows that the relative recovery of cement production after World War
II ran three years ahead of its post-World War I pace.

24
Figure 5
Post-World War I and Post-World War Ii Recoveries
of Western European Steel Production*
• Post-World War I

X Post-World War II

Prewar 100

1920—21

U.S. recession
Weighted average of Britain, Denmark. France, Italy, Belgium. Luxemburg, Netherlands,
and Germany. West Germany only after World War II.
Source: BR. Mitchell, European Historical Statistics; U.N. Economic Commission for
Europe, Economic Survey of Europe since the War; Ingmar Svennilson, Growth and
Stagnation in the European Economy.

The recovery of coal production after World War II also outran its

post-World War I pace by a substantial margin, as figure 7 shows, even
though coal was seen as in notoriously short supply in the post-World

War II years. By contrast, the recovery of coal production after World
War I was erratic. Coal production declined from 1920 to 1921—falling
from 83 percent of pre-Worid War I levels in 1920 to 72 percent in
1921—as a result of the deflation imposed on the European economy by
central banks that sought the restoration of pre-Worid War I gold
standard parities, accepted the burden of deflation, and allowed the 1921

25

recession in the United States to be transmitted to their own countries.
After World War 11, no central bank or government pursued monetary
orthodoxy so aggressively in order to roll back price and wage increases
and preserve the real wealth of rentiers.
FIgure 6
Post-World War I and Post-World War II Recoveries
of Western European Cement Productlon*
140

• Post-World War I

X Post-World War II

120

Prewar 100
80

60
8

10

Years alter the end of the war
Weighted average of Britain, Denmark. France, Italy, Belgium, Luxemburg, Netherlands,
and Germany. West Germany only after World War It.
Source: BR. Mitchell, European Historical Statistics; U.N. Economic Commission for
Europe. Economic Survey of Europe since the War; Ingmar Svennilson, Growth and
Stagnation in the European Economy.

Coal production fell again in 1922—23. The breakdown of
negotiations over German reparations led the French to occupy the Ruhr.

Their occupation did not lead to significantly increased transfers from
Germany to France. But it did begin the German hyperinflation.

26
Figure 7
Post-World War I and Post-World War II Recoveries
of Western European Coal Productlon*
XPost-World War II

•Post-World War I

Prewar 100

2
0
Years after the end of
Ruhr
1920—21 occupation
U.S. recession

Postgold standard
British
coal strike

Weighted average of Britain, Denmark. France. Italy, Belgium, Luxemburg, Netherlands,
and Germany. West Germany only after World War H.
Source: B.R. Mitchell, European Historical Statistics; U.N. Economic Commission for
Europe, Economic Survey of Europe since the War; lngmar Svennilson, Growth and
Stagnation in the European Economy.

Coal production fell for yet a third time in 1926. Attempts to

reduce wages in the aftermath of Britain's deflationary return to gold
triggered a walkout by British coal miners, accompanied by a shortlived general strike. The 1920's in Britain saw stubborn attachment by
successive governments to a policy of a high real exchange rate and
deflation, and an extraordinary degree of downward nominal wage
inflexibility as well.
The course of coal production shows that to a large extent the slow

27

post-World War I recovery was inflicted by Europeans on themselves.
The major factors hindering a rapid post-World War I recovery were not
strictly economic but social and political. One interpretation is that postWorld War I Europe saw the recovery of output repeatedly interrupted
by political and economic "wars of attrition," in the language of Alesina
and Drazen (1991), that produced instability in European finance,
politics, and labor relations.
In the aftermath of World War I, the distribution of wealth both
within and between nations, the question of who would bear the burden
of postwar adjustment, and the degree to which government would act to
secure the property of the rentier were all unresolved issues. Social
classes, political factions, and nation-states saw that they had much to
lose if they did not aggressively promote their claims for favorable
redistribution. Much of the social and economic history of interwar
Europe can be seen in terms of such "wars of attrition," in which fiscal,
financial, monetary, and labor relations instability—and concomitant
slow economic growth—are trials of strength over who would succeed
in obtaining a favorable redistribution of wealth.
After World War II such "wars of attrition" were less virulent.
Memories of the disastrous consequences of the aggressive pursuit of
redistributional goals during the interwar period made moderation
appear more attractive to all. The availability of Marshall Plan aid to
nations that had accomplished stabilization provided a very strong
incentive to compromise such distributional conflicts early, and gave
European countries a pooi of resources that could be used to cushion the

28

wealth losses sustained in restructuring.2'

3. This was "Supergrowth" and not simply a "rubber band effect"
Moreover, post-World War II reconstruction did more than return
Western Europe to its previous growth path. As Figure 1 showed,
French and West German growth during the post-World War II boom
raised national product per capita at rates that far exceeded pre-Worid
War 11, pre-1929, or even pre-1913 trends.

This was not merely a process of making up ground lost during the
war. In fact, there is no strong connection between the fall in levels of
production across the wartime period and the pace of the subsequent
recovery, contrary to what would be expected if fast post-World War II
growth was primarily a process of catch-up to pre-war trends. The
bivariate relationship is statistically significant at standard confidence
levels (cf. Dumke, 1990), but when one controls for other characteristics
of countries like openness and the investment rate, the significance of
the relationship evaporates and even its sign becomes uncertain (see
Eichengreen and Uzan, 1991).
The reconstruction of Western Europe in the aftermath of World
War II appears to have created economies capable of dynamic economic
growth an order of magnitude stronger than had previously been seen in
Europe. Postwar Europe's "supergrowth," as Charles Kindleberger has

21Olson (1982) argues that World War II destroyed distributional coalitions and delayed the
development of new ones, thus limiting the extent to which post-World War II European political
economy could follow the post-World War I pattern of intensive redistributional strife. Below we
suggest, however, that there was no absence of distributional coalitions after World War H; the
difference lay rather in their behavior—and in the selective incentives to which they responded.

29

termed it, was much more than catch-up and reattainment of a pre-war
neoclassical growth path.

4. "Supergrowth" reflected more than a favorable environment
Yet such rapid growth and recovery as Western Europe saw after
World War II was not inevitable. It was not a natural consequence of a
favorable international regime. The post-World War II expansion of
world trade under Bretton Woods was a great aid to European recovery,
but Western European growth reflected more than a rising tide of
international trade lifting all boats.
As Figure 1 showed, a Latin American country like Argentina, as
rich in the years before and immediately after World War H as industhal
Western Europe, grew slowly even under the post-World War II
expansionary Bretton Woods regime. Fast post-World War II growth
and catchup to American standards of productivity were to a large
degree specific to Western Europe, and thus to the countries that
received Marshall Plan aid.

Ill.

The Marshall Plan and Private Investment
Investment is an obvious channel through which the Marshall Plan

might have accelerated economic growth in post-World War II Western
Europe. Postwar Europe was poor and capital-scarce. Maintaining living
standards at levels the citizenry regarded as minimally tolerable
consumed a large share of total product, leaving little for the
replacement of railroads, buildings and machines damaged by war. The
Marshall Plan could have relaxed this constraint.

30
It is difficult to ascribe large effects to this channel. Viewed
relative to total investment in the recipient countries, the Marshall Plan
was not large. Marshall Plan grants were provided at a pace that was not
much greater in flow terms than previous UNRRA aid and amounted to
less than three percent of the combined national incomes of the recipient
countries between 1948 and 1951. They equalled less than a fifth of
gross investment in recipient countries. Only 17 percent of Marshall
Plan dollars were spent on "machinery and vehicles" and
"miscellaneous." The rest were devoted to imports of industrial
materials, semi-finished products and agricultural commodities. The
commodities bought directly with Marshall Plan dollars were not
additions to the fixed capital stock of Western Europe that would have
boosted output permanently.
Marshall Plan dollars did significantly affect the level of
investment: countries that received large amounts of Marshall Plan aid
invested more. Eichengreen and Uzan (1991) calculate that out of each

dollar of Marshall Plan aid some 65 cents went to increased production
and 35 cents to increased investment. The returns to new investment
were high. Eichengreen and Uzan's analysis suggests that social returns
may have been as high as 50 percent a year: an extra dollar of
investment raised national product by 50 cents in the subsequent year.
Even with such strong links between the Marshall Plan and
investment and between investment and growth, the investment effects
of Marshall Plan aid were simply too small to trigger an economic
miracle. U.S. aid in the amount of three percent of West European
output per year raised the share of private investment in national income
by one percentage point. An increase of one percentage point in the ratio

31

of investment to national income over would increase economic growth
by one-half of one percentage point.
Over the four years of the Marshall Plan, this increase in growth
cumulates to two percent of national product. Eichengreen and Uzan's
estimates of the strength of this investment channel suggest thus that it
led to Western European national income levels after 1951 that were
some two percent higher than would have been the case otherwise.
While this was a valuable addition, it is hardly the sort of dramatic
change trumpeted by champions of the Marshall Plan. It was too little to

make the difference between prosperity and stagnation. It was not
enough to make the Marshall Plan a decisive factor in the long boom of
the post-World War II period.

IV. The Marshall Plan and Public Investment

A second channel through which the Marshall Plan could have
stimulated growth was by financing public spending on infrastructure.
Western European roads, bridges, railroads, ports, and other
infrastructure had been severely damaged by the war. They were prime
targets of the Allied strategic bombing campaign. Their destruction had
been the first priority of retreating Nazis. The social rate of return to
their repair and reconstruction was very high. This task was one of the
principal objectives of postwar governments. Those same governments
had limited resources out of which to finance infrastructure repair.
National tax systems were in disarray. The tax base had been eroded by
the war. Social programs competed for scarce public revenues.
Inflationary finance was at odds with the imperative of financial

32
stabilization.
The question is how tightly the fiscal constraint limited public
spending on infrastructure repair. In fact, the damage to European
infrastructure was not that thorough or that long lasting. Although allied
generals had learned during World War II that strategic bombing could
destroy bridges, paralyze rail yards, and disrupt the movement of goods
and troops, they had also learned that bridges could be quickly rebuilt
and tracks quickly relaid.
Figure 8
Post-World War II Recovery of Western European Rail Traffic*
1938

K Continental Western Europe

IWestern Europe

Western Europe includes Britain, Denmark, France, Italy, Belgium, Luxemburg, Netherlands.
and the British, French, and American occupation zones in Germany. Continental
Western Europe is Western Europe with Britain omitted.
Source: U.N. Economic Commission (or Europe, Economic Survey of Europe 1948.

Europe's transportation infrastructure was in fact quickly repaired.

As Figure 8 shows, by the last quarter of 1946 almost as much freight
was loaded onto railways in Western Europe as had been transported in

33

1938. Including British railways, total goods loaded and shipped in the
last quarter of 1946 amounted to ninety-seven percent of pre-war traffic.
Weighted by the distance traveled—measured in units not of tons carried
but multiplying each ton carried by the number of kilometers traveled—
1947 railroad traffic was a quarter higher than pre-Worid War II traffic.
European recovery was not significantly delayed by the lack of track and
rolling stock.22

V. Bottlenecks and Foreign Exchange Constraints
Another channel through which the Marshall Plan might have

stimulated growth was by relaxing foreign exchange constraints.
Marshall Plan funds were hard currency in a dollar-scarce world. They
might have allowed Europe to obtain imports that that would relieve
bottlenecks. After the war, coal, cotton, petroleum, and other materials
were in short supply. The Marshall Plan allowed them to be purchased at
a higher rate than would have been possible otherwise. Marshall Plan

dollars added to Europe's international liquidity and played a role in
restoring intra-European trade. To the extent that the breakdown of the
intra-European division of labor was reducing production, added
22Sinularly, the rapid repair of other forms of publicly-provided infrastructure prevented them
from constraining recovery. Water systems were quickly restored. The electrical grid was put
back into operation (although there was not always coal to fuel the power plants). In fact, public
spending did not rise in countries receiving large amounts of Marshall Plan aid. Countriesthat
were major aid recipients saw the government spending share of national income fall relative to
other nations (see Eichengreen and Uzan, 1991). The Marshall Plan did not accelerate growth by
releasing resource constraints that prevented governments from rebuilding infrastructure.
Earlier pre-Marshall Plan post-World War II aid may, however, have helped in the
speedy reconstruction of Europe's infrastructure.

34

liquidity may have relieved bottlenecks in foreign exchange.
In a well-functioning market economy, it is difficult to argue that
such bottlenecks had more than a transient impact on the level of

production. The European economy was not without possibilities for
substitution. Market economies are very good at finding and utilizing
such possibilities. However, assume for argument's sake that little active
substitution of cheap goods for scarce imports was possible on the
production side. It is still the case that Europe would not have seen
lower production without Marshall Plan aid if governments had made
sustaining production a priority when allocating foreign exchange.
Absent the Marshall Plan, according to this scenario, imports of
consumption goods would have been reduced as foreign exchange was
diverted to purchase industrial raw materials, but output would not have
been noticeably affected.
Had substitution possibilities been lacking in both production and
use of foreign exchange, materials shortages might then have reduced
production. But consider the following back-of-the-envelope calculation
for the most severe bottleneck: coal. In 1938 Western Europe consumed
460 million tons of hard coal. It produced only 400 million tons in 1948.

Over the life span of the Marshall Plan, Western Europe imported about
seven percent of its coal consumption from the United States. Assuming
that coal was the most important bottleneck, that half of national product
was produced in coal-burning sectors, and that these coal-burning
sectors used fixed coefficients in production, then elimination of coal
imports would have reduced Western European total product over the
duration of the Marshall Plan by no more than three per cent.
This back-of-the-envelope calculation neglects indirect effects and

35

general equilibrium repercussions. One can imagine that, for example, a

small decline in coal consumption might have produced a large decline
in steel output, which in turn provoked an even larger fall in output in
sectors for which steel was an essential input.
Input-output analysis is the classic way of analyzing such a
situation. Consider Italy, for which Marshall Plan administrators
prepared a 1950 input-output table.23 Italy imported $72 million—13
billion lire—worth of coal during the Marshall Plan. Assume that all

uses of coal would have been proportionately reduced in the absence of
Marshall Plan imports, that all industry production functions were
Leontief, and that slack resources would have remained idle.24 Then
input-output analysis reveals that industrial production would have
fallen by 6.8 percent and transportation by 7.3 percent of a year's
production.25 The coal bottleneck would have produced secondary
bottlenecks in steel production, refining, and transport. But agriculture
and services would have been unaffected. Since industry and transport
account for less than half of national product, the latter would have
fallen by 3.2 percent of a year's production.26
This, of course, is an overestimate of the likely effects in 1950 of a
coal bottleneck. The economy did possess substitution possibilities in
231950 is almost precisely the midpoint of the Marshall Plan. The MSA mission, led by Hollis
Chenery, in fact provided several such tables. We use the 16 sector input-output table provided
by U.S. Mutual Security Agency (1953), pp.132-133.
240f course, these assumptions are patently false, a point whose implications we explore below.
25We derive these estimates by reducing each element of the vector of final demands by the
same proportion until the coal constraint is just binding.
26Compare the back-of-the-envelope calculation in the preceding paragraph, which came to
three percent.

36

production and foreign-exchange allocation. If the market was

functioning and so uncovering substitution possibilities, it is plausible
that losses due to all bottlenecks together would have been less than this
calculation for coal. And even 3 percent is small relative to the speed of

the remarkable European recovery. In individual periods —such as the
winter of 1947—bottlenecks, primarily in coal, were present. Earlier in
recovery, bottlenecks and resource scarcities may well have been very
important. But the elimination of bottlenecks more than three years after
the end of the war as a result of Marshall aid is unlikely to have been a
significant factor driving the rapid Western European recovery, at least
if the counterfactual is one in which the market is doing its job of
adjustment and reallocation.

VI.

The Political Economy of European Reconstruction
But would the market economy have been allowed to do its job?

The 1930's had seen not chronic bottlenecks but chronic deficiencies of
aggregate demand. Production had fallen far below normal for the entire
decade; market forces had failed to restore demand to normal levels.
Circumstances during the Great Depression had been exceptional, but
circumstances in the aftermath of World War II were exceptional as
well. Many feared the return of the Depression.27
27jç fact, aside from the possibility that fear of a renewed Great Depression would act as a selffulfilling prophecy, the return of the Great Depression was not likely in the 1940's. The memory
of the Depression, and the greater strength and incorporation of social democratic political
movements in government kept right-wing governments from adopting policies of out-and-out
national deflation. The availability of the large United States market to European exports—
especially with the coming of the Korean War Boom and NATO in the early 1950's—prevented

37

Thus a live possibility in the absence of the Marshall Plan was that
governments would not stand aside and allow the market system to do
its job. In the wake of the Great Depression, many still recalled the
disastrous outcome of the laissez-faire policies then in effect. Politicians
were predisposed toward intervention and regulation: no matter how
damaging "government failure" might be to the economy, it had to be

better than the "market failure" of the Depression.
Hdd European political economy taken a different turn, post-World
War II European recovery might have been stagnant. Governments
might have been slow to dismantle wartime allocation controls, and so
have severely constrained the market mechanism. In fact the Marshall
Plan era saw a rapid dismantling of controls over product and factor
markets in Western Europe, and the restoration of price and exchange
rate stability. An alternative scenario would have seen the maintenance
and expansion of wartime controls in order to guard against substantial
shifts in income distribution. The late 1940's and early 1950's might
have seen the creation in Western Europe of allocative bureaucracies to
ration scarce foreign exchange, and the imposition of price controls on
exportables in order to protect the living standards of urban working
classes.
A. Europe in the Argentine Mirror
The consequences of such policies can be seen in the Argentine
mirror. In response to the social and economic upheavals of the
any large world aggregate demand shortfall as in the Great Depression. With the American
locomotive under full steam, Western European economies were unlikely to suffer from

prolonged Keynesian demand-shortfall depressions.

38

Depression, Argentina adopted demand stimulation and income
redistribution. These policies were coupled with a distrust of foreign
trade and capital, and an attraction to the use of controls instead of prices

as allocative mechanisms. Argentina's growth performance in the postWorld War II period was very poor. Figure 9 displays the post-World
War II growth of Argentine GDP per capita along with that of the four
largest European economies. Even in the 1950's, and even relative
relative to Britain, Argentine growth was slow.
DIaz Alejandro (1970) provides a standard analysis of Argentina's
post-World War II economic stagnation. According to his interpretation,
the collapse of world trade in the Great Depression was a disaster of the
first magnitude for an Argentina tightly integrated into the world
division of labor. While Argentina continued to service its foreign debt,
its trade partners took unilateral steps to shut it out of markets. The
experience of the Depression justifiably undermined the nation's
commitment to free trade.28
In this environment Juan Perón gained mass political support.
Taxes were increased, agricultural marketing boards created, unions
supported, urban real wages boosted, international trade regulated. Perón
sought to generate rapid growth and to twist terms of trade against rural
agriculture and redistribute wealth to urban workers who did not receive
their fair share. The redistribution to urban workers and to firms that had
to pay their newly increased wages required a redistribution away from
28Moreover, conservative dictatorships in the 1930's had sharpened lines of political cleavage.
Landowner and exporter elites had always appropriated the lion's share of the benefits of free
trade. They had in the 1930's shown a willingness to sacrifice political democracy in order to
stunt the growth of the welfare state.

39

exporters, agricultural oligarchs, foreigners, and entrepreneurs.
FIgure 9
Post-World War II GDP per Capita Growth In Argentina, Britain, France
West Germany, and Italy
Germany

1.5

Log Scale
0.5

Source: Robert Summers and Alan Heston. Penn World Table V.

The Perónist program was not prima fade unreasonable given the
memory of the Great Depression, and it produced almost half a decade
of very rapid growth. Then exports fell sharply as a result of the
international business cycle as the consequences of the enforced
reduction in real prices of rural exportables made themselves felt.
Agricultural production fell because of low prices offered by
government marketing agencies. Domestic consumption rose. The rural
sector found itself short of fertilizer and tractors. Squeezed between
declining production and rising domestic consumption, Argentinian
exports fell. By the first half of the 1950's the real value of Argentine
exports was only 60 percent of the depressed levels of the late 1930's,
and only 40 percent of 1920's levels. Due to the twisting of terms of

40
trade against agriculture and exportables, when the network of world
trade was put back together, Argentina was by and large excluded.
The consequent foreign exchange shortage presented PerOn with
unattractive options. First, he could attempt to balance foreign payments
by devaluing to bring imports and exports back into balance in the long
run and in the short run by borrowing from abroad.29 But effective

devaluation would have entailed raising the real price of imported goods
and therefore cutting living standards of the urban workers who made up
his political base. Foreign borrowing would have meant a betrayal of his

strong nationalist position. Second, he could contract the economy,
raising unemployment and reducing consumption, and expand incentives
to produce for export by decontrolling agricultural prices.30 But once
again this would have required a reversal of the distributional shifts that
had been the central aim of his administration.
The remaining option was one of controlling and rationing
imports. Not surprisingly, PerOn and his advisors chose the second

alternative, believing that a dash for growth and a reduction in
dependence on the world economy was good for Argentina. Dfaz
Alejandro writes:

First priority was given to raw materials and
intermediate goods imports needed to maintain
29Foreign borrowing would have appeared even less attractive to Argentines who recalled the
extraordinarily high real effective interest rates that their foreign debt had carried during the
deflation of the 1930's. See Dfaz Alejandro (1970).
30The experience of the previous generation, however, suggested cx ante that Argentina did not
need to further specialize in the international division of labor. Demand for its export products
had been depressed for twenty years.

41

existing capacity in operation. Machinery and
equipment for new capacity could neither be
imported nor produced domestically. A sharp
decrease in the rate of real capital formation in
new machinery and equipment followed. Hostility
toward foreign capital, which could have provided
a way out of this difficulty, aggravated the
crisis...
Subsequent governments did not fully reverse these policies, for the
political forces that Perón had mobilized still had to be appeased. Thus
post-World War II Argentina saw foreign exchange allocated by the
central government in order to, first, keep existing factories running and,
second, keep home consumption high. Third and last priority under the
controlled exchange régime went to imports of capital goods for
investment and capacity expansion.
As a result, the early 1950's saw a huge rise in the price of capital
goods. Each percentage point of total product saved led to less than half

a percentage point's worth of investment. DIaz Alejandro found
"[riemarkably, the capital... in electricity and communications increased

by a larger percentage during the depression years 1929-39 than... 194555," although the 1945—55 government boasted of encouraging
industrialization. Given low and fixed agriculture prices, hence loW
exports, it was very expensive to sacrifice materials imports needed to
keep industry running in order to import capital goods. Unable to invest,
the Argentine economy stagnated.
In 1929 Argentina had appeared as rich as any large country in
continental Europe. It was still as rich in 1950, when Western Europe

42

had for the most part reattained pre-Worid War II levels of national
product. But by 1960 Argentina was poorer than Italy and had less than

two-thirds of the GDP per capita of France or West Germany. One way
to think about post-World War II Argentina is that its mixed economy
was poorly oriented: the government allocated goods, especially
imports, among alternative uses; the controlled market redistributed
income. Thus neither the private nor the public sector was used to its
comparative advantage: in Western Europe market forces allocated
resources—even, to a large extent, for nationalized industries—the
government redistributed income, and the outcome was much more
favorable.
B. The European Analogy
In the absence of the Marshall Plan, might have Western Europe

followed a similar trajectory? In DIaz Alejandro's estimation, four
factors set the stage for Argentina's relative decline: a politically-active
and militant urban industrial working class, economic nationalism, sharp
divisions between traditional elites and poorer strata, and a government
used to exercising control over goods allocation that viewed the price
system as a tool for redistributing wealth rather than for determining the
pattern of economic activity.
From the perspective of 1947, the political economy of Western
Europe would lead one to think that it was at least as vulnerable as
Argentina to economic stagnation induced by populist overregulation.

The war had given Europe more experience than Argentina with
economic planning and rationing. Militant urban working classes calling
for wealth redistribution voted in such numbers as to make Communists

43
plausibly part of a permanent ruling political coalition in France and
Italy.3' Economic nationalism had been nurtured by a decade and a half
of Depression, autarky and war. European political parties had been
divided substantially along economic class lines for a generation.
Yet Europe avoided this trap. After World War II Western
Europe's mixed economies built substantial redistributional systems, but
they were built on top of and not as replacements for market allocations
of goods and factors. Just as post-World War II Western Europe saw the
avoidance of the political-economic "wars of attrition" that had put a

brake on post-World War I European recovery, so post-World War II
Western Europe avoided the tight web of controls that kept post-World
War II Argentina from being able to adjust and grow.

VU. The Role of the Marshall Plan
Did the Marshall Plan play a role in Western Europe's successful
avoidance of these traps? In answering this question, it is important to
distinguish three effects of the American Marshall Plan program: its
immediate contribution to the restoration of financial stability; its role in
restoring the free play of market forces; and its part in the negotiation of
the social contract upon which the subsequent generation of supergrowth
was based.
A. The Restoration of Financial Stability
Financial instability was pervasive in post-World War II Europe.
3tFor details, see Casella and Eichengreen (1991).

44
Relief expenditure sent budgets deep into deficit. Governments
responded to inflation by retaining controls, prompting the growth of
black markets and discouraging transactions at official prices. Farmers
refused to market produce as long as prices were restricted to low levels.
With receipts vulnerable to inflation or taxation, they were better off
hoarding inventories. The post-World War II food shortage reflected not
merely bad weather in 1947 but the reluctance of farmers to deliver food
to cities. Moreover, manufactured goods farmers might have purchased
remained in short supply. Manufacturing enterprises had the same
incentive to hoard inventories. As long as food shortages persisted,
workers had little ability—or incentive—to devote their full effort to
market work. Few were willing to sell goods for money when inflation
threatened to accelerate at any time. 32
The liberal, market-oriented solution to the crisis was
straightforward. Prices had to be decontrolled to coax producers to bring
their goods to market, Inflation had to be halted for the price mechanism
to operate smoothly and to encourage saving and initiative. Budgets had
to be balanced to remove inflationary pressure. With financial stability
restored and market forces given free reign, individuals could direct
their attention to market work. Without financial stability, the allocative
mechanisms of the market could not be relied on—and government
controls over the process of goods allocation would appear the more
attractive option.
32WalIich (1955) describes how German industries that made consumer goods would pay their
workers in the factorys output so that its workers would have something with which to barter,
while industries that made producer goods paid their workers some of their wages in coal which
managers had diverted from power generation.

45

For budgets to be balanced and inflation to be halted, however,

political compromise was required. Consumers had to accept higher
posted prices for foodstuffs and necessities. Workers had to moderate
their demands for higher wages. Owners had to moderate demands for
profits. Taxpayers had to shoulder additional liabilities. Recipients of
social services had to accept limits on safety nets. Rentiers had to accept
that the war had destroyed their wealth. There had to be broad
agreement on a "fair" distribution of income, or at least on a distribution
of the burdens that was not so unfair as to be intolerable. Only then
could pressure on central banks to continually monetize budget deficits
and cause either explicit or repressed inflation be removed.
Here the Marshall Plan may have played a critical role. It did not
obviate the need for sacrifice. But it increased the size of the pie
available for division among interest groups. Two-and-a-half percent—
Marshall Plan aid as a share of recipient GDP—was not an
overwhelmingly large change in the size of the pie. But if the sum of
notional demands exceeded aggregate supply by five or seven-and-a-half
percent, Marshall Plan transfers could reduce the sacrifices required of
competing distributional interests by a third or as much as a half. The
presence of Marshall Plan aid could thus have significantly reduced the
costs of compromise relative to the benefits.33
Dangerous instability arises if the failure to compromise leads to a
"war of attrition." Suppose that the difference between the total sum of
claims to output and output itself shows up as a deficit in the

government's budget. Then even small conflicts over "fair shares" can
33This is the argument developed for Italy and France in CaseUa and Eichengreen (1991).

46
easily lead to aggregate demand which exceeds supply by some seven or
eight percent. To meet such a shortfall of revenues relative to demands

for services and transfers through money creation, the government has to
increase the high-powered money supply by eight percent of GDP each
year. The consequences of such a rate of increase in high-powered
money are likely to be disastrous.
Marshall Plan aid of two and a half percent of national product
goes a substantial way toward closing this excess demand gap.

Moreover, its potential availability if the government's stabilization plan
meets the criteria required by Plan administrators provides a powerful
incentive for governments to impose financial discipline. With Marshall
Plan aid available, the benefits for quick resolution of "wars of attrition"
were greater, and so the Plan in all likelihood advanced the date of
financial stabilization. While internal price stabilization after World War
II took four years, the German hyperinflation took place in the sixth year
after the end of World War I, and France's post-World War I inflation
lasted for eight years. Some large part of the credit for this early
stabilization goes to the Marshall Plan, and to earlier aid programs.34
Along with the carrot of Marshall Plan grants, the U.S. also
wielded a stick. For every dollar of Marshall Plan aid received, the
recipient country was required to place a matching amount of domestic
currency in a counterpart fund to be used only for purposes approved by
the U.S. government. Each dollar of Marshall Plan aid thus gave the
34Banca Italiana governor Menichella attributed Italian stabilization to the pre-Marshall Plan
"interim aid" program. In his belief, "stabilization was made possible by interim aid... .Interiirt
aid and the prospect of the Marshall Plan made it possible to maintain stability in prices. See
Price (1955).

47

U.S. government control over two dollars' worth of real resources.
Marshall Plan aid could be spent on external goods only with the
approval of the United States government. And the counterpart funds
could be spent internally only with the approval of the Marshall Plan
administration as well.
In some instances the U.S. insisted that the funds be used to
buttress financial stability. Britain used the bulk of its counterpart funds
to retire public debt. Vincent Auriol claims that the U.S. refused to
release French counterpart funds in 1948 until the new government
affirmed its willingness to continue policies leading to a balanced
budget.35 French officials were outraged: nevertheless, they took steps to
obtain release and raised taxes. This was policy: nations undergoing
inflation could not draw on counterpart funds until the Marshall Plan
administration was satisfied that they had achieved a workable

stabilization program (Price, 1955).
Marshall Plan administrators believed that their veto power over
the use of counterpart funds considerably increased U.S. leverage over
Western European economic policies. Moreover, counterpart funds were
only one of several available levers. Plan administrators believed that if
governments could afford to divert funds from reconstruction to social
services, Marshall aid could be eliminated proportionately. Britain lost
its Marshall Plan timber line item as a result of the government's entry
into the construction of public housing. West Germany found the release
of counterpart funds delayed until the nationalized railway had reduced

35Auriol (1970), P.162. Other sources do not contradict Auriol's memoires. See, for example,
Price (1955),

48

expenditures to match revenues (Arkes, 1972). Marshall and Lucius
Clay, Military Governor of the American zone of Germany, viewed with
alarm British schemes for unifying and nationalizing the coal industries
of the Ruhr, then part of the British zone of occupation, and successfully
lobbied against them. The United States was not interested in having
Marshall Plan aid support policies of nationalization. The U.S. even put
pressure on Britain's Labour government to delay and shrink its own
nationalization programs.

B. The Free Play of Market Forces
Renewed growth required, in addition to financial stability, the free
play of market forces. Though there was support for the restoration of a
market economy in Western Europe, it was far from universal. Wartime
controls were viewed as exceptional policies for exceptional times, but it
was not clear what was to replace them. Communist and someSocialist
ministers opposed a return to the market. It was not clear when, or even
if, the transition would take place.
On this issue the Marshall Plan—specifically, the conditions

attached to U.S. aid—left Western Europeans with no choice. Each
recipient had to sign a bilateral pact with the United States. Countries
had to agree to balance government budgets, restore internal financial
stability, and stabilize exchange rates at realistic levels. Europe was still
committed to the mixed economy. But the U.S. insisted that market
forces be represented more liberally in the mix. This was the price that
the U.S. charged for its aid.
The demand that European governments trust the market came
from the highest levels of the Marshall Plan administration. Dean

49
Acheson describes the head administrator, Economic Cooperation
Administration chief Paul Hoffman, as an "economic Savonarola."
Acheson describes watching Hoffman "preach.. .his doctrine of
salvation by exports" to British Foreign Secretary Ernest Bevin. "1 have
heard it said," wrote Acheson, "that Paul Hoffman... missed his calling:
that he should have been an evangelist. Both parts of the statement miss
the mark. He did not miss his calling, and he was and is an evangelist."36
European economic integration was pursued intensely by the Plan
administration. Even where domestic markets were highly concentrated,

they believed competition could be injected via intra-European and
international trade. Government intervention and other efforts to
interfere with the operation of market forces would be disciplined by
foreign competition. As a condition for receiving Marshall Plan aid,

each country was required to develop a program for removing quotas

36The Marshall Plan was not left to professional politicians, potentially interested in getting
along with recipient countries and building bureaucratic empires. Because Republican senators
like Arthur Vandenberg had feared either that Marshall aid would be wasted or—like New Deal
programs—used to solidify Democratic political bases in the U.S., the Economic Cooperation
Administration had "sunset" provisions built into its enabling legislation and a peculiar Status as
an administrative agency formally subordinate to but not reporting to or responsible to the
president. Republican worries moreover set in motion a chain of events that led the Economics
Cooperation Administration to be headed by a businessman: Paul Hoffman had previously been
President of Studebaker.
Truman originally sought Dean Acheson as Marshall Plan Administrator, but Acheson
demurred. Senator Arthur Vandenberg had been the key to getting the program shell fuelled with
appropriations. Vandenberg had worked hard to separate Marshall Plan administration from the
ongoing governmental bureaucracy. Acheson believed—correctly—that the appointment of a
State Department insider like himself would be taken as a rejection of what Vandenberg had
worked for. Acheson suggested that Truman, instead, ask Vandenberg for his choice—and he
speculated that Vandenberg would recommend Paul Hoffman. Truman did ask, and Vandenberg
did so recommend.

50
and other trade controls. In 1950, discussions culminated in the
European Payments Union, a system of credits to promote multilateral
trade among European countries.37
It was not inevitable that Western Europe would have accepted the
bargain. Marshall aid was ostensibly offered to Eastern Europe, and
even to the U.S.S.R. Moscow's rejection can be seen in part as
unwillingness to allow the U.S. to sidetrack its satellites' progress
toward central planning. It is critical to acknowledge that the price
charged for the aid was a price Western Europe might have paid for its
own sake in any event. Support for the market was widespread, although
just how widespread was uncertain. The Marshall Plan at most tipped
the balance.
Post-World War II Europe was far from laissez faire. Government
ownership of utilities and heavy industry was substantial. Government
redistributions of income were large. The magnitude of the "safety nets"
and social insurance programs provided by the post-World War II
welfare states were far beyond anything that had been thought possible
before World War I. But these large welfare states were accompanied by
financial stability, and by substantial reliance on market processes for
allocation and exchange.
C. The Social Contract and Long-Term Growth
The restoration of financial stability and the free play of market
37Between 1948 and 1952, trade among European countries increased more than five times as
fast as European trade with other continents. The economies of Europe were once again
permitted to specialize in the production of goods in which they had a comparative advantage.
Productivity received another boost.

51

forces launched the European economy onto a two-decade long path of
unprecedented rapid growth. European economic growth between 1953
and 1973 was twice as fast as for any comparable period before or since.
The growth rate of GDP was 2 percent per annum between 1870 and
1913 and 2.5 percent per annum between 1922 and 1937. In contrast,
growth accelerated to an astonishing 4.8 percent per year between 1953
and 1973, before slowing to half that rate from 1973 to 1979.38

Because the roots of postwar Europe's "super-growth" are not
adequately understood, it is difficult to isolate the contribution of the
Marshall Plan. We will nonetheless hazard some speculations about the
role that U.S. aid might have played.39
Europe's rapid growth in the 1950's and 1960's was associated
with exceptionally high investment rates.40 The investment share of
GNP was nearly twice as high as it had been in the last decade before
World War II or it was again to be after 1972. Accompanying high rates
of investment was rapid growth of productivity. Even in Britain, the
laggard, productivity growth rose sharply between 1924-37 and 195 173, from 1 to 2.4 percent per annum.41 This high investment share did
not, however, reflect unusual investment behavior during expansion
phases of the business cycle. Rather, it reflected the tendency of
investment to collapse during cyclical contractions and the absence of

38Statistics in this section are from Boltho (1982).
39'rhe hypotheses advanced in this and the succeeding paragraph are developed at more length in
Eichengreen (1 989b).
40mis point, made forcefully for Britain by Matthews (1967), applies to other European
countries as well. See Glyn et al. (1990).
41Broadberry (1991), Table 6, computed from Matthews, Feinstein and Odling-Smee (1982).

52

significant cyclical downturns between 1950 and 1971.

It would be tempting to ascribe Europe's cyclical stability to the
advent of Keynesian stabilization policy, but for the fact that Keynesian
policy was not forgotten when increasingly volatile cyclical fluctuations
recurred after 1972. A possible reconciliation is that Keynesian policy
was effective only so long as labor markets were accomodating. So long
as increased pressure of demand applied by governments in response to
slowdowns produced additional output and employment rather than
higher wages and hence higher prices, the macroeconomy was stable.
Investment was maintained at high levels, and rapid growth persisted.
The key to Europe's rapid growth, from this perspective, was its
relatively inflation-resistant labor markets.42 So long as they
accomodated demand pressure by supplying more labor input rather than
demanding higher wages, the other pieces of the puzzle fell into place.
What then accounted for the accomodating nature of postwar labor
markets?
The conventional explanation, following Kindleberger (1967), is
elastic supplies of. underemployed labor from rural sectors within the
advanced countries and from Europe's southern and eastern fringe.

Elastic supplies of labor disciplined potentially militant labor unions. A
problem with this argument is that the competition of underemployed
Italians or Greeks or Eastern European refugees was hardly felt in the
United Kingdom, yet labor market behavior was transformed in the U.K.
as in other countries after World War 11.43
42This, of course, is the famous conclusion of Kindleberger (1967), although the mechanism
there linking labor markets to economic performance is somewhat different.
43See Broadberry (1991).

53

Another explanation is "History." Memory of high unemployment
and strife between the wars served to moderate labor-market conflict.
Conservatives could recall that attempts to roll back interwar welfare
states had led to polarization, destabilizing representative institutions
and setting the stage for fascism. Left-wingers could recall the other side
of the same story. Both could reflect on the stagnation of the interwar
period and blame it on political deadlock.
Yet another potential explanation is the Bretton Woods System.
Bretton Woods linked the dollar to gold at $35 an ounce and other
currencies to the dollar. So long as American policy makers'
commitment to the Bretton Woods parity remained firm, limits were
placed on the extent of inflationary policies. So long as European policy
makers were loath to devalue against the dollar, limits were placed on
their policies as well. Price expectations were stabilized. inflation, where
it surfaced, was more likely to be regarded as transitory. Consequently,
increased pressure of demand was less likely to translate into higher

prices instead of higher output, higher employment, and greater
macroeconomic stability.
A final potential explanation is the Marshall Plan. Putting the point
in this way serves to underscore that the Marshall Plan was but one of
several factors contributing to observed outcomes. In principle, the
Marshall Plan could have mattered directly. Marshall Planners sought a
labor movement interested in raising productivity rather than in
redistributing income from rich to poor. With labor peace a potential
precondition for substantial Marshall Plan aid, labor organizations
agreed to push for productivity improvements first and defer
redistributions to later. Moreover, money was channeled to non-

54

Communist labor organizations. European labor movements split over

the question of whether Marshall aid should be welcomed—which left

the Communists on the wrong side, opposed to economic recovery
(Maier, 1987).
In practice, we believe, the Marshall Plan's indirect effects were
important. One way to think about the post-World War II settlement,
and the contrast with the interwar period, is as a coordination problem.

Labor, management and government in Europe could, in effect, choose
to try to maximize their current share of national income—as after
World War I. Inflation, strikes, financial disarray, cyclical instability and
productivity problems can all be seen as corollaries of this equilibrium.
Alternatively, the parties could trade current compensation for faster
long-term growth and higher living standards, even in present-value
terms. Workers would moderate their wage demands, management its
demands for profits. Government agreed to use demand management to
maintain employment in return for wage restraint on the part of unions.
Higher investment and faster productivity growth could ensue,

eventually rendering everyone better off.
Such a "social contract" is advantageous only if it is generally
accepted. If workers continued to aggressively press for higher wages,
management had little incentive to plow back profits in return for the
promise of higher future profits. If management failed to plow back
profits, workers had little incentive to moderate current wage demands
in return for higher future productivity and compensation. If labor
relations were conflictual rather than harmonious, productivity would be
the casualty. The Marshall Plan could have shifted Europe onto this

"social contract" equilibrium path, for once workers and management

55
began coordinating on the superior equilibrium they had no obvious

reason to stop.44
The Marshall Plan provided immediate incentives for wage

moderation in the late 1940's. U.S. policy encouraged European
governments to pursue investment-friendly policies. Productivity soared
in the wake of financial stabilization and the advent of the Marshall
Plan. The advantages of the cooperative equilibrium were suddenly
clear.
It is intriguing that, within the group of reconstructing nations,
those where the United States had most leverage had the fastest-growing
economies. United States influence was strongest in Germany, weaker in
France and Italy, and weakest in Britain. In the post-World War II

period the German economy was the most successful, the British
economy least. Japan, where MacArthur was proconsul, is the exception
that proves the rule.

VIII.

Implications for Eastern Europe
Do conditions like those that made the Marshall Plan a success

after World War II exist in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union today?
There are important parallels. Just as in Western Europe in 1947—48,

enterprises hold back inventories in anticipation of higher prices once
controls are relaxed. Excess liquidity and government budget deficits
44We leave for another place what the question of what caused the postwar settlement to break
down in the 1970's. Two intriguing treatments of this question are those of Maiglin (1990) and
Broadberry (1991), both of whom argue that the postwar settlement contained the seeds of its
own destruction.

56
create the specter of rampant inflation. Belief that reform must occur
soon, but uncertainty about its nature, provides a powerful incentive to
delay investment and rationalization until the situation is clarified.
A paradox of reform in Eastern Europe is that the workers in heavy
industry who initiated the rebellion against Communist domination
were, from an economic standpoint, relatively unproductive at world
prices and thus "privileged" under the ancien régime. Their wages were
relatively high. The industries in which they worked were massively
subsidized. Their real wages will be among the first to fall, and must fall
the farthest. Their jobs are most likely to disappear during transition.
Ironically, those in the vanguard of rebellion against the ancien régime
may be the first to withdraw their support for reform. Even with
substantial aid to cushion the fall in consumption during adjustment, it is
not clear that adjustment can be successfully completed.
As in Europe after World War I, political struggles over economic
structure could lead to damaging "wars of attrition." Conflict over

distribution could produce inflation, price controls, and foreignexchange rationing. Alternatively, market prices could be controlled in
the interest of stabilizing income distributions. The government's fiscal
and investment stance would be used to allocate resources. This might
well result in stagnation, for much evidence suggests that markets are
best at the allocation of resources and governments at moderating the
distribution of income. If Argentina is any guide, such a semi-planned
economy might last for a generation before being discredited.
To avoid both the post-World War I "distributional conflict" trap
and the Argentinian "populist overregulation" trap, Eastern Europe will
have to be lucky. A substantial aid program might help them to make

57

their own luck. Supporting Eastern European living standards could

limit public opposition to economic reform when output initially falls
during the transition to a market economy. Hard currency would allow
higher imports of much-needed commodities from the West. Reserves
would make monetary stabilization and currency convertibility possible.
Important differences weaken the case for a Marshall Plan,
especially for the regions of the Soviet Union. In post-World War II
Western Europe there already existed widespread support for and
experience with the market. The Marshall Plan only tipped the balance.
It is not clear that comparable support exists in the Soviet Union today,
or in much of Eastern Europe. Powerful elements still oppose economic
liberalization. And many advocates have no clear idea of what
liberalization entails.
In post-World War II Western Europe, Marshall Plan aid was
effective at least in part because Europe had experience with markets. It
possessed the institutions needed for their operation. Property rights,
bankruptcy codes, court systems to enforce market contracts—not to
mention entrepreneurial skills—all were in place. None of this holds in
Eastern Europe today. For fifty years potential entrepreneurs have been
labeled as "speculators" and attacked as public enemies. One principle
of a market economy is that entrepreneurial profits tell not how much
the entrepreneur is an exploiter but how wasteful of resources the
situation would have been in his absence. This principle is not yet
established, and so political leaders will be tempted to try to earn

populist applause by renewed crackdowns on "speculators."
In post-World War II Western Europe, U.S. aid and U.S.
conditionality encouraged the reductions in government spending

58

needed for financial stability. It encouraged the elimination of controls
and the liberalization of trade. It is far from certain that aid today will
have the same effect. Transfers to the central government may delay
rather than accelerate the process of privatizing industry and creating a
market economy. But whatever programs are adopted, aid is likely to
work better if provided on the basis of actions taken rather than need.
These observations all point toward caution on the part of those
contemplating the extension of Western aid to the East. They remind
that aid for Eastern European reform is a gamble. The original Marshall

Plan was a gamble as well. The Marshall Plan's Senate floor leader,
Arthur Vandenberg, did not promise success. In his final speech before
the Senate vote he warned that "...there are no blueprints to guarantee
results. We are entirely surrounded by calculated risks. I profoundly
believe that the pending program is the best of these risks..."

59

References

Acheson, Dean (1960), Sketches from Life. New York: Harper & Bros.

Acheson, Dean (1966). Present at the Creation. New York: New
American Library.
Alesina, Alberto and Allen Drazen (1992), '4Why are Stabilizations
Delayed?" A,nerican Economic Review (forthcoming).

Auriol, Vincent (1970). Mon Septennat, 1947-1954. Paris: Armand
Cohn.

Arkes, Hadley (1972). Bureaucracy, the Marshall Plan, and the
National Interest. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Bohien, Charles (1973). Witness to History 1929-69. New York: W.W.
Norton.

Block, Fred (1977). The Origins of International Economic Disorder.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Boltho, Andrea (1982), "Growth." In Andrea Boitho (ed.), The
European Economy. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Broadberry, S.N. (1991). "Why Was Unemployment in Postwar Britain
So Low?" Unpublished manuscript, Warwick University.

Calvocoressi, Peter, and Wint, Guy (1972). Total War: Causes and
Courses of World War II. New York: Pantheon Books.

60
Casella, Alessandra and Barry Eichengreen (1991). "Halting Inflation in
Italy and France After World War II." In Michael Bordo and Forrest
Capie (eds.), Monetaiy Regimes in Transition, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press (forthcoming).
Collins, Susan, and Rodrik, Dani (1991). Eastern Europe and the Soviet
Union in the World Economy. Washington, DC: Institute for
international Economics.
Cowan, Tyler (1985). "The Marshall Plan: Myths and Realities." In
Doug Bandow, ed., U.S. Aid to the Developing World. Washington,
D.C.: Heritage Foundation.

De Cecco, Marcello (1986). "On Milward's Reconstruction of Western
Europe." In Political Economy: Studies in the Suiplus Approach 2:1,
pp. 105—14.

Diaz-Alejandro, Carlos (1970). Essays on the Economic History of the
Argentine Republic, New Haven: Yale University Press.

Dumke, RoIf (1990). "Reassessing the Wirtschaftswunder:
Reconstruction and Postwar Growth in West Germany in an
International Context." O.xford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics
52:2, pp. 451-49 1.
Eichengreen, Barry (1989a). "The U.S. Capital Market and Foreign
Lending, 1920-1955." In Jeffrey Sachs., ed., Developing Country Debt
and Economic Performance: The International Financial System.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, pp.107-158.
Eichengreen, Barry (1989b). "European Economic Growth After World
War II: The Grand Schema." presented to the Conference Marking the

61

Retirement of William N. Parker, New Haven.

Eichengreen, Barry and Richard Portes (1989). "After the Deluge:
Default, Negotiation, and Readjustment during the Interwar Years." in
Barry Eichengreen and Peter Lindert, The international Debt Crisis in
Historical Perspective, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp.12-47.
Eichengreen, Barry, and Marc Uzan (1991). "The Marshall Plan:
Economic Effects and Implications for Eastern Europe." Economic
Policy (forthcoming).

Ellis, John (1990), Brute Force. New York: Viking.
Feis, Herbert (1950), The Diplomacy of the Dollar, 1919-1 932: First
Era. Baltimore MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Gimbel, John (1968). The American Occupation of Germany: Politics
and the Military, 1945-1949. Palo Alto: Stanford University Press.

Gimbel, John (1976). The Origins of the Marshall Plan. Palo Alto:
Stanford University Press.
Glyn, Andrew, Alan Hughes, Alain Lipietz and Ajit Singh (1990). "The
Rise and Fall of the Golden Age." In Stephen Marglin and Juliet Schor
(eds.), The Golden Age of Capitalism, Oxford: Clarendon, pp.39-125.
Halle, Louis (1967). The Cold War as History. New York: Harper and
Row.

Harris, Seymour (1948). The European Recovery Program. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.

62
Hazlitt, Henry (1947), Will Dollars Save tile World? New York:
Appleton-Century.

Hogan, Michael (1987). Tue Mars/ia/I Plan: America, Britain, and the
Reconstruction of Western Europe, 1947-1952. Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge University Press.
Holtfrerich, Carl-Ludwig (1986). "U.S. Capital Exports to Germany,
1919-23 Compared to 1924-29." Explorations in Economic History
23, pp.1-32.

Kindleberger, Charles (1967). Europe's Postwar Growth. London:
Oxford University Press.

Kindleberger, Charles (1987), Marshall Plan Days
Kostrzewa, Wojciech; Nunnenkamp, Pater; and Schmeiding, Holger
(1990), "A Marshall Plan for Middle and Eastern Europe?" World
Economy 13:1 (March), pp. 27—50.
Lukacs, John (1991). The Duel. New York: Ticknor & Fields.
Maier, Charles S. (1987). In Search of Stability. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Maier, Charles S. (1977). "The Politics of Productivity: Foundations of
American International Economic Policy after World War 11."
international Organization 31, pp. 607-33.
Maier, Charles S. (1981). "The Two Postwar Eras and the Conditions for
Stability in Twentieth-Century Western Europe." American Historical
Review 86, pp. 327-52.

63

Marglin, Stephen (1990). "Lessons of the Golden Age: An Overview."
In Stephen Marglin and Juliet Schor (eds.), The Golden Age of
Capitalism, Oxford: Clarendon, pp.1 -38.
Matthews, R.C.O. (1968). "Why has Britain had Full Employment Since
the War?" Economic Journal 82, pp.195-204.
Matthews, R.C.O., C. Feinstein and J. Odling-Smee (1982). British
Economic Growth, 1856-1973, Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Mayne, Richard (1973), The Recovery of Europe, 1945-1973. Garden
City, NY: Anchor Books.

Mee, Charles (1984), The Marshall Plan: The Launching of the Pax
Americana. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Milward, Alan S. (1965). The German Economy at War. London:
Methuen.
Milward, Alan S. (1984). The Reconstruction of Western Europe 194551. London: Methuen.

Pogue, Forrest C. (1990). George C. Marshall: Statesman 1945-49. New
York: Viking Press.
Sweezy, Paul (1942). The Theory of Capitalist Development. New York:
Oxford University Press.

Tinbergen, Jan (1954). "The Significance of the Marshall Plan for the
Netherlands Economy." In Kingdom of the Netherlands Ministry of
Finance, The Road to Recovery: The Marshall Plan, Its InportanCe

64

for the Netherlands. and European Cooperation. The Hague:
Kingdom of the Netherlands Ministry of Finance.
United States Mutual Security Agency (1953), The Structure and
Growth of the italian Econotny, Rome: MSA.

United Nations (1948). international Capital Movements During the
interwar Period. Lake Success, NY: United Nations.
United Nations (various years), Economic Survey of Europe, Geneva:
United Nations.

Wallich, Henry (1955). Mainsprings of the German Recovery. New
Haven: Yale University Press.
van der Beugel, Ernst Hans (1966). From Marshall Aid to Atlantic
Partnership: European integration as a Concern of American Foreign
Policy. New York: Elsevier.

van der Wee, Hermann (1986). Prosperity and Upheaval. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Wexier, Imanuel (1983). The Marshall Plan Revisited: The European
Recovery Program in Economic Perspective. Westport, CN:
Greenwood Press.

