                   NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




         CHANGES IN EARNINGS DIFFERENTIALS IN THE 1980s:
       CONCORDANCE, CONVERGENCE, CAUSES, AND CONSEQUENCES




                     McKinley L. Blackburn
                         David E. Bloom
                       Richard B. Freeman




                     Working Paper No. 3901




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          November 1991




An earlier version of this paper was presented at the Jerome Levy
Economics Institute at Bard College in June 1991. The authors
thank Melissa Binder and Pravin Krishna for computational
assistance, and Alan Blinder and Kevin Lang for helpful comments.
This paper is part of NBER's research program in Labor Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author s and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper *3901
                                             November 1991

           CHANGES IN EARNINGS DIFFERENTIALS IN THE 1980s:
          CONCORDANCE, CONVERGENCE, CAUSES, AND CONSEQUENCES

                                  ABSTRACT

    This paper analyzes changes in U.S. earnings differentials in the
1980s between race, gender, age, and schooling groups. There are four
main sets of results to report.
     First, the economic position of less-educated workers declined
relative to the more-educated among almost all demographic groups.
Education-earnings differentials clearly rose for whites, but less
clearly for blacks, while employment rate differences associated with
education increased more for blacks than for whites.
     Second, much of the change in education-earnings differentials
for specific groups is attributable to measurable economic factors: to
changes in the occupational or industrial structure of employment; to
changes in average wages within industries; to the fall in the real
value of the minimum wage and the tall in union density; and to
changes in the relative growth rate of more-educated workers.
     Third, the earnings and employment position of white females, and
to a lesser extent of black females, converged to that of white males
in the 1980s, across education groups. At the same time, the economic
position of more-educated black males appears to have worsened
relative to their white-male counterparts.
     Fourth, there has been a sizable college-enrollment response to
the rising relative wages of college graduates. This response
suggests that education-earnings differentials may stop increasing, or
even start to decline, in the near future.


Mckinley L. Blackburn                        David E. Bloom
Department of Economics                      Department of Economics
University of South Carolina                 Columbia University
Columbia, SC 29208                           New York, NY 10027
                                             and NBER

Richard B. Freeman
Center for Economic Performance
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2 2AE, England
and NEER
     The structure of earnings in the United States changed sharply in the

i98Os. In contrast to the long-term trend of declining wage differentials

between more- and less-skilled workers, the structure of earnings shifted

against the less-skilled, with less-educated workers suffering sizable losses

in real wages while more-educated workers enjoyed modest gains (see, e.g.,

Blackburn. Bloom, and Freeman, 1990; Bound and Johnson, 1989; Katz and

Revenga, 1969; and Murphy and Welch, 1988). Increases in education-earnings

differentials appear to account for part, though not all, of the rise in

earnings inequality among males (see Blackburn, 1989; and Juhn, Murphy, and

Pierce, 1989), which has in turn contributed to the rise in income inequality

among famiLies (Blackburn and Bloom, 1991).

      Analyses of the changing pattern of earnings in the 1980s have generally

focused on the magnitudes and causes of the increase in education-earnings

differentials among white males. Only limited attention has been paid to the

earnings structure among females and minority workers, or to the effects of

changes in the earnings structure on school enrollment decisions.' Have the

earnings structure and employnient rates of these other demographic groups

changed in the same manner in the 1980s as they did for white maLes? Within

education groups, what happened to earnings and employment differentials

between white males and other demographic groups? What can be learned about

the causes of the changing earnings structure from differences in the

experience of the various demographic groups? To what extent have   the

college-enrollment decisions of the different groups responded to changes     in

the earnings structure? Are market-supply responses likely to "correct"      the

massive rise in differentials?

       We address these questions using March 1980 and March 1989 CPS data on

 the earnings and employment status of workers in selected demographic groups.
The Match CPS provides information on workers'      annual earnings for the
calendar year    preceding each survey, and on workers' labor-force status at the

time of the survey. To capture primarily changes in annual earnings due to

changes in wage rates, and not to changes in hours worked, we examine the

earnings of full-time, year-round workers only. As our measure of employment,

we use employment-to-population ratios rather than unemployment rates,

although the fact that unemployment rates and employment rates move inversely

for most groups suggests that a focus on unemployment would yield similar

results. We focus on the earnings differentials of high school graduates (HS)

reLative to workers with less than high school education (LT}IS) and of college

graduates (CC) relative to high schooL graduates.2 We also examine changes in

the economic position of our specified demographic groups relative to white

males, both in terms of earnings and employment.

         We find that:

         (1) Education-earnings and education-employment rate differentials

widened for most, but not all, demographic groups. Education-earnings

differentials rose more for whites (i.e., nonblacks, as defined in our

analysis) than for blacks, while employment rate differences associated with

education increased more fqr blacks than for whites. Most strikingly, the

earnings differential between high school graduates and dropouts narrowed for

black men while their employment-rate differential widened substantialLy. The

fact that the change in education-earnings differentials varied across

demographic groups in magnitude, and in some cases in direction, implies that

distinct factors have affected the different groups. It also suggests that

the overall increase in earnings inequality in the U.S. represents the net

effect    of sometimes   discordant underlying currents.




                                           2
        (2) The earnings and employment position of white females improved

relative to white males in the 1980s across all education groups. The change

in the relative economic position of blacks, however is less clear.

        (3) Much of the change in education-earnings differentials for specific

groups is attributable to measurable economic factors: to changes in the

occupational or industrial structure of employment; to changes in industry

average wages; to the fall in the real value of the minimum wage, and the fall

in union density: and to changes in the relative growth rate of more-educated

workers. These factors also heLp in explaining the changes in demographic'

group differentials within education categories.

        (4) There has been a sizable college-enrollment response to the rising

relative wages of college graduates. Females appear to respond more to male

than to female earnings differentials, suggesting that they anticipate

continued elimination of gender differentials within education groups over

time.    Looking to the future, the suppLy responses suggest that college-to-

high school differentials will drop in the 1990s, barring accelerated shifts

in the relative demand for college graduates.




fl   Chances ft   Earninn     Emclovment Differentials fr Race/Gender Groups

        One of the most striking changes in the labor market for maLe workers in

the l9BOs was the massive increase in earnings and employment differentials

across schooling groups. The increase was most marked for young workers,

driven largely by sizable falls in the real earnings and employment of the

less-educated rather than by any major improvements in the economic position

of more-educated workers,

        Table 1 records average real earnings for 24 demographic-education

groups in 1979 and L988, and the implied annual growth rates   of earnings




                                         3
between those years. We distinguish between blacks and whites, men and women,

and 25-64 and 25-34 year olds, in addition to the three education groups. The

reported statistics are geometric means of annual wage and salary income for

full-time year-round workers in the relevant March CFS, adjusted for inflation

using the GP personal-consumption-expenditure deflator. The table

illustrates the well-known fall in real earnings for less-educated white

males, and the modest rise in real earnings for white males with four or more

years of college. The nature of changes in average earnings within education

groups is similar for all prime-age white males (ages 25-64) and for those

white males who have more recently entered the labor market (ages 25-34),

although among the less-educated, real earnings have declined more rapidly for

the young than for the old.

                              [Table 1 about herel

      The results for white women show a pattern of change similar to that for

white men, with a notable difference in the levels of change: greater

increases in real earnings for the more-educated, and smaller decreases in

real earnings for the less-educated (both compared to white men). The

statistics for blacks, however, are lore mixed. Among 25-64 year olds, black-

male high school graduates- - suffered larger losses in real earnings than

dropouts, producing a fall in the earnings differential between these

educational groups. The earnings of 25-64 year-old black females increased

more rapidly than those of white males, but less rapidly than those of white

females, in all three education groups. Among 25-34 year olds, black-male

college graduates suffered a real earnings loss of almost the same

proportionate magnitude as that suffered by high school graduates, with both

groups losing ground relative to high school dropouts. Among black women,

high school graduates (though not college graduates) had larger losses in real



                                        4
earnings than dropouts. Taken at face value, the statistics in table I

suggest that different factors affected the job markets for blacks and whites.



                              [Table 2 about here]

      To examine whether these changes in average earnings are due to changes

in the labor-market characteristics of these broad demographic-education

groups, we also estimated education-earnings differentials from regressions

that control for the effects of age, marital status, and region on earnings.

The resul.ts of these regressions, reported in table 2. reveal large increases

in differentials for both white males and white females, but a mixed pattern

of small increases, and some decreases, for blacks.    In particular, the rise

in the CG/HS differential was much smaller for blacks than for whites, and the

change in the HS/LTHS differential for blacks diverged qualitatively from the

changes for whites. None of the estimated changes for blacks are

statistically significant.5

                              [Table 3 about here]

      Turning from earnings to employment patterns, table 3 reports

employment-to-population ratios in 1980 and 1989 by level of education for the

various demographic groups. For white men, employment rates fell among 25-64

year olds, with a slightly greater fall for the less-educated, but were

unchanged among 25-34 year olds (having fallen in the l970s for that age

group). Among black men, by contrast, employment rates dropped sharply --     for
all three education groups among 25-64 year-olds, but especially for the less-

educated among 25-34 year-olds. The nature of changes in employment rates for

women is different. Among whites, employment-population ratios rose; since

they tended to rise more for the more-educated, employment differences between

educational categories widened (except for the CG/HS differential for 25-34



                                       S
year-olds). Among black females, the most striking change is a sharp drop in

 the employment rate for 25-34 year old high school dropouts.6

         For groups whose relative earnings and employment moved in the same

direction, or for which one statistic changed greatly while the other did nor.

the patterns of change in the two measures give a consistent-picture of market

changes. However, opposing changes in relative earnings and employment in the

HS/LTHS differentials for 25-34 year old blacks (a 17 point drop in the

earnings differential coupled with a 7 point increase in the employTnent rate

difference) leave open the question of whether the overall economic position

of the more-educated improved or worsened relative to the less-educated. One

way to combine the two statistics to reach an overall assessment is to

multiply the earnings and employment rates to yield earnings per member of the

population.7 In this case, the overall change would be equal to the change in

the logarithmic earnings differential plus the change in the logarithm of the

ratio of employment rates.       For example, comparing young black-male high

school graduates to high school dropouts, this calculation suggests that the

change in employment rates had an effect on the "total earnings" differential

that is equivalent to a 13 log-point increase in the education/wage

differential between these-two groups. This essentially offsets the estimated

17 log-point decline in the annual-earnings differential (reported in table

2). The impact of changes in employment rates on the HS/LTHS "total earnings"

differential for young black females is even larger -- a 34 log-point increase
-   - suggesting   that the labor market for high school graduates may have

improved relative to dropouts among this group.

        One way to highlight the cross-group variation of earnings and

employment experiences is to reorganize the earnings and employment data to

show differentials by demographic group within educational categories. Table



                                           6
4 does this by reporting changes in earnings and employment rates for black

males, white females, and black females relative to changes for white males in

the same education category.

                                       (Table 4 about here]

        Among 25-64 year olds, white and black women gained relative to white

men in both earnings levels and employment. However, the earnings position of

black men did not improve relative to that of white men, except among

dropouts. With the employment rates of black men falling relative to those of

white men in all education groups, more-educated black men fell further behind

whites. Among 25-34 year olds, white women gained relative to white men in

both earnings and employment. Among college graduates, black men and women

had modest falls in relative earnings, while among high school graduates,

black males lost ground in both their relative earnings and employment rates.

There are remarkable black-white differences among 25-34 year old high school

dropouts, as both black men and women gained in earnings but Lost in

employment. In sum, the economic position of white females clearly improved

relative to white males, but the change in the status of blacks relative to

white males is less clear.

        Can the complex changes in earnings across demographic-education groups

be summarized parsimoniously? The following identity Links the earnings (W13)

of workers in the ith education category and jth gender-race group to the

earnings of white males in the same education group (W1):

              —   W1   +

where      is the difference of the average earnings of workers in the ijth

race/gender group with those of the reference group of white males. Focusing

on changes over time (t), we have

        (1) AW1J —     AW   +   AD1J




                                                7
 If the labor market treats all race-gender groups similarly, save for fixed

differences due co discrimination, changes in W1 would be associaced with

 identical changes Ln W1 over time, producing similar changes in educational

differentials for all demographic groups. We refer to this as the concordant

change hypothesis      If market forces were purring equal pressure on non-

competitive labor-market differentials to disappear we would further expect

within-group differences to narrow more rapidly the greater the initial

differential. This suggests that               —     with .Z'cfi<O; with this

relationship, average earnings will increase more rapidly for groups with the

largest initial earnings differences relative to white males, while variation

in the average level of earnings across groups will decline over time. We

refer to this as the convergent change hypothesis. The following estimable

version of equation (I) links observed changes in a particular group's

earnings to the changes in earnings of the reference group, and to the initiaL

deviation of its earnings from those of the reference group:

       (2)   AtJu —    +                 e,
where e is an error term, and the coefficient 'y is allowed to differ from

unity in order to capture imperfect transmission to other demographic groups

of the factors that aLter the relative earnings of white males .

      To examine the extent to which changes in the earnings structure among

demographic groups can be represented by a simple coiiibination of concordant

and convergent changes, we estimated equation (2) using the l979-to-1988

changes in earnings for 9 education/demographic groups (3 education groups for

each of 3 race/gender groups). For 25-64 year olds, the estimated regression

is (standard errors in parentheses)

             — -1089   + .41 AW4   -   .19 D1      R2 — .67
               (1196) (A6)             (.11)

which is consistent with both the concordance and convergence hypotheses. For


                                              8
25-34 year olds, the estimated regression is

              —   -2460 + .35   AW1
                                      -    34     D a2   — 39
                  (1691)   (.28)          (.21)
which, though less precisely estimated, also provides some support tor both
hypotheses. However, the strong version of the concordance hypochests (&—1)

is not supported, and the R1s suggest that substantial variation in wage

changes is not accounted for by concordance and convergence. We turn next to

explore   the reasons for the concordant and convergent changes in earnings

differentials, as well as the reasons for the non-concordant and nonconvergent

variation.




fl.   Differential    Factors

       Studies of rising earnings differentials among white wales have

considered several measurable economic factors as potential contributors to

this rise: the inter-industry distribution of employment, the inter-occupation

distribution of employment, the real value of the minimum wage, union density,

immigration, educational quality, and relative labor supplies. These studies

have accounted for some of the increased differentials, though a sizable

residual remain.s9 In this section, we use a regression decomposition

analysis to examine how a number of these factors have contributed to the

trends in both education-earnings differentials and race/gender differentials.

(See Blackburn, Bloom, and Freeman, 1990, for a full description of this

method of analysts.)

       Table 5 reports our estimates of the contribution of selected factors to

changes in education-earnings differentials)0 The upper panel refers to 25-

64 year olds, the lower panel to 25-34 year olds. The first column repeats

the estimated change in the regression-corrected earnings differentials

reported in table 3; the middle columns report the contributions of each of


                                                  9
the five factors; the penultimate column reports the sum
                                                     of these
contributions;   and   the final column reports   the   residual   change.

      Our estimates of the effects of changes in occupational and industrial

mix and the inter-industry wage structure are based on a simple regression

decomposition. We pool our 1979 and 1988 samples for all workers in a

demographic group and estimate a log earnings equation for the pooled sample.

In controlling for the effects of education, age, region, and marital status

on earnings, we allow these factors to have separate coefficients for 1979 and

1988. However, when we add dummy variables for occupation as independent

variables, we constrain the coefficients on the dummy variables to be the same

in both years. In this way, we measure the effect of occupational shifts

holding constant the occupational wage structure (at its average level for the

two years). The magnitudes by which the estimated changes over time in the

regression-corrected education-earnings differential are lowered when the

occupation dummies are added is our measure of the occupational-mix effect;

these numbers are reported in the second column of table 11 Starting with a

specification that includes occupation dummies, we then add industry dummy

variables as controls, again estimating only one set of coefficients for the

industry variables for both 1979 and l9S8. FinaLly, we estimate the effect

of changes in the industrial wage structure on earnings-education

differentials by allowing the industry wage coefficients in the earnings

regression to vary from 1919 to 1988. The effects of industry shifts and

industry-wage changes are reported in the third and fourth columns of table 5.

    Because union status is not available for jobs in the previous calendar

year in our data, our measures of the impact of changes in union status are

based on separate calculations using current-job information in the Kay 1979

CPS and the March 1989 U'S.'3 We first calculated the percent unionized in



                                         10
1979 and in 1989 for each demographic-education group; these statistics (in

columns 1 and.2 of table A-4) illustrate the well-known fall in union density,

particularly among less-educated workers. We then estimated union premia in

1979 for the various groups, by including union dummy variables interacted

with education categories in our specifications for a usual-hourly-earnings

regression.1' The estimated premia we obtained for men are consistent with

those from other studies, showing a larger union effect on wages for the less-

educated. For women, our analysis shows little difference in union premia by

education group, the one, exception being a very large estimated union effect

for 25-34 year old black female college graduates (i.e., 32 percent). Because

we doubt the validity of this estimate, we have replaced it with the estimated

premium for 25-34 year old white female college graduates. We estimate the

effect of deunionization on the average earnings of the relevant education'

demographic group by multiplying the decrease in the groups' proportion

unionized by the relevant union wage premium. Estimates are reported in the

sixth column of table 5.

      Our estimate of the effect of the change in the real minimum wage on the

relative earnings of different groups of workers is also based on calculations

using the May 1979 and March 1989 CPS. We compared the differentials from the

actual distribution of hourly earnings in 1989 to the differentials from a

simulated distribution constructed under the assumption that from 1979 to 1988

the nominal minimum wage increased at the rate of inflation (so that the

minimum wage had the sane real value in 1989 as it did in L979.)15 Our

procedure for simulating the effect of raising the 1989 minimum wage to the

real vaLue of the minimum in 1979 is straightforward; first, if a worker's

wage is between the actual minimum wage in 1989 ($3.35) and the simulated

minimum ($4.61), their wage was raised to the simulated minimum; second, if a



                                       11
worker's wage was below the actual minimum in 1989, their wage was multiplied

by the ratio of the simulated minimum to the actual minimum; and third, if a

worker's wage was above the simulated minimum, it was not changed.15 Our

estimate of the impact of the fall in the real minimum wage on an
                                                                      earnings

differential (reported in the fifth column of table 5) is simply the

difference between the actual change in the earnings differential and the

change in our simulated data that hold the real minimum constant.

                                 [Table 5 about here)

      Changes in the occupational structure of employment appear to explain

little of the changes in educational differentials, more often suggesting

decreases rather than increases in earnings differentials. The estimated

effects of shifts in industry employment are, on the other hand, generally in

the 'right" direction and moderate; the effects of industry-wage shifts also

tend to help explain the observed changes. Taken together, the shifts in

occupation and industry employment and in the industry-wage structure can

account for 20 to 40 percent of the increase in differentials for whites, but

often suggest declines for blacks. Changes in union density have substantial

effects on the pattern of differentials for male workers, while the minimum

wage has a sizable effect primarily for the differential involving the lowest

paid group --   black   female dropouts. The drop in unionization is the dominant

factor explaining the change in the KS/LiftS differential among white males,

and the change in the CG/HS differentiaL among black malesj'

      There are a large number of decomposition statistics in table 5. In

some cases the statistics suggest that our decomposition analysis explains a

sizable proportion of the observed changes; in other cases, our analysis

"over-explains" changes; and in yet others, it fails to explain much of the

change at all. Can we summarize this diverse set of results using a single



                                         12
measure of the overall success of our analysis in accounting for the observed

changes in education-earnings differentials? We propose a pseudo-R2 measure

that contrasts the sum of the squared changes in relative earnings after our

analysis (the residual changes in the final column) to the sum of the squared

changes in relative earnings for all groups before our analysis (in the first

column). if E( W)a is the sum of the squared changes in actual earnings

differentials, and if (L WF)2 is the sum of squared residual changes, we

measure the proportion of the earnings-differential changes explained by our

analysis as

         1    -
                  [E(   r)Z / E(A   W)2]

If we explain all of the      change       in relative earnings for all groups, this

statistic will equal unity. However, because the decompositions can increase

rather than decrease the squared residuals, the statistic can be negative.

Measuring the goodness-of-fit of our analysis in this way, we find that our

analysis accounts for 53 percent of the squared changes in relative earnings

for 2561. year olds, and for 48 percent of the squared changes in relative

earnings for 25-34 years oldsJ8


Demographic Differentials Within Education Groups

      TabLe 6 reports the results of analyses designed to explain changes in

differentials between various demographic groups and white males. The

estimated effects of occupation and industry on changes in between-group

differentials are from log earnings regressions estimated separately by

educational group.19 The estimated effects of unionization and minimum wages

are calculated as the estimated effect of each factor on the average earnings

of the specified group minus the effect on average earnings for white males.

Using our pseudo-R1 measure of the explanatory power of the model, our

analysis accounts for 39 percent of the variation in changes between groups


                                                 13
 among 25-64 year olds, and 62 percent of the variation in changes across

 groups among 25-34 year 0145.20 This result for 25-34 year olds mainly

reflects the effect of deunionizarion on the relative earnings of high school

dropouts, since white males were the most highly unionized group in this

education category. Note also that occupation which explains little of the

changes in education-earnings differentials, helps explain several of the

changes in demographic differentials within education categories, particularly

for LTHS workers. Changes in industry employment are also an important

factor. By contrast, changes in the inter-industry wage structure often work

in the opposite direction to the actual changes. As before, the decline in

the minimum wage has its major effect on black female dropouts.

                              [Table 6 about here]


The Effect of Relative Labor Supplies

      Several recent analyses have stressed the slowdown in the relative

growth of more-educated to less-educated white males, and the actual decline

in the relative proportion of more-educated workers among 25-34 year old white

males, as contributing to the rise in education-earnings differentials (see

Blackburn, Bloom, and Freeman, 1990; Katz and Revenga, 1989). It seems

natural to explore the extent to which the relative supplies of workers with

differing levels of schooling have changed within demographic groups. To what

extent, if at all, are cross-group differences in the change in the relative

supply of more-educated workers --   taken as predetermined by earlier market
conditions due to the time lag involved in obtaining schooling -   - related   to

differences in the change in relative earnings? To address this issue, we

estimated the annual growth rate of the relative number of labor-force

participants in specified education groups. The results of these tabulations

for 1980-89 are presented in the top panel of table 7. There was an increase


                                        14
in the ratio of more- to less-educated workers for most demographic groups!

with two exceptions: declines among    both   white males and black males in the

number of college graduates relative to high-school graduates among 25-34 year

o)4s. In addition, the table reveals considerable variation across groups in

the change in relative supplies in the 1980s.

                               [Table 7 about herel

      To determine whether supply changes help explain changes in the residual

earnings differentials, we calculated correlation coefficients between the

1980-89 annual growth rates of relative supply (from table 7) and both the

actual changes in the HS/LTIIS and CC/MS differentials, and the residual

earnings changes after correcting for the five factors in table ,h1 If

differences in rates of growth of relative supply contributed to the differing

changes in education-earnings differentials, these correlation coefficients

should be negative. The estimated correlation coefficients, presented in table

8, are uniformly negative, supporting this conclusion.

                               (Table 8 about here]

      Finally, we also examined the correlation between the growth rate of

relative supply and the change in earnings differentials between white males

and our other race/gender groups. These correlations, presented in table 8,

are also uniformly negative, but tend to be smaller than the correlations for

the education differentials.



ILLS. Market Responses

      The preceding analyses provide evidence that the relative economic

position of more-educated workers improved during the 1980s within race,

gender, and age groups. However, the form of the improvement exhibits some

cross-group variation. The relative earnings of more-educated white males and



                                        15
 more-educated white females increased sizably and
                                                     significantly (both for
 25-66 and 25-34 year olds), though their relative employment rates increased

 only slightly (if at all). By contrast, the relative earnings of more-

 educated black males and black females tend to show small
                                                             and statistically

 insignificant increases, though the relative employment rates for these
                                                                           groups
 tended to increase sizably.

       Our results also provide some evidence of convergence during the l9SOs

between the wages of white females in different educational categories and

 those of white males in corresponding categories. Rut there is little

evidence of similar convergence between the wages of either black males or

black females and those of white males.

      Our analyses suggest that multiple factors are required to explain

changes in the reLative earnings of more-educated workers and that a number of

plausible explanations are not borne out by the data.    In particular,

deunionization and changes in the industrial composition of employment account

for small, but non-negligible, portions of relative earnings increases for

college graduates in different demographic groups, On the other hand, we find

little evidence that changes in the occupational distribution of employment or

(except for black females)-the fall in the real value of the minimum wage are

associated with the widening of education-earnings differentials. Since the

variation across demographic groups in the change in the supply of more-

educated workers supports a negative association between supply changes and

the change in relative earnings, changes in relative supply also appear to be

a contributor to changes in the wage structure observed in the l9BOs.

      Thus far, our analysis has focused almost exclusively on the comparison

of 1979 and 1988 data. In figures la and lb we plot the 1967-1987 time series

of education-earnings differentials for males and females aged 25-34 --   of   all



                                     16
races.22 These plots suggest that the data for 1979 and 1988 are not

anomalous in any obvious way; they also reveal that the level that education-

earnings differentials reached in the 1980s is not unprecedented, at Least for

men.

                            (Figures La and lb about here)

       What are the future consequences for the U.S. labor market of recent

increases in education-earnings differentials? The Lost important consequence

one might expect would be a supply response to the change in relative wages.

In order to examine this hypothesis, we have plotted in figures 2a-2d time-

series data from 1965 to 1989 on school enrollment rates for L8-19 and 20-21

year olds in four race/gender groups. For 18-19 year old white males and

white females, enrollment rates track changes in relative earnings fairly

closely throughout this time period. Though weaker, there is also some

correspondence between the time series patterns of relative earnings and

school enrollment rates among white males and white females aged 20-21. For

black males and black females, enrollment rates exhibit too much year-to-year

variation (mainly because the rates are calculated from much smaller samples

than for the whites) to draw any firm conclusions. Since enrollment rates can

be viewed as leading indicators of changes in the relative supply of more-

educated workers, we may expect that an accelerated growth rate of more-

educated workers will depress education-earnings differentials in the coming

years -

                        (Figures   2a, 2b, 2c, and Zd about here)

          The closeness of the time-series patterns in figures 1. and 2 suggests

that individuals are responding in their schooling investment decisions to

signals being sent from the labor market about the private returns to

schooling.23 ut schooling decisions would also be expected to depend upon



                                            17
the private costs of schooling investments. One component of the direct costs

of attending ollege --   tuition   and fees --   is   plotted in figure 3 (in

inflation-adjusted terms for two- and four-year public institutions combined).

Especially notable in this series is the sharp rise in tuition and fees froni

1980 to 1987, a trend that would, all else equal, be expected to discourage

school enrollment,

                             (Figure 3 about here]

      To test this idea, we estimated probability models of the school

enrollment behavior of college-age youths using the CC/ES differential,

corrected for tuition costs, and a linear trend variable as explanatory

variables.2' The results are reported in table 9 for white males and white

females.25 For white males, enrollment rates tend to increase when the

earnings differential for males rises: the enrollment-rate elasticity with

respect to changes in the differential is 0.34 (evaluated at the average

enrollment rate). For white females aged 18-19, enrollment rates also tend to

increase when relative earnings increase, though the magnitude of the response

is less than that among males. In addition, females aged 18-19 appear to

treat male relative earnings as a more relevant factor than female relative

earnings in their decision-to enroll in school. (The elasticity with respect

to changes in the male differential is 0.25). The results for white females

aged 20-21 do not suggest a strong connection between enrollment decisions and

the relative earnings differentials of females or males. Holding constant the

earnings differential, enrollment rates have been increasing over time for

white women, but falling for white men.26

                              (Table 9 about here I

      These results provide evidence that school enrollment decisions are

quite sensitive to changes in the net return on schooling, particularly for



                                         18
white men. If the difference in real earnings between college graduates and

high-school graduates had not increased over the 1980s, our probit estimates

suggest that the school enrollment rate for 18-19 year old white males would

have been 8 percentage points lower than it actually was in 1987.

Alternatively, if tuition had not increased as it did over the 1980s (see

figure 3), schooL enrollment rates would have been higher, though by less than

one percentage point.27

      What do these responses portend for changes in education-earnings

differentials in the near future? One of the primary factors causing

differentials to decline in the early 1970s was the increase in enrollment

rates in the late l96Os -   - itself   a result of the high level of differentials

that existed in the late l960s. In similar fashion, one might expect that the

high enrollment rates of the late l9SOs (particularly among whites) will cause

education-earnings differentials to falL in the 1990s. A dependable forecast

of changes in the differentials in the near future would require a careful

model of the impact of supply changes on earnings differentials, something

that we have not provided. But it does appear from the results we have

provided that the market is responding, and responding strongly, to the

increased incentive to acquire a college education.

      Can government policy influence education-earnings differentials? Given

that the value of a college education has increased, policymakers may consider

it socially beneficial to promote investment in this area. As our analysis of

enrollment-rate behavior suggests that college-age individuals do respond to

financial incentives, government could attempt to amplify this response by

increasing the after-tax return to a college education. Whether this would be

done most efficiently by increasing tuition subsidies, adjusting marginal tax

rates, or providing wage subsidies to college graduates is not clear.



                                           19
      Thile it appears chat the government can influence college-enrollment

behavior, it is not obvious from our analysis whether it would be appropriate

for it to do so,     It is true that the social value of a college education

increased in the 1980s, but we see no reason to believe that the value of a

college education to private individuals has not increased by a similar

amount.28 If there was no strong argument for increasing the subsidization of

college education in the late 1970s, there would appear to be no strong

argument for doing so now. Also, further increasing the number of college

graduates would have uncertain effects on earnings variation across

individuals - -   reducing   the earnings differences between college graduates and

high school graduates but increasing the number of individuals at the top end

of the earnings distribution. Given these uncertainties, and the strong

market response to the increased differentials, the case for increased tuition

subsidies does not appear to be all that compelling.




                                          20
                                      t'TOTES




1. Katz and Revenga (1989) focus on women as well as men, while Blackburn,
Bloom, and Freeman (1990) present earnings differentials for four race/gender
groups.

2. The educational grouping of the sample is actually based on completed years
of schooling: college graduates are individuals with 16 or more years of
completed schooling; high school graduates are individuals with exactly 12
years of schooling; and individuals with less than a high school education
have Less than 12 years of schooling. We will sometimes refer to LTHS workers
as high school dropouts, even though a substantial portion of these workers
never reached high school.

3. The differentials are taken from coefficient estimates for education dummy
variables in a log-earnings regression. Therefore, the differentials are in
log points, and can roughly be interpreted as measuring percentage differences
in (geometric) means between the two groups being compared.
      We also estimated education-earnings differentials using the hourly wage
data in the May 1979 and March 1989 CI'S surveys; the results are presented in
Appendix Table A-I. One advantage of the hourly wage data is that we do not
need to restrict the sample to full-time, year-round workers; however, it has
the disadvantage that the data are available for only one-fourth of the
sample, resulting in higher standard errors for the changes.

4. In terms of magnitudes, the table suggests a greater absolute log-point
increase in the CC/HS differential than in the HS/LThS differential for most
groups. This pattern should not, however, be interpreted as indicating a
greater increase in the educational premium per year of schooling for the
CC/HS than the KS/LullS differential: college graduates have on average mote
than four years of additional schooling compared to high school graduates,
while high school graduates hawe about two more years of schooling compared to
dropouts.

5. This is Likely due to the relatively smaller samples available for blacks
in the March CI'S (see Appendix Table A-2): there are only 65 LTI-tS black males
aged 25-34 in our samples for 1988, and only 41 LIES black females aged 25-34.

6. The 12 point fall in employment rates for 25-34 year old black male
dropouts raises the possibility that their increased real earnings (reported
in table 1) reflect a change in the selection process into employment, with
the fall in employment concentrated among those with the lowest earnings. The
identical 12 point fall in the employment rate for 25-34 year old black female
dropouts does cast some doubt on this interpretation, however, as the real
                                                                               -

earnings of young female dropouts fell. Nevertheless, testing this hypothesis
more carefully for the 1980s would be a useful subject for future research,

7. This procedure is valid under the assumption that the differential in
average hours worked between education groups has not changed over time.
There is also an implicit assumption that the extra leisure associated with a
fall in the employment rate for a particular group has no value to individuals
in the group. If this latter assumption is not true, we wilL tend to
overstate the impact of changes in employment rates on changes in the relative
position of the more- and less-educated.

                                        21
8. The changes in earnings within demographic groups, and the initial
earnings differences, are calculated using the average earnings statistics
reported in table 1.

9. The residual may at least partly be accounted for by technological change,
or changing patterns of international trade,   For attempts to measure these
influences, see Allen (1991), Krueger (1991), Mincer (1991), and Murphy and
Welch (1988),

10. Appendix Table A-3 presents the white-female CC/LTHS differentials in
1979 and 1988 within age cohorts, The results show that education-earnings
differentials have increased for both young and old cohorts, suggesting that
changes in educational quality do not appear to be an important factor
increasing earnings differentials. (A similar result for white males was
reported by Blackburn, Bloom, and Freeman, 1990).

11.  For exampLe, the change from 1979 to 1988 in the regression-corrected
HS/LTHS differential for white males aged 25-34 is .06; when we add occupation
dummies to the regression, the estimated change is .05, implying that .01 of
the change is due to the effects of occupational employment shifts.

12. In our analysis, we add occupation dummies, then industry dummies, to the
regression. Since the two are likely to be correlated, it could be the case
that occupation picks up part of the industry-shift effects, so that we
overstate the occupation effect and understate the industry effect. However,
our measured contributions are essentially invariant to the order in which we
add these two sets of variables to the regression - - which is not surprising.
given the small estimates we obtain for the occupation effects.

13. For the detaiLs of these calculations, see Appendix Table A-4.

14. The hourly-wage regressions were estimated with industry dummies as
independent variables in order to avoid double-counting the industry-shift
effect as part of the union effect. One might also suspect that the declines
in unionization rates are also partly due to industrial shifts, which wocild
again imply double-counting; however, calculations made for Blackburn, Bloom,
and Freeman (1990) suggest that the estimated impact of industrial shifts on
unionization rates is very small.

15. We utilized the usual hourly earnings data in the March 1989 CPS instead
of the annual earnings data because the usual earnings figures likely provide
more reliable information on hourly pay.

16. As noted in Blackburn, Bloom, and Freeman (1990), this simulation will
not capture any effects that changing the minimum may have on the employment
or unemployment rates of workers above and below the minimum, or the effect it
might have on the wage distribution above the minimum.

17. One odd result is the union effect for black females, where a larger drop
in density for coLlege graduates than for high school graduates acted to
reduce rather than increase the CC/HS differential.

18. Our goodness-of-fit measure uses squared deviations of the estimated
differentials (and residuals) from zero, rather than from their sample
averages. A pseudo-R2 measure could also be constructed using the deviations

                                      22
from the sample average, i.e. one minus the ratio of the variance of the
residual changes to the variance of the actual changes. These alternative R2s
are 11 percent for the 25-64 year-olds, and 36 percent for the 25-34 year-
olds. However-, this alternative 1(2 does not take into account the extent to
which our analysis explains changes that are operating in a similar fashion
for all four demographic groups, but rather only measures the extent to which
we account for discordant changes in differentials.

19. Since marital-status effects on wages tend to be very different for males
and females, we omitted marital-status dummies from these regressions

20. The alternative pseudo-R2's are even higher for the changes in
demographic-group differentials -- 62 percent for the 25-64 year-olds and 72
percent for the 25-34 year-aIds. This implies that much of our "explanation'
of the changes in these differentials pertains to how the changes in
differentials vary across groups, and less to why the changes are different
from zero.

21. Since the analysis combines two different education groups, with
elasticities of substitution that presumably differ, the correlations should
be viewed as giving crude indicators of the direction of the effects.

22. These differentials were calculated using arithmetic means reported in
the Current Population Reports P-GO series. They are for all races combined,
since average earnings statistics within races were not available in all
years. Two adjustments were made to the pre-1975 statistics: one, for
changes in the imputation procedure for income that were first implemented
with the 1975 data; and, two, for using average income in our pre-1975
calculations rather than average earnings (since the latter was not
available). For more detail on these adjustments, see Blackburn, Bloom, and
Freeman (1990).

23. This type of response would be suggested by a recursive, or cobweb,"
model of enrollment decisions. Cobweb models have been used successfully in
the past in analyzing enrollment behavior (e.g.. see Freeman, l97).

24. The differential we use as an explanatory variable in our enrollment
equations is constructed as:

             —       (C-rn/(H4-T)

where C is college-graduate earnings, H is high-school-graduates earnings, and
T is tuition. Under several simplifying assumptions, the internal rate of
return to investing in a college education can be shown to be reasonably
approximated by a linear function of D. I.e.,

           r —         + 61D

In our estimations, we use the college-graduate and high-school earnings for
25-34 year-olds in the numerator of D, and high-school earnings for 18-24
year-olds in the denominator.
      Among individuals, we assume the best alternative rate of return r —
         so that the probability of enrolling in school is
                 —    P(r>rA)   —

                                      23
We use grouped-probit methods to estimate d/a and (80+p)/a from time-series
estimates of P and D', i.e., we estimate, by least-squares

                   —   (90+p)/a   + (81/a)D' +

We also add a linear-trend term as a right-hand-side variable, which can be
thought of as measuring changes over time in      The error term () arises in
part because E is an estimate of the true percentage attending school, and so
will necessarily be heteroskedastic (see Maddala, 1983). However, a weighted-
least-squares estimator that takes this problem into account left the
coefficients and standard errors virtually unchanged from our OLS estimates.

25. We do not report results for blacks because the published data used to
estimate these equations do not report average earnings figures by race, and
the apparent differences between blacks and whites in the pattern for
education-earnings differentials in the l980s suggests that the combined
differentials in figure 1 would be a much poorer proxy for blacks.

26. There is no apparent reason to believe that young males are "under-
responding' to the increased differentials. In fact, estimates allowing the
coefficient for the corrected differential to vary before and after 1979
suggest that the response to the differential was higher after 1979 (though
the change in the coefficient is not statistically significant).

27. This is because tuition is a very small part of the overall cost of a
college education, even after the tuition increase. Our analysis likely
understates the impact of tuition changes, since it does not take into account
the fact that tuition costs are certain but the CG/HS earnings difference over
one's lifetime is varying and uncertain. However, estimates that allowed the
C-H and H-iT to enter linearly provided highly imprecise coefficient estimates
for 1-1+T that were also not robust to the years used for estimation.

28. It is true that private tuition costs increased in the 1980s, but over
the same period the average real expenditures per college tudent were also
increasing.




                                      24
                                References

Allen, Steven.   1991. !!Technology and the Wage Structure." Unpublished
   manuscript! North Carolina State University.

Blackburn, McKinley.  1990.  "What Can Explain the Increase in Earnings
   Inequality Among Males?" Industrial Relations. 29(3): 441-456.

          and David Bloom. 1991.    Changes in the Structure of Family
   tncome Inequality in the U.S. and Other Industrialized Nations During
   the 1980s." Unpublished manuscript.

____________ and Richard Freeman. 1990.    'The Declining Economic Position
   of Less Skilled American Men." In A Future of Lousy Jobs? The Changing
   Structure of U.S. Wages. Edited by Gary Burtless. Washington! D.C.:
   The Brookings Institution.

________________   1991. "An Era of Falling Earnings and Rising
   Inequality? The Brookings Review. 9(1): 38-43.

Bound, John and George Johnson. 1989. "Changes in the Structure of Wages
   During the 1980s: An Evaluation of Alternative Hypotheses." National
   Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper # 2963.

Freeman! Richard. 1975.   "Overinvestment in College Training?" Journal of
   Human Resources. 10(3): 287-311.

Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin Murphy, and Brooks Pierce. 1989. "Wage Inequality
   and the Rise in Returns to Skill," Unpublished paper, University of
   Chicago.

Katz, Lawrence, and Ana Revenga. 1989. 'Changes in the Structure of
   Wages: The United States vs Japan." Journal of the Japanese and
   International Economies.  3: 522-553;

Krueger, Alan. L991. 'How Computers Have Changed the Wage Structure,"
   Unpublished manuscript.

Madalla, G.S. 1983. Limited-Dependent and Qualitative Variables in
   Econometrics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Mincer, Jacob. 1991. "Human Capital, Technology, and the Wage Structure:
   What Do Time Series Show?' NEER Working Paper #3581.

Murphy, Kevin and Finis Welch. 1991. "Wage Differentials in the l980s:
   The Role of International Trade." Forthcoming in Economic Inquiry.
                                                  Figure la
                                Earnings Ratios for Males, 25-34

   1.6-

   1.5-
                                                                          *
                *                                                              *
   1.4




      1967             1971                1975            1979    1983       1987
                                                    Year


                                    * 3/-JS           — HSJLTHS
Source; Current Population Reports, P-60
                                           Figure lb
                              Earnings Ratios for Females, 25-34

   1.6
                                                                                          * *
   1.5
                                  *
   1.4                        *        **                               * * * *
                                                  *          *
                                                                  **       A
   1.3                                                                                         L]
                                                                                  •
                                                                                      ..1t1
                                                                                      Er
   1.2


   1.1


     1
     1967              1971                1975                  1979      1983               1987
                                                      Year


                                           CG/HS        -        HS/LTHS
Source; Current Population Reports, P-60
                                                Figure 2a
                             Enrollment Rates Among 18-19 Vear-Olds
                                            Sy Race/Gender Group


    0.65


    0.55                                                                       /? -@_u
                                                                          *
    0.45

                                         * *
    0.35


    0.25
       1965               1970              1975            1980           1985
                                                    Year


                                      White Males      *    White
                                                                    Femalesj
Source; Current Population Reports,
Series P-20
                                               Figure 2b
                            Enrollment Rates Among 18-19 Year-Olds
                                           By Race/Gender Group

           -
    0.65




       1965               1970              1975            1980           1985
                                                    Year


                                      Black Males          Black Females
Source: Current Population Reports.
Series P-20
                                         Figure 2c
                          Enrollment Rates Among 20-21 Year-Olds
                                        By Race/Gender Group


    0.5


    0.                                                                              /p
                                                                *
                                                                                    /
                                                                        3*
    0.3                                        * *     **           *
                  *     * *                        *
              *       *
    0.2


    0.1


         0
     1965               1970            1975             1980                1985
                                                Year


                              °   White Males      *   White Females
Source; Current Population Reports1
Series P-20
                                          Figure 2d
                         Enrollment Rates Among 20-21 Vear-Olds
                                      By RacefGender Group

         -
   0.5




     1965              1970            1975            1980           1985
                                               Year


                                 Black Males          Black Females
Source Current Population Reports.
Series P-20
                                              Figure 3
                               Average Undergraduate Tuition and Fees
                                     All  Public lnstltuions (1987 dollars)

    1200



    1100



    1000



      900



      800
         1965            1969             1973          1977             1981   1985
                                                     Year
Source; Digest of Education Statistics,
1989
                                    Table 1
           Average Earnings Within Demographic Groups 1979 and


                            Average Earnings in
                    b                                       Annual
Demographic Group           1979           1988           Growth RateC

Age: 25-64

All Workers                23645          23297              -0.0%

White Males
  LTHS                     22682          19282              -1.8
  MS                       27785          25109              -1.1
  GO                       35901          37034               0.3
Black Males
  LTHS                     17331          16918              -0.3
  HS                       21264          19054              -1.2
  CC                       29896          30333               0.2
White Females
  LTHS                     13005          12647              -0.3
  US                       15800          16225               0.3
  CC                       22431          25537               1.4
Black Females
  LTHS                     11883          11340              -0.5
  MS                       14966          14649              -0.2
  GO                       22688          23704               0.5

Age: 25-34

All Workers                21823          20678              -0.6%

White Males
  LTUS                     19848          16108              -2.3
  US                       24889          21776              -1.5
  CC                       29288          29780               0.2
Black Males
  LTHS                     14596          14594              -0.0
  HS                       19449          16638              -2.0
  CC                       26830          24348              -1.5
White Females
  LTHS                    12623           10852              -1.7
  MS                      15403           15348              -0.0
  CO                      20987           23791               1.4
Black Females
  LTHS                    11749           11169              -0.6
  HS                      14596           13285              -1.0
  CG                      19349           19567               0.1


  aihese statistics were calculated using the March 1980 and March 1989
Current Population Surveys. Earnings are defined as wage and salary income;
only fuIl-tiroe, year-round workers with no self-employment earnings were
included in the sample for this table. The awerage earnings statistics are
geometric means! reported in 1988 dollars.
  bwhites include both the white and the 'other" racial group. The
educational-group abbreviations are:

        LTHS     less than high school education (completed schooling
                 less than 12 years)
          115 -- high school graduates (schooling equal to 12 years)
          CG -- college graduates (schooling 16 years or greater)

 CThis growth rate is calculated using the 1979 and 1988 endpoints only
                                   Table 2
   Regression Estimates of Changes in Education-Earnings Differentials Within
                      Demographic Groups, 1979 and 1988 a]



Age: 25-64
                       White Hales                        Black Males
               1979      1988      a"             1979      1988


HS/LThS         .23       .29     .06(01)          .21       .18   -.03(04)
CC/H S          .28        39     .11(01)          .34       .40    .06(06)
                      White Females                      Black Females
               1979      1988       A             1979      1988       a


HS/LTHS         .20       .27     .07(02)          .23       .25     .02(04)
CC/MS           .35       .4S     .11(01)          .45       .49     .04(05)


Age: 25-34
                       White MaLes                        Black Males
              1979       1988      a              1979      1988      a


HS/LTHS         .23       .30     .07(.03)         .30       .15   -.15(09)
CC/US           .17       .33     .16(.02)         .28       .35    .07(09)

                      White Females                      Black Females
              1979       L988      A              1979      1988       A


KS /LTHS        .21       .36     .15(.04)         .21       .19   -.02(09)
CC /115         .31       .43     .l2(.02)         .32       .38    .06(07)


  am5. statistics are estimated differentiaLs from logarithmic earnings
regressions that include nine age dummies, three marital status dummies,
and eight region dummies, as well as education dummies. The dependent
variable is annual wage and salary income, and the sample is restricted to
full-time, year-round workers.
  bmis is the estimated change in the differentiaL from 1979 to 1988. The
number in parentheses is the standard error for this change.
  cKS,LThS is the differential between high-school graduates and dropouts.
and CC/MS is the differential between college graduates and high school
graduates.
                                  Table 3
 Measures of Labor Market Activity Within Education Groups, 1980 and 1989



Age; 25-64
                      White Males                         Slack Males
              1980      1989      A              1980       1989
        *
E/P0F
  LIKS         .75       .71     -.04            .64         .57     -.07
  MS           .88       .86     -.02            .84         .76     -.08
  CC           .94       .93     -.01            .90         .86     -.04

  MS - LTMS    .13       .15       .02           .20         .19     -
                                                                         .01
  CC - MS      .06       .09       .01           .06         .10         .04

                     White Females                       Black Females
              1980      1989       a             1.980      1989       a
5/POP
  LTHS         .40       .42       .02           .43         .41     -   .02
  MS           .58       .65       .07           .64         .68         .04
  CC           .71       .79       .08           .85         .86         .01

  HS-LTMS      .18       .23       .05           .21         .27         .06
  CC-MS        .13       .14       .01           .21         .18     -.03

Age; 25-34
                     White Males                          Black Males
              1980      1989         A           1980       1989      A
5/POP
  LTIIS        .80       .80         0           .68         .56     -.12
  MS           .90       .90         0           .80         .75     -.05
  CC           .94       .94         0           .90         .90         0

  HS-LTHS      .10       .10         0           .12         .19         .07
  CC - MS      .04       .04         0           .10         .15         .05

                     White Females                       Black Females
              1980      1989         A           1980       1989       A
S/POP
  LTUS         .43       .44       .01           .41         .29     -   .12
  MS           .59       .67       .08           .64         .64         0
  CC           .75       .82       .07           .84         .88         .04

  HS-LTI4S     .16       .23       .07           .23         .35         .12
  CC-H S       .16       .15    -.01             .20         .24         .04



  *
   5/POP is the employment-to-population ratio. The statistics were
calculated using the March 1980 and March 1989 Current Population Surveys.
                                   TabLe 4
Changes in Earnings and Employment Rates of Demographic Groups Relative to
                                  White Males

                         -   - Within   Education Categories


Age Group:                        25-64                             25-34


                                Change in                      Change in
                                   a                b
Group                   Earnings            E/POP        Earnings           E/P0P

College Graduates

  BLack Males           -.02 (.04)          -.03        -.06 (.06)               0
  White Females          .09 (.02)            .09         09 (.02)              .07
  Black Females           0    (.04)         .02        -.02 (.06)              .04

High School Graduates

  Black Males            0 (.02)            -.06        -.03 (.04)          -.05
  White FemaLes         .12 (.01)            .09         .13 (.02)              .08
  Black Females         .07 (.02)            .06         .03 (.04)               0

Less than High School

  Black Males           .09 (.03)           -.03         .L9 (.07)          -.12
  White Females         .12 (.02)            .06         .08 (.05)           .01
  Black Females         .09 (.04)            .02         .14 (.09)          -   .12



  ami5 is the estimated change (from 1979 to 1986) in the earnings
differentials between the specified race/gender group and white maLes, within
the specified education category. The differentials are from
regression estimates that include region and age dummies as independent
variables. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.

  bThis is the change (from 1960 to 1989) in the difference in the
employment-to-population ratio between the specified group and white males.
                                     Table 5
       Contribution of Changes in the OccupationaL and Industrial Mix, the
       Minimum Wage, and Unionization to Changes in Earnings Differentials
                  -
                            Within Demographic Groups

                      Actual                        Change Due to:a                                  Not
                                                                                                           b
Differential          Change       0cc.   Indus         1. Wage Minim.   Union Total             Expl.



Age: 25-64

White Males
  NS/LTHS              .06         .01        0            .01   .01         .05       .08       - 02
  CC/ES                .11         0          .02          0      0          .01       .03           .08

Black Males
  US/LIES              .03     -.02           .01      -.01      .01     -.02      -.03               0
  CC/ES                .06      .01       -
                                              .02      -.02       0       .05       .02               04

White Females
 US /LThS              .07         0          .01          .02   .02      .01          .06           .01
 CC/US                 .11         01         .03      -   .01    0      -.01          .02           .09

Black Females
  HS/LTHS              .02         0          .01          0     .04         0         .05       -   .03
 CC/N S                .04     -.01           .02          .02   .01.    -   .03       .01           .03



Age: 25-34

White Males
  HS/LTES              .07         .02        0            .01   .01         .03       .07            0
  CC/ES                .16         0          .03          0      0          .03       .06           .10

Black Males
  HS/LTHS              .15     -.01       -.02             .02   .01     -.03      -   .03       -.12
                       .07         0 -        .02          .03    0          .06       .11       -.04
  CC/ES

White Females
  NS/LTHS              .15         .02        0            .01   .01         .01       .05           .10
  CC/US                .12         0          .05          0     .01     -   .01       .05           .07

Slack Females
  HS/LTHS             -02      -.04           0            .01    .04    -02       -.01          -.01
  CC/US                .06     -   .03        .02       - .02     .01    -.02      -   .04        .10


  ams are the estimated effects of the change on the specified                               earnings
differentials. The changes refer to:
     0cc. -. the occupational mix of the demographic group
       md.   -.   the industrial mix of the group
  I.   Wage --    the interindustry wage structure
   Minin.         the real, value of the minimum wage
                              Table 5 (continued)

   Union - - the percentage of the group unionized.
   Total -- the sut of the five estimated effects.

  bme portion "not explained" is the actual change in the differential
minus the total, change explained by the five effects listed in note (a).
                                    Table 6
      Contribution of Changes in the Occupational. and Industrial Mix, the
      Minimum Wage, and Unionization to Changes in Earnings Differentials
                             Relative to White Males


                Actual                     Change Due to:                         Not
DifferentiaL    Change     0cc.   Indus.       I. Wage Minim.   Union   Total    F.xpl.


Age: 25-64

College Graduates
 B. Males      -.02       - .03   -.02           0       0        0     - .03     .01
 W. Females      .09       .02     .02           0       0      -.02     .02      .07
 B. Females       0        .01     .04         - 0l      0      - .05   - .01.    .01

US Graduates
 B. Males           0     -.02    - .01.         0       0      - .04   -.07      .07
 W. Females         .12    .01     .01.         .01.     0        0      .03      .09
 B. Females         .07    .01     .02          .01    - .01    -.01     .02      .05

Less Than HS
 B. Males           .09    .03       0          .01      0       .03     .07      .02
 S.!. Females       .12    .03       0          .02    -.01      .04     .04      .08
 B. Females         .09    .02    - .01.       -.02    -.03      .04      0       .09


Age: 25—34

College Graduates
 B.Males        -.06      -.03       0           0       0        0     -.03     -.03
 U. Females         .09    .01      .04        - .01     0      - .02    .02      .07
 B. Females     .
                    .02   - .02     .04        - .02     0      - .04   - .04     .02

US Graduates
 B.Males        -.03      -.01    -.02           0       0      -.03    -.07      .04
 U. Females      .13        0       .01         .02    -.01      .02      .04     .09
 B. Females      .03       .01       0          .03    -.01      .01      .06    - .01

Less Than HS                                                                        .
 B. Males           .19    .03      .02          0        0      .03      .0fi     .11
 U. Females         .08     0       .01        - .01   - .01.    .04      .03      .05
 S. Females         .14    .01       0          .03    -.03      .06      .07      .07
                                     Table 7
                Annual Crowth Rates of the Relative Supply of Labor
                           Force Participants, 1980-1989


A: Relative Supply Within Demographic Groups

 Age:                             25-64                            25-34
                        HS/LTHS           CG/HS         HS/LTHS             ccus
 White Males              .04               0                .01            - .02

 Mack   Hales             .06              .03               .05            •.02

 White Females            .04              .06               .02             .01

 Black Females            .07              .02               .08             .02


5: Supply Relative to White Males, Within Education Categories


 Age:                              25-64                            25-34
                         LTHS        US           CC    LTHS                         CC

 Black Males              .01       .02           .04    -
                                                             .02      .02           .03

 White Females            .01        0            .06   '.02          .00           .03

 Black Females             0        .03           .04   -    .07      0             .04
                                    Table B
     Correlation of Changes in Earnings Differentials and Relative Supply



                                     Correlation Coefficientsa

Differential                  Age:          25-64          25-34



                          b
Education Differentials

                                            - .64
                                                    *      - .69
                                                                   *
     Actual. Change

                                            - .69
                                                    *      - .37
     Residual Change

Group DifferentialsC

     Actual Change                          - .48          - .69
                                                                   **
     Residual Change                        - .46          - .45



  aThese are correlation coefficients of the growth rate in relative supply
and the change in the relevant earnings differential. Tests of the hypothesis
that the correlation coefficient differed from zero were conducted using an
F-test for independence. One star denotes statistical significance at the 10
petcent level, two stars at the 5 percent level.
  bmese correlations are for the actual and residual changes in the
education-earnings differentials (both HS/LTHS and CC/HS) from table 5.
         correlations are for the change in race/gender earnings differentials
within education groups, from table 6.
                                        Table 9
             Estimates of Enrollment Equations for White Hales and Femalesa


                                           I Enrolled                                  % Enrolled
Dependent Variable                      of 18-19 Year-Olds                          of 20-21 Year-0].ds


                                    Males                Females                   Males                Females
Indep. Var.                   (1)           (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)           (6)                    (8)
                                                                                                      (7)_—

Constant                  -   .32       -
                                            .33    -
                                                       .51    -    49    -   .51       -
                                                                                           .49    -   .78     -
                                                                                                                   78
                          (.06)         (.07)      (.07)      (.06)      (.08)         (.08)      (.06)       (.07)
    *            b
D for MaLes                   .87           .78                   .46        .73           .98                 .10
                          (.11)         (.31)                 (.15)      (.13)         (.35)                  (.17)
    *                 C
0       for FemaLes                         .18        .43    -   .37                  -   .51        .06     -
                                                                                                                   ii.
                                        (.58)      (.16)      (.30)                    (.65)      (.15)       (.34)

Trend                     -   .006      -
                                            .007       .014       .019   -. 013        -   .010       .016        .017
                          (.002)        (.004)     (.002) (.002)         (.002)        (.004) (.002) (.003)



                              .79           .79        .84        .90        .77           .78        .86         .86


                          1.73          1.63       L08        1.60       1.54          1.56       2.57        2.45




  aThe dependent variable is the inverse of the cumulative normal function
evaluated at the percentage enrolled in school among the specified age group.
The estimation method is ordinary least squares, with standard errors for the
coefficient estimates reported in parentheses. The sample consists of annual
observations for 1967-1987. Over this period, the average enrollment
percentage was .52 among white males aged 18-19, .46 among white females
18-19, .38 among white males 20-21, and .30 among white females 18-19.

  bmis is the average-earnings differential between male college graduates
and male high-school graduates (both aged 25-34), divided by one plus the
ratio of tuition to high-school-graduate earnings for males 18-24. Tuition
costs are the average undergraduate tuition in public institutions of higher
education. When this differential appears in enrollment equations for
females, the denominator in the correction uses female, not male,
high-school-graduate earnings -

  cThi is the corrected differential for females. When it is used in
equations for male enrollment rates, the denominator uses maLe high-school
graduate earnings.
                              Appendix Table 1
              Changes in Education-Earnings Differentials Within
                       Demographic Groups 1979 and 1989
                                                            *
                Hourly Earnings, All Employed Individuals


Age: 25-64
                      White Males                        Black Males
              1979      1989      A              1979      1989


MS /LTHS       .19       .27     .08(02)          .18       .17    -.01(08)
CC/H S         .22       .42     .20(.02)         .28       .37     .09(08)

                     White Females                      Black Females
              1979      1989       A             1979      1989         A


HS/LTHS        .17       .27     .10(03)          .14       .41     .27C08)
CC/H S         .34       .48     .14(02)          .4S       .58     .13(07)


Age: 25-34
                      White Males                        Black Males
              1979      1989                     1979      1989        a

HS/LTHS        .23       .31     .08(04)          .18       .13   -.O5(.l3)
CC/H S         .15       .38     .23(03)          .31       .37    .06(.L1)

                     White Females                      Black Females
              1979      1989        A            1979      1989       A


HS/LTHS        .15       .25     .10(05)          .08       .25     .17(13)
CC/H S         .33       .48     .15(04)          .38       .57     .19(09)

  *
   These statistics are calculated using the "usual earnings and hours
information available for one-quarter of the CPS sample. We use the May
1979 and March 1989 surveys. Standard errors for the changes are reported in
parentheses.
                                    Appendix Table 2
                                                                          *
              Sample Sizes for Data on Full-Time, Year-Round Workers



 Age:                                25-64                     25-34

Demographic Croup            1979            1988       1979           1988


Age: 25-64

All Workers                 36135        35505         13113       12703

White Hales
  LTHS                       4159            2479       846             730
 1-iS                        7806            7119      2773            2771
  CC                         5653            5994      2328            1954
Black Males
  LTHS                        559             329       108              65
 1-IS                         624             622       252             254
  CC                          180             300        88              84
White Females
  LTHS                       1722            1177        331            258
  HS                         5256            5557       1721           1857
  Cc                         2391            3489      1213            1508
Black Females
  LTHS                        378             232        73              41
 1-iS                         602             744       262             291
  CC                          226             346       101             142


   These are the sizes of the annual earnings samples drawn from the March
1980 and March 1989 Current Population Surveys.
                           Appendix Table 3
Earnings Differentials for White Females Within Age Cohorts, 1979 to 1988

            Annual Earnings, Full-Time Year-Round Workers



     Cohort Age in:                  CG/LTHS Earnings Differential

    1979       1988                         1979        1988


    18-24      27-33                                        .81

    25-30      34-39                         .52            .76

    31-36      40-45                         .60            .77

    37-42      46-51                         .50            .70

    43-48      52-57                         .50            .70
    49-54      58-63                         .63            .71
                                 Appendix Table 4
         Impact of Deunionization on Changes in Average Hourly Earnings
                                from 1980 to 1989

                 Hourly Earnings, All Employed Individuals Aged 25-64



Demographic/                  Percent Unionized:a        Union      Effect on
                                                                               c
Education Group             1979      1989      a       Premium     A in Wages


Age: 25-64

White Males
  LTHS                      .48       .24     -.24           .24        -.06
  MS                        .47       .32     -   .15        .10        -.01
  CC                        .24       .17     -.07       -   .01            0

Black    Males
  LTNS                      .42       .29     -.13           .22        -.03
  MS                        .56       .30     -.26           .18        -.05
  CC                        .41       .42      .01       -   .12            0

White    Females
  LTHS                      .27       .11     -.16           .14        -.02
  HS                        .19       .12     -.07           .11        -.01
  CC                        .35       .25     -.10           .15        -.02
Black    Females
  LTHS                      .32       .18     -   .14        .17        - .02
  KS                         43       .24     -   .19        .10        - .02
  CC                        .52       .28     -
                                                  .24        .21        - .05

Age: 25-34
White Males
  LTHS                      .37       .12     -.25           .25        -.06
  KS                        .46       .25     -
                                                  .21        16         - .03
  CC                        .24       .13     -.11           .03            0

Black Males
  LTHS                      .28       .17     -.11           .31        -.03
  115                       .55       .22     - .33          .18            .06
  CC                        .48       .51         .03        .03            0

White    Females
  LTHS                      .18       .06     -.12           .19        -.02
  MS                        .17       .11     -.06           .16        -.01
  CC                        .32       .18     -.14           .14        -.02
Slack    Females
  LTHS                      .30       .14     -.16       -.03               0
  115                       .40       .16     -.24           •°8d
                                                                        -   .02
  CC                        .53       .25     -.28           .14        -   .04
  aThIS statistic is the number of wage and salary workers who are members
of a labor union or employee organization.
  bThis is the estimated effect of being a union member on hourly wages,
from log wage iegressions using the 1979 data.   Separate union effects were
estimated for the different demographic/education groups.
  cThS number is equal to the change from 1979 to 1988 in the percent
unionized multiplied by the estimated union coefficient for that
race/gender/education group.
  dsince the estimated union premium for black female college graduates aged
25-34 was likely an overestimate, we use the estimated union premium for white
female college graduates.
