                  NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




 CORPORATE FINANCIAL POLICY, TAXATION, AND MACROECONOMIC RISK




                          Mark Gertler
                        R. Glenn Hubbard




                     Working Paper No. 3902




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          November 1991




This is a substantially revised version of an earlier paper
entitled "Corporate Overindebtedness and Macroeconomic Risk." We
are grateful to Jason Cumrnins for research assistance, and to Ben
Bernanke, Simon Gilchrist, Anil Kashyap, Jeff Lacker, Mitchell
Petersen, John Shoven for helpful comments. We also thank the
Garn Institute of Finance and the C.V. Starr Center for support.
This paper is part of NBER's research programs in Corporate
Finance and Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                           NBER Working Paper #3902
                                           November 1991


   CORPORATE FINANCIAL POLICY, TAXATION. AND MACROECONOMIC RISK

                             ABSTRACT


     This paper develops a simple model of corporate financial
structure intended to formalize the macroeconomic concern over
excessive leverage. In particular, we attempt to rationalize why
firms designing an optimal capital structure would choose a level
of debt that leaves them heavily exposed to macroeconomic risk.
Our starting point is a variant of the "corporate control" model
often used to motivate debt as the optimal financial contract. We
modify this framework in two ways. First, we include common risks,
interpretable as business cycle risks, as well as idiosyncratic
risks. Second, we include corporate and investor-level taxes, and
consider the implications of a net tax bias against equity finance.
The tax distortion confronts firms with a tradeoff ex ante between
the costs of equity finance and the costs of increased exposure to
macroeconomic risk accompanying debt finance. In this regard, an
equilibrium with "excessive leverage" is possible. Further,
despite the possibility of renegotiation, debt is in general less
effective than equity in insulating the firm against aggregate
risk.
     Our model leads to the prediction that individual firm
dividends may vary with macroeconomic conditions, even after
controlling for the effects of relevant   firm-specific performance
measures, such as earnings. We present    some formal econometric
evidence in support of this prediction,   using a panel of individual
corporations. Evidence on some related    predictions is also
presented.

Mark Gertler                               R. Glenn Hubbard
Department of Economics                    Graduate School
New York University                         of Business
269 Mercer Street                          Columbia University
New York, NY 10003                         Uris Hall
and NBER                                   New yoi-k, NY 10027
                                           and NBER
I. INTRODUCTION

     The significant rise In corporate borrowing In the 1980s has renewed

Interest both In the determinants of corporate leverage and in the

Implications of high leverage for macroeconomic stability.   In the process, It

has stirred a lively debate. Many financial economists point to the benefits

of high leverage in restricting non-value—maximizing behavior by managers (see

for example Jensen, 1986, 1988). On the other hand, a number of

niacroeconomlsts have expressed concern over whether the Increased leverage

makes firms excessively vulnerable to a downturn (see for example Bernanke

and Campbell. 1988; and Friedman, 1986. 1990).

     Underlying the macroeconomic concern is the Idea that, somehow, the

existing corporate financial structure Is not designed to Insulate firms

optimally against the risk of the business cycle. In this paper, we

develop a simple model of capital structure intended to formalize this

possibility. We attempt to rationalize why firms designing an optimal capital

structure may choose ex ante a level of debt that leaves them heavily exposed

to macroeconomic risk.

     Our starting point is a variant of the "corporate control" model often

used to n)otivate debt as the optimal financial contract.1 We modify this

framework In two key ways. First, we include common risks to firms,

interpretable as business—cycle risks, as well as idiosyncratic risks.      In

this kind of setting, incentive considerations dictate that the firm should

bear the idiosyncratic risk, but that the outside lenders should absorb the

aggregate risk. As a consequence, the optimal contract is no longer pure

debt, but a mixture of debt and equity, where equity is the mechanism through



1For a survey of corporate control models of debt, see Harris and Raviv
(1991).
which the firm shifts (at least some of) the aggregate risk to Its creditors.

Second, we include corporate and Investor-level taxes, and consider the

implications of a net tax bias against equity finance. The tax distortion

confronts firms with a tradeoff ex ante between the costs of equity finance

and the costs of Increased exposure to macroeconomic risk accompanying debt

finance. In this regard, an equilibrium with "excessive leverage" is

possible. Further, despite the possibility of renegotiation, debt is never

effectively "equity in drag." As we demonstrate, even when costless

renegotiation is feasible, debt cannot in general perfectly substitute for

equity as a means of insulating a firms' real activities against aggregate

risk.

        Our analysis differs from the traditional approach to studying debt and

taxes (e.g., Gordon and Malkiel, 1981) by emphasizing the distinction between

aggregate and idiosyncratic risks. Indeed, if the only risks to the firm are

idiosyncratic, then the tax bias against equity tax does not distort the

captial structure choice; pure debt finance is optimal for incentive reasons,

as well as tax reasons. Tax considerations confront the firm with a

meaningful tradeoff only when aggregate risks are present.2 We also differ

by explicitly considering whether the the possibility of renegotiation makes

the tax distinction between debt and equity irrelevent.

        Perhaps the key element of our theory is the role of equity in permiting

firms to share aggregate risks with Its creditors, as way to minimize the

possibility of recession—induced financial distress. As we demonstrate, this

leads to the prediction that individual firm dividends may vary with

macroeconomic conditions, even after controlling for the effects of relevant



2Relatedly, while the tax bias distorts the firm's mix between debt and equity
finance, it is not essential to explaining the existence of debt. Corporate
control considerations serve this function.




                                         2
firm-specifc performance measures, such as earnings. We present some

formal econometric evidence in support of this prediction, using a panel of

indvldual corporations. Independently of firm—level variables, macroeconomic

conditions are significant predictors of dividends. These results are robust

to a variety of different proxies for macroeconomic conditions.

     The paper is organized as follows. We introduce the assumptions of the

basic model in section II, and then characterize the optimal financial

arrangement and equilibrium behavior in section III. To ease the exposition

we first develop the analysis under the assumption that renegotiation of debt

is arbitrarily precluded. We then drop this restriction, arid demonstrate that

the basic results remain unaffected. In section IV, we provide evidence on

two of the model's basic implications: the macroeconomic effect on individual

firm dividend policy, and the connection between captial structure and the

aggregate rate of Involuntary business liquidations. We also attempt to

quantify the role of equity in sharing aggregate risk by examining the

cyclical behavior of the "equity cushion," the ratio of dividends to interest

payments. Finally, we discuss the relation of the model to the increase in

corporate debt during the 1980s and, as well, to the recent trend away from

debt lnance. Concluding remarks are presented in section V.



 II. THE FINANCIAL CONTRACTING PROBLEM: SETTING

      The model characterizes a sector of the economy consisting of many risky

 firms that are identical ex ante. There are three periods -- 0, 1, and 2.

 Each firm operates a project that involves potentially three stages. One unit

 of input is required in period 0. In period I, the option of suspending the

 project arises. The liquidation value (in units of period 2 output) is w < 1.

 If instead the project is continued, it yields a random level of output In




                                        3
period 2.

     There is a both an aggregate and an idiosyncratic component to project

risk. The aggregate shock Is realized In period 1, prior to the liquidation

decision.   It Is summarized by a (common) success probability p. drawn from a

continuous probability distribution: p £     [,p),   with 0 <   <    < 1;   and H(p)

and h(p) are the respective cumulative distribution and density functions.

Presuming the project is not liquidated in period 1, the outcome of

idiosyncratic risk is then realized in period 2. Output for each project

equals y with probability p and 0 with probability 1 — p.       Thus aggregate

conditions govern the period I conditional mean of period 2 output, equal to

py, while idiosyncratic factors govern the ex post realization about the mean.

We assume further that


                                   y>w                                            (1)



which, since    is the lowest possible realization of p, implies that

liquidations are never socially efficient.

     Each firm's objective is to maximize its expected discounted return.         It

obtains financing In period 0 from risk-neutral lenders. Under symmetric

Information, the overall outcome is simple to characterize. As long as the

unconditional mean of project output exceeds the gross riskiess Interest rate

r (i.e, as long as 5 py h(p)dp    r) it is optimal to Initiate the project.


Condition (1) ensures that the project should not be liquidated prematurely,

regardless of the realization of the aggregate state. Finally, financial

structure is irrelevant and indeterminate. Any security which offers lenders

an expected return equal to r will suffice.

     To motivate a meaningful role for financial structure we introduce the

following agency problem. Suppose that after the aggregate state is realized




                                       4
in period 1, each firm has the option of secretly using the invested capital

for its own purposes. The period 2 payoff from this malfeasant behavior is i,

and is unobservable by outsiders. The trade off is that the misallocation of

funds guarantees an unsuccessful project outcome. This scenario is a simple

formalization of the story which Berle and Means (1932), Jensen (1986, 1988).

and others have used to motivate a divergence of objectives between

ownership and management. We place the following restrictions on the relative

size of V:


                                   v<w                                        (2)

                                                                              (3)



The significance of these two restrictions will be taken up later.

     In period 0. each firm issues securities to lenders. The securities

specify (i) a decision rule for whether to liquidate or to continue after

period 1, and (Ii) a set of state—contingent payments. Observables upon

which the contract may be conditioned include the common shock p and, If the

project continues, the idiosyncratic output realizations. Importantly, It is

not possible to Include contingencies based on the allocation of Invested

capital, since this activity is not publicly observable.

     To address tax considerations, we divide the set of feasible

state—contingent securities into two kinds: "debt' and "equity.       The Internal

Revenue Service requires that to be classified as debt, a security must offer

an Interest obligation that is 'sum certain.' The standards imposed by the

sum certain requirement are somewhat vague since the tax code does permit debt

to Involve some risk. Roughly speaking, the security must offer (I) a fixed

payment, except in the event of distress; and (Ii) liquidation and seniority




                                       5
rights.3 With these considerations in mind, we assume that a debt contract

specifies a face value obligation D and a liquidation rule. The contract

gives the bondholders the right to liquidate whenever expected earnings are

below the point where the firm can credibly commit to managing the project

efficiently (see below).4 This amounts to specifying a reservation value for

the aggregate disturbance p; call it p0.        If p <         the debtholders liquidate
                                                         p0.
the firm and receive the proceeds w (since they are senior claimants). If

instead p a p. production proceeds and the bondholders are paid D if the
                                            5
outcome Is good and nothing if it is bad.         Given that lenders are risk—

neutral, the expected payoff to debt must satisfy


                   (1—t)1fpDh(p)dp +   H(p)       wI = (l—t)ç(ir                     (4)
                         p0

where t Is the personal income tax rate and         Is the fraction of the project

that is financed by debt.6

     A commonly held view is that equity offers firms more flexibility than

debt in times of distress. We capture this idea by assuming that equity



3See the discussion in Bulow, Summers, and Summers (1990) and Gertler and
Hubbard (1990).

41n our formulation, debt is a two period contract.   It is initiated In period
0; there is a call provision in period 1; and final payoffs (in the absence
of liquidation) occur In period 2. An equivalent and perhaps more realistic
formulation is to think of the financial arrangement as a sequence of one
period contracts. At the end of period 1, the bondholders decide whether to
roll over the debt for another period or sue for liquidation. The liquidation
rule Is based on the realization of p.

5it is straightforward to verify that it is optimal for creditors to receive 0
In the bad productivity state. We embed this result a priori simply to
conserve on algebra.
6We model taxes as being levied on gross returns for simplicity of exposition.
The results are not affected by imposing taxes on net returns.   In the absence
of an investment model with long-lived capital, any assumptions about
depreciation for tax purposes would be somewhat artificial. To focus on the
capital structure issues central to our analysis, we avoid discussion of
depreciation accounting.




                                       6
payoffs may be indexed to the observable common shock. In particular, an

equity contract pays a "dividend" E" if the project outcome Is successful and

the realized aggregate state is p; and it pays nothing otherwise. Implicit in

Ihis formulation is that equltyholders have no liquidation or seniority

rights. To offer a competitive return, the expected return on equity must

satisfy


                       (1_ta) fp Eh(p)dp =             (l—t)(l—')r               (5)

                                p0
where te is the personal tax rate on equity, and (l-) is the fraction of the

project financed by equity.

     Each firm maximizes, net of taxes, expected final output minus payments

to bondholders and equityholders. This objective, V(p,D,E) is given by


             V(p0,D,E) =    (l_tc)    .1   p(y   —   D)h(p)dp   —   S pEh(p)dp   (6)

                                      p0                            p0
where tc is the corporate tax rate. Equation (6) takes into account that
dividends are not deductible for corporate tax purposes. Further, since

transfers to the firm are taxable, it is required that



                                                 Vpp0                            (7)



     It is optimal to design the financial structure to eliminate the firms

incentive to misallocate the project input. This Is true since the firm's

gain from this activity, ij',   is   by assumption less than the project's

liquidation value, u.7'8 Accordingly, the following set of incentive



TEx ante it is preferable to arrange to liquidate when the firm has an
incentive to misallocate funds (as opposed to simply letting the firm
misallocate); expected project surplus is higher since u > v.

8We have assumed for simplicity that u and v do not vary with the aggregate
state. What is critical for our results is that u and v are less procyclical
than expected project earnings from operating honestly. For example, think




                                                 7
constraints are relevant:


                       (I_tc) p(y — D) -   pE   a v, V p   p0
                                                                               (8)



The left side of condition (8) s the firm's expected gain from honestly

proceeding with the project., crnditional on the aggregate state's being p.

The right side Is the gain from cheating. Note that condition (8) Implies a

separate incentive constraint associated with each aggregate state In which it

is feasible for the firm to continue operating (i.e., for each p a p ).       This
is because the firm has the option of cheating after aggregate conditions are

known. It suggests that, excepting possibly for tax considerations, the

optimal financial structure will allow for payments contingent on the common

disturbance.



III. EQUILIBRIUM

       If we define


                                      X a l/(l_tC)



                                  z   a (I_te)/(1_t.)


then   a more compact statement of each firm's contracting and investment

problem is:


                      max     5 p(y - D)h(p)dp - ,f pxEh(p)dp                  (9)
                   {D,E,p p                          p0
subject   to



of the economy as consisting of a cyclical and a non-cyclical sector. Capital
may be shifted (at a cost) between sectors.




                                            8
                     $ p(fl   +   zE)h(p)dp      +   H(p)u   =       r                      (10)

                     p0


                      p(y - 0      —   xE)   a xv     ; p a p                               (11)




                                       a 0   ; p a   p0                                     (12)



and the feasibility condition. p a           .   Equations (9), (11), and (12)

correspond to (6), (7), and (8). respectively. Equation (10) is obtained by

combining constraints (3) and (4) to eliminate .                     The weights x and z reflect

the relative corporate and personal tax treatment of equity.

     Since all firms are Identical ex ante and since r is given exogenously,

an equilibrium is defined by a vector (U, E', p0} that solves the above

problem. Ex post output per firm is py if p a p0. and it is 0 if p < p0.

     In sction lilA below, we analyze the equilibrium when x = z.                     In this

benchmark case there is no tax bias against, equity; the effective surtax-on

equity at the corporate level is completely offset by the effective subsidy                      at

the personal level. We then turn in section IllS to the case where x exceeds

z, implying a net tax disadvantage to equity. For pedagogical purposes, we

begin by arbitrarily precluding renegotiation of debt; however, in section

 IIIC we drop this restriction.

      lilA. Case 1: No Tax Bias Against Equity (x =                  z1.   Substituting equation

 (11) into the objective (10) yields the following expression for the firm's

expected after—tax profit, fl(p):


                    fl(p) a ($ py h(p)dp +           U(p)w       -   nIx                        (13)

                                  p0

 Maximizing expected profits thus corresponds to minimizing p.

      The capital structure which minimizes p0 concentrates the firms




                                                 9
obligations In good aggregate states, to the maximum extent feasible. Each

incentive constraint In equation (11) defines a ceiling on the sum of expected

debt and equity payments, one corresponding to each macroeconomic state p.

The "state p cel1ing equals the difference between expected output and the

gain from cheating, py - xv.   Since this difference increases with p, the

ceiling is higher the better the aggregate state. The firm thus gains by

shifting its expected obligations to good aggregate states. Doing so allows

it to promise less to creditors in bad aggregate states, making it feasible to

operate at lower values of p. MInimizing p0 therefore implies offering to

creditors the maximum incentive-compatible expected payment in each state p

p. In any optimum (with p >    ), therefore,    the "state p incentive

constraint binds.

     The optimal value of p is computed simply by integrating over the

incentive constraints and making use of (10) to eliminate D and E from the

expression; it is accordingly the minimum p which solves


                           11(p)    [1 —   H(p)]v                              (14)



The optimal p Is therefore the minimum value at which the firm's expected

gain from managing its investment honestly (the left side of equations (14))

exceeds its expected gain conditional on cheating.

     Figure 1 illustrates the outcome. The ep (for "expected profit") curve

portrays !l(p), and the gc (for "gain from cheating") curves portrays El —

H(pflv.   Both curves slope downward. Figure 1 portrays the optimum as the

minimum p a p at which the ep and gc curves intersect. For realizations of p

below p, it pays for the debtholders liquidate since the firm since has the

incentive to cheat if it Is allowed to proceed. If 11(p) a [1 —   H(p)]v,    the

first-best outcome is attainable. Since the ep curve lies above the gc curve




                                       10
at    In this case, it is feasible to set p0 equal to .               Conversely,   if TI()

is sufficiently smaller than (1 - H(2)1u.' then the ep             and gc curves need not

Intersect, implying that no solution exists for p0. In this instance, agency

problems preclude Investment altogether.

      When the incentive constraints bind, the optimal financial structure is a

mixture of debt and equity, with equityholders absorbing the aggregate risk.

In the limiting case in which the firm just escapes liquidation (i.e., when p

=    p)   payments to equityholders are cut to zero. The expected obligation to

bondholder equals the maximum liability afforded by the Incentive constraint.
                                p0
D is thus found by setting E         equal to zero in the 'state p' Incentive

constraint:


                                     D = y   -                                            (15)
                                                 xi.'/p0

Clearly, if p falls below p, the firm's expected debt liability exceeds the

ceiling permitted by the incentive constraint. In this situation, the

bondholders liquidate the firm and receive w.

          A relation for E is obtained by using (15) to eliminate D in each "state

p" incentive constraint:


                                     =
                                         (1/p0
                                                 —    l/ph                                (16)



 E is clearly increasing In p; payments to equityholders vary positively with

 macroeconomic conditions. The key point is that a "macroeconomic" effect on

 dividends arises, operating independently of the firm's ex post earnings

 performance.      It arises because the primary role of equity here is to provide

 the firm with insurance against changing aggregate conditions.

          IIIB. Case II: Tax Bias Against Equity (x )        z).    We now suppose that x

 exceeds z, reflecting a net tax bias against equity. It turns out that in




                                                     II
this situation firms effectively choose between two different financing

regimes. One is the kind of mixed debt-equity structure described in the

previous section. The other is exclusive use of debt. We describe each

possibility, in turn.

       The outcome In the mixed debt-equity regime has the same structure as the

previous case. Equations (14), (15), and (16) still determine p. D, and E.

The only difference is that rT(p0) Is now given by equation (17), rather than

equation (14):


       H (p ) = [S py h(p)dp + H(p )w -
           0     p                0
                                             nix - [(x —   z)/x)J'p pE h(p)dp     (17)
                    0                                            0

Expected profits now Incorporate the impact of the effective surtax on equity,

reflected In the second term in equation (17). A rise in the tax wedge

(x —   z)/x,   holding x constant, ultimately increases the firm's exposure to

aggregate risk. p increases because the added cost of equity induces

greater reliance on debt.      In terms of Figure 1, the reduction in expected

profits owing to the rise In (x —     z)/x   shifts the ep curve dowrward, raising

p0.

       The tax subsidy opens the possibility that the firm may opt for pure

debt. Let pd denote the the reservation value of p for this case. To compute

the optimum under pure debt, note that only the state            Incentive constraint

may bind. Since debt may not be indexed to the aggregate state, the incentive

constraints for p > pd are always slack. Combining the state p incentive

constraint with the pure debt version of equation (10) implIes pd is given by


                           fld(d)   (d/:)[1 - H(pd))v                             (18)




9Note that the tax wedge, (x — z)/x, is just 1 —       t(l_te)(i_tc)/(1_t)),
                                                                       the net
 tax subsidy to debt finance often analyzed in the public finance literature.




                                             12
                                                              d
where p Is the expectation of p conditioned on p             p. and with expected
             d d
profits. TI (ps), defined by


                       fld(d) =   (5 py   h(p)dp +         — nIx                      (19)
                           °



        Figure   2 illustrates the trade off between the pure debt and mixed

regimes. The epC and gcd curves portray          the   left and right sides of equation

(18), respectively. The optimum under pure debt finance corresponds

to the intersection of these two curves with the lowest value of                The

optimum under mixed debt—equity finance is portrayed the same way as in Figure

1, except that the ep curve now reflects equation (17) rather than equation

(13). Exposure to macroeconomic risk is always greatest under pure debt

finance; that is, p > p0 in Figure 2.10 A fully levered firm faces a greater

prospect of liquidation because it is unable to concentrate its obligations In

good aggregate states. A firm may nonetheless opt for pure debt. Recause of

the tax asymmetry, ndI:p may still exceed 11(p).

        Factors beyond the tax wedge affect the capital structure choice. A rise

 in either the mean project return or in the project liquidation value

 increases the relative attractiveness of debt. The same is true for a

 reduction in macroeconomic risk. As the macroeconomic risk converges to zero,

 pure debt finance becomes optimal: Though the idiosyncratic risk may remain

 large, both incentive and tax considerations dictate that the optimal contract

 is pure debt. This kind of result differs from the traditional public finance

 literature, which does not distinguish the significance of aggregate versus

 idiosyncratic risk.



 1°It is straightforward to verify that the gap between the gc and epd curves
 always exceeds the corresponding gap between the gc and ep curves, implying
 that       must always exceed p.




                                               13
       IIIC. The Possibility of Renegotiation.            If p falls below p, each firm

and its debiholders may be willing to renegotiate a deal that permits the

project to continue.       In this subsection we reconsider the contracting problem

In light of this possibility. As we will demonstrate, the basic insights from

the previous analysis remain intact.

       Assume that upon threat of liquidation, firms are able to make

take-It—or-leave-it offers to debtholders. Giving bargaining power to firms

in this situation Is in accord with how Chapter 11 of the U.S. bankruptcy code

influences bargaining positions for debt renegotiation (see the discussion in

Gertner and ScharfsteIn, l989).i This assumption is mainly for convenience

of exposition, however. It turns out that the division of ex post bargaining

power does not affect the optimal reservation value of p. Nor does it affect

the division of expected surplus between the firm and Its lenders. Also, for

pedagogical purposes, assume there is no subsidy to debt finance, i.e. ,           x = z:

Extension to the case with x > z Is straightforward.

      Define p as the value of p at which the expected return to debtholders

conditional on not liquidating equals their gain from liquidating, i.e., the

value of p at which pD = w.        From equation (15), p satisfies p y — w =
         0          0                                   r

or   equivalently,


                                     =   (w +    i.')/y                                 (20)

       If p    p. renegotiation never occurs and the equilibrium corresponds

exactly to the case where renegotiation Is arbitrarily precluded. Suppose

that p lands below p .      Since p < p , pD       < w.    The liquidation value thus
                       0           0    r


exceeds any feasible expected return on renegotiated debt. This is true since


That for some period (a minimum of 120 days) the debtor in possession has
control of the firm's assets and the exclusive right to offer plans for
reorganization implies that claims are realigned In favor of Inside equity.




                                            14
the firm cannot make an offer exceeding D without violating the incentive

constraint. Bondholders will therefore never opt to renegotiate. Equations

(14) through (16) thus continue to characterize the outcome. Figure 3a

illustrates this case.

       Now suppose p0 >   p.   Bondholders will renegotiate if p lands in the

interval (p,p0), since p a         implies pD a w.    In this situation, the firm

offers bondholders an expected return equal to their reservation price w for

the right to continue. Since the offer is "take it or leave it," the

bondholders accept. Renegotiation thus alters the outcome in this case by
                                                     12
making r the effective reservation value of p.            Note, however, that

inefficient liquidations may still occur since bondholders will refuse to

renegotiate whenever p falls below p. Equation (3) Implies that p >             p'    °
that   inefficient liquidations can still occur with positive probability.

Figure 3b illustrates this case.

       Financial distress here cannot be resolved in this case by simple

conversion to equity, an oft-proposed solution. Resolving distress

instead requires a net transfer from the bondholders to the firs. The firm's

expected obligation must be reduced to the point where It no longer has an

 incentive to misallocate. Bondholders may not be willing to do this,

especially if their gain from liquidation is relatively large.13



 12The solutions for p,rJ and E remain the same In this case. Because they
 still receive w whenever p       p ,   bondholders expected return remains 5 pD      h(p)
                                   0                                   p0
 + H(p)w.    The constraints (10) - (12) thus remain unaffected. The only
 difference in the contracting problem Is that fl(p r)     replaces
                                                                 0
                                                                      1I(p ) as the

 objective since the firm gets the expected surplus py — w for all p C EPrPO)
 It is straightforward to verify that equations (14) - (16) still determine
 D, and E.
 13Note also that our analysis overstates the likelihood of successful
 renegotiation by abstracting from a number of the practical problems.           See our
 (1990) paper for a discussion of the effective costs of renegotiating



                                             15
IV. EMPIRICAL IMPLICATIONS

     In this section we examine some empirical predictions of the model.

Perhaps the key feature of our theory is the role of equity as a means of

sharing aggregate risks. This leads to the prediction that payments to

equityholders should vary with macroeconomic conditions, everything else equal

regarding the firms performance (see equation (16)). In section IVA below we

present some formal evidence supporting the notion of an independent

macroeconomic effect on dividends. Another important implication, related to

the role of equity in sharing aggregate risks, involves the connection between

corporate capital structure and the cyclical behavior of business failures; we

address this issue in section IVB.   In section IVC we present some facts on

the relative cyclical patterns in dividends and interest payments as a way to

quantify the historical importance of equity as a cushion against cyclical

risks. This exercise also allows us to draw quantitative Inferences about the

recent shift to leverage for the equity cushion. Finally, in section IVD     we

assess at a qualitative level whether our model Is compatible with the

Increase in corporate debt during the 1980s by taking account the behavior of

taxes and other factors affecting the choice of debt In our model.

     IVA. The Macroeconomic Effect on Dividends. We now test the prediction

of equation (16), that macroeconomic conditions should influence payments to

equityholders, even independently of the firm's earnings performance. We

confront a number of issues in performing this test. First, and most

significantly, our model is too stylized to take to directly to data. We

therefore adopt an econometric specification designed to capture the basic

idea. We modify a conventional empirical dividend model to allow for the

possibility of a macroeconomic effect. Second,since how 'macroeconomic



corporate debt in the U.S.




                                       16
conditions' should be measured Is an open question, we use a variety of

measures. Finally, it is important to control for the possibility that

macroeconomic variables may matter statistically simply because they contain

news about future earnings performance that is not already contained   in

firm-specific variables. We approach this problem in two ways: first, when

possible, by only allowing the macroeconomic variables to enter one period

lagged after the firm-specific variables; second, by allowing the firm's

contemporaneous stock price to enter.

       The data we use are annual and consist of information on a panel on on

manufacturing corporations drawn from Standard and Poor's C01'PUSTAT industrial

file from 1970 to 1989.

       The econometric framework is a a variant of Lintner's (1956) famous

partial adjustment framework. We experiment with specifications of the

form

                           S
                          Dt. =a I +        It +cHt +e It
                                       bY                                       (21)


         S
where D is the desired dividend payout, with I and t denoting the firm and

 the time period, respectively; a is fixed firm effect; Y1 reflects firm

 specific economic variables that influence the pay out decision;      reflects

 macroeconomic variables that influence the payout decision14; and e1 is a

 white—noise error term. All firm—specific variables are expressed in per
                15
 share terms.



 14Strictly speaking, our model only makes predictions about adjustments in the
 total present value of dividend payouts in the wake of a change in
 macroeconomic conditions, as opposed to predictions about exact timing.
 However, all that is necessary for our empirical predictions Is that at least
 some of the adjustment in dividends closely follows the movement in
 macroeconomic conditions.
 15A logical alternative Is to use logs of the relevant variables. In the
 COMPUSTAT data, unfortunately, there are sufficiently many negative
 observations for key firm-specific variables, such as earnings, to make this



                                             17
       Following the literature, we assume partial adjustment of dividends:16


                             DIt —Di,t—I =X(Dit -D i.,t—i           )                  (22)

Using (21) to eliminate D In (22) and then first differencing to remove

firm—specific effects yields


                    ADIt =   (l—A)AD           +   AbAY
                                                          It
                                                               + AcAM
                                                                        t
                                                                            +   c It   (23)
                                       i,t—1


wherec
     it
        =A(eIt -e I,t—1
       We take as the null hypothesis the conventional Lintner—type model, with

c =   0.   The alternative we offer, suggested by equation (16), is that c

should differ from zero; that is, everything else equal regarding the firm's

performance, dividends should vary with macroeconomic conditions.

       There are two ways In which to interpret equation (23). One is as a

structural model. The other, which we prefer, Is simply as a reduced form.

Our strategy then should be interpreted as testing whether macroeconomic

factors should matter in the reduced form, after controlling for all the

relevant firm—specific variables.

       We use two kinds of proxies for macroeconomic conditions. The first is

set of year dummies. This effectively amounts to allowing for a time varying

intercept which is common across firms, and interpreting movements in the

intercept as the "macroeconomic effect." Using year effects allows us to be

agnostic about the source of aggregate shocks relevant to dividend behavior.

It also allows us to abstract from problems of timing and measurement error.

The disadvantage is that it does not provide us with a precise metric against

which to judge the extent to which movements in the intercept are truly driven


choice unattractive.

16See also the review of studies In Poterba (1987).




                                                   18
by macroeconomic factors. The second approach, therefore, is to include a

macroeconomic variable directly in the regression.

     We begin with a set of regressions that use year dummies to reflect

macroeconomic conditions, The term XcM In equation (23) is treated as as

time—varying intercept. We then estimate three different versions. The first

uses contemporaneous firms earnings per share, E, as the measure of the

firm—specific effect on the desired dividend pay out, Y.17 The second adds

the contemporaneous firm stock price per share, S, to the set of firm

specific variables to control for the possibility that the year dummy is

simply contains news about the firm's fortunes that is not reflected in the

its current earnings. The last version controls for the possible influence of

tax changes on the estimated year effects. We allow the dividend payout

parameter conditioned on firm—specific events (b in equation (23)) to vary

with the tax price of dividends at the shareholder level. That Is, we let


                              b=b 0 +bTAX
                                        1   t.
                                                                              (24)



where TAX Is the ratio of the after—shareholder—tax value of a one-dollar
                                                                        18
dividend payout to the after—shareholder-tax value of a capital gain.        This

specification allows for the possibility that an additional common effect,

from the tax system, influences payout. An increase In the tax rate on

dividend distributions relative to the effective tax rate on capital gains

decreases TAX. We estimated hybrids of these three versions, but since they



17lJsing lagged earnings instead of contemporaneous earnings in estImating (23)
produces virtually identical results. We opted for contemporaneous rather
than lagged earnings to ensure that the firm-specific variable contains as
much news as possible about future earnings.

18That Is, TAX = (l—8)/(1-c), where 0 and c are average effective shareholder
tax rates on dividends and capital gains, respectively. To calculate TAX, we
updated the series reported in Poterba (1987).




                                       19
do not suggest any important changes, we do not report the results.

     Table I and Figure 4 report the results for the three regressions using

the year effects as the macroeconomic variable. Table I presents the

estimated coefficients and significance levels for the firm—specific variables

in each regression, and also reports the significance level of the year

dummies.19 Figures 4a - 4c plot the estimated year effects for each of the

three cases.

     The year effects are highly significant in each case, indicating the

presence of a statistically significant common effect on dividends, after

controlling for the influence of conventional firm—specific factors.2°

Importantly, the estimated patterns In the year effects are procyclical,

rising in upturns and falling In downturns. And this pattern holds across

specifications.   In all three cases, pronounced troughs occur in 1975 and

1983, the wakes of the two previous recessions.   It Is also true that a dip

occurs in 1987, not a recession period. However, GNP growth was below trend

in the latter part of 1986, IndIcating less than desirable macroeconomic

performance.



19Because the model is a reduced form, we restrict our interest to whether the
macroeconomic effect is significant, and forego any attempt to interpret the
coefficients on the firm-specific variables. Note also that the possible
auto—correlation in the error term, which is a consequence of the differencing
to remove the firm—specific effect, is likely to bias the coefficient on
lagged dividends. It does not, however, bias the estimated macroeconomic
effect.
20Though we do not report them here, we found similar results using a probit
specification to model dividend cuts. The probit specification was motivated
by the idea that dividend cuts may be reasonably approximated as discrete
events. We modeled the probability of a dividend cut as a function of
percentage changes in firm earnings and the stock price and year effects. The
firm—specific variables were statistically significant with the Intuitive
effect (Increases in firm earnings or stock prices reduce the probability of a
dividend cut). But, importantly, the year effects were also statistically
significant and countercyclical in magnitude: Holding constant firm—specific
influences, the probability of a dividend cut rises in recessions. The
results hold whether dividend cuts are modeled as nominal or real.




                                       20
    As a way to confirm our- interpretation that. aggregate conditions are

responsible for the estimated patterns in the year effects, we reestimate the

three versions of the model, this tine using a macroeconomic variable, the

percentage change in real GNP, instead of the year dummies. The macroeconomic

variable is entered lagged one period, along with contemporaneous values of

the firm-specific variables. We use the lagged value of the macroeconomic

variable to minimize the possible news effect. The lag specification also

seems reasonable given that it takes time for precise information about GNP to

unfold (especially given data revisions).

     Table 2 presents the results. The coefficient on the lagged percentage

change in GNP is positive across the three specifications, and precisely

estimated. The estimated coefficient is robust to the three specifications.

These results confirm that the common effect present in the first set of

regressions is connected with the business cycle. We also tried two

alternative variables to proxy macroeconomic conditions, corporate profits and

the unemployment rate, and found similarly that these variables had

significant predictive In the dividend regression.

     Conventional models of dividend behavior cannot easily explain these

results. Models which predict simply that dividends vary with earnings cannot

explain an independent macroeconomic effect. These models predict only that

dividends should vary positively with firm-specific measures of profitability.

To the extent it is possible to control for all of the relevant firm-specific

factors, macroeconomic variables should not have independent predictive power.

Dividend models based on signaling theories do not in general yield this

result.21 Taking these models literally, a firm a firm needs only     to signal


21Bhattacharya  (1979) is a seminal paper on the signaling theory of dividends.
 In a different vein, Easterbrook (1984) has suggested that periodic payments
 to equltyholders serve as a mechanism for exposing managers to capital-market



                                       21
about its performance relative to the mean. Because information about common

movements in firm profitability is publicly available, there is no reason to

use dividends to signal changes in aggregate conditions. Hence, there is no

reason for an Independent macroeconomic effect on dividend behavior.

     IVB. Involuntary Business Liquidations. Whenever p drops below p,

debtholders sue to liquidate the firm. Our model therefore predicts that

Involuntary liquidations should be countercyclical. Further, given that p is

determined jointly with financial structure, the model also predicts a

relation between financial structure and the pace of involuntary liquidations.

Equation (15), in particular, predicts a positive relation between debt and

the expected number of involuntary liquidations (holding constant output

conditional on success, y, and the gain from cheating, v).

     A frictionless model could explain countercyclical voluntary business

exits, but it cannot explain countercyclical involuntary liquidations,

particularly if they involve efficiency costs, as they do endogenously in our

model. Because the Modigliani—Miller theorem holds in a frictionless setting,

this kind of framework also has difficulty explaining how an increase in

leverage could induce a rise in the business failures. These predictions are

easily generated, of course, in a model that arbitrarily restricts the form

that financial contracts can take, say to non—Indexed debt. Typically,

though, any predictions about debt and the cyclical behavior of liquidations

disappear once one permits the financial contracts to be indexed to aggregate

variables. A satisfactory model of recessions and financial distress must

provide some rationale for why this indexing does not emerge.   In our

framework, institutional features of the tax code play an explicit role in



discipline to avoid non-value-maximizing uses of Internal funds. This
approach also does not predict an independent macroeconomic effect on
dividends.




                                      22
dampening the Incentive index financial contracts to aggregate cyclical

variables, effectively by dampenin.g the incentive to use equity.

     Figure 5 plots times-series data for the postwar on liabilities of

business failures as fraction of GNP, taken from Dun and l3radstreet.   (See

Friedman (1990) for a related discussion of these data.) Unfortunately, the

failure data do not separate involuntary from voluntary exits.22 Thus, while

the pattern is clearly countercyclical, this evidence alone Is not

inconsistent with a perfect—markets setting. However, as Friedman (1990) has

observed, there Is a dramatic shift in the failure rate that coincides with

the increase In corporate leverage. The ratio of liabilities of business

failures to GNP increases more than fourfold over the 1980s, despite the

sustained business expansion that begins in 1983. A perfect-narkets model

would have difficulty explaining such a sharp change in the business failure

rate, as well as the strong correlation of this change with the Increase in

corporate leverage.

     The rise In the failure rate also casts doubt on the view that most

corporate debt is effectively "equity in drag." The potential for

renegotiation alone does not Imbue debt with all the effective features

equity. As our model suggests, even when costless renegotiation is feasible,

debt may not perfectly supplant equity as a device for sharing aggregate

risks.

     IVC. The Equity Cushion We now present some evidence on the cyclical

behavior of dividends relative to interest payments. The objective is to gain

some quantitative sense of the degree to which equity Is used for sharing

aggregate risk. This exercise also leads us to a measure of financial



23Dun and Bradstreet defines a "failure" as the exit of a business Involved
in court proceedings or an exit by voluntary actions involving losses to
creditors.




                                      23
distress supplementary to the ratio of interest payments to cash flow, the

measure suggested by Bernanke and Campbell (1988) and others.

     FIgure 6 plots the level of dividends relative to net interest payments,

using the quarterly postwar NIPA data. The most Immediate feature Is the

secular decline in this ratio, owing to the shift to debt finance. The mean

value is 2.53 over the postwar period, but shrinks to 0.81 over the decade of

the 1980s. For comparison, we also plot the ratio of cash flow to interest,

the Inverse of the 'Bernanke-Campbell' ratio. Not surprisingly, the secular

behavior of these two ratios Is closely related: The raw correlation is .974.

     To isolate the cyclical from the secular movement in dividends relative

to interest we apply the detrending procedure suggested by Hodrick and

Prescott (1980). Figure 7 plots the detrended series. Pronounced troughs

appear around 1958, 1970, 1975, and 1982, times which either precede or

coincide with NBER dated recessions.23 In assessing the aggregate risk sharing

role of equity, the last three episodes are probably the most comparable,

since the secular value of the dividend to interest ratio was relatively

stable over this period (see Figure 6). In the last three episodes, the ratio

of dividends to interest fell about 257..

     To gauge the the relative size of the cycical variation in the

dividend—to—interest ratio, we also report the similarly detrended ratio of

cash flow to interest. Naturally, troughs also occur around recession periods

in this series. Judging from the last three episodes, they are slightly less

than twice the size In percentage terms of the drop in dividends relative to

interest. This accords with the raw correlation between the two detrended



15The behavior of the dividend-interest ratio is robust to using lagged
interest payments in the denominator; hence contemporaneous fluctuations in
short-term nominal interest rates are not accounting for the cyclical
movements in the series.




                                       24
ratios, which is .603. Presuming that total interest obligations are

relatively stable over the cycle, these results suggest that, historically,

roughly over half of the cyclical drop in corporate cash flows was met by a

drop in dividends. Taken in conjunction with our earlier results that

indicate that dividends respond to macroeconomic conditions independently of

firm—level variables, this evidence suggests that the aggregate risk sharing

role of equity may be considerable.

     The ratio of dividends to interest supplements the use of the ratio of

interest payments to cash flow as a measure of financial distress.     In this

regard, the secular decline in the "equity cushion" is another symptom of the

financial vulnerability of firms. Given that this ratio has fallen to about

0.6, and given the historical magnitude of declines in this ratio during

recessions, it is clear that corporations face greater exposure to

macreconomic risk. These arguments, of course, hinge on the interpretation

of "debt's being debt,' and not effectively 'equity in drag.    Our model

suggests, however, that debt in general never perfectly substitutes for equity

as vehicle for sharing aggregate risks.24

     IVD. The Increase in Corporate Debt. Finally, is our simple model

compatible with the debt build—up of the 1980s? Obviously, the model is too

stylized to make quantitative statements. However, three events occurred In

the 1980s, each which would lead to increased use of debt in the context of

our model. The first was a rise in the tax subsidy to debt. However, while

the combined effect of the 1981 and 1986 tax reforms probably increased the

tax bias against equity finance, it is unlikely that this effect alone was



24lnnovations over the last decade have increased the flexibility of debt. Our
argument is only that, while debt may now be a closer substitute for equity as
a device to share aggregate risk, it cannot become a perfect substitute so
long as the institutional restrictions of the tax code remain.




                                      25
large enough to provide a complete explanation (see Gordon and HacKle-Mason,

1990; and our 1990 paper.)

    Another possible factor is improved macroeconomic conditions.      In our

framework, a rise in either the mean of the aggregate shock or a reduction in

the risk (i.e., a mean—preserving 'narrowing" of the distribution) reduces the

need for equity, thereby increasing firms' incentives to take advantage of the

tax subsidy to debt. To the extent the business expansion of the 1980s is

captured by this simple abstraction for improvement in macroeconomic

conditions, our framework would suggest that it provided a climate conducive

to growth in debt finance. This explanation is also compatible with the fact

that many firms have begun shifting back to equity finance in the recent

period of deteriorating aggregate economic conditions.

     A final possibility is the improved liquidity of corporate assets owing

to the relaxation of antitrust laws and the increased participation by foreign

investors, as suggested by Shielfer and Vishny (1990). In our model, an

increase In firms' liquidation value similarly makes debt more attractive by

reducing the risk. An additional effect is that debtholders' Incentive to

renegotiate declines, possibly raising the cyclical sensitivity of involuntary

business liquidations (see the discussion in section lIC). Thus, the story is

capable of explaining both a rise in debt and an increase in the pace of

business failures.

     It is difficult, however, to separate entirely the latter two

explanations of debt growth from tax considerations. Both improvement In

macroeconomic conditions and In firm liquidation values potentially reduce the

agency costs of external finance in our framework. Absent the institutional

considerations of the tax code, however, these factors cannot explain why

firms would choose to increase their exposure to macroeconomic risk.      If they




                                       26
did not have to forego the tax subsidy, the firms in our model would always

opt for a financial structure with greater insulation against, aggregate risks.



V. CONCLUDING REMARKS

     Our model, we think, is in keeping keeping with the WaJJ Street Journal

intuition that equity provides firms with a cushion against aggregate

fluctuations, and, relatedly, that firms are more likely to cut dividends in

recessions, when other firms are doing the same, everything else equal

regarding their earnings performance. Specifically, equity in our model

allows a firm to share aggregate risks with its creditors, minimizing the

chance that a recession could push it into financial distress. We show that

the institutional features of the tax code in general preclude debt from

perfectly substituting for equity in this aggregate risk-sharing role, even

when costless renegotiation is feasible. Overall, the tax bias against equity

reduces the extent to which firms insulate themselves against aggregrate

risks.

     The role of equity in sharing aggregate risks leads to the prediction

that individual firm dividends should vary with macroeconomic conditions,

after controlling for the effects of all the relevant firm—level variables.

We present in support of this prediction, using several different ways to

proxy macreconomic conditions. In this regard, both our theortical and

empirical analysis may provide an insight Into why dividends traditionally

appear smooth relative to earnings at the firm—level but variable at the

aggregate level (see, e.g., Marsh and Merton,1987; and Poterba, 1987).

Regardless of whether one accepts our theory, however, we think that it is

important to ultimately explain why macroeconomic variables have signlfcant

independent predictive power in firm-level dividend equations.




                                       27
    Finally, our model is too stylized to provide any quantitative Insight

into the costs of excessive leverage, Recent empirical work by Cantor (1990)

and Sharpe (1990), however, Indicates a significant impact of debt on firm

employment volatility. More work along these lines would be useful.




                                      28
                                    REFERENCES

Berle, Adolph   and Gardiner Means. The Modern Corporation and Private

     Property. New York:    Macmillan, 1932.
Bernanke,   Ben, and John Y. Campbell.   "Is   There a Corporate Debt   Crisis?,"
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1 (1988): 83 - 125.

Bernanke, Ben, John Y. Campbell, and Toni H. Whited.        U.S. Corporate

     Leverage: Developments in 1987 and 1988." Brooklngs Papers on

     Economic ActIvity 1 (1990): 255 — 286.

Bhattacharya, Sudipto. "Imperfect Information, Dividend Policy, and The Bird

     in the Hand Fallacy." Bell Journal of Economics 10 (SprIng 1979) : 259 -

     270.

Bulow, Jeremy I., Lawrence H. Summers, and Victoria Summers. "Distinguishing

     Debt from Equity in the Junk Bond Market Era." In John B. Shoven and Joel

     Waldfogel, eds., Debt, Taxes, and Corporate Restructuring. Washington,

     D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1990.

Cantor, Richard. "A Panel Study of the Effects of Leverage on Investment and

     Employment." Federal Reserve Bank of New York Quarterly Review (Summer

     1990): 31—41.

Easterbrook, Frank. "Two Agency-Cost Explanations of Dividends." American

     Economic Review 74 (September 1984): 650—659.

Friedman, Benjamin. "Increasing Indebtedness and Financial Instability in the

     United States," in Debt, Financial Stability and Public Policy. Federal

     Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 1986.

Friedman, Benjamin. "Views on the Likelihood of Financial Crisis." Working

     Paper No. 3407, National Bureau of Economic Research, August 1990.

Gertler, Mark and R. Glenn Hubbard. "Taxation, Corporate Capital Structure,

     and Financial Distress." In Lawrence H. Summers ed. ,     Tax Policy and The




                                         29
     Economy, Vol. 4. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1990.

Gordon, Roger H. and Jeffrey HacKle-Mason. "Effects of the Tax Reform Act of

     1986 on Corporate Financial Policy and Organizational Form." Mimeograph,

     University of MichIgan, September 1989.

Gordon, Roger and Burton Malkiel. "Corporate Finance." In Henry Aaron and

     Joseph Pechman, eds., How Taxes Affect Economic Behavior. Washington,

     D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1981.

Harris, Milton and Artur Raviv. "The Theory of Capital Structure." Journal of

     Finance 46 (March 1991).

Hodrick, Robert J., and Edward C. Prescott. "Postwar U.S. Business Cycles: An

     Empirical Investigation." Discussion Paper 451. Carnegie—Mellon

     University, (1980).

Jensen, Michael. "Active Investors, LBOs. and the Privatization of

     Bankruptcy." Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 2 (Spring 1989): 35—44.

Jensen, Michael. "Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance and

     Takeovers." American Economic Review 76 (May 1986): 323—329.

Lintner, John V. •'The Distribution of Incomes of Corporations Among Dividends,

     Retained Earnings and Taxes." American Economic Review 46 (May 1956):

     97—113.

Marsh, Terry and Robert Merton. "Dividend Behavior for the Aggregate Stock

     Market." Journal of Business 60 (January 1987): 1—44.

Miller, Merton and Kevin Rock. "Dividend Policy Under Asymmetric

      Information." Journal of Finance 40 (September 1985): 103—151.

Poterba, James. "Tax Policy and Corporate Saving." Brookings Papers on

      Economic Activity 2 (1987): 455—503.

Sharpe, Stephen, "Debt and Employment Volatility over the Business Cycle,"

      mimeo, Federal Reserve Board, 1990.




                                          30
Shleifer, Andrel and Robert W. Vishny. 'Asset Sales and Debt Capacity.'

     Working Paper No. 3618, National Bureau of Economic Research, February

     1991.

Warshawsky, Hark. "Is There A Corporate Debt Crisis?: Another Look." In R.

     Glenn Hubbard, ed. ,   Financial   Markets and Financial Crises. Chicago:

     University of Chicago Press, 1991.




                                           31
                                     TABLE I

           Econometric Models of Determinants of Firm Dividend Behavior
              (Macroeconomic Conditions Represented by Year Dummies)

                Regression I:        Regression II:             Regression III:
Variable        Earnthg           Earnings, Share Price         Earnings, Taxes




                -.340                   -.340                          —.356
                (.011)                 (.011)                          (.011)




                 .025                    .024                           .014
                (.002)                  (.002)                         (.004)




£i(Share                                 .013
  Price)                                (.003)




TAX•1E                                                                  .018
                                                                       (.006)


                 .085                    .086                           .085


F test for      (.0001)                 (.0001)                        (.0001)
excluding
year effects




Note: The models (described In the text) were estimated by Ordinary Least
Squares using panel data from COMPUSTAT. HeteroskedastiCityCOflSlsteflt
standard errors are in parentheses. The estimated year effects are plotted In
FIgure 8.




                                        32
                                       TABLE 2

            Econometric Models of Determinants of Firm Dividend Behavior
          (Macroeconomic Conditions Represented by Percentage Change in GNP)

                 Regression I:         Regression II:             Regression III:
Variable         Earnings           Earnings. Share Price         Earnings. Taxes




Intercept        — .021                  —.022                       —. 021
                 (.011)                  (.011)                       (.011)




                 —.341                   —.340                       —.341
                 (.015)                  (.014)                      (.014)




 tE                .015                    .014                         .014
                  (.002)                  (.002)                       (.007)




ti(Share                                   .013
  Price)                                  (.003)




TAX•EIE                                                                 .014
                                                                       (.006)




7. change In         1.05                   1.17                           1.05
GNP (lagged)        (.286)                 (.287)                         (.286)




R2                   .083                      .085                        .083




Note: The models (described in the text) were estimated by Ordinary Least
Squares using panel data from COMPUSTAT. Heteroskedasticity—coflsiSt.ent
standard errors are in parentheses.




                                          33
                  FIGURE 1: DETERMINATION OF P0 (NO-TAX-SUBSIDY CASE)



                        9c



1-I




             0
                             pa




      - (r - c)                                             p0



                  FIGURE 2: DETERMINATION OF P0 (TAX-SUBSIDY CASE)



                         d




Il(P0),

                                            epd




             0
                   p0



                                                            p0
                  FIGURE 3a: EQUILIBRIUM WITH NO RENEGOTIATION




TI (%)
4:(p0)




            0
                  Pr        P0




                                                             P0




                       FIGURE 3b: EQUILIBRIUM WITH RENEGOTIATION



                       gc



TI (p0)




             0




                                                             P0
     - (r - c.)
                      FIGURE 4

        Year Effects in Simple Dividend Models




                           Year

                           4B
0.15


  0.1


0.05


    0



—0.05



 -0.1




                           Y.or
                              FIGURE 5

                  LIABILITIES OF BUSINESS
               FAILURES AS A SHARE OF GNP
0.012

 0.01'

0.008

0.006

0.004

0.002


     1945 1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990



0.0025

 0.002

0.0015'

 0.00 1


0.0005

        0—                                         1975   1980
        1945    1950   1955   1960   1965   1970
                                 Yew's
0.011




0.001
    1960 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989
                          FI(;URE 6

    DIVIDEND-INTEREST AND CASh-FLOW-INTEREST RATIOS

                  (Aggregate Time-Series Data)
                                                                      6

                                                                      5
7
                                                                      4
6

5                                                                     3

4                                                                     2

3
                                                                      1


                                                                      0




                                                 - CF'INT   DJVINTJ
                                    FIGIJRE 7

         DETRENDED DIVIDEND-INTEREST ANI) CASH-FLOW-INTEREST RATIOS

                             (Aggregale Time-Series Data)




 1.0


 0   .                                                                  .25

 0.0


—0   .
—1.0




                                       I
                                                DETRENCF    DETRENDII
