                   NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




             PRODUCTIVITY AND MACHINERY INVESTMENT:
                   A LONG RUN LOOK 1870-1980




                      J. Bradford   De Long




                     Working Paper No. 3903




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          November 1991




This paper is part of NBER's research program in Growth. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #3903
                                        November 1991




              PRODUCTIVITY AND MACHINERY INVESTMENT:
                    A LONG RUN LOOK 1870-1980




                            ABSTRACT



     Over the past century the long-run growth of six economies
shows a strong association between investment in machinery and
economic growth that holds both within and across nations and
periods. A similar strong association holds for the post-world
War II period for a broader cross section of nations. A number
of considerations suggest that this association is causal, and
that a high rate of machinery investment is a necessary

prerequisite for rapid long-run productivity growth -   a

hypothesis also supported by narratives from the history of

technology.




                                        J. Bradford De Long
                                        NBER
                                        1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                        Cambridge, MA 02138
Productivity and Machinery Investment:
               A Long Run Look 1870—1980

                                                              J.   BRADFORD DE LONG




                                     I.   Introduction

    Machinery investment and productivity growth are strongly associ-
ated over the past century in a sample of six currently-industrialized
nations—Canada, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the
United States. A similar association holds since World War II for a
broad cross-section of nations.1 Many have noted such an association in
individual cases and for shorter periods.2 Moreover, there are signs that a
 J. Bradford De Long is Frederick S. Danziger Associate Professor of Economics at Harvard
University, and John fri. Olin Fellow at the National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge,
MA 02138. He would like to thank Timothy Hatton, Knick Harley. Chad Jones, Jan McLean,
Andrei Shleifer, Lany Summers, Alan Taylor, Robert Waldmann, and Jeffrey Williamson for
helpful discussions and comments; bang Quan Vu and Marco Bechi for excellent research
assistance, and the National Science, Sloan, Olin, and Paskus Foundations, as well as the NBER,
for financial support.
1See Bradford De Long and Lawrence Summers Equipment Investment and Economic
Growth," Qua rtei'ly Journal of Economics 106 (May 1991), pp. 445—502.
2For example, RoIf Hayn. "Capital Formation and Argentina's Price Cost Siructure," Review of
Economics and Statistics 44 (1962) pp. 340—3, and Carlos Diaz-Alejandro, Essays on i/it
Economic His:oiy of i/ic Argentine Republic (New Haven, CN: Yale University Press, 1970),
argued that Argentina's extraordinarily poor performance since World War II was due to a low
                                                2




large part of this association is causal in tl1at high machinery investment
generates rapid growth. The strong association between machinery
investment and productivity growth suggests a fundamental link of
growth with mechanization, with the acquisition of machinery that
embodies the technologies of the Industrial Revolution.
    This article begins by sketching some issues at stake in the debate
over the role of machinery accumulation in growth. Section II turns to
the reliability of the data. Section III documents the association of
machinery investment and growth. Section IV discusses causality—does
high machinery investment cause fast growth, or does fast growth lead
to high machinery investment? And section V tries to fit the macro pat-
terns to the micro narratives of historians of technology.
    Historians have long stressed the role of mechanization in the mul-
tiplication of productivity over the past two centuries. Industrial nations
are more than eight times as wealthy as a century ago because they can
and have poured resources into making the machines that embody the
technologies of the Industrial Revolution. Factors supporting high
machinery investment are given a prominent role in historians' narra-
tives, and are in the forefront of the pictures drawn by Rostow and Ger-
schenkron, by Rosenberg, Landes, and Pollard, and by many, many

rate of machinery investment in machinery resulting from counterproductive policies. T.P. 11111,
"Growth and Investment According to International Comparisons." Economic Journal (June
1964), pp. 287—304, found a strong bivariate association between machinery investment and
growth over 1954—62 in OECD countries. De Long and Summers, "Equipment Investment and
Economic Growth," found a strong association between machinery investment and growth over
1950—85 for a broad sample of nations, as did Charles Jones, "Economic Growth and Producer
Durables Prices" (Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. xerox, 1990).
                                               3




others.3
    Development and growth economists have taken another direction.
They concluded that accumulation had been over.stressed, and other fac-
tors—like formal education, the exploitation of scale, appropriate terms
of trade, and so on—were more central.4 Studies in the growth account-
ing tradition of Solow have been interpreted as revealing that capital
deepening is responsible for only a small part of productivity growth.5
The general drift of this line is that rapid machinery accumulation is
neither sufficient nor necessary for economic growth: formal education,
the overcoming of bottlenecks, and the removal of inefficiencies in the
use of resources are more strategic factors in long-run growth than the
accumulation of machinery.


3See W.W. Rostow, Stages of Economic Growth (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1960); Alexander Gerschenkron, Economic Backwa,-dness in Historical Perspective (Cambridge.
MA: Harvard University Press, 1962); Nathan Rosenberg, 'Capital Goods, Technology, and
Economic Growth," QAford Economic Papers 15(1963), pp. 2 17—28: David Landes, The
Unbound Prometheus (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1969); Sidney Pollard, Peaceful
Conquest (Oxford: Oxford Univesrity Press. 1981); and Jérôme-Adolphe Blanqui, Hisgoire de
l'Economie Politique in Europe (1837; English trans. Emily Leonard from the fourth French ed.;
New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons, 1880).
4w.w. Rostow, Theorists of Economic G,-owt/t (New York: Oxford University Press, 1990),
surveys the development of theories of economic growth. Cohn Clark, Conditions of Economic
Progress (London: Macmillan, 3d ed. 1957), was among the first to argue that capital deepening
was not responsible for the bulk of growth.
5For example, Mrinal Datta-Chadhuri's claim in "Market Failure and Government Failure,"
Journal of Economic Perspectives 4:3 (Summer 1990), pp. 25—40, that "Solow .. demonstrated
that only a small pan of.. growth.. .can be explained by.. physical capital." Robert Solow's
"Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function," Review of Economics and Statistics
39 (August 1957), pp. 312—20 is more restrained. See also Edward Denison, Why Growth Rates
Differ (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 1967).
                                                 4




     This paper reaffirms the Gerschenkronian view. The macro patterns
it finds suggest thai machinery investment is iii a sense the strategic fac-
tor in economic growth. Moreover, t.he macro pattern fits well with the
micro narratives of technological historians. Rosenberg is only one of
many that argue on the basis of micro studies of innovation that the
construction, acquisition, and installation of machines is a key link in the
process of economic development.6 This paper suggests that the trees
sketched by technological historians give a good idea of the forest as
well.



                                           II. Data


     This study covers six nations—Canada,7 Germany,8 Italy, Japan, the
United Kingdom, and the United States—over eight periods—I 870 to
1885, 1885 to 1900, 1900 to 1913, 1913 to 1929, 1929 to 1938, 1938 to
1950, and 1950 to 1965, and 1965 to 1980. The fifteen-year frequency
of observation, with some dates offset to better match the cycle and the
eras of war and peace,9 was chosen to focus on longer-run shifts in
growth rates instead of shorter-run cyclical fluctuations.

6See Rosenberg, "Technological Change in the Machine Tool Industry," Journal of Economic
Hisrory 23 (December 1963), pp. 414—43.
7Data for Canada is relatively poor before 1929, and is not used.
8West Germany after World war ii.
9The 1913—1929 period ends on che eve of the Great Depression, thus containing all of World
War I and subsequent business cycles leading up to the end of the 1920's boom. And the 1938—
50 period ends when post-World War II reconstruction had been substantially completed.
                                                 5




    The nations were chosen on the basis of data availability. Long-run
national product estimates of the quality necessary are rare. These six
countries are those with the best data. They make up a substantial part of
the industrial world, accounting for roughly sixty percent of total world
economic product today and for perhaps forty percent in 1870. 10
   In choosing among different estimates of growth rates and invest-
ment shares, this paper stays as close as possible to the numbers com-
piled by Maddison, whose database has had a substantial influence on
conceptions of long-run growth in comparative perspective.11 The esti-
WA seventh once-rich nation, Argentina, is of extraordinary interest: its post-World war n rela-
tive economic collapse has carried it from the First to the Third World. Inclusion of Argentina
would help to control for a potential sample selection problem—since all of the nations in the
sample have done well, perhaps they are unrepresentative—but it cannot be reliably included in
the statistical analysis. If Argentinian data is included, the coefficients estimated for the regres-
sions are very similar, but the standard errors of the coefficients are much smaller.
        of those cross-country estimates available, Maddison's database one of the most compre-
hensive and certainly the best documented. See Angus Maddison, Phases of Capitalist Develop-
mew (New York: Oxford University Press, 1982), and Economic Grows/i in she Twewk'i/s Ce:,-
nay (Paris: OECD, 1989). However, Maddison's estimates are not immune from challenge. See
Jan de Vries, "The Decline and Rise of the Dutch Economy," in 0. Saxonhouse and 0. wright.
eds., Technique, Spirit, and Form in size Making of she Modern Economies: Essays in Honor of
William H. Parker (Supplement 3, in 1984, to Research in Economnic History), for a convincing
argument that Maddison's estimates of Dutch nineteenth century growth are substantially awry.
.1. Bradford De Long, "Productivity Growth, Convergence, and Welfare: Comment," American
Economic Review 78 (December 1988), pp. 1138—1154, makes some skeptical observations on
some of the estimates in Phases of Capitalist Development, particularly for Japan and
Scandinavia.
     Nevertheless, future challengers and revisors of Maddison must begin where his work leaves
off—and his work has made that of potential revisionists much easier. For estimates of compara-
tive living standards made via wage levels compared using contemporary purchasing power par-
ity benchmarks, see Jeffrey Williamson, "The Evolution of Global Labor Markets" (Cambridge.
MA: Harvard University xerox, 1991). williamson's estimates find sufliciently large discrepan-
cies to be worrisome, but not large enough to fully invalidate Maddison's database, On ilie ocher
                                                 6




 mates of output per capita used have been drawn from his Phases of
 Capitalist Development. These estimates of relative past output levels
 are derived by extrapolating growth rates as given by nation-specific
 studies backward froni a current benchmark. Growth is measured using
 different price vectors: the prices in which Japanese growth from 1965—
 79 is calculated are not the relative prices in which German growth from
 1900—13 is calculated. There is thus no good reason to believe that the
different output growth rates reported by Maddison are consistent.
    The estimates of machinery investment are compiled from individual
national sources. 12 The same potential inconsistencies are thus present in

hand, Michael MuIhall's Industries and Wealth of Nations (London: Longmans, Greene, and Co.,
1896) contains contemporary estimates of the industries and wealth of nations that have a corre-
lation for the sample used here (excluding Japan) of 0.98 with Maddison's estimates.
12Sources of pie-World War II data on capital stock estimates and investment shares are as fol-
lows. For Canada, only official post-1929 data are available. A more detailed picture of earlier
growth could be constructed by extrapolating from the individual years covered by O.J.
Firestone, Canada's Economic Development (Ottawa: Department of Trade and Commerce,
1953), but the data will not bear the weight of such extrapolation. For Germany, the estimates
used are Maddison's revisions in Phases of Capitalist Development of W.G. Hoffman em a!. '5
estimates in Das WaC/ISIUFtI der deutschen Wirisehaft (Berlin: Springer, 1965). Before 1929, the
underlying estimates of the German capital stock are "net concept" estimates. All other estimates
used are "gross concept" estimates. Jtalian machinery and equipment data are derived from
Giorgio Fua, ed., La Sviluppo Economico in Iralia (Milano: Angeli, 1969), for the pre-World
War 11 period, and from Robert Summers and Alan Heston, "The Penn World Table, version vs
Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 (May 1991), pp. 327—68. thereafter. Japanese data are
derived from Kazushi Ohkawu, Estimates of Long-Term Economic Statistics of Japan since 1868
(Tokyo: Toyo Keizai Shimpo Sin, 1966), for the pre-World War II period, and froni "Penn
World Table V" for the post-World War 11 period. United Kingdom data are taken from CA-I.
Feinstein, National Income, Expendittu-e, and Output in the United Kingdom (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1972). For the United States, the estimates for the post-1929 period
are the official Department of Commerce estimates; the estimates for the pre-1929 period are
derived from Simon Kutnets, Capital in the American Economy (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
                                     7




the investment estimates as well. Prices used differ across countries and
in some cases across periods. This paper bets that such inconsistencies
do not corrupt the conclusions, but it cannot be used to draw strong
lessons about characteristics and patterns of growth in any one country
relative to others in the sample. Statements about the deviations of
national patterns from the average pattern found in the sample derived
from the data used in this paper may well be misleading. But conclu-
sions about long-run growth in the "typical" industrialized nation are
more secure, for errors made in describing the quantitative shape of
growth in of individual nations cancel to some degree when averages are
considered.
   The investment estimates used in this paper are typically equal to
gross investment less retirements. It is larger than "net investment,"
which subtracts depreciation on existing capital. It is smaller than "gross
investment." The concept used here is the concept appropriate for
aggregate production functions: it measures the change in physical capi-
tal for use in production.



            Ill.   Machinery Accumulation and Productivity

    Figure I plots machinery investment shares and output per capita
growth. The association is strong, capturing more than half of the vari-
ance of output per capita growth. The machinery coefficient is large:

University Press. 1962).
                                                              8




each one percentage point rise in machinery investment as a share of
output is associated with an increase of more than one-half a percent per
year in output per capita growth.



     Figure I: Machinery Investment and Output per
                     Capita Growth
                                                                                                   -
                                                                                 • Japan 1950-65




                                                           •
                      !                                                                                •Japti-i 1965 79
                                              Japan 3929-38
                                                                                    Germany 1950-65
                                                    \ ccnoia 3938—SO
                .04                                                           •Itody 1965
 Annual Pate                  German                          ILJSA 1938-50             • Italy 1965-79
                                                       p
 of Notional              ermaiy 193-    .• ,
                                         92938
                                                                                  Germany 1965-79

 Product per
   Capita         0                        P.                                   Canada 3965-79


                          aS     •
                             LiSA 1929 38
   Growtti
               Canc        1929—38              •Geffnony 1938—SO

               -.04                         S Japan 3938—SO



                 -.02                0              fl2            .04            .06            .1)8

                  Annual Pate of Change of Gross Macranery and Equipment Capital Stock, as
                                      a Proportion of Nalional Product

                          Source: Author's calculations as described In the text.



    The highest-growth highest-investment points come after World War
1!. This "Great Keynesian Boom" saw growth more rapid than any pre-
vious era. Perhaps it is a structural break, and the association of machin-
ery and growth is a reflection of this break. This is not the case. Post-
1950 growth has been no more rapid on average than predicted from
                                                                 9




pre-1950 relations.'3



       Table I: GDP per Capita Growth Regressed on
      Machinery and non-Machinery Investment Rates
                                     Non-       Extra ENact of
                                  Residential     Machinery:                 Outpuvcapita
                     Machinery Construction                       Population Level Relatve
Specification        Investment lnvesbflent.      T-Statistic    Growth Rate    to U.S.       A2      SEE


                       0561         0.192            1.47            -0.481       -0.011     0.587   0.0139
                       (0.157)      (0.117)                          (0.504)      (0.009)


                       0.624        0.167            1.91            -0.543                  0.572   0.0140
                       (0.147)      (0.115)                          (0.504)


                       0.599        0.127           2.10                          -0.011     0.577   0.0139
                      (0.151)       (0.094)                                       (0.009)


Naon Dummies'          0.675        0.101           2.07             -0.373       .0.049     0.665   0.0135
                       (0.169)      (0.129)                          (0.609)      (0.021)


Era Dummies"           0.736        0.175            1.80            -0.741       -0.003     0.640   0.0144
                       (0.225)      (0.138)                          (0.644)      (0.011)


Nation & Era"          1.227        0.046           3.35             -2.212       -0.031     0.758   0.0130
Dummies                (0.266)      (0.140)                          (0.907)      (0.026)


'The U.S. alone has a sñcant nadon dummy: 40.0208.
"None ci the era dummies we signnt
"The 1965-79 era coefficient has a signiFicant negative coefficient, the Canada
      and the USA. nation coeffcients ace signifcant and posJtie.

                                            Source: As described In the Iext.


t3Little of rapid post-1950 growth in output or investment in machinery can be attributed to
replacement of wartime losses. Only Japan and Germany were below their pre-Worki War 11
growth paths by 1950, and they were not far below. By 1965, all six of the countries were above
not only their pre-World War II but also their pm-Great Depression growth paths. See Alan
Miiward, The Reconstruction of Western Europe (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press).
                                                10




     Table I reports regressions of output per capita growth on investment
in machinery and on additional variables: the level of output per capita
relative to America (to take account of possible "convergence" as fol-
lower countries more quickly retrace the steps of leaders), the rate of
population growth (to take account of the burdens of capital widening),
the share of non-residential construction investment in national product
(to control for the increase in productivity produced by other forms of
investment besides equipment), and separate indicator variables for each
nation and era (to partially control for the host of additional influences,
nation- and era-specific, on the rate of economic growth). 14 Table I also
reports the t-statistic on the difference between the coefficient on
investment in machinery and the coefficient on investment in general.
     This reveals the significance of the additional correlation between
growth and machinery above the correlation between growth and
investment in general. Consider just the first regression, with the lowest
such t-statistic: 1.47. An observer thinking the odds were 1-1 for
machinery having a stronger association with growth than other, invest-
ment but having no view as to the magnitude of the differential would, if
this regression came as new information, believe that the odds were 14-1
that machinery had the stronger association.



        other additional variables were also included in results not shown. Direct measures of
education are noted below. "Defeat in war" indicator variables, and variables measuring the
orientation of exports toward primary products or manufactures did not have a noticeable effect
on the machinery investment coefficient.
                                                 11




    The nation and era indicators rarely achieve statistical significance.'5
It is interesting that there are not significant nation and era effects. Such
would proxy for important variables—like rates of education, impacts of
economic policies, or the functioning of the international régime—with
differential effects across nations and eras. There are surely important
determinants of growth other than population growth, machinery and
other forms of investment, and "catch-up." But such determinants are
neither persistent within any nation nor pervasive in any era.16
   Regressions with both nation and era indicator variables included
generate very large coefficients on the machinery investment variable
and implausible estimates of the relationship between population and
output per capita growth. Inclusion of both sets soaks up too much of
identifying variance, producing coefficient estimates that are untrustwor-

15Nation effects are measured relative to Germany. Era effects are measured relative to the ini-
tial l870—85 period. The U.S. indicator is one of the few that is significant: the U.S. has grown
over the past century about two percent per year faster than would be expected given its level of
per capita national product relative to the other industrial nations and its rate of equipment
investment. When the level of output per capita relative to the U.S. is dropped from the indepen-
dent variables, then the U.S. indicator variable loses its significance. The U.S. is an exception to
the "convergence" toward average productivity levels for the set of industrial nations as a whole
that is exhibited by other industrial economies. The U.S. has managed to mainta'm its productiv-
ity lead for an astonishingly long time. See Moses Abramovitz, "Catching Up, Forging Ahead,
and Falling Behind," Journal of Economic History 46 (June 1986). pp. 385—406, and William
Baumol, Sue Anne Beatty Blackman, and Edward Wolff. Productivity and American Leaders/i ip
(Cambridge. MA: M.I.T. Press, 1989), The positive U.S. indicator reveals not that the U.S. has
grown faster than expected given its rate of machinery investment, but that it has grown faster
than expected given its relative wealth,
'6Adding direct measures of education, or of the change in education over a period, did not
reduce the magnitude or significance of the coefficient on machinery. This may well have come
about only because official measurements are poor proxies for the actual stock of "human" or
"organizational" capital that should enter a production function.
                                              12




 thy. For this reason I place more reliance on the regressions without
 indicator variables, since their small coefficients imply that their omis-
 sion cannot seriously bias the machinery coefficient estimate.



                                     IV.   Causality

     Few would argue that machinery investment is not to a degree
dependent on output growth. Any influence generating faster growth
will raise future profits. If firms anticipate such an increase they will
invest in machinery to capture these future profits. The degree to which
causation runs from investment to growth or from growth to investment
is impossible to untangle with complete confidence. Nevertheless, three
pieces of evidence suggest that a substantial share of causation runs
from higher machinery investment to faster growth, not the reverse.
    The first piece exploits the distinction between output growth and
output per capita growth. If faster growth leads to higher investment
because of the expectation of profits, investment might well respond
equally to increases in output generated by productivity and increases
generated by population. It should not matter much whether larger
demand comes from having niore consumers or richer consumers.17




17Th1s insight is due to Barry Bosworth, who suggested it to Lawrence Summers. Dc Long and
Summers have used it to try to identify causality between machinery investment and growth in
the post-World war U period.
                                                       13




 Table II: Machinery Investment Regressed on Output
                       per Capita and Population Growth

                                                               Non-
                           Output                           Residential
Dependent                 per Capita      Population        Consliuction
VMiable                    Growth           Growth          Investment      R2     SEE


Machinery Investment        0710            0.319                          0-556    0.0137
                           (0.104)          (0.383)


Machinery Investment        0.513           -0.459            0.265        0.627    0,0127
                           (0.121)          (0.458)           (0.098)



                                     Source: As descrIbed In the text.




     Table II regresses machinery investment rates on output per capita
and population growth rates, and shows a strong association between
output per capita growth and machinery , and a weaker and imprecisely
estimated association between population growth (holding output per
capita constant) and machinery. Intensive growth that raises productivity
and income levels is especially strongly associated with machinery
investment.
    A second piece of evidence is the recent, post-World War II experi-
ence as assessed by De Long and Summers, and by Jones)8 Today car-
ries information about yesterday: the evidence of the present allows us


1 8"Equipment Investment and Economic Growth," and Jones, "Economic Growth and Producer
Durables Prices." See also Steven Dowrick and Duc-Tho Nguyen, 'DECO Comparative Catchup
and Convergence," American EconomicReview 79 (December 1989), pp, 1010-10.
                                    22




different conclusions.
   One obvious addition to tile sample that would have led to different
conclusions is the Soviet Union: since Stalin took absolute power at the
end of the 1920's, the Soviet Union has invested extraordinarily heavily
in machinery, and yet achieved productivity growth rates very poor by
the standards of tile industrial West. The inefficiency of the Soviet eco-
nomy at translating inputs into outputs is one of the most fascinating and
heartbreaking stories of the economic history of the twentieth century.
Yet its experience serves as a warning to governments seeking to
industrialize and accelerate growth: the type of machinery investment
that leads to rapid growth appears to be the type generated by private
firms and market allocation processes, not by central planners.
    Nevertheless, the experience of the past century is that those coun-
tries that have grown most rapidly have been those that have invested
very heavily in machinery. There is a strong case that their rapid growth
is in large part due to this investment: it enabled their workers and firms
to gain experience at using and thus master the technologies ofi the
Industrial Revolution embodied in machinery. This is a vision of the
process of economic growth that is familiar to economic historians. The
fit between their micro narratives and the macro patterns should lead
them to place more confidence in their narratives of machinery invest-
ment and innovation.
                                     I5




Summers and Jones stress that in the post-World War H period high
machinery investment is strongly correlated with low relative prices of
producer durables and rapid growth. If rapid growth causes increased
machinery investment by increasing demand for machinery, it would
raise the price of producer durables as well. The likelihood that the post-
World War II pattern reflects causation running from high machinery
investment to rapid growth creates, if we are willing to write history
backwards, a presumption that the same is true in the longer run as well.


National Experiences
    The third piece of evidence comes from narrative histories of policy
and growth in individual nations. Consider the case of Argentina. Argen-
tinian long-run national income accounts are not sufficiently reliable for
its inclusion in the database for the regressions. Neverthless, it is perhaps
the most fascinating case study. Up to the late 1950's it was as rich as
continental Europe, and had grown rapidly since large-scale settlement
began in the mid-nineteenth century. In 1929 Argentina had been
perhaps fifth in the world in automobiles per capita. In 1913 Buenos
Aires had been in the top twenty among cities of the world in telephones
per capita. Yet today Argentina is a third world country. Figure III plots
the relative erosion of Argentine ouput per capita from levels compara-
ble to Europe at the end of World War II.
   Carlos DIaz Alejandro's Essays on the Economic History of the
Argentine Republic provides a powerful—but controversial—analysis of
Argentina's relative decline. The Depression had left Argentina justly
                                               16




suspicious of the free-trade order: its trading partners had shut it out of
markets to preserve domestic employment. Political cleavages had
sharpened as landowner and exporter elites showed eagerness to aban-
don democracy to stunt the welfare state. In this environment Juan PerOn
gained support for a program of national assertion and populist
redistribution.


 Figure III: Post-World War II Argentine and European
               Real GDP per Capita Levels
            1.5
                                                                             Germany




Log Scale
            0.5




             C


             1950            1960           1970           1980           199O

                  Source: Robed Summers and Alan Heslon, "Penn World Table V."




    Peron sought rapid economic growth and the redistribution of wealth
to urban workers who had not received their fair share. His program of
stimulation, price controls, and wage raises produced almost half a
decade of growth, but then exports fell as the disincentives implicit in
his program made themselves felt. The resulting -foreign exchange short-
                                     17




age gave PerOn only unattractive options: devaluation and borrowing
from abroad, thus betraying his nationalist commitments; internal aus-
terity, causing unemployment and reversing his redistributions; or con-
trols on imports to balance foreign payments by rationing imported
goods. Perón chose this third alternative, believing that growth, a con-
tinuation of redistribution, and a reduction in dependence on the world
economy was good. First priority for foreign exchange went to raw
materials to keep factories operating, second priority to consumption
goods to keep workers' living standards high, and last priority to imports
of capital goods for investment.
   As a result, the early 1950's saw Argentina's relative prices of pro -
ducer durables rise to more than twice world levels. Each percentage
point of output saved and committed to the purchase of machinery pro-
duced less than one-half a percentage point's worth of real machinery
investment. Even though the 1945—55 government boasted of industrial-
ization, DIaz Alejandro found "[rjemarkably, the capital stock in elec-
tricity and communications increased by a larger percentage during the
depression years 1929-39 than during 1945-55." Subsequent govern-
ments moderated but did not rollback PerOnist policies. In spite of
healthy savings, Argentinian rates of machinery investment have been
low since World War II. And the economy has stagnated.
    The case of post-World War II Argentina finds its opposite in post-
World War II West Germany. Post-World War II Argentina was thought
to have a bright economic future. Post-World War H West Germany was
seen as likely to require more than a generation to regain anything close
                                      18




to its previous relative economic position. Yet as figure III also shows,
between 1950 and 1960 West German national product per capita gained
35 percent relative to France and 45 percent relative to Britain, leaving it
in 1960 with productivity halfway between the two.
    During this decade of the Wirtschaftswunder real returns on the
German stock market averaged twenty-four percent per year. Such high
rates of stock price growth indicate that Germany's growth leap of the
1950's was a surprise: had investors foreseen rapid economic growth,
they would have bid stock prices up to higher levels in the early 1950's
in anticipation. Belief in rapid growth of the magnitude seen in the
Wirtschaftswunder was the exception, not the rule in post-World War II
Germany. Thus it is not possible to claim that high machinery invest-
ment in Germany over 1950—65 was induced by a high demand for
machinery by firms anticipating rapid economic growth, for by and large
Germans did not anticipate the bright future that in fact lay ahead. If
Germany's high machinery investment in the early post-World War II
period is related to its growth thiracle, it is as cause, not as consequence.



                  V.   Technology and Productivity

   The macro pattern sketched above is of a strong association between
machinery investment and economic growth, an association that some
evidence suggests reflects a strong causal chain running from high
machinery investment to rapid growth. This macro pattern is consistent
                                              19




with a view of the micro structure of innovation that historians of tech -
nology have been drawing for generations.20 As Nathan Rosenberg puts
it: ".. .inventions are relatively crude and inefficient [at first]... .Tliey
are, of necessity, badly adapted to many of the[ir] ultimate uses., they
offer only small advantages, or perhaps none at all." Rosenberg con-
cludes that "the pace at which... improvements are made will be a major
determinant of the rate of diffusion.... improving a process contributes
even more to technological progress than does its initial development."2
    Consider three classic and exemplary studies. First, Fishlow's study
of American railroad productivity found that over the forty years from
1870 to 1910 the lion's share of cost reduction was contributed by
incremental changes in the design of freight cars and locomotives; one
by one, these changes were small and barely noticed; but over forty
years they added up to a doubling of the effective power of locomotives
and to a tripling of the capacity of freight cars.22 Second, a similar pat-
tern holds in the past two decades in the computerized tomography
industry: initial invention had relatively small benefits, but the subse-
quent explosion of innovation and adaptation changed a curiosity into a
very valuable diagnostic device. The wave of small innovations—them-


20Nathan Rosenberg, "The Historiography of Technical Progress," in Inside the Black Box
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982), excellently surveys work on tle history of
technology. Rosenberg's survey was written before David Houn.shelt's excellent Fiim 1/ic
American System to Mass Production (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. J954)
21Rosenberg, Perspectives on Technology (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1976).
22Alben Fishlow, "Productivity and Technological Change in the Railroad Sector," in D. Brady.
ed., Output, Employment. and Productivity in the United States After 1800 (New York: NBFR,
1966).
                                              20




selves separate from although unthinkable without the initial inven-
tion—contributed the lion's share of the value of the innovation.23 Third,
recall Hunter's famous study of the development of the steamboat; both
the engine and the principles of ship design were borrowings from Bri-
tain, yet the developed American steamboat had a different kind of
engine, a different strength of frame, a different shape of hull, a different
form of superstructure—no feature of the original British design was
kept without major modification.24
   Case studies cannot prove a general pattern. Nevertheless, it is worth
noting that historians who have examined the process of technological
development have for the most part stressed the process of feedback and
incremental improvements in operation and design. A similar stress on
incremental improvements can be found in studies of technology adap-
tation by countries not at the forefront of invention and innovation. How
are such incremental improvements made? Clearly they can only be
made by those who are already very familiar with the technology and its
uses. Without workers and managers with hands-on experience the pro-
cess of technology transfer and technological adaptation becomes
impossibly difficult. Feedback from users and small adaptations of
machines and organizations lies at the heart of the stories of productivity
growth narrated by technological historians. Such a pattern strongly

23See Manuel Trajtenbcrg, Economic Analysis of Product Innovation (Cambridge. MA: l-larvaFd
University Press, 1990). Similar patcems can be found even in technologies that appear at first
glance stable.
24Louis Hunter, Steamboats on the Western Rivers (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
1949).
                                    21




suggests that rapid productivity growth requires intimate experience
with—and abundant accumulation of—the machinery in which the tech-
nologies that need to be adapted are embodied.
    Thus the macro association of machinery investment and growth and
the micro studies in the history of technology may be pieces of the same
puzzle. On the macro side, rapid machinery accumulation is associated
with rapid productivity growth, and appears to yield social benefits to
the economy in terms of higher productivity that dwarf the profits that
the owners of the capital goods installed are able to privately appropri-
ate. On the micro side, active experience with technologies is a neces-
sary prerequisite to developing them further or to using them
productively.
    The association between machinery investment and growth in this
sample is very strong. The estimated coefficients suggest thai. each addi -
tional percentage point of total output devoted to investment in machin-
ery raises output per worker growth by more than half a percentage point
per year. This might be taken to imply a gross social rate of return on
equipment investment of more than fifty percent per year—or a net
social payback period of three years or less even allowing for very rapid
depreciation of machinery.
    This high estimate may be too high. The nations in the sample are,
today, wealthy and successfully industrialized economies. Circum-
stances have broken in their favor over the past century. The high coef-
ficient may to some degree be capturing the good luck that the countries
in the sample have had. A different sample might well have led to
                                    22




different conclusions.
   One obvious addition to tile sample that would have led to different
conclusions is the Soviet Union: since Stalin took absolute power at the
end of the 1920's, the Soviet Union has invested extraordinarily heavily
in machinery, and yet achieved productivity growth rates very poor by
the standards of tile industrial West. The inefficiency of the Soviet eco-
nomy at translating inputs into outputs is one of the most fascinating and
heartbreaking stories of the economic history of the twentieth century.
Yet its experience serves as a warning to governments seeking to
industrialize and accelerate growth: the type of machinery investment
that leads to rapid growth appears to be the type generated by private
firms and market allocation processes, not by central planners.
    Nevertheless, the experience of the past century is that those coun-
tries that have grown most rapidly have been those that have invested
very heavily in machinery. There is a strong case that their rapid growth
is in large part due to this investment: it enabled their workers and firms
to gain experience at using and thus master the technologies ofi the
Industrial Revolution embodied in machinery. This is a vision of the
process of economic growth that is familiar to economic historians. The
fit between their micro narratives and the macro patterns should lead
them to place more confidence in their narratives of machinery invest-
ment and innovation.
