                   NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




         ARE OPTION-IMPLIED FORECASTS OF EXCHANGE RATE
                VOLATILITY EXCESSIVELY VARIABLE?




                          Shang-Jin   Wei
                       Jeffrey A. Frankel




                     Working Paper No. 3910




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          November 1991



We have received helpful comments from Menzie Chinri, Angelo
Melino, Maurice Obstfeld, David Parsley, seminar participants at
UC Berkeley and NBER Summer Institute, and especially. David
Bates, Richard Levich, Richard Meese and David Romer. We would
also like to thank the Pacific Basin Center -for Economic and
Monetary Studies of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco for
help with the manuscript. We are responsible for any errors in
the paper, except for the white noise. This paper is part of
NBER's research programs in Asset Pricing and International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #3910
                                        November 1991


                ARE OPTION-IMPLIED FORECASTS OF
         EXCHANGE RAPE VOLATILITY EXCESSIVELY VARIABLE?


                            ABSTRACT


     Market participants' forecasts of future exchange rate
volatility can be recovered from option contracts on foreign
currencies. Such implicit volatility forecasts for four
currencies are used to test rational expectations jointly with
the applicability of the standard Black-Scholes formula. First,
we examine the null hypothesis that the market-anticipated
one-month-ahead standard deviation is an unbiased estimator of
the subsequent realized standard deviation. The parametric
regression method rejects this hypothesis overwhelmingly: the
implicit forecasts are themselves excessively variable.
Simulations indicate that the rejection is not caused by
non-normality of the error term. Second, we use a nonparametric
method to test a weaker version of market rationality: the market
can correctly forecast the direction of the change in exchange
rate volatility. This time, the weaker version of rationality is
confirmed- Third, we investigate how market forecasts are
formed. We find some evidence that market participants put heavy
weight on lagged volatility when forecasting future volatility.
Finally, results from the Alternating Conditional Expectations
algorithm provide further support for the central finding that
when the market predicts a large deviation of volatility from its
mean, it could do better by moderating its forecast.



Shang-Jin Wei                          Jeffrey A. Frankel
Department of Economics                Department of Economics
University of California               University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720                     Berkeley, CA 94720
                                       and NEER
 "It would be wise to cut expectations in half."
          Anonymous, from a fortune cookie in a Chinese restaurant


 Section 1 Introduction


        While there are by now hundreds of tests of rational
 expectations in financial markets, most do not specify what the
 alternative hypothesis is.                        Bilson (1981) and Froot (1989) have
 specified an alternative hypothesis: the proposition that investors'
 forecasts have a tendency to be excessively variable.                                           In other
 words, when their forecast is high it is on average too high and
 when it is low it is on average too low; investors would do better
 by placing more weight on the long run average value of the price
 they are trying to forecast. As unattractive as a rejection of
 rational expectations is to economists on a priori grounds, there
 is evidence to support it.'
         In the foreign exchange market, the evidence concerns
  investors' estimates of the expected future spot rate.                                              Tryon
  (1979), Longworth (1981), Bilson (1981) and others measure the
 expedted future change in the spot rate by the discount in the
  forward exchange market, and find that the estimates are biased in
  the direction of excessive variability.2 Frankel and Froot (1987)


    'Froot (1989)   and Frankel   and Stock (1987) describe how this evidence relates to the variance bounds
tests of SMiler   (1981) and LeRoy   and Porter   (1981).

          2 The problem with these results as a test of rational
  expectations is the possibility of a risk premium. In other words,
  in detennining the forward rate, risk-averse investors may add a
  risk premium to their forecasts of future spot rates, which would
  cause the forward rate to be a biased forecast of the future spot
  rate even if the investors' forecast is unbiased. Other tests that
  find bias in the forward rate include Fama (1984) and Hsieh (1984).

                                                            1
and Froot and Frankel (1989) measure the expected future change in
the   spot   rate by survey data, and find the same bias.3
      In   this paper, we use options data to examine the analogous
excess—variability     hypothesis for the case of the second moment of
exchange rates.4 That is, we test that investors could do better
in their forecasts of the variance by putting more weight on the
long—nfl average value.      Options data provide a relatively clean
test because the options pricing formula is derived from a
no—arbitrage argument and investors' forecasts of volatility are the
only quantity not directly observed by an econometrician. It must
be acknowledged that, here too, it is a joint hypothesis that we are
testing: there could be a failure of one of the assumptions of the
Black—Scholes formula, such as the assumption that the spot rate
follows a diffusion process. But even if a rejection of the null
hypothesis were due to a failure of an auxiliary assumption, it
would still be an important finding, as it would still mean that it
is dangerous to rely on options prices' implicit volatilities as
forecasts of future variances.
      It would be disturbing to conclude that the market's
expectations are completely foolish.       In the second stage of the
test, we look at a weaker version of rationality: the market can
correctly predict the direction of the change in exchange rate


           A problem with these results is that many readers are
skeptical of survey data because, among other reasons, investors may
strategically misrepresent themselves in a survey. In contrast, the
forecasts of future volatility implicit in options prices are used
by traders in executing actual trading.

             Stein (1989)   examines the term structure of the
option-implied volatility in stocks, and finds that the short—tern
stock volatility tends to overreact relative to the long—term
volatility.
                                    2
volatility. A nonparametric method is used to examine the weaker
criterion of rationality. Here, the market expectations are found
to be informative about subsequent events.


    There exists a relatively small empirical literature testing
the efficiency of foreign exchange options prices.         Using a
simulation method, Eorensztein and Dooley (1987) found bias in the
foreign exchange option data, namely, that there are deviations from
the Black—Scholes values for call options that are deep "out of the

money."   (In contrast, the option data used in this paper are
entirely those that are closest to being at the money.)         The
direction of the bias was an apparent overvaluation of the option,
implying an overestimation of the likelihood of change in the value
of the dollar.   Similarly, Bodurtha and Courtadon (1987) find a
(small) bias toward apparent overpricing of call and put options on
foreign exchange, which is equivalent to apparent overestimation of
volatility. Bates (1990) argues that an asymmetric jump-diffusion
process is more appropriate than the standard processes assumed for
the spot rate. lie, like Borensztein and IJooley, examines data from
the mid—1980s and believes that the apparent failure of the Black—
Scholes formula to fit out—of—the—money options is attributable to
market perceptions in each period of a certain probability that the
dollar will plunge in value.   Melino and Turnbull (1991) allow for
the spot rate process to differ from the standard log—normal, but
again find that the options prices overestimate volatility.
    Among other papers using data on foreign exchange options,
Lyons(1988) has estimated option-implied volatilities for three
currencies and used them in a test of time—varying risk premium in
the forward discount, though this was not a test of whether the

                                 3
implied volatility is an unbiased estimator of the future realized
volatility. Wei (1991) uses implied exchange rate volatility to
examinethe effects of anticipated volatility on bid-ask spreads in
foreign exchange markets; an increase in anticipated volatility is
found to widen the spreads.
    The balance of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2
describes the data source and selection criteria, as well as the
formula used in extracting market-anticipated volatility. Based on
these estimates, Section 3 examines, through a parametric
regression, if the implied standard deviation is an unbiased
estimator of the realized one,       It also uses simulations to
determinehow sensitive the size of the test in a small sample is
to non-normal distributions of the error term. Section 4 tests a
weaker version of rationality with a nonparainetric method. Section
5 looks closely at the formation of the market anticipation and
possible patterns of the expectational errors. Section 6 uses the
technique   of Alternating Conditional Expectations to test further
the proposition that emerged from Section 3, namely that market
participants would do better if their forecasts put more weight on
the long—run average volatility. Finally, section 7 reviews the
findings.


Section 2 Estimating the market anticipated exchange volatility


2.1 Data Description


   Currency option trading started at the end of 1982 on the
Philadelphia Exchange. In 1985, the Chicago Board of Exchange also
began to trade currency options. The data used in this study are

                                 4
of options on the Philadelphia Exchange from February of 1983 to
January of 1990. Early trading was very thin. The first few months
of data might give unreliable estimates of the standard deviations,
and so are discarded. The source of the option and spot exchange
rate data is various issues of the Wall Street Journal. The data
are described as follows.
    (1) The four most heavily traded currency options: British
Pound, West German Mark, Japanese Yen and Swiss Franc, all relative
to the US Dollar.
    (2) call options (American style) that are closest to being at
the money. These options are most heavily traded and thus yield
more reliable estimates of implied volatility.
    (3) contracts signed on the third Wednesday of each month.

    (4)   If possible,   contracts that matured in the following month.
Otherwise, contracts with the next nearest maturity.
    (5) The closing quote for the spot exchange rates on the same
day the option contract is signed and on the same Exchange.
     The interest rates are: the 3—month Treasury Bill rate for the
United States, and call money rates for the other four countries.
The source is OECD Main Economic Indicators. Daily exchange rates
are used to calculate the realized standard deviations in the spot
exchange rates.     They are the closing bid rates in the London
market. The data are from Data Resource Inc.'s financial database.


2.2 The Valuation Model


    One model commonly used by the market in calculating European
currency option value is the Garman-Kohlhagen (1983) formula, which
is equivalent to a version of Black—Scholes formula for options on

                                     5
a stock which pays a continuous stream of dividends (with the
foreign interest rate essentially substituted for the dividend
rate).       Underlying the Garmãn-Kohlhagen formula is the assumption
regarding the stochastic process governing the asset on which the
option     is written. Let the spot exchange rate be S(t), which gives
units of domestic currency per unit 'of foreign currency. S(t) is
assumed to follow a log normal process.


      dS(t)/S(t) =      udt   +   a dw(t)                     (1)


where ii     is   its instantaneous mean rate of change, 5         5 the   standard
deviation of the instantaneous rate of change, and w(t) is a
standard Wiener process. By Ito's lemma, lnS(t) —                 lnS(O)   (U — 0.5
a2) t +       a   w(t). In other words, for all j >


      E{ Ln S(t+j) — Ln 5(t) I 5(t) } = (u—0.5o)              j

      Var{ La S(t+j) — Ln S(t) / S(t) } =              a2 j   (2)



      Given the process for 8(t) in (1), the Garman—Xohlhagen value
of a European call option on foreign exchange is given by the
following expression:


C[ 8(t), K, T, i, i, a
=
    8(t)   exp[_i*(T_t)] N( d +      o(T-t)°5)   — K   exp[—i(T—t)] N(d) (3)
with the following definitions:


      C(.)              the value of the call option
      5(t)              current spot exchange rate


                                            6
    K             —   strike price
    P                  maturity date
    j.                  instantaneous domestic nominal interest rate
    j*                 instantaneous foreign nominal interest rate
                      market anticipated standard deviation from time t
to maturity T,   the    same a      as in (1).
    d            ——           Lnf    S(t/K1 + (i   —   — 0.5   a2.(T—t
                              a
    N(.)               the   value of the cumulative normal distribution
function.

    One property of (3) that will be frequently used in the next
section is that the call value is an increasing function of a. The
more volatile the spot exchange rate is, the more likely is the spot
rate to exceed the strike price during the specified time interval,
and hence the more valuable is the option to buy foreign currency
at that price.
    We use American options in our study, because European option
trading started in 1985 and thus has too short a history for time
series analysis. Unfortunately, there is no closed—form solution
such as (3) for the American options. However, as long as early
exercise is not heavy, the value of American call and European call
are known to be very close. Some random checking of the values of
European and American calls with the same striking price and
maturity date reveals that they are indeed quite close. Buttler
(1989) and Adams and Wyatt (1989) have independently shown through
simulations that when the domestic interest rate is higher than the
foreign interest rate, the prices of a European and an American call
are identical. Furthermore, the difference between the values of
the two types of call options is small when the domestic interest




                                         7
rate is equal to or slightly lower than the foreign interest rate.5
Throughout our sample, the US interest rate was higher than the
Japanese, German and Swiss interest rates (though it was not higher
than the British interest rate). Therefore, we do not expect the
errors resulting from use of the European formula to be serious.
But the appropriateness of the European option feature, and other
aspects of the Garman—Kohlhagen formula, should be considered to be
part of the joint null hypothesis. In any case, future research
could consider using some numerical approximation method such as the
binomial model to improve the estimates of the implied volatility.
    There are two other potential sources of error in applying the
Garman—Kohlhagen (GK) formula to price currency options. Both have
to do with the assumption regarding the spot exchange rate process.
With either one of these two complications, currency options can no
longer be priced by a no—arbitrage argument. Indeed, there can be
no generally agreed—upon method to price options in such cases,
since it would have to depend critically on the particular
specification of the jump process or the volatility process.
    First, volatility is assumed to be non-random, but could in
principle also follow a stochastic process. Wiggins (1987) and Hull
and White (1987) are among those who have analyzed the effect of
stochastic volatility on proper pricing of options. The effect is
to introduce a risk premium into the option—pricing formula. Nelino
and Turnbull (1990) argue that allowing for this risk premium to be
non—zero (though constant) sharply reduces the magnitude of apparent
errors in pricing foreign exchange options (though there is no
evident guarantee that this premium is in fact related to risk in
the proper way, as opposed to being merely a free parameter that
helps to fit the data).
    Hull and White (1987) and Ng (1991) show that under certain
special conditions (volatility instantaneously uncorrelated with
aggregate Consumption), the risk premium becomes zero.   In that


          See also Shastri and Tandon (1985) and Jorion and Stoughton
(1987).

                                   8
case, a version of the Black—Scholes formula with the average
volatility over the interval of the option substituted for the known
volatility becomes appropriate.   One can interpret the null
hypothesis considered in this paper to be the joint hypothesis
consisting of this uncorrelatedness assumption regarding the spot
rate process together with the proposition that the forecast of
average volatility for each interval is unbiased.
    The second potential source of error is that, while the GE
formula assumes the exchange rate process to be a lognormal or
diffusion process, it could in reality be a mixture of diffusion and
jump processes (Jorion, 1988). As mentioned earlier, Borensztein
and Dooley (1987) and Bates (1990) attribute the finding of apparent
overvaluation in out—of—the—money options to the existence of a jump
process, and specifically to the perceived possibility in the mid—
1980s of a future large depreciation of the dollar.   It has also
been argued that a jump process is particularly plausible when one
takes into account frequent government intervention in foreign
exchange markets (Ball and Roma, 1990).
    The present paper differs from earlier studies of bias in that
the options examined are at the money (or close to it), which we
suspect makes the possibility of a jump process less important as
a potential source of apparent bias- The assumption that the spot
rate follows a diffusion process, nevertheless, is part of the joint
null hypothesis that we test.

2.3 Estimation of the implied volatility and comparison with the
realized volatility

    Given S(t), K, T, i and 1*, equation (3) defines an implicit
function in the market estimate of the standard deviation a.
    We   can rewrite (3) as


    g(a) =   C(S,K,T,i,i*,    a)   —C =   0.      (4)




                                      9
     Notice that   appears (with different powers) in the numerator
and the denominator of d, which in turn is an argument of the
cumulative normal function. Because (4) is a non-linear equation,
the Gauss-Newton iteration method is used to solve for a.
    The corresponding monthly series of the realized standard
deviation is computed from daily exchange rates. Let Log 5(j) be
the log of the spot rate on day j. Then the realized standard
deviation (rsd) for a given month is defined as the standard
deviation of changes in the logarithm of the daily spot rate, Log
S(j+1) - Log 5(j), from the third Wednesday of the month to the
third Wednesday of the following month. Notice that this definition
is consistent with the assumption regarding the stochastic process
of the spot rate, as given in (2). Plots of the option-implied
volatility against ex post realized volatility for each of the four
currencies are presented in Figure 1.
    The means of the four implied volatility are: British pound,
0.00592; Deutche Mark, 0.00618; Japanese yen, 0.00520; and Swiss
franc, 0.00616. In comparison, the means of the realized volatility
are: British pound, 0.00586; Deutche Mark; 0.00667, Japanese yen,
0.00568; and Swiss franc, 0.00700. Notice that the four implied
volatility are lower than the corresponding realized ones. This
suggests that at-the—money options are not "overpriced" compared to
deep—in—the—money or deep—out—of—the—money options.
    One shortcoming of the data is that the call prices, spot
exchange rates and interest rates are not exactly time—synchronized.
In future, we will use time—stamped transaction data to improve in
this regard as well as to expand the sample size.


Section 3: A parametric test of strong rationality.


    The hypothesis tested in this section             is   that the
market—anticipated standard deviation is an unbiased estimator of
the subsequent realized one. We require that the market not only
get the direction of change correctly, but also get the magnitude


                                10
of change correctly on average. In section 4, we will test a weaker
notion of rationality, which only requires that investors are on
average on the right side of the market.

3.1 Tests of the unbiasedness   of the isd based on   linear   regressions
    To test formally     the hypothesis that isd is an unbiased
predictor   of the future rsd, consider the following regression:
    rsd,1 = a    + B isd + et+i                                    (5)
where rsd,1 is the realized standard deviation from t to         t+l,
                                                                and
isd is the forecast of the standard deviation from t to t+l that is
implicit in the option price observed in the market at tine        t.    The
null hypothesis is H0: B =1. One might also include the restriction
a=O as part of the null hypothesis, but we decided not to, so as to
focus on excess variability as the alternative hypothesis. This
makes the test more conservative, in the sense that it is more
difficult to reject H0 than otherwise.
    The results of regression (5) for the four exchange rates are
reported in Panel A of Table 1. Notice that for each of the four
currencies, the null B =1 is rejected at the 5% level. In fact, the
B's in two of the four equations are not significantly different
from zero at the 5% level. The point estimates are all smaller than
one, suggesting that market participants tend to overpredict the
magnitude of volatility. They would be wise in their forecasts to
put more weight on the long-run average volatility. The quote given
at the beginning of the paper seems appropriate: 'it would be wise
to cut expectations in half."
    If there is heteroskedasticity in the data, the standard errors
can be underestimated. This c6uld cause the null hypothesis to be
incorrectly rejected even when it is true. To examine this
possibility, White's test of heteroskedasticity is performed and the
results are reported in Panel A of Table 1. The hypothesis of no
heteroskedasticity is rejected for the German Nark at the five
percent level, but not for the other three currencies. Standard
errors can also be reestimated using White's method of correcting

                                   11
for unknown heteroskedasticity. The results are in the square
brackets in Panel A of Table 1. The standard errors are generally
larger than without the correction. But even with this correction,
the null hypothesis that the slope parameter is one can be rejected
for all four currencies at the five percent level.
    One may also wonder about the possibility of a structural break
in the sample. We split the sample into two equal-sized subsaniples,
and use a Chow test to examine for structural break. The results are
reported in the last column of Panel A, Table 1. Except for the
British Pound, there is no evidence of a structural break at the
five percent level.
    The first moments of exchange rate changes are known to be
highly correlated across currencies, and it is likely that the
second moments are as well.   To take advantage of the possible
cross—currency correlations, we use the method of seemingly
unrelated regression (SUR) to estimate the four equations as a
system. Because the STiR method takes into account cross—equation
restrictions on the covariance matrix of the error terms, it should
yield more efficient estimator of the B's. The results using SUR
are reported in Panel B of Table 1. Again, the null hypothesis of
unbiasedness is rejected for all four currencies at the 5% level.


                        (Table-i about here]

    Before concluding that isd is a biased estimator of the rsd, we
will note two types of problems that could conceivably invalidate
the test. The first problem is the possibility of incorrect size
of the test. This problem will be more carefully examined in the
next subsection.   The second problem is related to observations
derived from option contracts with overlapping time to maturity.
    Before the end of 1985 options were available only at four
maturity dates:  March, June, September and December.  Monthly
series of isd necessarily contain overlapping time periods.
Overlapping time periods in isd would cause serial correlation of
the prediction errors for isd, and thus e.1 in (5) would not be
                                 12
white noise. To overcome this problem, we have redone the Sun on
a sub—sample that excludes the observations with overlapping
horizons.' The results are reported in Panel C of Table 1. From
Panels B and C of Table 1, we see that after correcting for
overlapping observations, the SUR estimates of 13's are still
statistically different from one, which confirms the finding in
Panels A and B of the sante table.
    One might worry about possible non—stationarity in the data
that could invalidate the tests. We performed a Dickey-Fuller test
for unit roots on the rsd series, and found that the null hypothesis
of a unit root is rejected for the four currencies. When the SUR
estimation is redone for variables in first—differenced form, the
13   estimates are still statistically different from one. To save
space, these results are not reported here.
      OLS estimation equation—by—equation and SUR estimation, with or
without correcting overlapping observations, all point to the same
conclusion: that the null (H0: 13=1) is overwhelmingly rejected.
This says that the implied standard deviation is a biased predictor
of the realized standard deviation in the exchange market.

3.2 Non—normality     and size of the test in small samples: Some
simulation results

       The point estimation and hypothesis testing reported above
depend on assumptions made about the regression model.            In
particular, these include an assumption that the error term in the
equation    (5) has a normal distribution.7 As the standard deviation

       •
       We could apply Hansen and Hodrick's (1980) method of moments
to correct for problems with overlapping observations. However,
since the fraction of the data that come from overlapping contracts
is small, we lose only a few observations by simply dropping those
observations.

       We know that the levelof exchange rates is characterized by
leptokurtosis and moderate skewness, particularly in high frequency
data (see, for example, Boothe and Classman, 1987). It is possible
that the standard deviation series of exchange rates (or its
                                  13
can never be less than zero, its true distribution cannot literally
be normal.   But then the question naturally arises whether our
estimates and inference are still valid.
    First, we know that in large samples, non—normality does not
matter: The slope estimator will be consistent and asymptotically
normal, as long as the regressor is uncorrelated with the error
term, which is true under the null hypothesis of rational
expectations. Second, even in small samples, the estimator is still
unbiased. However, the distribution of the estimator in a small
sample is not guaranteed to be normal.  Given that the null of
unhiasedness is rejected in the previous subsection, a relevant
question for us is how sensitive the size of the test is to
non—normal distributions of the error term. This is the subject of
investigation in this subsection.
    One way of checking sensitivity to the normality assumption is
to run the regressions with all variables in logarithms instead of
in levels. The log-normal distribution has the advantage that it
implies that the standard deviation can never be negative.6 The
results are presented in Table 2. Two features are evident. First,
the slope estimates are all statistically different from one at the
5% level for all four currencies. This is true whether the OLS or
SUR method is used. The point estimates here are generally smaller
than the corresponding ones in Table 1.     Second, the intercept
estimates are all statistically different from zero.
     [Again, the White's test of heteroskedasticity is performed and
heteroskedasticity_consistent standard error are estimated. The


logarithmic   transformation) also has a non—normal distribution.
       It is possible that the logarithmic transformation could
actually introduce bias into the hypothesis testing.   If   the implied
standard   deviation in levels is an unbiased estimator of the
realized standard deviation in levels, Jensen's inequality implies
that the logarithm of the [sd is not an unbiased estimator of the
logarithm of the rsd. But the Black-.Scholes formula does not give
us any reason to choose the level of the standard deviation over the
log. (Under the assumptions of the formula, the standard deviation
is known with certainty, so that there is no issue.)

                                 14
White's test indicates that there is problem of heteroskedasticity
for British pound and Japanese yen. But even when correct for the
heteroskedasticity using the White's method, the results of the
hypothesis testing regarding the slope parameter are unaffected.

                         [Table 2 about here]

    Let us now formally examine the moment properties of the
residuals from OLS regressions, presented in Table 3. Panel A
reports the properties of OLS residuals from regressions with
variables in levels. The skewness of the residuals for the British
Pound, German   Mark, Japanese Yen and Swiss Franc is, respectively,
1.0967, 0.564, 1.584, and 0.9317. In a chi—square test, all four
are statistically different from the skewness of a normal
distribution at the five percent level.         The kurtosis of the
residuals for the four currencies is, respectively, 5.053, 3.237,
6.281, and 3.936. Based on a chi-square test at the 5% level, the
kurtosis parameters for the British Pound, Japanese yen and Swiss
Franc are also statistically different from those of a normal
distribution.   In individual Jarque-Bera tests, the null of
normality is rejected for three of the four currencies at the five
percent level. Panel B reports similar statistics for residuals
from OLS regressions with variables expressed in logarithms. Here,
the kurtosis parameters are no longer statistically different from
those of a normal distribution. The Jarque—Bera tests also fail to
reject the null hypothesis of normality at the five percent level.
This suggests that the logarithmic transformation indeed makes the
residuals much closer to normality.      However, the four skewness
parameters are still statistically different from those of a normal
distribution. In other words the deviation from normality, although
smaller, does not vanish completely.


                         [Table 3 about here]

    Having established that the errors are not normal, we proceed

                                  15
to investigate whether we reject the null of unbiasedness too much
in our sample.   We generate 1000 samples according to the null
hypothesis and count the number of rejections using a t—statistic
and its conventional critical value. Specifically, we specify the
error term, z, as follows:

    z      h [eht_Mt0.S}


where w is a normal variate with mean z and variance g.     The
advantage of this specification is that the moments of z can be
easily computed with the aid of the moment generating function of
a normal variate. For example, zcan be shown to have the following
properties: (let r = e)
     (a) E(z) = 0
     (b) Var(z) = h2e2r(r—1)
     (c)   E(z3) = h]e3r3/2[r3_3r+2]
     (d)   E(z') =h4e4M[rB_4r5+6r)_3r2]
     Ce)   Skewness(z) = E(z])/[E(22)J]/2 =             (r)_3r+2]/[r_l)3'2
                                                   =
     (f) Kurtosis(z) =        E(z')/[E(z2)]2           r4+2r3+3r2—3


    In principle, for any arbitrary distribution of the error term
we can, by appropriately choosing /4, g and h, use z to match any
given three moments of the distribution (in addition to the zero
mean). Sometimes this can not be done perfectly. For example, the
skewness and kurtosis coefficients involve only one parameter.
However, this will not be a serious problem for us as will be clear
later. Table 4 shows how skewness and kurtosis change as g (or r)
increases. It is clear both are inonotonically increasing functions
of the parameter. If we choose (hz, g, h) to be (0, 0.07, 0.01265),
we can approximate reasonably well the average magnitude of sample
variance, skewness and kurtosis of the OLS residuals as reported in
Table 3.


                                [Table 4 about here]


                                            16
    We do 14 different permutations of the triple of parameters (we
restrict p to be zero). For each chosen triple of the parameter,
we generate one thousand samples of size 85 under the null that the
slope coefficient is one (and intercept is 0.03), and compute the
percentage of times we reject the null with a conventional t test
at five percent significance level. The results are reported in
Table 5.


                         [Table 5 about here]


    First of all, we vary g in the neighborhood of 0.07 while
keeping h fixed at 0.01265.  As g varies from 0.04 to 1, the
skewness of the error term, z, varies from a low of 0.614 to a high
of 6.18, the kurtosis from 3.678 to 113.94. Column (6) reports the
tne" size of the test in the simulation, Column (7) the average
point estimate of the slope. The point estimate is very close to
one. The percentage of rejection is somewhere between 5.2 percent
and 6.6 percent. Therefore, the true size of the test in the small
sample   due to non—normality is higher than 5   percent, but not by
much.   This is true even in the case of very high skewness and
kurtosis for the error term.
    Next, we vary the value of h in the neighborhood of 0.01265,
keeping g at 0.07. As h changes from 0.01165 to 0.110, the variance
of the error term changes from 10.55*10.6 to 940.96*l0. Again we
can see that the average point estimate is quite close to one and
the percentage of times rejecting the null is not much different
from 5 percent.
    To suxñmarize, our simulations are designed to examine whether
deviations from normality can cuse too many rejections of the t
test in small samples.         Within the family of non-normal
distributions chosen here, the answer is no. The true size of the
test is only slightly different from 5 percent, even when we vary
the variance, skewness and kurtosis of the error distribution to a
considerably large magnitude relative to their actual magnitude in
the sample. Therefore, the rejection of the unbiasedness hypothesis
                                 17
in the previous subsection seems to be robust to the distributional



Section 4. weak rationality and   a    nonparainetric test

    It would be disturbing to conclude that market participants are
so foolish that they make forecastA that are completely irrelevant
to subsequent realized events. Therefore, we continue our study
here by looking at a weaker version of rationality. This version
of rationality says that market participants are forward—looking and
can predict the direction of the change in exchange rate volatility.
It is weaker than the version of rational expectations tested in
section 3.1, because it looks only at the direction of the change
as opposed to the magnitude of the change.
    In Tables 1 and 2, most of the slope estimates, though less
than one, were statistically significantly grater than zero. So
we already know that the market's anticipated volatility Ia
informative in one sense: it can help predict the realized
volatility relative to its sample mean. Here we test whether the
option—implied volatility is informative about the direction of
change in the realized standard deviation relative to its last
period's value.     We take as our null hypothesis that the
option—implied standard deviation is useless as a forecast of the
future realized change in the standard deviation. Included in the
null hypothesis is the possibility that the isd fails to beat the
random walk as a description of the standard deviation, which
predicts that the expected change is always zero.
    The test is non—parametric in nature and thus is robust to
distributional assumptions of the exchange rate process.        In
addition, it permits non-stationarity of conditional probabilities
over time. It was developed by Henriksson and Merton (1981) in the
context of mutual fund performance evaluation, and adapted by


       Of course, the simulation results are valid only up to the
family of distributions that has been considered.

                                  18
Havenner and Modjtahedi (1988) and Lai (1990) to examine the
usefulness of foreign exchange forecasts.
    Let p1 be the conditional probability of making a successful
forecast when the realized standard deviation in the subsequent
period decreases or does not change, and p2 the conditional
probability of making a successful forecast when the realized
standard deviation increases. I.e., p1    Prob[Aisd0            and
p2     Prob(Aisd>0 IArsd>0J. Henriksson and Merton (1981) show that
a sufficient statistic for evaluating weak rationality is Pl+P2.       A
necessary      and sufficient condition for the market's forecast to have
no value is that Pl+P2 =1. For example, a forecaster always using
a random walk process would have p1=l, p2=O and p1+p21.
    Let nl be the number of times Arsd0 and n2 number of times
Arsd>0. N=ni+n2 is the total sample size. Let ml be the number of
successful forecasts in the sample when Arsd0, m2 number of
unsuccessful forecasts when £rsd>0. M=ml+m2 is the total number of
times AisdO in the entire sample. By definition, p1=E(ml/nl) and
p2='1—E(m2/n2)
       Under the null hypothesis that the market forecasts are
useless, H: p1+p2=i, we have E(ml/nl)=E(m2/n2)=pl. Henriksson and
Merton show that under the null, the probability distribution for
mi——the number of correct forecasts, given that ársdO —— has the
form of     a hypergeometric distribution and is independent of both p1
and p2.       I.e.,

                                         [ni'\ fn2\
       Pr   (ml       x / ni, n2, M) =   x/  M-x)
                                         _________
                                              (N
                                              lx
       This   is the basis of the test. However, the computation of the
test   statistic is difficult for even moderate numbers of ml, nl and
n2, since factorial and gamma function are cumbersome to calculate.
Fortunately, a normal distribution approximation is available for
the hypergeometric distribution. The approximation is very accurate
even   for small samples, as long as ni is roughly equal to N/2. The


                                         19
parameters used for this normal approximation are the mean and
variance for the hypergeometric distribution, which can be written
as follows: E(ml) = Nfl/N and var(ml)   mlnln2(N-M)/[N2(N—l)].
    Table 6 presents results of applying this nonparametric test to
our data.   In the actual calculations, we take out all the data
points that involve contracts of overlapping maturities (as
explained in footnote 4). As a result, we have 64 data points for
each of the four currencies. We then look at both a one—tail test
(corresponding to an alternative: p1+p2>l) and a two—tail test
(corresponding to an alternative: p1+p2*l). From Table 6, it can be
seen that the null hypothesis of useless forecasts is rejected for
the four currencies, individually and jointly, and for both one-tail
and two—tail tests, at five percent significance level. For the
British Pound for example, out of 64 sample points, Arsd0 30 times.
Out of these 30 down times, the market got 27 correct forecasts.
The point estimate of p1+p2   1.282. Corresponding to a critical
value at the 5 percent, the required ml to reject the null is 24.65
for a one—tail test and 25.06 for a two—tail test, when a normal
approximation is used to compute the test statistic. Since the
actual value of m1 is 27, the null hypothesis that isd is useless
is rejected at the five percent level for both tests. Similarly,
the point estimates of p1+p2 for the German Mark, Japanese Yen and
Swiss Franc are 1.375, 1.356 and 1.291, respectively. They are all
statistically different from one at the five percent level for both
the one—tail and two—tail tests. If we pool the four currencies
together, the null hypothesis of isd being useless is also rejected
at the five percent level for both the one—tail and the two-tail
tests.


                       [Table 6 about here

    Given the overwhelming rejections of the null hypothesis, we
might ask again how sensitive the probability of type—one error is
to the small size of the sample when normal approximations are
employed. In other words, does the test reject too much when the
                                20
market forecasts are actually useless? Luckily, Henriks6on and
Merton have conducted some simulations to check the true size of the
test in small samples when normal approximation is employed to
compute the statistic. They found that the size of the test is not
much influenced by normal approximation in a sample as small as 50
data points, provided that nI is closeto N12. Since for all four
of our currencies, nl is quite close to half of the total sample
size, we can safely conclude that the rejections of the null are not
caused by unusually large type—one errors.
    In conclusion, even though the previous section rejects the
strong version of rationality by parametric regression method, this
section finds that a weaker version of rationality is supported by
the data. While the market ex ante anticipation of exchange rate
volatility may not be an unbiased estimate of the magnitude of the
realized volatility, it does rationally forecast the direction of
change in the realized volatility.               The market forecast
unambiguously outperforms some naive forecast rules, such            as a
random walk rule, as far as direction of change is concerned.


Section   5. The formation of the   isd and pattern   of the expectational
errors
    One naturally wonders how market participants form their
estimate of the exchange volatility to be used in currency options.
Specifically, we investigate three questions in this section. The
first question is whether investors lean from their forecast errors
in the past and whether they effectively have adaptive expectations.
Second, we examine if the exkectational errors are serially
correlated. Third, we examine the possibility that the nature of
the forecasting errors is best described by saying that market
participants put too much weight on recently observed volatility,
and not enough on the long—run average volatility.



                                     21
5.1 The possibility of learning and adaptive expectations

    Let us define the difference between the realized   and market
forecasted standard deviations, rsd,1—isd, as the expectation error
at time t. To see if market participants learn from their mistakes,
we regress the implied standard deviation on last period's
prediction error (and last periotl's isd). The result is reported
in Table 7. (This regression uses the SUR method on non-overlapping
observations.) The point estimates for the adaptive expectations
parameter, which is the coefficient on last period's prediction
error, range from 0.2266 for the Swiss Franc to 0-3035 for the
British Pound.   They are all positive and all statistically
different from zero.   This says that when last period's isd.1
overpredicts rsd by 1 unit, market participants on average adjust
this period's prediction isd downward by about 0.27 units.
    The point estimates of the coefficient for last period's isd
are similar in magnitude to the coefficient on the contemporaneous
prediction error.'°    This suggests that a proper specification
might simply have market participants form their forecasts of future
volatility based only on recent observed volatility. We will pursue
this idea in section 5.3.


                       [Table 7 about here]

5.2 serial correlation in the expectational errors


    One implication of the rational expectations hypothesis is that
the expectational errors should be serially uncorrelated. A finding
of positive serial correlation would imply that the adaptive
expecations parameter estimated in the preceding section is lower
than is optimal. We formally test this implication now with the

     ° They are statistically significantly greater than zero,
ranging from from 0.2647 for the Swiss Franc to 0.5019 for the
Pound. This means that if last period's forecast, isd.1 is high,
then this period's forecast, isd, tends to be high, and vice versa.

                                22
Portmanteau Q—test. The results of the test for lags 1,3,5,7,9 and
11 are reported in Table 8.
    One can see that for the Pound, Yen and Swiss Franc, there is
evidence that the expectational errors are serially correlated. For
example, with P=l, the null hypothesis of no serial correlation is
rejected for the Swiss Franc at 5% level. With P=9 and 11, the null
hypothesis is rejected for both the Pound and Yen at the 10 % level.
The expectational errors for the German mark, in contrast, appear
to be serially uncorrelated for all lags. To summarize, there is
some evidence that the expectational errors are serially correlated,
but the evidence is not strong.

                       [Table 8 about here]


5.3 Do investors put too much weight on recent volatility?

    In section 3 we saw that ——   whatever information investors base
their forecasts of future volatility on -— they appear to put too
much weight on that information and not enough on the long-run
average level of volatility. But we said nothing there about what
information investors use. There has been a great deal of empirical
research, most of it using ARCH and GARCH techniques, showing that
lagged volatility is a key variable, both in describing the actual
process that generates volatility and in describing the model to
which investors appear from their economic behavior to subscribe."
Textbooks instruct would-be options traders to use historical
volatility to price options. A natural question, then, is whether
the nature of investors' systematic forecast errors can be described
as putting greater weight on lagged volatility than is optimal.
    Table 9 reports regressions against the previous two lags of
the realized standard deviation. For each currency, the dependent
variable in the first equation tested is the isd. In each case, the


     ' For example, Garman   and Klass (1980) [and Hsieh and Nanas—
Anton (1988)1.
                                   23
lagged r&d is indeed a statistically significant determinant of the
isd (and in most cases the twice-lagged rsd is as well).      The
dependent variable in the second test for each currency is the
realized r&d over the coming period. In each case, the lagged r&d
is again a statistically significant determinant.
    In three out of four cases, the coefficient in the isd
regression is greater than the coefficient in the r&d regression.
In other words, the lagged volatility is not quite as important a
determinant of the future volatility as market participants think
it is. Is this difference statistically significant? To answer
this question, the third test for each currency regresses the
difference between the rsd and isd against the lagged volatilities.
None of the negative coefficients is statistically different from
zero.   Thus, although the point estimates suggest that market
participants may be putting too much weight on the lagged
volatility, the significance levels are not high enough to allow us
to conclude with any confidence that this is indeed the nature of
the mistake that they are making.


                        [Table 9 about here]

6. Another technique for testing the relationship between the
expectational errors and the level of the expectations

     In this section, we continue to examine the existence of the
systematic pattern in the expectational errors that was uncovered
in section 3. We use the Alternating Conditional Expectations (ACE)
algorithm to provide some clues to the search. The ACE algorithm
is a non—parametric procedure, designed to find the optimal
transformations (possibly non—linear) of the dependent variable and
a set of explanatory variables so as to minimize the mean squared
crrors in regressions.
    To ease interpretations, we restrict the transformations on the
realized standard deviations (the dependent variable), to be linear.
Under the null hypothesis that the isd is an unbiased estimator of
                                 24
the rsd, one expects the required ACE transformation of the isd (the
explanatory variable) to be linear, too. 'The results of the ACE
procedure are reported in Figures 2—5. Figure 2 is the ACE result
for the British Pound. The top graph is a scatter plot of the
ACE—transformed rsd series against the original rsd series. It is
linear by construction. The bottom graph is a scatter plot of the
ACE—transformed isd series against the original series. Figures 3,
4 and 5 are similar pairs of scatter plots for the German Mark,
Japanese Yen and Swiss Franc. The scale of all the transformed
series is normalized to have zero mean.
     From the bhttom graphs in each figure, we can see the type of
transformation of the implied standard deviation required in order
to maximize the correlation between them and the corresponding
realized standard deviation series. Two characteristics of the isd
series are suggested by these plots. First, for all of the four
currencies, the required transformation of isd is not linear, as
would be the case under the unbiasedness hypothesis. Second, with
the exception of the Yen, there is a common pattern to the required
transformation of the isd series. The transformation of the two
tails is different from that of the middle range. In general, when
the isd gets big relative to its mean (i.e.,on the right tails), ACE
assigns a smaller weight relative to the weights assigned to isds
around the mean. When the isd gets small relative to its mean(i.e.,
on the left tails), ACE raises the weight relative to the weights
assigned to isd's around the mean. This is true for the Yen too,
except that the changes in weights in this case are more dramatic
than for the other currencies.       Based on these results, we
hypothesize that the market expectations are overly excited on the
two tails. When the market predicts a high volatility next month,
it tends to overpredict (i.e., it predicts too high a volatility
relative to the true one). When it predicts a low volatility in the
following month, the market also tends to overpredict (i.e., it
predicts too low a volatility relative to the true one).
    This suggests that the market does overpredict the deviations
of isd from its mean either when it predicts a high or a ow
                                25
volatility. To echo the quote from the beginning of the paper, "it
would be wise to cut expectations' a bit for the market.


Section 7: Overview and conclusions

     This paper investigates the rationality of the market in
forming its ex ante anticipation of the one—month—ahead exchange
rate volatility for four currencies from February of 1983 to January
of 1990. The market ex ante anticipation of exchange volatility is
inferred from call option contracts on foreign currencies. We first
examined a strong version of the rational expectations question: Is
the implied standard deviation an unbiased predictor of the future
realized standard deviation? We found that strong rationality is
overwhelmingly rejected.  This is true both in OLS and in SUlk
estimations, with or without correction for overlapping
observations. Because there exists evidence of non—normality in the
residuals of the OLS regressions, we then used a simulation method
to determine whether the rejection of the strong rationality could
be caused by incorrect size of the test in small samples. We found
that the size of the test is not altered very much even if we
consider distributions with much higher variance, skewness and
kurtosis than observed from the OLS residuals. Thus, the rejection
of strong rationality seems to be robust to the distributional
assumption.
    Some caution in the interpretation of the rejection of
unbiasedness is in order before concluding that expectations are not
rational. It is always possible that the market anticipation of
volatility is incorrectly estimated. One candidate explanation is
that, contrary to the assumption underlying the Black—Scholes and
Garman—Kohihagen formulas, the spot exchange rate process contains
significant jumps. It could be a mixture of diffusion ahd jump
processes, as proposed by Jorion (1988), Ball and Roma(1990) and
Bates (1990). If the market participants take this into account in
forming their anticipations, the anticipated volatility inferred by
the Garman—Kohlhagen formula may be incorrect as an estimate of
                                26
investors' forecasts.'2 The magnitude of this effect on the point
estimates and hypothesis—testing needs to be examined more carefully
in future research. But even if the observed bias is due to the
failure of one of the Garman—lcohlhagen assumptions rather than
investors' mistakes, an important finding stands: the implicit
volatilities extracted from options prices in the standard way are
not optimal forecasts of future volatilities.
    A weaker version of rationality was also examined: the market
can rationally forecast the direction of change, regardless of the
magnitude of the change.      A nonparametric test developed by
Henriksson and Merton was employed. The test is robust to the form
of the distribution of the standard deviation process and can permit
certain forms of nonstationarity. Here, the null hypothesis of the
market anticipation being useless is overwhelmingly rejected. The
market anticipation satisfies the weaker rationality condition.
    As to the question of how the market forms its anticipations,
we find some evidence of learning behavior and adaptive
expectations. When the expectational error series are examined by
the Portinanteau Q test, some evidence is found for the presence of
serial correlation, suggesting that the investors may not adapt
quickly enough.  On the other hand there is also weak evidence
suggesting that they may put excessive weight on the most recent
volatility.
    When an ACE algorithm is performed on the isd and rsd series,
it seems that the market is overexcited on both tails of the isd
series. That is to say, when the market predicts a high volatility,
it tends to predict too high a value; when it predicts a low
volatility, it tends to predict too low a value. The central
finding of the paper is that expectational errors, rsd.1— isd, are


     12
        Another possible interpretation, however, is that, because
the Garman-Xohlhagen formula is known to be widely used in the
markets, the extracted volatilities are what the market has in mind,
regardless whether the assumptions underlying the derivation of the
formula are correct, and that therefore our results do after all
suggest bias in investors' formation of expectations.
                                 27
negatively related to the level of the expectations, isd. Market
participants could improve their forecasts of future volatility by
putting more weight on the long—run average.




                                28
References


Adams, Paul ID. and Steve B. Wyatt (1989) "On the pricing of European
   and American foreign currency options: a clarification".
   Journal of International Money and Finance, 8, 305 —311.
Ball, Cliff and Antonio Roma (1990) "The European monetary system,
   jump—diffusion processes,    and the pricing of options".
   Unpublished manuscript. Vanderbilt University, August.
Bates, David, 1990 'The crash premium: Option pricing under
   asymmetric processes, with applications to options on
   Deutschemark   Futures,"    Wharton    School,   University    of
   Pennsylvania, July.
Bilson, John (1981) "The speculative efficiency hypothesis".
   Journal of Business,54, 433—451.
Bodurtha, James, and Georges Courtadon (1987), "Tests of an American
   Option Pricing Model on the Foreign Currency Options Market,"
   Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 22, 153—67.
Bollerslev, Tim (1986) "Generalized autoregressive conditional
   heteroskedasticity". Journal of Econometrics, 31, 307—327.
Boothe, Paul and Debra Glassman (1987) "The statistical distribution
   of   exchange    rates:   Empirical   evidence    and   economic
   implications". Journal of International Economics, 22, 297—319.
Borensztein, Eduardo and Michael Dooley (1987) "Options on foreign
   exchange and the exchange rate expectations". IMF staff papers,
   643—680. December.
Buttler, Hans—Jurg (1989) "An expository note on the valuation of
   foreign exchange options". Journal of International Money and
   Finance, 8, 295—304.
Cox, John and Mark, Rubinstein (1985) Options Markets Prentice Ball:
   Englewood Cliffs
Fama, Eugene (1984) "Forward and spot exchange rates". Journal of
   Monetary Economics, 14, 319—338.
Frankel, Jeffrey and Kenneth Froot (1987) "Using survey data to test
   standard propositions on exchange rate expectations." American
   Economic Review 77, March, 133—153.
                                29
Frankel, Jeffrey and James Stock (1987) "Regression vs. volatility
   tests of foreign exchange markets' Journal of International
   Money and Finance, 6:49-56.
Froot, Kenneth and Jeffrey Frankel (1989). "Forward Discount Bias:
   Is it an exchange risk premium?'          quarterly Journal of
   Economics, 104, no. 1. February.
Froot, Kenneth, (1990) 'On the Efficiency of the Foreign Exchange
   Market' Journal of Economic Perspectives . January.
Garman, Mark and M. Klass (1980) " On the estimation of Security
   Price Volatility from historic data." Journal of Business, vol
   53 no. 1 67—78.
Garman, Mark, and Steven Kohihagen (1983), "Foreign Currency Option
   Values,' Journal of International Money and Finance 2, 231—238.
Hansen, Lars and Robert Hodrick (1980) "Forward exchange rates as
   optimal predictors of future spot rates: An econometric
   analysis". Journal of Political Economy. October, 88:829—853.
Havenner, Arthur and Bagher and Modjtahedi (1988) "Foreign exchange
   rates: A multiple currency and maturity analysis". Journal of
   Econometrics 37, 251—264.
Henriksson, Roy and Robert Merton (1981) "On market timing and
   investment performance.   II.  Statistical procedures   for
   evaluating forecasting skills". Journal of Business 54, no.4.
Hsieh, David (1984) "Tests of rational expectations and no risk
   premium in forward exchange markets". Journal of International
   Economics, 17, 173—184.
Hsieh, David, and Manas-Anton, 1988, "Empirical regularities in the
   Deutsche Mark futures options," Advances in Futures and Options
   Research 3, 183—208.
Hull, John and Alan White, 1987, "The pricing of options on assets
   with stochastic volatility". Journal of Finance 42: 281—300
1141 (1984): "Exchange Rate Volatility and World Trade". Occasional
   Paper 28 (July).
Jorion p. (1988) "On jump processes in the foreign exchange and stock
   markets", The Review of Financial Studies Vol.l,No.4,427—445.
Lal, Kon S (1990) "An evaluation of survey exchange rate forecasts'.

                                 30
   Economics Letters 32, 61—65.
Longworth, David (1981) 'Testing the efficiency of the Canadian_U.S.
   exchange market under the assumption of no risk premium'.
   Journal of Finance, 36, 43-49.
Lyons, Richard (1988):"Tests of the foreign exchange risk premium
   using the expected second moments implied by option pricing'.
   Journal of International Money and Finance. Vol.7, No.1, March.
Meese, Richard and Kenneth Rogoff (1983) "Empirical exchange rate
   models of the seventies: Do they fit out of sample?" Journal of
   International Economics, 14, February. 3—24.
Meese, Richard and Kenneth Rogoff (1983) "The out—of—sample failure
   of empirical exchange rate models: Sampling errors or
   misspecification?"    Exchange      Rates   and    International
   Macroeconomics, Jacob Frenkel, ed. Chicago: University of
   Chicago Press. 67—105.
Melino, Angelo, and Stuart Turnbull (1990), "Pricing Foreign
   Currency Options with Stochastic Volatility," Journal of
   Econometrics 45, 239—265.
Melino, Angelo, and Stuart Turnbull (1991), "The Pricing of Foreign
   Currency Options," Canadian Journal of Economics 24, no. 2, May,
   251—261.
Merton, Robert (1973): "Theory of rational option pricing". Bell
   Journal of Economics and Management Science 4, 141—183.
Merton, Robert (1977): "On the pricing of contingent claims and the
   Modigliani—Miller theorem'. Journal of Financial Economics 5,
   177—188.
Ng Victor, 1991, "Stochastic Volatility Option Pricing in Discrete
   Time," School of Business Admin., Univ. of Michigan, June.
Shiller, Robert J. (1981) "Do stock prices move too much to be
   justified by subsequent changes in dividends?" American Economic
   Review, 71, 421—436.
Stein, Jeremy (1989): "Overreactions in the options market". Journal
   of Finance, Vol XLIV, No.4, September.
Tryon, Ralph (1979) 'Testing for rational expectaions in foreign
   exchange markets. Federal Reserve Board International Finance
                                  31
   Discussion Paper, No.139.
Ware, Roger and Ralph Winter (1988): "Forward markets, currency
   options and hedging of foreign exchange risk". Journal of
   International Economics 25, 291—302.
Wei, Shang-Jin (1991): "Anticipations of foreign exchange volatility
   and bid—ask spreads." International Finance Discussion Papers,
   Number   409, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
   August.
Wiggins, James (1987): 'Option values under stochastic volatility".
   Journal of Financial Economics 19, 351—312.




                                 32
                           Tablet: Testing the unbinsedness of the ISD, 1983:2-1990:1
                                                 rsd,1.a +flisd +c,1

   Currency                           p              adj.R2            DW      White's test   Chow's test

   £01.2 estimation, whole sample (N=85)

         BP          0.002369          0.7592         0.30            1.74           3.538         6.009
                    (0.000777)'       (0.1247)#                                     {0.170}       {0.004}
                    [0.000972P        10.1618]'
         DM          0.002717          0.6407         0.17            1.62           5.884         0.2391
                    (0.000962)'       (0.1509)'#                                    {0.053}       {0.788}
                    [0.000935]'       [0.1609J'
         ITY         0.005130          0.1058         -0.008          1.61           3.102         L851
                    (0.000993)'       (0.1850)#                                     {0.212}      {0.164}
                    10.001246]'       [0.2288]
         SF          0.00524 1         0.2869         0.027           1.33           2.790        0.630
                    (0.000999)'       (0.1564)#                                     {0.248J      {0.535}
                    [0.001.237]'      (0.2010]



  B. STIR estimation, whole sample (N=85)

         BP          0.003726'        0.5299#         0.31            1.53
                    (0.000557)        (0.0845)
     PM              0.005048'        0.2633'#        0.18            1.47
                    (0.000522)        (0.0749)
                     0.005185'         tL09S4 #       0.003           1.61
                    (0.000787)        (0.1441)
     SF              0.005770'        0.2011'#        0.039          1.31
                    (0.000506)       (0.0703)


  C. SUIt estimation. excluding data from contracts with overlapping maturities (M 64)

     EP              0.00497'         0.3049'3q       0.053          1.57
                    (0.00077)        (0.1281)
     PM              0.00553'         0.1859 #        0.096          1.53
                    (0.00062)        (0.0954)
     JY              0.00503'         0.1806 #        0.016          1.78
                    (0.00080)        (0.1506)
     SF              0.00582'         0.2167'#        0.029          1.64
                    (0.00064)        (0.0970)


Motes:
(1)       Standard errors are in parentheses.
(2)       Ileteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are in square brackets.
(3)       P-values are in curly brackets.
          • denotes
(4)                 that the estimate is statistically different from zero at 5% level.
(5)       iV denotes that the estimate is statistically different from one at 5% level.
                        Table 2: Testing the unbiasedness of the 1Sf), 1983:2-1990:1
                                       IoØrsd,1) =a . log(isd) +



  Currency         a                              adj.R2           DW       White's test        Chow's test


  A. OLS estimation, whole sample (N = 85)

      BP          -2-555            0.4811         0.18            1.51           9.431              6.506'
                  (0 5635)'        (0 1085)'#                                    {0.009}'           (0 002J'
                  10.75491'        [0.1465]'
      DM          -2247             0.5515         0.15            1.57           1.2641             0.226
                  (0.7170)'        (0.1399)'#                                    {0.531}            {0.798}
                  L0.6752]'        [0.1306]'
      JY          -4.9322           0.0575         001             1.61           8.2812             2.128
                  (0-7756) •       (03464) #                                     { 0.016}
                                                                                            •       {0.126}
                  11,0768]'        [0.2049]
      SF          -3.4850           0.2992         0.04            1.28           0.8786             0.8139
                  (0.7012)'        (0.1378)'#                                    jO.644}            {0.447}
                  [0.76571'        [0.1487]



  B. SUE estimation, whole sample (TN=85)

      B?          -3.0693           0.3818#        0.19             1.51
                  (0.4264)         (0.0824)
      DM          -3.7551'          0.2569#        0.16             1.45
                  (0.3750)          (0.0729)
      .JY         -4.6656           0.1079#         0.002           1.62
                  (0.610 1)         (0.1150)
      SF          -3.832            0.2314"#        0.054           1.26
                   (0.3365)         (0.0652)



  C. STIR estimation, excluding data from contracts with overlapping maturities (N 64)

      B?           -3.7569          0,248r#         0.039           1.53
                   (0.5558)         (0.1063)
      DM           -3.8597'         0.2346#         0.12            1.56
                   (0.4703)         (0.0907)
      JY           -4.4147'         0.1452 0        0.008           1.80
                   (0.6296)         (0.1178)
      SF           -3.7658'          0.238&#        0.051           1.5.4
                   (0.4220)         (0.0815)


Notes:
(1)      Standard errors are in parentheses.
(2)      ileteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are in square brackets.
(3)      P-vaiues are in curly brackets.
(4)      • denotes that the estimate is statistically different from zero at 5% level.
(5)       # denotes that the estimate is statistically different from one at 5% level.
                     Table 3: Properties of the OhS residuals and tests of normality


               A. Residuals from the OLS regressions in levels: rsd..1     = +Pisd +e,1
                                      B?            OM               JY               SF
                   U2'10             4.926         4.612            4.900            5.821

                   U) •iü9          11.990         5.584           17.179            13.086

                  111012            122.584        68.851         150.779           133.399

                  skewness          1.097          0.564           1.584            0.932
                  kurtosis          5•Q53*         3.237           6.281            3.936
                .Jarque-Bera       31.967          4.701          73.669            15.403


               B. Residuals from the OhS regressions in logarithnt
               Iog(rsd,) =a + 1og(isd)


                                      BP            Dli              JY               SF
                   a2 .102          10.333         10.202          12.778           10.766

                                    7.296          -9.470          12.449            5.618

                   144'10          429.220        338.090         573.136           327.915

                 skewness           0.220         -0.291'         0.273'            0.159'
                  kurtosis          4.020          3.248           3.510             2.829
                Jarque-Bera         4.368          1.414           1.974             0.462

Notes:
         (1)     Uj denotes thefth central moment. Skewness =        U)iI.      Kurtosis      u4/u.
         (2)     ,Jarque-Bera statistic = T{[S2161+[(k_3)2/24}}, where T is the sample size, S the
                 skewness, and K the kurtosis. Under the nuil hypothesis of normality, the Jarque-Bera
                 statistic has a CM-square distribution wilit 2 detrees of freedom. The critical value at 5%
                 level is 5.991. Under the null hypothesis of normality, T[S2/6] and T[(K_3)2124],
                 individually, has a Chi-square distribution With 1 degree of freedom. The critical values
                 of S and K to reject the null at 5% level, are 0.05207 and 4.0414, respectively.
                 * denotes "different from that under
         (3)                                          normAlity at 5% level.'
                       Table 4: Skewness and kurtosis of z as a function of y
                                         (with h being positive)



                             y         exp (y)          Skewness         KurLosis

                            0,0001    1.000100          0.030001        3.001600
                            0.01      1.010050          0.301759        3.162323
                            0.05      1.051271          0.690903        3.860583
                            0.1       1.105170          1.007008        4.855750
                            0.3       1.349858          1.981403        10.70567
                            0.5       1.648721          2.938708        21.50727
                            0.7       2.013752      ,
                                                        4.041258        41.94258
                            0.04      1.040810          0.614294        3.678365
                            0.07      1.072508          0.82734.4       4.241307
                            0.1       1.105170          1.007008        4.855750
                            0.13      1,138828          1.169517        5.526779
                            0.4       1.491824          2.4.48824       15.26988
                            0.7       2.013752          4.041258        4L94258
                            1         2.718281          6.184877        113.9363


Notes:
         (1)   Let w   be    a normal variate with mean u     and   variance y. z is defined as follows;
               z =h [exp(w) —exp(u +0.5y)).
         (2)   If h is negative, then all the skewness would also be negative (with the same magnitude
               as in the table).
                        Table 5: Simulation for size of the t-test under non-normality
                           (sample size=85, repetition size per simulation= 1000)

        parameters               -—-implied properties of z—             t-test          point estimate
    h •io           ?          var(z)   skewness      kw-tosis           true             average p
        (1)      (2)            (3)         (4)         (5)              size
                                                                          (6)
     12.65      0.04          6.7972     0.614294     3.678365           0.066              0.9986
     12.65      0.07          12.444     0.827344     4.241307           0.056              1.0028
    12.65       0.1           18.600     1.007008     4.855750           0.057              1.0100
    12.65       0.13          2&300      1.169517     5.526779           0.052              1.0035
    1.2.65      0.4           117.41    2.4-48824     15.26986           0.058              1.0049
    12.65       0.7           326.68    4.041258      41.94258           0.060              0.9640
    12.65       1             747.43    6.184877      113.9363           0.058              1.0430

    11.65       0.07          10.555    0.82734-4     4.241307           0.064              0.9963
    12.65       0.07          12.444    0.8273.44     4.241307           0.058              0.9931
    13.65       0.07          14.489    0.827344      4.241307           0.056              0.9013
    14M5        0.07          16.690    0.827344      4.241307           0.063              0.9965
    20          0.07          31.106    0.827344      4.241307           0.058              0.9714
    50          0.07          194.41    0.827344      4.241307           0.052              1.0501
    80          0.07          497.70    0.827344      4.241307           0.048              0,9341
   110          0.07          940.96    0.827344      4.241307           0.049              0.8987

    -12.65      0.04          6.7972    -0.614294     &678365            0.061              0.9977
    -12.85      0M7           12.444    -0.827344     4.241307           0050               1.0045
    -12.65      0.1           18.600    -1.007008     4$55750            0.068              1.0043
   -12.65       0.13          25.300    -1.169511     5.526779           0.049              1.0121
   -12.65       3.4           111.41    -2.448824     15.26988           0.070              0.9798
   -12.65       0.7           326.68    4.041258      41.94258           0.049              1.0417
    -12.65      1             747.43    -6.184877     113.9363           0.048              1.0033


Note:
         See the notes for Table 4 for the definitions of Ja, y and z.
                            Table 6: Test of the weaker version of rationality
                               (Data from overlapping contracts excluded)
                             H0:p1-p2a1. (lad is useless as predictor of rod)

                                                                             in1 needed to reject
                                                                                     H0
     Currency       N            2      M      in1    in3   nj1   p1 +p2    1-tail test   2-tail test
          BP       64     30     34     48     27     21    30     1.282      24.66"       25.06"
         DM        64     32     32     4-4    28     16    32     1.375      24.15"       24.56"
          ,JY      64     31     33     44     27     17    31     1,356      23.72"       24.188
          SF       64     29     35     46     25     20    29     1.291      22.&r        23.07"
         Total     256    122    134    181    107    74    122    1.325      90.S'P       91.75"


Notes:
         (1)     PoInt estimate of (p P2 =(m1/n) + (n2 —m2)/n2-
         (2)     m,amaxt0, m—n2}, m1=min{n1, M).

         (3)     • denotes that the null hypothesis that the market's forecast is useless is rejected at 5%
                 leveL
                                  Table 7: Factors that affect 181), 1983:2 - 1990:1

                                      is00.01(rsd—isd_1).03isd1 + error
                           SUIt estimation, excluding data from overlapping contracts.



    Currency                    00                                                    adj.R2            DW
         BP               0.00245               0.3035              0.5019             0.52             1.84
                          (0.00041)             (0.0525)            (0.638)
         1DM              0.00312'              0.2946'             0.4264'            0.40             2.10
                          (0.00046)             (0.0530)            (0.0720)
         JY               0.00328'              0.2409              0.2898             0.19             2.21
                          (0.00055)             (0.0506)            (0.0969)
         SF               0.00406               0.2266'             0.2647'            0.20             2.02
                          (0.00056)             (0.0558)            (0.0827)


Notes:
             (1)     The standard errors are in the parentheses.
             (2)     • denotes that the estimate in question is statistically different from zero at 5% leveL




                   TableS: The Portmanteau Q test of the expectational errors, 1983:2-1990:1
                                       H0:rsd,1 -isd is serially uzicorrelated


    Lag P               Q-BP            Q4)M               QJY                Q-SF    Critical value to reject H0

                                                                                        a =0.05        a —0.10
         1               0.34            1.69               2.46              6.58'      3.8.41          2.71
         3               5.05            1.85              6.974'            7.524'      7.815           6.25
         5               6.93            3.40               8.85              7.68       11.07          9.24
         7               8.78            8.78              14.&              12.34'      14.07          12.02
         9              16.0#            10.3              17.3'              12.6       18.31          15.99
     11                 17.6#            11.4              17.94'             14.2       19.68          17.28

Notes:
             (1)    The standard errors are in the parentheses.
             (2)
                    • denotes the null hypothesis of no serial correlation is rejected at 5% level.
             (3)    4' denotes the null hypothesis of no serial correlation is rejected at 10% level.
               Table 9: Do Investors Respond Too Much to Lagged Volatility?
                                       (1983:4 - 1990:2)


                                Independent Variable
Dependent Variable        c          log rsd(-i)   log rsd(-2)                DW         S.E.E.
                                                                           Durbin's I'
    IogBPISD           -t.M7          0.5135        0.2071        0.474       £39        0.240
                       (0.433)        (0.0819)      (0.0825)
    IoEBPRSD           2221*          0.3656        0.1945#       0.216       1.97       0.322
                        (0.581)       (0.1098)      (0.1106)                (-0.004)
IogBPRSD-IogBPISD      -0.6747         -0.1479       -0.0125     -0.0015      1.64       0.370
                       (0.6673)       (0.1262)      (0.1270)

    1ogDMISD           -2.6238        0.3849        0d096#        0.381       1.52       0.192
                       (0.3722)       (0.0637)      (0.0637)
    IogDMRSD            -3.351        0.3321        0.00602       0.091      2.01        0.335
                       (0.6488)       (0.1111)      (0.1110)                (0.344)
IogDMRSD-IogDMISD       -0.7269        -0.0528      -0.1035      -0.0042                 0.326
                       (0.6319)       (0.1082)      (0.1082)                  1.76

    IogJYLSD           -3.856         0.2470         0.0301       0.108                  0.243
                      (0.59009)       (0.0751)      (0.0155)                  1.71
    IogJYRSD           -3.761         0i783#         0.1034       0.026                  0.359
                       (0.7414)       (0.1112)      (0.1118)                  2.05
IogJYRSD-logJYJSD       0.0946         -0.0687       0.0733      -0.019      (-2.16)     0.438
                       (0.9041)       (0.1356)      (0.1363)                   1.67

    IogSFISD           -3.148         0.1793'       0.2165'       0.171                  0.236
                       (0.459)        (0.0833)      (0.0831)                  1.57
    IogSFRSD           -2882'         0.393P         0.0319       0.145                  0.315
                       (0.6123)       (0.0319)      (0.1110)                 2.01
IogSFRSD-1ogSFISD       0.2665        0.2143#       -1.1845       0.017     (0.031)      0.370
                       (0.7195)       (0.1306)      (0.1304)                  L74
           Figure 1: option-implied standard deviations vs. realized ones


                                                           V.-

      '4-
                                                           P
                                                           0
      0
      0
                                                           0
      0                                                    P
                                                           0                      0
                                                                                                          00
-C    ci                                             -C                      o           00
                                                                                                              0
(a
      0                                              (I)                     o             000
C-                                                   E                   O         o_.p o

                                                                   o'o
-C
                                                     C)
     (0
                                                           cc
                                                           0                                          0
     o                                                     0                                                  0
     ci
     0                                                     ci                         oo
                                                                                       0
     01                                                                      0
     o
                                                           00
                                                           01
     o
     o                                                     ci
            0.002           0.008       0.014                    0002 0.006                 0.010              0.014

                             bprsd                                                    g mrs d




     '4.
     0                                                     0                 0
     ci                                                    ci

     C                                                     0
     ci
     0              0                                      ci                          0 0                        0
                                                           C
V
(0                   0
                        0                            V
                                                     (a
                                                                              00
                                                                              o
                                                                                            9,            0
>,                  0                                0)                  o            000        6'
     (0
     o                                           0         0
                                                           cc
                                                                                              00              0
     0••
     o         flo                                         0

             cc
                                                 0         ci

     04                                                                      0
     o                                                     04
                                                           0
     o
     o                   —                  t1             0
                                                           a
            0002 0.006              0.010   0.014                0.002           0.006      0.010 0014
                             jyrsd                                                    sirsd
   Figure 2: ACE results: British pound

SD for each independent            variable:
      2.50122e—0j.
X variable:          sfrsd
Y variable:          tsfr

 3.0000
                                                                                          2
                                                                                  S   *
             I

             I                                                              ***
             I                                                      .22*2
             I                                           31 2
             I                                43*335
             I                       5342
                            5*375*
                     *22
—2.0000      I
           0.0020000                                                                            0.016000
X variable:          sfisdl
Y variable:          tsfi

 0.80000     I




             I

             I
                                          *
                                          2                     *
                                                                    222 3
                                          *   44          3*
             I
                                              *5
                                      33—4__•
             I                       22            *
             I                    43362            35*
             I              *4*
                        *

                 *
             I
—0.80000     I
           0.0020000                                                                          0.014000
  Figure 3: ACE results: German                   mark

SD for each independent variable:
      4.258 44e—0l

X variable:          gtnrsd
I variable:          tgmr
 3.0000     I

            I                                                                      3   *
            I                                                         *        *
            I                                                    **3* *
            I                                         23   **23
                                              42242
            I                        463433
            I               2*3433
            I
                     **
—2.0000     I

          0.0020000                                                                        0.014000
X variable:           gmisdl
I variable:           tgmi

 1.0000     I




            I                                                         22   *
            I                                                    *2        *
                                                           .74
            I                                            22*
                                                     2
                                              *4 2
                                *3**222
                               22
                I         *2

—1.0000         I*
          0.0030000                                                                           0.01c000
  Figure 4; ACE results: Japanese yen

SD for each             independent variable:
      4. 58392e—0l

X variable:                jyrsu
Y variable:                tjyr
 4.0000
            I                                                                                  2
                                                                                           *



                                                                                    2
            I                                                                  **

            I                                                       22
                                                               22
                                                       263
            I                                   2233
            I                            4475
            I                      562

            I * 22
            *
—2.0000     I
          0.0020000                                                                            0.014000
X variable:                jyisdl
Y variable:                tjyi
 3.5000     I
                I
                                   *




                    I
                                                  *
                    I
                                                      -                    2445522' • 2'
                                                          32             23
                    I                                      343       47'
                                                               '24 '52
 —1.0000            I
                                                                                               0.010000
  Figure 5: ACE results: Swiss franc


SD for each independent variable:
      G.74165e—0l

X variable:      bprsd
I variable:      tbpr
 4.0000     I




                                                                             *   *

            I                                                   *
            I                                               3
            I                                       2
                                             252*
            I                                4
            I                   2*87*
            I                4962
            I          232
                 *4*
            It
—2.0000     I



          0.0020000                                                                    0.018000
X variable:      bpisdl
I variable:      tbpi
 3.5000     I




            I
                                                                        **
            I
                                                                    *




                                        4               *
                                        34       24'

            I" 3*           *25*3 5
            I          '33'62    3
            I
                             **     4
—1.0000
          0.0020000                                                                  0.014000
Nuntier Author                 Title
3850   Hope Cbnruan            The Effects of thud Health on Marital 09/91
       Robert Kaesther         Status aid Family Structure
3851   Giuseppe Bertola        Factor Shares aid Savings in Ertlogenous 09/9 1

3852   Alessaixln casella      Haltirq Thflation in Italy aid France    09/91
       Barry Eichengreen       After World War II
3853   Michael Rothschild      The University in the Marketplace: Sate 09/91
       lawrence J. White       Insights aid Sate Puzzles
3854   Steven C. Allen         thanges in the Cyclical Sensitivity of 09/91
                               Wages in the United States, 1891-1987
3855   Xavier Sala—i--Nartin   Fiscal Federalism aid cptinun Q2rrency 10/9 1
       Jeffrey Sachs           Areas: Evidence for Europe Fran the
                               United States
3856   Benjamin N. Fflednan    Another Thok at the Evidence on Money- 10/91
       Kenneth N. }itther      Incxxre usality
3857   McKinley Blackburn      Unctserved Ability, Efficiency Wages,    10/91
       Evid Neurnark           aid Interiniustry Wage Differentials
3858   Alan B. Krueger         Ha Qrçuters Have thangat the Wage        10/91
                               Structure: Evidence Fran Micraiata,
                               1984—89

3859   [avid Netniark          Evidence on Thiployment Effects of       10/9 1
       William Wascher         Minimt Wages aid Suhninimxm Wage
                               Provisions Fran Panel tta on State
                               Mininzn Wage laws
3860   A1berto Alesina         The European Central Bank: Pashapirq     10/91
       Vitthrio Grilli         Monetary Puliticz in Europe
3861   Geert Bekaert           On Biases in the Measurement of Foreign 10/91
       Robert 3. HaIrick       diange Risk Pranitmi
3862   Franklin Allen          stock Price Manipilation, Market Micro— 10/91
       Gary Gorton             structure aid Asynrtric Intonation
3863   Victor Zarncwitz        What is a aisiness Cycle?                10/9 1

3864   Giuseççe Bertola        Flexibility, Investitent, aid GrcMth     10/91
3865   Giuseppe Bertola        Irreversibility aid Aggregate            10/91
       Ricardo 3. caballero    Irwestnent
3866   Giuseppe Bertola        labor Thrnover Osts aid Average labor 10/9 1
 Nurter Author                    Title
 3867    Victor Zarnc,4tz         Has Macro-raasting Filcd?               10/91
 3868    lads Xaplav              Private Versus Socially Optimal         10/91
         Steven Shavell           Provision of ac Ante Legal Mvice
 3869    Elbanan Helçran         Erdogenais Macroectriomic Grwth Thctry 10/91
 3870    Rictard Jensen          Patent Pa, Product Standards, arid      10/9 1
         Marie Thursby           International Orpetition
3871     Albert ÂMe              Younger Households Saving: Evidence     10/91
         laigi Guise             Fran Japan and Italy
         tnie1e Trlizzese
         Eniel DDrsainvil
3872    Martin Gayn3r            Hcpital QJsts and the Cost of ipty      10/91
        Gerard F. Anderson       Hospital Beds
3873    Bruce N. Iehmann         Asset Pricing and Intrinsic Values:     10/91
                                 A Peview Essay
3874    Jonathan Skinner         Raising and Saving in the United States 10/91
3875    Rictard B. Freeman       Crime and the E)tployxient of           10/91
                                 Disadvantaged Youths
3876    Nouriel Paibini          Financial Development, the made         10/91
        Xavier Sala-i-Martin     Regime, and Ea'nanic Grwth
3877    Jair B. Pebitzer         The Cbnsa4ucnces of Mininno Wages laws: 10/91
        La.'efl J. Taylor        Sane New Thecattical Ideas
3878 Reba N. Blank               Why Were tverty Rates So High in the    10/91
                                 198 Os?

3879    Benjamin M. Friedman     Why toes the Paper-Bill Spread Predict 10/91
        Kenneth N. &itther       Peal Economic Activity?
3880    Patric H. jiertershott   Are Peal House Prices Likely to fc1 the 10/91
                                 By 47 Percent?
3881    Micthael Bruno           Fran Sharp Stabilization to Crocith:    10/9 1
                                 On the ft,litical Ecoinny of Israel's
                                 mansition
3882    D3uglas L. Kruse         Pension Substitution in the iSCOs: Why 10/91
                                 the Shift Tani Definai Contribution
                                 Pension Plans?
3883    James B. P.ebitzer       to tabur Markets Provide Enough Short   10/91
        LcMell 3. Taylor         flour Jctc? An Analysis of Work Hours
                                 and Work Incentives
Nurnter Author                  Title                                    Exte
3884   Victor R. F\ichs         National Health Insurance Revisited      10/91
3885   N. Grory Mankiti         The Reincarnation of Keynesian           10/91
                                Economics

3886   False Brezis             Leapfrogging: A Theory of Cycles in      10/91
       Paul Krugman             National Tothnolcqical leadership
       iniel Tsi&lon
3887   N. Ishag Nadiri          The Effects of Public Infrastructure     10/91
       Theofanis P. Mamuneas    and R&D Capital on the Cost Structure
                                and Perforinajtt of U.S. Manufacturing
                                Industries
3888   Jerry A. Hausinri        An Ordered Prxtit Analysis of Trans-     10/91
       Andrew W. Ix             action Stock Prices
       A. Craig MacKinlay
3889   Ridard K. Lyons          Private Beliefs and Intonation           10/91
                                Externalities in the Foreign Exchange
                                Market
3890   txanie1 S - Harrermesh   Labor [Enand: What Lb We Know? What      11/9 1
                                Ebn't We Know?

3891   GiThert E. Metcalf       The Role of Federal Taxation in the      11/91
                                Supply of Municipal Bonis: Evidence
                                Frau Municipal qovernments
3892   Mark Gertler             Monetary Etlicy, aisiness Cycles and     11/9 1
       SnDn Gilctrist           the Behavior of Small Manufacturing
                                Firms
3893   Ann P. Bartel            Productivity Gains finn the Iniplerent— 11/9 1
                                ation of flnployee Training Programs

3894   Jctn J. Lbnthue          Ctntinuws Versus Episodic Ctange: The 11/91
       Jaircs Hecienan          Liipact of Civil Rights Policy on the
                                Ecnnanic Status of Blacks
3895   Alan J. Anerbath         Th,etion and Foreign Direct InvesbiEnt 11/9 1
       }Cevrn Hassett           in the United States: A Reconsideration
                                of the Evidence
3896   Ruidiger Lbrrthusch      Mcxderate inflation                      11/9 1
       Stanley Fischer
3897   Shulan'it Kahn           [)es Th'ployer Monopcony PcMer Increase 11/91
                                Ccnipationa]. /kaidents? The Case of
                                Xentud Coal Mines
miter Author                     Title                                    lute
3898    Olivia S. Mitchell       Pension flirxling in the Public Sector   11/91
        Pctert S. Smith
3899    J. Bradford De long      The Marshall Plan: History's Most        11/91
        Barry Eicthen9reen       Suocessful Structhral Adj usthnt Plan
3900    Enie1 R. Feetherq        Which Households Own nicipaJ Bonis?      11/91
        Jaites M. Foterba        Evidence Frau Tax Pethrns
3901    McKinley L. Blackburn    thanges in Earnings Differentials in     11/91
        Evid E. Bloan            the 1980s: anctrdance, Qonver9ence,
                                 thanges, aM Consequences
3902    Mark Cattier             Corporate Financial Iklicy, Taxation,    11/91
        1%. Glenn Hubbard        aM Macroecxznuic Risk
3903    J. Bradford De tong     Prcductivity aM Machinery Investhent: 11/91
                                A long Run took 1870—1980
3904    Dxaglas W. Elneniorf    Taxation of labor Inoatie aM the l)3mani 11/9 1
        Miles S. Xixthall       For Risky Assets
3905    Janes B. Pauch          Prtxiuctivity Gains Fran Geograçhic       11/91
                                Concentration of Human capital:
                                Evidence Frau the Cities
3906    Oliver Hart             A Thry of Lebt Based an the mallen- 11/91
        Jc*m Moore              ability of Hunan pital
3907    Efln Young thali        lAquidity Constraints aM Intertenwral 11/91
        Valerie A. Pancy        Ctnstmer Optimization: Theory aM
        floss N. Starr          Evidence Fran Exirable Goods
3908   Alan L. Gustian          Pension WLAS                              11/91
       Thanas L. Steinteier
3909   Jan Nullahy              Alotholisn, Work, aM linre O'a the        11/91
       Jody L. Sinielar         life Cycle
3910   Shang-Jin Wei            Are Cption—Inplied Forecasts of           11/91
       Jeffrey A. Frankel       Fccthange Rate Volatility Excessively
                                Variable?




Copies of the above working papers can te cbtainal by serxiing $5.00 per oopj
(plus $10. 00/order f or pastage aM banning for all locations outside the
cxntinental U.S.) to Working Papers, 1ER, 1050 Massachusetts Avenue,
cantridge, K; 02138. Advance paynent is required on all orders. Please nla]ce
checks payable to the National ireau of Bx'nauic Research.
