                   NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




      ESTIMATING THE EFFECT OF TRAINING ON EMPLOYMENT AND
    UNEMPLOYMENT DURATIONS: EVIDENCE FROM EXPERIMENTAL DATA




                          John C. Ham
                       Robert J. LaLonde




                     Working Paper No. 3912




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          November 1991




This paper is part of NBER's research program in Labor Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #3912
                                        November 1991



      ESTIMATING THE EFFECT OF TRAINING ON EMPLOYMENT AND
    UNEMPLOYMENT DURATIONS: EVIDENCE FROM EXPERIMENTAL DATA




                            ABSTRACT

    Using data from a social experiment, we estimate the impact

of training on the duration of employment and unemployment spells

for AFDC recipients. Although an experimental design eliminates
the need to construct a comparison group for this analysis,
simple comparisons between the average durations or the
transition rates of treatments' and controls' employment and
unemployment spells lead to biased estimates of the effects of

training. We present and implement several econometric
approaches that demonstrate the importance of and correct for
these biases. For the training program studied in the paper, we
find that it raised employment ra€es because employment durations
increased. In contrast, training did not lead to shorter

unemployment spells.




John C. Ham                            Robert J. LaLonde
Department of Economics                Graduate School of
University of Pittsburgh                Business
Pittsburgh, PA 15260                   University of Chicago
     and                               Chicago, IL 60638
Institute for Policy Analysis           and NEER
University of Toronto
1. INTRODUCTION

       Employment and training programs often improve the labor market prospects of

economically disadvantaged women.1 This improvement results largely from increases in

post-program employment rates rather than from increases in wages or in weekly hours

for those who work. Training raises employment rates because former trainees find jobs

faster when unemployed or hold on to their jobs longer when employed.

       This paper develops an econometric framework for estimating the effect of

training on the duration of unemployment and employment. There are several reasons

for separately estimating these effects. First, considerable benefits may accrue from

combining a program that improves the employment prospects of unemployed workers

with a program that enhances the ability of employed workers to retain their jobs.

Second, a program that lengthens trainees' employment durations may be preferred to

one that shortens unemployment durations because stable employment is likely to lead to

greater human capital accumulation than frequent job hopping. Such human capital

increases may lead to subsequent rises in trainees' wages. Finally, for evaluations using

short sampling frames, separate estimates of training's impact on employment and

unemployment durations may be used to estimate the program's long-run effect.2



        'Among nonexpcrimental evaluations Ashenfelter (1978) reports earnings gains for the 1964 MDTA
cohorts; Bassi (1983) and Ashenfclter and Card (1985) find more modest earnings gains for CETA
participants. Barnow (1986) provides a summary or evaluations of CETA. Card and Sullivan (1987) report
gains in employment rates for CETA participants. Several experimental evaluations report employment and
earnings gains for women. Those studies indudc: The National Supported Work Demonstration (see
Hollister, Kempcr, and Maynard (1984)); the WIN Research Laboratory Project (see \Vokhagcn and
Goldman (1983)); The WorkWel1are Experiments (see Friedlander (1988)); and the AFDC Homemaker
Home Health Aid Demonstration (Bell and Orr (1987)).

       2p estimate of the long-run effect of training on employment rates can be calculated from the
difference between the ratio of the expected duration of employment to the sum of the expected durations of
employment and unemployment for the trainees and the corresponding ratio for the control group.
       In order to examine the effect of training on the durations of unemployment and

employment, we apply our econometric approach to data from a social experiment. The

advantage of these data is that among the population of eligible program volunteers, a

woman's training status is uncorrelated with unobserved heterogeneity. In this case, a

simple comparison between trainees' and controls' employment rates yields an unbiased

estimate of training's effect on short-run employment rates. But, as we shall show,

similar comparisons between the durations of trainees' and controls' employment and

unemployment spells yield potentially biased and economically misleading estimates of

the training effect. Consequently, even when using experimental data, evaluations of

training's effect on employment and unemployment durations require a parametric
statistical framework.

       Our empirical findings may be summarized as follows. First, in our data, the

standard empirical practice of using only fresh spells to avoid initial conditions problems

in event history analysis yields misleading estimates of the training effect because it

creates a serious sample selection problem that contaminates the experimental design.

Second, our econometric framework successfully addresses these sample selection

problems. This finding is important because there is no modification to the sample

design that would eliminate such problems in our data. Finally, the social experiment

studied in the paper — the National Supported Work (NSW) Demonstration — raised the

trainees' employment rates because it helped those who found jobs hold onto them

longer. The program had no effect on the rate at which trainees left unemployment.

       The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the social


                                             2
                                                    3

experiment. Section 3 discusses the problems that occur when using expeimental data

to make inferences about the effect of training on employment and unemployment

durations. Section 4 constructs a statistical model that formally addresses the problems

raised in the previous section. Section 5 reports our empirical findings. Section 6

concludes the paper and briefly discusses the benefits of having experimental data when

analyzing this type of problem.



2. TRAINING'S EFFECT ON EMPWYMENT RATES

        The NSW Demonstration provided work experience to a random sample of

eligible AFDC women who volunteered for training.3 These women were guaranteed 9-

18 months of subsidized employment in jobs in which productivity standards were raised

gradually over time. Most jobs were in clerical or services occupations and paid slightly

below the prevailing wage in the participants' labor markets. When their subsidized

employment ended, the trainees were expected to enter the labor market and find

regular jobs.
        Despite similar pre-program employment rates, the trainees' post-program
employment rates substantially exceeded those of the control group members. As shown

by Figure 1, the trainees' and controls' pre-program employment rates were essentially

identical and were declining in the 48 semi-monthly periods prior to the baseline. After



       3Therc are 275 trainees and 266 controls n our sample. Tabk A presents the means of the trainees'
 and controls' demographic and pre.baseline employment characteristics using the entire experimental sample.
 As expected with an experimental design, these means br the two groups are nearly identical for every
 characteristic (except marital status). For more details on the NSW sample see the appendix. For an in-
 depth discussion of the program and its costs see Hollister Ct al. (1984).
                                              4

the baseline, the employment rates of the two experimental groups diverged as the

trainees entered Supported Work jobs. The employment rates of the two groups
approached each other as the trainees' terms in Supported Work ended or they

voluntarily dropped out of the program. Nevertheless, in the 100th semi-monthly period,
or more than a year after the typical trainee had left Supported Work, the employment

rates of the trainees exceeded those of the control group by 9 percentage points. Thus

the experimental evaluation shows that at least in the short run, NSW substantially

improved the employment prospects of AFDC participants.
       Supported Work achieved these employment gains by helping trainees to hold on

to their jobs longer and/or to find jobs faster, thereby increasing the length of their

employment spells and/or reducing the length of their unemployment spells. A
seemingly natural way to analyze the separate effects of training on employment and

unemployment durations consists of comparing the mean durations of the trainees' and

controls' employment and unemployment spells. These comparisons indicate that the

controls have longer employment and unemployment spells. Unfortunately, this finding
simply reflects the longer sampling frame for the controls. (Since the trainees spend an

average of one year in training, their sampling frame is approximately one year shorter

than the controls' sampling frame.) Thus simple comparisons between trainees' and

controls' mean durations are uninformative.

       Comparisons between trainees' and controls' empirical survivor functions (i.e., the

probability of remaining employed or unemployed through a given date) avoid the
problem associated with comparisons between mean durations. As shown by Table 1,
                                             5

the trainees' employment spells are longer than the controls' spells. For example, 65

percent of the trainees' employment spells lasted six months, compared with only 57

percent of the controls' spells. By contrast, the two groups' unemployment spells are of

similar lengths; for example, 73 percent of both the trainees' and the controls' spells

lasted at least 6 months. These comparisons between trainees' and controls' empirical

survivor functions suggest that the NSW program raised employment rates by increasing

the duration of employment spells rather than by decreasing the length of unemployment

spells. Unfortunately, such a simple analysis may be inappropriate. The following

section discusses the problems associated with these comparisons and presents the case

for adopting a more formal statistical framework when using experimental data to

estimate the effect of training on employment and unemployment durations.



3. EXPERIMENTAL DATA AND DURATION ANALYSES

       There are at least three reasons why, even in experimental settings, comparisons

between trainees' and controls' empirical survivor functions may yield misleading

estimates of the training effect. The first problem arises because the first year of data

 for the controls comes from a period when the treatment group is in training. Thus, on

 average, the controls may face different demand conditions than the treatments.
        The second.problem with comparing survivor functions is that there are other

 differences among individuals besides their training status. In general, failing to account

 for such differences biases our measurement of the training effect even though a
                                                     6

woman's training status is determined by random assignment.4 This bias occurs since

the empirical survivor functions in Table 1 are a function of the corresponding hazard

functions and neglected heterogeneity will bias those calculations. Therefore, even when

using experimental data, heterogeneity must be taken into account when analyzing the

effects of training on the duration of employment and unemployment.

        The third problem with the comparison of the trainees' and controls' survivor

functions occurs because much of the data on the controls' unemployment spells come

from their unemployment spells which are in progress at the baseline. Data from

interrupted spells are comparable to data from fresh spells only in the absence of

duration dependence, and in our empirical work we find significant evidence of duration

dependence.5

        Standard empirical analysis of duration models can avoid the first two problems,

first, by conditioning on demand variables and observed characteristics and second, by

allowing for unobserved heterogeneity which is uncorrelated with observed character-

istics, including training status. Standard empirical analysis deals with the third problem

of interrupted spells by discarding them and using only fresh spells that begin after the
baseline. As shown by column 5 in Table 1, if we adopt this procedure, training actually

appears to have raised unemployment durations.



      4See, for example, Heckman and Singer (1984a) and Lancaster and Nickel (1980). Ridder and
Verbakel (1984) discusses this problem explicitly in an experimental setting.

       31n the absence of unobserved heterogeneity, one can avoid this problem by measuring duration from
the beginning of the spell in progress at the baseline and not from the baseline. However, in the presence of
unobserved heterogeneity, this adjustment will still produce biased results. See l-ieckman and Singer (1984a).
We find significant evidence of unobserved heterogeneity below.
                                                      7

       However, by following standard practice in our study of economically disadvan-

taged women, we create a potentially serious sample selection problem. For a control to

have a fresh unemployment spell, she must first complete the unemployment spell in

progress at the baseline, and then complete an employment spell before the end of the

sample period (Figure 2a). Nearly half the controls in our sampling frame never leave

the unemployment spell in progress at the baseline, and thus they never appear in our

sample of fresh unemployment spells. If these controls are less skilled than the controls

who have fresh unemployment spells, using only fresh spells contaminates the experi-

mental design by comparing above-average members of the control group with typical

trainees.6 As shown by Table 2, controls with fresh unemployment spells (in column 5)

have more prior work experience and education than either the full sample of controls or

the sample of trainees with unemployment spells.7 Consequently, it is quite possible

that the controls with fresh unemployment spells leave unemployment more quickly than

the trainees because they are a select sample and not because training increases

unemployment duration.

        A similar sample selection problem may arise for the trainees. Although most

trainees become unemployed when they leave Supported Work, some move directly into

a regular job. Further, some of these trainees never experience a subsequent spell of
unemployment during the sample period. As shown in columns I and 3 of Table 2,


       6Thi.s point simply restates the general result that using only new spells is inappropriate in the
 presence of unobserved heterogeneity (Heckman and Singer 1984a).

       Two measures of work experience arc reported in Table 2. The first measure is the number of semi-
 monthly periods of employment in the two years prior to the baseline. The second measure is the Iraction of
 women who had never had a regular job.
                                              8

trainees with employment spells are more skilled than those with unemphyment spells.

Consequently, the sample of trainees with unemployment spells may exclude women with

"above average" characteristics.

      Standard duration models can account for the differences in observed character-

istics resulting from the foregoing sample selection problem. However, such models can-

not account for differences in unobserved characteristics, since they assume that the

heterogeneity is uncorrelated with observed characteristics. By contrast, in our problem

unobserved heterogeneity will be correlated with a woman's training status. Thus, to

follow standard empirical practice, we would have to adopt one of the following two

implausible assumptions: (i) there is no duration dependence in unemployment spells, or

(ii) unobserved heterogeneity is uncorrelated with training status in the sample

experiencing fresh unemployment spells. We now turn to an estimation approach that

avoids both of these assumptions.



4. ECONOMETRIC MODEL

       In order to develop a likelihood function that addresses the problems discussed in

the previous section, we segment the data into three parts: (i) the employment and

unemployment spells that began after the baseline (fresh spells); (ii) the controls'

unemployment spells that are in progress at the baseline (interrupted spells); and (iii) the

treatments' time in training (training spells).
                                                     9
4.1 The Contribution of the Fresh Spells

       The contribution of a fresh spell to the likelihood function is straightforward. We

define the hazard functions for exiting employment and unemployment to be as follows:


(1)                                 ,(t   , 0) = .1(t,lX, D, O; ),

where j = e denotes an employment spell and j = u denotes an unemployment spell. In

(1), t is the duration of the current spell, X is a vector of explanatory variables (some of

which vary with time), D denotes a dummy variable which equals 1 when a woman

belongs to the treatment group, O is a scalar random variable representing unobserved

characteristics, and     is a vector of parameters to be estimated. The foregoing hazard

function gives the probability conditional on a woman's training status and observed and

unobserved characteristics that she leaves employment (unemployment) in period t, given

that she has been in employment (unemployment) up to that point. This probability

depends of course on the corresponding density and distribution functions for the number

of periods spent in an employment (or unemployment) spell:


(2)                                    )(.) =    _______ =     f(.)
                                                 1—F1()        S()
In (2),f1() and Fe) are the density and distribution functions associated with the length

of employment (or unemployment) spells, and Se) is the survivor function. The fresh

spells' contribution to the likelihood function follows from these hazard functions. For

example, suppose a woman had a fresh employment spell lasting r periods followed by an


      3See, e.g., Flinn and Hecknian (1982) or Lancaster (1990).
                                                      10

unemployment spell (of t periods) which was in progress when the sampling frame ended

(see Figure 2a). Conditional on the unobserved heterogeneity, the contribution to the
likelihood for these spells is given by


(3)                  L1(ç,ç I             = fe(teID,e,0efl )S(t                       )•
In (3),   x and        contain the explanatory variables for the fresh employment and

unemployment spells, respectively.



4.2 The Contribution of Interrupted Spells

         The interrupted spells' contribution to the likelihood is more complicated than the

contribution of the fresh spells. It might seem that the two years of pre-baseline data,

noted in Figure 1, would alleviate the difficulties associated with these interrupted spells.9

Using such data, however, simply moves the initial conditions problem back to the

beginning of the pre-baseline data. Further, a likelihood function that describes the pre-

baseline data must account for the program's eligibility criteria. The NSW administrators

required participants to be unemployed when they volunteered for training and to have

been unemployed for at least three of the six months prior to the baseline. Unfortunately,

the likelihood function that accounts for this eligibility criterion and these data are

extremely complicated (see Appendix B). Therefore we relegate its estimation to future

work.




        'Use of the pre-baseine data would also incrcase sample size and therefore increase the precision of
the cstmates.
                                                      11

       Because of the problems surrounding the pre-baseline data, we use only the post-

baseline data when accounting for the interrupted spells' contribution to the likelihood.

Even in this case, the exact likelihood remains extremely complicated (see Appendix B).

To see how these complications arise, let M denote the event that a woman is eligible to

participate in training. Consider a woman who leaves her interrupted spell after rperiods

and then experiences fresh employment and unemployment spells, denoted by (see

Figure 2a). Her contribution to the likelihood is given by


(4)                 L(r,tI,O,O) =

where 0(0) denotes the heterogeneity distribution conditional on program eligibility. In

(4), the contribution of the time remaining in the interrupted spells, h(), is a complicated

function of the probability of program eligibility, the entry rate into unemployment, and

the hazard rate from unemployment (see Appendix B).1° In light of these complications,

we follow Heckman's and Singer's (1984a) suggestion and estimate an approximation to

(4). In that approximation, we define a new hazard rate for leaving the interrupted

unemployment spell conditional on program eligibility and time spent in the spell since

the baseline, r,
(5)                                    (rI ,0) =
The survivor function corresponding to (5) is S,(r, Or). The contribution to the



                                                                                           on the date, 1,
       10Ttic interrupted spells' contribution can be simplified considerably by conditioning
when these spells began. However,  one must  at the same time condition  the heterogeneity distribution.
Therefore, because the heterogeneity distribution for each control is G(811) while for each trainee it is still
G(8), the random assignment in the experiment is contaminated.
                                              12

likelihood for a control group member who leaves her interrupted spell after r periods and

then experiences employment and unemployment spells, denoted by t, is now given by
(6)        L(r,tl )   = j)(rI ,O,) S(rj ,O,)          LAtI          dG(OOO,j)i

where we have appropriately redefined the heterogeneity distribution function, G(O). The

contribution for a woman who never leaves her interrupted spell during the sampling

frame is given by


(7)                             L(rI) =            •,Or)dGr(Or)•


In (7), G,(O) is the marginal distribution of 0,., and T is the length of the sampling period

after the baseline.

       It is interesting to compare the controls' contribution to the likelihood function in

our problem to the likelihood function for a typical sample selection problem, (e.g.,

Heckman (1979)). In (6) and (7), the contribution of controls' interrupted spells plays a

role analogous to the probit equation in the standard sample selection problem. Likewise,

the term for the fresh spells, L1( ), plays the role of the regression equation. As in the

sample selection problem, we may discard the interrupted spells and use the fresh spells to

estimate the training effect only when the heterogeneity associated with the interrupted

spells, 0,, is independent of the heterogeneity associated with the fresh spells, 0,. and 0.

Further, since some independent variables change with time, the interrupted spells'

contribution to the likelihood is based on different values of those variables than the fresh

spells' contribution to the likelihood. That difference should aid in the identification of

the hazard function's parameters. Finally, we should emphasize that we do not correct for
                                             13

selection bias in this problem because we wish to obtain structural as oppbsed to reduced

form parameter estimates (or unconditional versus conditional estimates). Instead, we

correct for the selection process into fresh spells so that we can make the parameters of

the treatments' and controls' hazard functions comparable.



43 The Contribution of the Training Spells
        In contrast to the controls' interrupted spells, the treatments' unemployment spells

end when they are randomly assigned into training (see Figure 2b). The treatments were

eligible for up to S periods of training, but they could leave the program early if they

dropped out or if they found a regular job. Therefore the treatments' contribution to the
likelihood function must account for their time in training and whether or not they left

training early for employment or unemployment. In order to model these possibilities, we

define the transition intensity (see, e.g., Lancaster 1990) from training into unemployment

after r periods as

(8a)                           A(rI,O) = )(rIXs,O;I3m).
Similarly, we define the transition intensity from training into employment as

(8b)                            A(r,O) = A(rIX,O;fl).
Given   those definitions, the hazard function for exiting training is the sum of the two

transition intensities

(9a)                     A,(rI,O,ON) =     A,e(TI0,,) +
                                               14

The survivor function corresponding to the hazard function in (9a) is given by


(9b)                        S(i•I•,O,O) =



To complete   our specification of the training spells' contribution to the likelihood, we


define   a dummy variable & that    equals I when a woman drops out of training for


unemployment     and zero otherwise, and a dummy variable        that equals 1 when a woman

leaves training for employment and zero otherwise. The contribution of a training spell of

t, weeks to the likelihood function (conditional on the unobserved heterogeneity) is


(10)            L(t5 , O, O) =    •2•,(t I ,            .,       S(t , 8, OM).
                                                                      I




To form the treatments' contribution to the likelihood, we combine        the training period

data   with the fresh spell data and integrate out the heterogeneity to obtain


(11)              L(ç,t,) =          •,O,e)L,(tI ,ee,euG(e,o,ee,eu).



where we have again redefined the distribution function G().

         As with the controls' contribution to the likelihood, we may draw an analogy from

(11) to the sample selection literature. In this case, the contribution of the training spells,

L5(), plays the role of the probit equation and the contribution of the fresh spells, L1(),

plays the role of the regression equation. Accordingly, we may exclude the training spells

from the analysis and still obtain consistent estimates of the training effect only when the
                                               15

heterogeneity terms associated with the training spells, (e Om), are independent of the

heterogeneity terms from the fresh spells (On, Os).



5. ESTIMATES OF THE TRAIMNG EFFECT

      To estimate the effect of training on employment and unemployment duration, we

maximize the likelihood formed by combining the controls' and treatments' contributions

to the likelihood, given by equations (6), (7), and (11). This likelihood function is

relatively complex and computationally demanding as it depends on five different param-

eter vectors (a,, , $,, fl,, flu,) and five different heterogeneity terms, (0,.   0, 0, Ok).
       The likelihood's complexity reflects the sample selection biases that arise when we

exclude the controls' interrupted spells and the treatments' training spells. To motivate

the use of our estimator and to indicate the potential importance of sample selection

biases, we first present estimates of the training effects using only data from fresh spells.

Next, we show how incorporating information on the controls' interrupted spells affects

our estimates of the unemployment and employment hazards. Finally, we also include the

treatments' training spells and estimate the complete likelihood function.

       We first follow standard empirical practice and use only fresh employment and

unemployment spells to estimate the training effect. By discarding the interrupted spells

and training spells, we implicitly assume that the heterogeneity terms associated with those

spells are independent of the heterogeneity terms in the employment and unemployment

spells. In addition we also assume that the heterogeneity terms associated with the

employment and unemployment spells are independent. Finally, we assume that the
                                                      16

hazard function for employment and unemployment is given by


(13a)                                   )(z) =       (1   +
                                                              exp(y))1,
where


(13b)                y. = 0.   +           + r) + y1D + alog(t)           +
                                                                              alog(5)2,

wherej = e,u.
        The vector X in the foregoing hazard functions includes both personal

characteristics and demand variables. Among the personal characteristics are age, years of

schooling, whether or not the women dropped out of high school, the number of children

less than 18, race, and marital status.t1 The demand variables are monthly nonagricul

tural employment and the number of persons receiving unemployment benefits. We

measured both demand variables as log deviations from SMSA means. Finally, we used

log duration and its square to capture the effects of duration dependence.12

         The estimated training effects using only fresh spells suggest that training lowered

the probabilities of leaving both employment and unemployment.13 In Table 3, column (1)

presents the coefficient (and standard error) of the training dummy variable and the

duration terms from the employment hazard when °e is constant, while column (2)


       LIThC means for treatments and controls characteristics are given in Table A of the Appendix. We
also experimented with adding age-squared, and dummy variables for whether a woman was of Hispanic
origin or currently married. None of these variables had a coefficient that was significantly different from
zero, nor did the addition of the variables affcct the results.

       Thc quadratic duration term was significant only in the employment hazard function. Consequently,
we dropped it from the unemployment hazard. We also used time dummy variables instead of log duration
and log duration squared to capture the effects of duration dependence (see Meyer 1989). This alternative
specification had no effect on any of the estimated coefficients, including that for training status.

        °The full set of parameter estimates arc contained in Table B in the Appendix.
                                                     17

presents the same estimates when the heterogeneity term is assumed to come from a

discrete distribution with two points of support.'4 The estimates indicate that training

increased employment durations by approximately 11 months. In columns (3) and (4) of

Table 4, we present the corresponding estimates for the unemployment hazard. The

estimates indicate that training increased unemployment durations by approximately 40

months.'5

        In light of training's positive impact on employment rates, the finding that training

impaired a woman's ability to find a job is surprising. However, a more plausible

conclusion to draw from the analysis of fresh spells is that the sample selection problem is

particularly serious when studying economically disadvantaged persons. The controls for

unobserved heterogeneity in column (4) assume that the heterogeneity terms are

independent of the explanatory variables, including training status. However, we argued

above that using only fresh spells is likely to create a sample selection problem and to

contaminate the experimental design. In this case, training status will be correlated with

O and O and the standard approach is inappropriate.
         An informal way of avoiding this selection problem is to include the controls'

interrupted spells and to assume that the fresh and interrupted spells have the same

 hazard function.16 But this procedure also involves the strong assumption of no duration


        "Sec Heckman and Singer (1984b).

       'The estimated differences in trainees' and controls' expected durations are calculated using the
 parameters from the estimated hazard functions, which ignore unobserved heterogeneity.

              measure the duration in the spells as time spent unemployed since the baseline. Alternatively, if
 we use the actual duration of those spells, which includes time spent unemployed prior to the bascline, the
 estimated training effect is similar to that reported for fresh spells in column 3 of Table 3. By using actual
 duration, we adjust downward the hazard for controls' interrupted spells in orderto take into account that
                                                     18

dependence in the unemployment hazard. If the assumption is inappropriate, including

interrupted spells involves trading off the bias from misspecification — that is, treating time

remaining in an interrupted spell the same as time in a fresh spell —against the sample

selection bias resulting from excluding these interrupted spells.

       As shown by column (5), when we use both interrupted and fresh unemployment

spells, the estimated training effect in the unemployment hazard falls by one-half in

absolute value and is no longer statistically significant at standard confidence levels.

However, we also find strong evidence of duration dependence. Moreover, this duration

dependence is not simply the result of neglected heterogeneity. As shown in column (6),

when we assume that unobserved heterogeneity is drawn from a two-point distribution, the

magnitude of the duration dependence coefficient declines but nonetheless remains

substantial and statistically significant. The existence of duration dependence indicates

that it is inappropriate to assume that the hazard function is the same for interrupted and

fresh spells.

        The findings in Table 3 indicate the potential importance of sample selection and

motivate consideration of the more rigorous statistical framework developed in the

previous section. To begin, we first allow the interrupted and fresh unemployment spells

to have different hazard functions and require the heterogeneity terms in those functions

to be correlated. We assume a one-factor loading structure where O = rO and O is

drawn from a two-point distribution. Further, we assume that the heterogeneity terms


those women have been unemployed for some time at the baseline. If there were no unobserved
heterogeneity, this alternative approach would be appropriate. But, in the presence of such heterogeneity, its
distribution for interrupted spells should be conditioned for time spent unemployed prior to the baseline,
again contaminating the ecperimentaI design.
                                                       19

associated with the interrupted and fresh unemployment spells are independent of the

heterogeneity terms associated with the employment and training spells (Or, O, 6k). As
shown in column (1) of Table 4, now training has essentially no effect on the transition

rate out of a fresh unemployment spell.

        We next consider the case where the heterogeneity terms from interrupted

unemployment spells, fresh unemployment spells, and employment spells are correlated
according to a one-factor structure where 0,. = rO and 0 =                 eOn, and   O is drawn from a

two-point distribution. Further, we assume that the heterogeneity terms associated with

these spells (0,., O, O) are independent of the heterogeneity terms associated with the

training spells (Ow.   Ow).   As shown by column (2), when we correct for selection bias in

this fashion, training has no effect on unemployment durations. However, as shown by

column (4), training continues to have a strong effect on employment durations.

        Finally, we account for the potential selection bias arising from the treatments' exit

from training. We assume that all the heterogeneity terms in our model are correlated

and again follow a one-factor structure where 0,. = r0,, O = eO,                  0= mOp, 0 = nO,,,"
and 0,, is drawn from a two-point distribution.18 Column (3) contains the coefficient for

the training dummy from the unemployment hazard for the fresh spells, while column (5)


        'Wc considered a generalization of this structure such that 6,,, = a,,, + m9,     a,,, + nr, 9, = a,,
+  e6', 9, = a, + r' and 9,, = a,, + 6" where 9" is a mean   :ero random variable drawn from a two-point
distribution. However, we tried this specification for a number of cases and starting values, and never had a
nonncgligible effect on the likelihood value or the parameter estimates.

       Thc project was quite computationally demanding and thus we generally stayed with the assumption
that 8 was drawn from a two-point distribution. However, we did try to add a third point of support for our
last model, which allows for full correlation. Even though we tried several starting values, we could only
achieve a trivia] increase in the likelihood. Given that we could not find a role for a third point of support in
our most complicated model, we maintained the assumption that 9,, was drawn from a two-point distribution
in our other specifications.
                                             20
contains the estimate of the training coefficient from the employment hazard. Comparing

columns (2) and (3), we see that the training dummy in the unemployment hazard has

risen, but the estimated coefficient in column (3) still has an asymptotic normal statistic

approximate'y equal to one. Comparing columns (4) and (5), we see that the training
coefficient in the employment hazard has also risen and is quite significant.

       Our estimates that account for sample selection indicate that training significantly

increased the duration of employment spells, while it had no statistically significant effect

on the duration of unemployment spells. We certainly found no evidence that training

reduced unemployment durations. These findings make considerably more economic

sense than the findings based only on fresh spells, which suggest that training substantially

raised unemployment duration. The results also indicate that initial conditions problems

are of more than theoretical interest in event history studies, and that policy conclusions

based on these studies may be quite sensitive to how researchers deal with such problems.



VI. CONCLUSIONS

       In this paper, we found that supported work raised employment rates because it

helped women who found jobs remain employed longer than they would have otherwise.

Our finding is in keeping with the program's objectives and is encouraging because longer

employed spells may lead to greater human capital accumulation. Such a possibility

suggests that the short-term program effects should persist and might even increase over

time. A recent study by Couch (1991) supports this contention. Using social security

quarterly earnings data, he reports that the NSW treatments had greater earnings than the
                                                     21

controls more than 7 years after the supported work program ended. Thus, our study

suggests that short sa.mpling frames contain information that program evaluators might use

to draw inferences about the long-term effects of training. Such a contention needs, of

course, to be explored further in future research.

       We conclude with a final point concerning the value of an experimental design

when evaluating training's effect on employment and unemployment durations. The
complexity of the estimator developed in this paper does not reflect a shortcoming of the

experimental design. Indeed, in a nonexperimental setting this problem is much more

complex. For example, Gritz (1988) uses the National Longitudinal Survey to evaluate the

impact of public sector training on employment and unemployment durations. Because he
does not have a random design, his study differs from ours in two fundamental ways.'9

First, since he does not condition the heterogeneity distribution for being eligible for

training, his study addresses a more ambitious question than ours, namely, what effect

 training would have on a randomly chosen member of the labor force. Second, since he

 must allow for individuals entering training both before and during his sampling rrame, he

 faces a more complex task in accounting for selection bias. Not surprisingly, Gritz finds

 that government-sponsored training substantially increases unemployment duration and

 decreases employment duration. He acknowledges that these findings may reflect the

 failure of his econometric model to account fully for selection bias.2°



       "He must also aggregate across different training programs.

        °Sec Ridder (1986) for an evaluation of Dutch training programs with nonexperimental data. As he
 expLicitly notes, Ridder is forced to make strong identifying assumptions since he lacks a control group and
 must instead rely on pre/post comparisons betwcen unemployment durations.
                                            22
      In contrast to Gritz, we analyze the effect of training only among those who were

eligible volunteers for the NSW program. Given the characteristics of individuals likely to

participate in government-sponsored training programs, we do not see this as a serious

limitation of our study. Moreover, for this group of eligible volunteers, random

assignment assures that an individual's heterogeneity is independent of her training status.
Because the experimental design eliminates the need to account for selection into training,

we must simply model how the controls leave their interrupted unemployment spells and

how the treatments leave their training spells. This task is clearly much more manageable

than Gritz's and our results reflect this fact. Therefore, although the experimental design

does not eliminate the need for a formal econometric model, it does give us sufficient

leverage to obtain economically meaningful results.
                                            23
                                      APPENDIX A

                DESCRIPTION OF NEW SUPPORTED WORK DATA



I. Source of Data and Documentation

      The data used in this study were obtained from the Employment and Earnings File

of the Supported Work Evaluation Study Public Use File. This file was prepared under

contract number 33-36-75-01 to the Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation.

The record layout and definitions of the variables in the public use file can be found in

Technical Document No. 8 "Constructed Variables Derivation for the Supported Work

Evaluation Study Public Use File: Employment and Earnings File," Mathematica Policy

Research, Inc. and Social and Scientific Systems, Inc., December 1980. This paper uses

data for the AFDC women who participated in the Demonstration.



IL Eligibility Requirements and Data Collection

       To qualify applicants had to be currently unemployed, to have been unemployed

for a total of at least 3 of the previous 6 months, to have received AFDC payments for 30

of the previous 36 months, and to have no preschool children. Eligible applicants who

volunteered for Supported Work were randomly assigned into a treatment or a control

group during 1976 and 1977. The experiment was run in seven sites: Atlanta, Georgia;

Chicago, Illinois; Hartford, Connecticut; Newark, New Jersey; New York City, New

York; Oakland, California; and in several locations in Wisconsin.

       All participants, including the control group members, were interviewed when
                                            24
admitted into the program. Among the information collected in these interviews was the

woman's age, years of schooling, whether she was a high school dropout, number of

children under 18, marital status including whether she had ever been married, and race.

In addition, retrospective data on a woman's employment status were obtained in

semi-monthly intervals for the two years prior to the baseline. This information was used

to calculate the respondent's number of semi-monthly periods of employment experience

in the two years prior to the baseline. Another question determined the number of weeks

since a woman's last regular job, which was used to construct a variable for whether a

woman had held a regular job since she was 16 years old.

      Both treatments and controls were interviewed at 9-month intervals following the

baseline. These interviews collected information on each woman's employment status in

semimonthly intervals during the previous nine months. These data were used to

construct the length of spells of employment and unemployment during the 26 months

following the baseline. Some women with a 27-month interval had employment data for

only 26 months because their interview took place before the end of the month. The

post-baseline employment histories in our study extend for 52 semi-monthly periods. The

sample used in the study consists of only those women with a baseline and three 9-month

interviews and who satisfied the two employment related eligibly criteria for the program.

Unfortunately, less than 40 percent of the sample was interviewed after 27 months due to

program costs. In addition, not every woman who participated in the program as either a

treatment or a control appears to have satisfied the employment-related eligibility criteria.

However, these factors do not affect the integrity of the experimental design since
                                            25

treatments and controls were affected equally. Nevertheless, the sample available for this

study was greatly reduced. There were 275 women in our treatment group and 266

women in our control group. All of these women volunteered for the program during

1976. The means and standard errors of these women's demographic characteristics are

presented in Table A.
       The labor demand variables used in the paper were collected from various issues of

Employment and Earnings published monthly by the U.S. Department of Labor. We used

the deviation around the site mean of total payroll employment and number of persons

receiving unemployment insurance to proxy for labor market conditions in each woman's

city at a point in time.



Ill. Miscellaneous Issues

A. Deleting Ineligibles
       There were thirty-four women — 19 trainees and 15 controls — whose employment

histories prior to the baseline were inconsistent with two intended eligibility requirements

of the program. Nearly all of these women were unemployed in less than 3 of the 6

months prior to the program; some also were employed at the baseline. When these

women are put back into the sample there are 294 trainees and 283 controls. Ham and

LaLonde (1990) presents the average durations and empirical survivor functions for this

slightly larger sample. The program's effect on employment rates is unaffected by which

sample we choose to use.

       Excluding these women should not affect the integrity of the experimental design as
                                             26
long as "ineligible" women were no more likely to be assigned to the treatment group

than to the control group. We focus on the program effects for this "eligible" sample in

this paper partly because there are relatively few cases of ineligibles and because we

would have too few data points to estimate a separate hazard for interrupted employment

spells.



B. Ne-Shows

          There were 14 treatment group members in our sample who volunteered and were

randomly assigned into training but never showed up for supported work. We treat these

no-shows as trainees throughout the analysis. To exclude these women from the analysis

would contaminate the experimental design. Therefore, the training effect measures the

impact on the employment opportunities of the treatment group members of the

opportunity to participate in supported work.



C. Supported Work Participation

          Trainees were guaranteed a subsidized supported work job for 9 to 18 months.

Initially productivity and attendance standards for the participants were less than would be

expected on a regular job, but these standards were raised by the program administrators

over time. Some participants either left the program voluntarily or were asked to leave

because of poor performance before their term expired. For the sample used in this

paper, 75% of the participants had left by the 13th month and 95% were out of the

program by the 17th month.
                                                      27
                                               APPENDIX B

                       ANALYSIS OF THE PRE-BASEUNE DATA AND

                         OF THE CONTROLS' INTERRUPTED SPELLS



       We face two problej in forming a likelihood that utilizes pre-baseline data. First,

we must model the probability of being eligible for training, even if we are controlling for

variation in unobserved variables only within the sample that volunteers for training. This

necessitates obtaining a tractable expression for calculating this probability.

       The second problem we face is that while we know the starting date of the

unemployment spell in progress at the beginning of the pre-baseline data, we do not know

the starting date of an employment spell in progress at the beginning of the pre-baseline

data. We can write a likelihood for these data, but it is not clear how well some

parameters will be identified. However we argue below that as a practical matter, it may

be sufficient to know the starting date of the unemployment spell.



I. Specifying the Probability of Program Eligibility21

       A woman is eligible for training if she was unemployed for at least six of the twelve

semi-monthly periods preceding the baseline. The probability of spending at least six

periods in unemployment in the interval (-12,0) depends on whether the individual is

employed or unemployed at calendar time .12 and on the length of time she has been in

employment or unemployment at this time.


       21Wc owe a substantial debt to Geert Ridder for his help in deriving the expression for this
probability.
                                                         28

        We denote the probability of being eligible as Pr(M 1) and define ani indicator

I(-12) = 1 if the individual is unemployed at time -12 and 0 otherwise. We note


(B.1)                  Pr(M1) = Pr(M,J(-12)1                  ) ÷   Pr(MJ(-12) = 01).


Define the probability of entering unemployment at time -r s


                                               k(-i IX),O),
where    O is an unobserved heterogeneity component. Then


(B.2)                   Pr(1(-12)= 11) = f k(-(T+ 12)1 ,e)S(f I
                                                     0



and
                                                 S


(B.3)             Pr(M,J(-l2) = ii ')           f k(-(T + 12)1      )S(T I .)Pr(M I     )dT
                                                 0



        Consider Pr(MI T,), the probability of an individual meeting the eligibility criterion

given that she has been unemployed for T periods at -12. Define N as the total number



        DTo obtain some intuition on the entry rate, considcr the following exmp!e. Suppose in period 0,
 individuals are assigned to employment and unemployment by a fair coin toss. The probability of entering
 unemployment in period 3 is the employment hazard, A,, times the probability of being employed in period 2,
 P(!,,(2)0). Thus k(3)       A, P(!(2)0)
           = A,[(1-X,)P(!(1) =0) + A.P(1,(l) = 1)]

           = .5A,((1-A,)(A, + 1-A,) +   )(A, + (1-A))l
 The entry rate is a complicated nonlinear function of transition rates in previous periods but these cross-
 equation restrictions are not imposed in cstimaton.
                                                        29

of unemployment spells in [.12,0], including the spell interrupted at -12. Define N as the

total number of employment spells in [-12,0). In theory there could be a very large

number of transitions in this interval, and N and N could be large integers. Even if we

work in discrete time, there are a large number of employment histories over [-12,0]

consistent with the eligibility criteria given T. As a practical matter, one would expect to
see very few transitions for this group. Thus while


(B.4) Pr(MJ 1)               Pr(M,N = J,N          =   it )   + i-o PrM,N j      =   +   1,N   =   it 1, .),
                       i-I

one should obtain an excellent approximation by considering only the first few terms


(B.5)      Pr(MI Ta,) Pr(M,N =            1,   Ne =    0I)    + Pr(M,N =   1,   N = 11)
                    + Pr(M,N = 2,     N=          ii -) +     Pr(M,   N 2, N = 2 1)
                    + Pr(M,N =     3,N          = 21).


        One can calculate each of the probabilities in (B.5). For example,


(B.6)                    Pr(M,N =    1,    N=      0     ,1) = SU(TU + 12

where S(T +       12   ') is the conditional probability of surviving for 12 additional periods

given that the individual has survived up to 7,,. Further, one can impose the requirement

that the individual be unemployed at the baseline by considering only the terms in (B.5)

where N,, > N.                                                              -


     To calculate Pr(M,J,,(-12) =         1),   first calculate (B.5), then substitute it into (B.3) for

each value of T, and integrate over this variable. We write
                                                    30

(B.8)                Pr(M,I(-l2) = 1 1) = Pr(M,I(-12) i Z( ),


where Z(    ) is a vector of explanatory variables dating back to the time the individual left
school. As a practical matter, it would be sensible to follow Nickell (1979) by first,

working in discrete time and second, summing over a limited number of periods in the

past.

        A similar approach can be used to calculate the probability of being eligible for

training for someone employed at -12,


(B.9)                Pr(M,I(-12) =     0   ) = Pr(M,1(-12) = 0        Z( ),O ,°e ,8)

where 8 is the unobserved heterogeneity component for the entry rate into employment.

Using (B.1), the probability of being eligible for training is

                                                                            23
(B.10)                        Pr(M1) = Pr(MIZ( ),

II. Contribution of a Control to a Likelihood
    Based on Pre- and Post-Baseline Data

        There are 48 semi-monthly periods of (retrospective) data available prior to the

baseline. Suppose that the individual is unemployed at period -48 and that this spell

began at       < -48.   (Note that i is negative.) If we denote remaining duration in the
spell by r, the contribution of this spell (conditional on O and O) is



        John Mickelwright suggested that we treat the selection rule as uncmploycd at the baseline, leading
to a simple stock sampling problem (as in Lancaster (1979) and Nickell (1979)). This would simplify matters
considerably at the cost of misspecifying the selection rule.
                                                     31

(B.11)                               k(rI , O)fU(rM-rU-48l
Subsequent employment and unemployment spells will contribute a standard multispell

likelihood along the lines of (3), which we continue to write as L1('                       The

contribution of such a control based on pie- and post-baseline data, and conditioned on

the unobserved heterogeneity, is


(B.12)      L('I•, Oe, O, O, Oth)

              = [Pr(M I    ,O ,O, '0th ,O)]'k(, ,O)f,(r,-                 I   ,O)L,( I

      The contribution of a control who is unemployed at time -48 and remains in this

spell until the end of the sampling frame is (conditional on the unobserved heterogeneity)


(B.13)              L(I , e ,O ,O ,O,) = [Pr(MI •)] k(r )S(52-r I •),
recalling that there are 52 biweekly post-baseline periods.

      The unconditional contribution of a control who is unemployed at -48 is


(B.14)                                =   $ L(I, O,O,Oe,8u)dO(),
where dG() is the density of (O,8jw,Oe,8u).

      The contribution of a control who is in an employment spell at -48 is more

complicated, since we do not know the start date of this employment spell. Suppose this



       Note that since we are not attempting to extrapolate beyond the population of volunteers, we do not
integrate separately over Pr(M 1) to allow for the selection rule to change the distribution of heterogeneity.
                                               32

interrupted employment spell lasts r periods after time -48. The joint density of !(-48) =

0   and r is


(B.15)                        g(I(-48) =   0, r I Z( ), X( ), °kc'   Oe)



                                         =            I ,O1)f(P re48       I   ,Oe)dre




Again denoting contribution of further spells by L1.(i ,Oe,Ou), the contribution for this

control is


(B.16)                L:e =
                              JtPr(MI Y'g(i ,O,Oe)Li(I .,8,O)dG(.)}.


(The case where the individual remains in the employment spell over the sample period is

uninteresting, since she will not be eligible for training.)

       There are two troublesome features of the contribution to the likelihood for a

control based on the pre- and post-sample data. First, calendar subscripts have been

suppressed to avoid notational clutter, but the likelihood will depend on explanatory

variables prior to time -48. In principle one can calculate the earlier values of these

variables, particularly if one goes back only a small number of years to keep computa-

tional demands within reason.

       Second, the entry rate for employment enters the likelihood only through integrals

(or sums in discrete time), which may make identification of its parameters quite difficult.

However, only 11% of the sample are in employment at -48, and only 4% of the sample

are in employment at -12 (for calculating the probability of selection). Thus, as a practical
                                             33

matter, discarding the data on interrupted spells of employment at -48 may not lead to

serious biases in the estimates. (Note that this affects trainees and controls to the same

degree, as opposed to the case of the interrupted unemployment spells at the baseline.)

Second, it may be appropriate to use the approximation


(B.17)                        Pr(M1) Pr(M,i(-12) = lIj)



Ill. Contribution of a Treatment to a Likelihood
     Based on Pre-Baseline and Post-Baseline Data

     The contribution for a treatment in the pre-baseline and post-baseline is derived in

an analogous manner. Essentially one uses an expression such as (B.12) to describe the

contribution (conditional on the heterogeneity) of her employment history up to the

baseline. Multiply this expression times her contribution to the post-baseline data (i.e.,

equation (3) times equation (10)), and then integrate out the heterogeneity from this

overall expression.



IV. The Contribution of Time Remaining in a
     Spell Interrupted at the Baseline for a Control

     First, we consider the case where there is no eligibility requirement for a control, and

then we simply observe a control in an unemployment spell in progress at the baseline. In

this case, the density of time spent in the spell after the baseline is given by


(B.18)                g(r I         = Sku(Tu I .,6)f(r +rj
                                               34
(Recall that we caxmot condition on the start date of the spell as this will contaminate the

random assignment.) However, we must also take into account the fact that volunteers

must satisfy the eligibility requirements, which will in turn affect the distribution of spells

in progress at the baseline. Thus we have (conditional on the heterogeneity)


(B.19)                        h(r,M,O,O,O,O) =          _______




where g(r,   M1) is the density of the joint event that an individual is eligible to
participate in the program and then spends r periods after the baseline in the interrupted

spell. Thus the controls' contribution to the likelihood based on multiplying (3) by (B.19)

and integrating out the unobserved heterogeneity is essentially as complicated as that

based on the pre-baseline data (B.14).
                         ACKNOWLEDGEMENT


We are grateful to John Abowd, David Card, Christopher Flinn,
James Heckman, Joseph Hotz, Lawrence Katz, George Jakubson, Tony
Lancaster, Angelo Melino, Robert Moffitt, Kevin M. Murphy, Thomas
Mroz, Geert Ridder, Robert Topel and James Walker for very
helpful discussions. Seminar participants at British Columbia,
Chicago, Georgetown, Michigan, Northwestern, Pittsburgh, Stony
Brook, Toronto, and Yale made useful suggestions. William
Anderson, Lee Bailey, Susan Skeath, and especially Tan Wang
provided excellent research assistance. The Social Science and
Humanities Research Council of Canada, the Industrial Relations
Section at Princeton University, and the Graduate School of
Business at the University of Chicago generously supported this
work. We emphasize that we alone are responsible for any errors.
                                           35
                                     REFERENCES


Ashenfelter, Orley (1978). "Estimating the Effect of Training Programs on Earnings,"
    Review of Economics and Statistics 60, 47-57.

Ashenfelter, Orley, and Card, David (1985). "Using the Longitudinal Structure of
    Earnings to Estimate the Effect of Training Programs." Review of Economics and
    StatLstics 67 (4), 648-660.

Barnow, Burt (1987). "The Impact of CETA Programs on Earnings: A Review of the
     Literature," Journal of Human Resources 22 (2), 157-193.

Bassi, Lauri (1983). "me Effect of CETA on the Post-Program Earnings of Participants,"
    Journal of Human Resources 18 (Fall): 539-56.

Bell, Steven, Enns, J., and Orr, Larry (1987). "The Effects of Job Training and
      Employment on the Earnings and Public Benefits of AFDC Recipients: The AFDC
      Homemaker-Home Health Aid Demonstrations. Final Report. Washington., D.C.:
      Abt Associates.

Card, David, and Sullivan, Daniel (1988). "Measuring the Effect of CETA Participation
     on Movements in and out of Employment," Econometrica 56, 497-530.
Couch, Kenneth (1991). "Long-Term Earnings Effects of the National Supported Work
    Experiment: Evidence for the Youth and AFDC Target Groups." University of
    Wisconsin.

Flinn, Christopher J., and Heckman James J. (1982). "Models for the Analysis of Labor
     Force Dynamics," in Advances in Econometrics, vol. 1, JAI Press, 35-95.

Friedlander, Daniel (1988). "Subgrouip Impact and Performance Indicators for Selected
     Welfare Employment Programs." New York: MDRC.

Gritz,, Mark (1988). "The Impact of Training on the Frequency and Duration of
     Employment." Mimeographed. University of Washington,

Ham, John. and LaLonde, Robert J. (1990). "Using Social Experiments to Estimate the
   Effect of Training on Transition Rates," in J. Hartog, G. Ridder, and J. Theeuwes
   (eds.), Panel Data and Labor Market Studies. North-Holland: Elsevier Science
   Publications.

Heckman, James J. (1979). "Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error,"
     Econometrica 47, 153-61.
                                            36

Heckman, James J., and Singer, Burton (1984a). "Econometric Duration Analysis,"
    Journal of Econo,netrics 24, 63-132.

Heckman, James J., and Singer, Burton (1984b). "A Method for Minimizing the Impact
    of Distributional Assumptions in Econometric Models for Duration Data,"
    Econometrica 47, 247-283.

Hollister, R., Kemper, P., and Maynard, R., eds. (1984). The National Supported Work
     Demonstration. (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press).

Lancaster, Tony (1979). "Econometric Methods for Duration of Unemployment,"
    Econometrica, 47, 939-956.

       (1990). The Econometric Analysis of Transition Data, Cambridge: Cambridge
     University Press.

Lancaster, Tony, and Nickell, Stephen (1980). "The Analysis of Re-Employment
    Probabilities for the Unemployed," Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A,
     143, 141-165.

Meyer, Bruce (1989), "Semi-parametric Estimation of Hazard Models," unpublished
    mimeo, Northwestern University.

Nickell, Stephen (1979). "Estimating the Probability of Leaving Unemployment,"
     Econometrica, 47, 1249-66.

Ridder, Geert (1986). "An Event History Approach to the Evaluation of Training,
    Recruitment, and Employment Programs," Journal of Applied Econometrics, 1.

Ridder, Geert, and Verbakel, Wim (1984). "On the Estimation of the Proportional
    Hazards Model in the Presence of Unobserved Heterogeneity," Report 17/84,
    Faculty of Actuarial Science and Econometrics, University of Amsterdam.

Wolthagen, C., and Goldman, Barbara (1983). "Job Search Strategies: Lessons from the
    Louisville WIN Laboratory." New York: MDRC.
                                            TABLE I

                              EMPIRICAL SURVIVOR FUNCTIONS

                          [Proportion Remaining Employed or Unemployedj


                    Employment                                      Unemployment
                                                                     Controls:        Controls:
Months       Treatments         Controls     I       Treatments      All SOdS         Fresh Spells

3/2              0.968             0.929     I          0.955              0.949           0.929
                 (.013)            (.018)    I           (.013)            (.011)          (.023)

                 0.929             0.848     1          0.910               0.914          0.895
                 (.019)            (.026)    I          (.018)              (.015)         (.028)

2                0.839             0.761     1           0.864              0.843          0.791
                 (.027)            (.030)    I           (.021)             (.019)         (.039)

3                0.787             0.687     I           0.817              0.807          0.756
                 (.031)            (.033)    I           (.024)             (.021)         (.039)

4                0.733             0.648         I       0.778              0.781          0.728
                 (.013)            (.018)        I       (.013)             (.011)          (.023)

5                0.670             0.603         I       0.746              0.756          0.672
                 (.013)            (.018)        I       (.013)             (.011)         (.023)

6                0.650             0.573         I       0.730              0.725          0.613
                 (.013)            (.018)        I       (.013)             (.011)         (.023)



     Notes.—-The calculations in Column 4 include spells in progress at the baseline. (In the spells
in progress, duration is measured from the baseline.) Those in Column 5 use only unemployment
spells that begin after the baseline. The standard error calculations account for "right censoring"
of the data.
                                            TABLE 2

                           INDIVIDUAL AND SPELL CHARACTERISTICS

                   Employment                                  Unemployment
                                                                   Controls:           Controls:
Variable       Treatments       Controls            Treatments    All Spells          Fresh Spells

                                  Panel A: Spell Characteristics
All Spells:
   Mean          14.98            15.67                21.18              28.63          15.75
   Duration      (0.79)           (1.04)               (0.86)             (1.05)          (1.26)
   Number
   of Spells      185             198                   269                374             126

Completed Spells:
  Mean            8.61             9.75                11.09              15.57            9.87
  Duration      (0.79)            (1.04)               (0.86)              (1.05)         (1.26)
   Number
   of Spells      81                121                 107                185            61

                                Panel B: Individual Characteristics

Age              33.77            34.73                33.21              34.80          34.36
                  (.60)            (.63)                 (.51)              (.44)          (.72)
Schooling        10.42            10.55                10.18               10.11          10.50
                   (.14)           (.17)                 (.13)              (.13)          (.20)
H.S. Dropout       .62              .60                   .71                .71            .63
                  (.04)            (.04)                (.03)               (.03)          (.05)
Kids under 18     2.29             2.41                 2.26                2.30           2.40
                  (.10)            (.12)                (.09)               (.08)          (.15)
Never Married      .38              .30                  .39                 .33            .34
                  (.04)            (.04)                (.03)               (.03)          (.05)
Proportion Black .83                .78                  .86                 .83            .82
                  (.03)            (.04)                (.02)               (.02)          (.04)
Prior Experience 2.46              4.09                 2.82                2.83           5.04
                  (.63)            (.65)                (.40)               (.40)          (.87)
Proportion         .17              .13                  .15                 .18            .12
Never Employed (.03)               (.03)                 (.02)              (.02)          (.03)
Number
of Women         149                138                   222                               92


     Notes.--Mean durations are the mean number of semi-monthly periods. All employment
spells and trainees' unemployment spells begin after the baseline. The controls' spells in column 4
include both unemployment spells that are in progress at the baseline and that begin after the
baseline. Duration of those spells in progress at the baseline is measured as semi-monthly periods
from the baseline. The statistics in column 5 include only spells that begin after the baseline. The
numbers in parentheses are the standard errors. Prior experience is number of semi-monthly
periods worked in the two years preceding the baseline.
                                           TABLE 3

                    ESTIMATED TRAINING EFFECTS USING FRESH SPELLS


                               Emolovment                Unemployment

                                                                        Fresh and
                                                  Fresh Spells         Interrupted
                                                     Only             SeIls Combined
                                (I)      (2)      (3)       (4)       (5)      (6)


Training   Status            -.394    -.425     -.382    -.374     -.191    -.105
                             (.155)   (.180)    (.166)   (.208)    (.129)   (.156)

Log Duration                  .212     .155     -.453    -.299     -.503    -.353
                             (.246)   (.258)    (.075)   (.1 19)   (.055)   (.082)


Log Duration Squared         -.168    -.113
                             (.069)    (.085)

Controls for
Unobserved Heterogeneity       No        Yes      No       Yes       No       Yes

Log Likelihood               —852.7    -851.6 -768.1     -765.5    -1416.4 -1411.9

Notes: All models include controls for age, years of schooling, a woman's high-school dropout
status, number of children under 18, marital status, race, and SMSA establishment employment
and unemployment insurance recipients. The standard errors are in parentheses.
                                                     TABLE 4
                         ESTIMATES OF THE TRAINING EFFECT BASED ON
                          ALTERNATIVE HETEROGENEITY ASSUMPTIONS
                                 Fresh Unemployment              Employment
                                      Hazard                       Hazard

                            (l)*           (2)b        (3)C       (4)b      (5)C


Training                   -0.0800       -0.0103      -0.2090    -0.2809   -0.4470
Status                     (0.2588)      (0.1948)     (0.2000)   (0.1828) (0.1680)
Log Likelihoodd            -1404.6       -2251.7      -3000.3    -2251.7   -3000.3
Log Likelihoodd
No Heterogeneity           -1407.9       -2260.7      -3005.7    -2260.7   -3005.7

         'Assuming only 6, and e, are correlated.
         bAssuming 6,, 8,, and   8 are correlated.
         Assuming all heterogeneity terms are correlated.
       din column (I) the log likelihood refers to the contribution of the fresh and interrupted
unemployment spells. In columns (2) and (4) it refers to the contribution from employment spells as
well as that from the interrupted and fresh unemployment spells. In columns (3) and (5) the log
likelihood refers to the contribution of all spells (i.e., including the training data).
                                            TABLE A
                   CHARACTERISTICS OF TREATMENTS AND CONTROLS

                                          Treatments                  Controls

Age                                          33.67                      34.98
                                              (.47)                      (.45)
Schooling                                    10.23                      10.18
                                              (.12)                      (.13)
H.S. Dropout                                   .70                        .71
                                              (.03)                      (.03)
Number of Kids                                2.25                       2.31
                                              (.08)                      (.08)
Never Married                                  .38                        .33
                                              (.02)                      (.03)
Black                                          .85                        .83
                                              (.02)                      (.02)
Prior Experienc&                              2.59                       2.91
                                              (.34)                      (.41)
Never Employed2                                .16                        .18
                                              (.02)                      (.02)
Number of Women                                275                        266


       'Prior experience is the number of semi-monthly periods of employment in the two years prior
to the baseline.
     'Never employed is a dummy variable indicating that the woman has not had a regular job since
she was 16 years old.
                                                           TABLE B

                              ESTIMATES OF EMPLOYMENT AND UNEMPLOYMENTHAZARD FUNCFIONS

                                              A: Full Set of Estimates for Table 3

                    Employment Spells         Fresh UncmolovmentSpells       All UnemDlovmcnt SDcIIs

                       (1)          (2)            (3)             (4)                (5)         (6)

                     -394          •.425          -.382          -374                 -191       -.105
Training status
                     (.155)        (.180)         (.166)         (.208)               (.129)    (.156)
                     -.013         -.016          -.009           .009                -.016      -.018
Age
                     (.011)        (.013)         (.012)         (.015)               (.009)    (.011)
                      .049          .056           .125            .149                .047       .169
Schooling
                     (.051)        (.062)         (.063)          (.078)              (.045)    (.054)
ItS. Dropout          .398          .472          -.306           -.427               -335       -.437
                     (.199)        (.238)         (.219)          (.277)              (.163)     (.200)
Kids   under 18       .010          .009          -.037           -.024                .030       .052
                     (.055)        (.066)         (.060)          (.073)              (.045)     (.053)
Never Married         .075          .028          -.148           -.182               -.243      -284
                     (.167)        (.205)         (.182)          (.238)              (.134)     (.167)
Black                 .060          .065          -.391           -.458               -386       -.469
                     (.191)        (.225)         (.210)          (.275)              (.153)    (.191)
Area Employment      1.78           .110          4.60           3.36                   .531    1.15
                    (3.78)        (4.18)         (4.24)         (4.83)               (3.10)     (338)
Area Unemployment     .651          .669          -.117          -.135               -1.26      -1.19
                     (.431)         (.447)        (.511)          (331                (368)      (.385)
                      .212           .155         -.453           -.299               -303       -353
Log Duration
                     (.246)         (.258)        (.075)          (.119)              (.055)     (.082)
Log Duration2         -.168         -.113
                     (.069)         (.845)
                    -3.15          -2.78         -2.91           -2.21               -3.16      -2.34
e1
                     (.817)       (1.03)          (.946)        (1.36)                (.694)    (.885)
                                  -4.12                          -3.81                          -3.94
02
                                  (1.19)                        (1.36)                          (.862)
                                    .181                         1.24                           1.68

                                  (1.20)                        (1.50)                          (.836)
                      852.7         851.6          768.1           765.5               1416.4     1411.9
-Log L
                                                                             TABLE B (cont'd)
                                                                   B: Full Set of Estimates for Table 4
                              Excluding Training                                 Exduding                                                 Including
                           and EmDlovmcnt Soclis                              Training Socils                                          Training Sods
                                 Unemolovment                            Uncmolovment                                                 Uncmnlovment
                                              Fresh                  Interrupted      Fresh        Employment                Interrupted         Fresh Employment
                           Interrupted
                                 (11            (2)                      (3)             (4)           (51                             (6)        (7)      (8)
Varayle                          —             -0.0800                   ---           -0.0103       -0.2809                           —         .209         -.447
Traintng status
                                               (0.2588)                                (0.195)        (.183)                                     (.200)       (.168)
                               -0.0300         -0.0092                 -0.0330         -0.0118       .0.0098                          -.027      -.007        -.016
Age
                               (0.0143)        (0.0144)                (0.0147)        (0.0127)      (0.0122)                         (.014)     (.01.5)      (.012)
                                0.1553          0.1710                  0.1307          0.1621        0.0617                           .168       .146         .020
Years of schooling
                               (0.0764)        (0.0770)                (0.0601)        (0.0663)      (0.0585)                         (.073)     (.084)       (.060)
Kids   under 18                 0.1736         -0.0296                  0.1547           -0.0467         0.0049                        .148      -.039         .019
                               (0.0795)        (0.0737)                (0.0791)          (0.0655)       (0.0620)                      (.071)     (.067)       (.060)
Black                          -0.5170         -0.4120                 -0.4412           -0.3485         0.0769                       •.478      -.386         .001
                               (0.2638)        (0.2946)                (0.2673)          (0.2309)       (0.2092)                      (.240)     (.237)       (.205)
Never married                  -0.3240         -0.2193                 -0.3498           -0.2134         0.0695                        •39       -.109         .075
                               (0.2272)        (0.2316)                (0.2307)          (0.2003)        (0.1830)                      (.211)    (.222)       (.182)
H.S. dropout                   -0.5503         -0.4520                  -0.5744          -0.2419         0.4664                        -.472     -.326         .292
                               (0.2706)        (0.2822)                (0.2578)          (0.2343)        (0.2230)                      (.253)    (.225)       (.243)
                               .4.2014          3.1148                  -2.8183           2.5632         -0.6375                      -4.168     4.697        2.205
L.ocal employment
                               (5.4625)        (5.1231)                (5.3823)          (4.4081)        (3.9943)                     (5.308)   (4.393)      (3.844)
                               -2.5277         .0.1334                  -2.5591          -0.0893         0.6708                       -2.450     -.150          .626
Local unemployment
                               (0.5771)        (0.5355)                 (03738)          (03261)         (0.4440)                      (371)     (.516)        (.438)
                               -0.4746         -0.2779                  -0.5002          -03459          0.1044                        -311       -396          .184
Log duration
                               (0.1277)        (0.1306)                (0.1114)          (0.0845)       (0.2506)                       (.114)    (.093)        (.246)
                                                                         --•               ---           .0.0998                        ---       ---          -.150
Log duration squared                                                                                                                                           (.069)
                                                                                                        (0.0751)
                               -0.0282                                  -0.0605                                                        -.037
                               (0.0135)                                (0.0181)                                                        (.013)
                               -0.0451                                  -0.0335                                                        -.026
02
                               (0.0163)                                (0.0096)                                                        (.092)
                               -1.0028                                  -0.5257                                                       2.033

                               (1.2078)                                (0.3694)                                                       (1.771)
                                                1.0000                  0.6153            1.000           0.9911                        .889     1.000          .778
LOADING                         0.7433
                                                                       (0.2772)                          (03749)                       (.449)                  (.520)
                               (0.3795)
                           -1404.6                                  -2251.7                                                     30003
Log L
Log L,                                                                                                                          3005.7
No hclerocncity            -1407,9                                  -2260.5
                                                                                                                  j   is dclincd as       ?/(1 +e). The "loading"   1.ctorc
          NOTES.--Local employment and unemployment arc defined as the log deviations from site means. The term
                                —          — U is normalized to equal 1.
arc defined as) — r, u, c where   JO1 and)
                               Figure    1




          EMPLOYMENT RATES FOR NSW WOMEN
                   Perrod 49    I. the       Bae.IIn.
0.9                                                           0.9


0.3                                                           0.3


0.7                                                           0.7•

0.6                                                           0.6


0.5                                                           0.5

0.4                                                           0.4

0.3                                                           0.3


0.2                                                           0.2


0.1                                                           0.1


 0                                                             0
      1                                                 100

                    Sm(—monthly P.rfode
                                      FIGURE 2
                   TREATMENTS MID CONTROLS L.BOR MARKET HISTORIES


                                 Figure 2A: Controls
Employment                                                           (t1)
Unemployment         ____________________                            ___________(tb)
Semi—    I                                                   I

Monthly —48                                 0               24                   52
Periods          pre—baseline     baseline




                                Figure 28: Treatments

Training                                                    (t1)
Employment _________ (t)                                                         (t,)
Unemployment                                                            (ta)
Semi—        I                              I                    I
Monthly    —48                              0                24                   52
Periods          pre—baseline     baseline       training




Notes: Time is measured in semi—monthly periods. Eligible women volunteer and
are randomly assigned into the treatment or control group at the baseline ——
time 0.    The treatment group members leave their spell of unemployment and
receive training for approximately 1 year (24 periods) while the controls
continue in their spell of unemployment.
