                   NEER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




               SOCIAL SECURITY AND MEDICARE POLICY
         FROM THE PERSPECTIVE OP GENERATIONAL ACCOUNTING




                        Alan C. Auerbach

                        Jagadeesh Gokhale
                      Laurence C. Kotlikoff




                     Working Paper No. 3915




              NATIONAL BUREAU OP ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          November 1991




This paper has been prepared for the annual flEER conference on
Tax Policy and the Economy, Washington DC, November 1991.
Sections of this paper draw on Auerbach, Gokhale, and Kotlikoff
(1991, 1992) and Kotlikoff (1992) . This paper is part of NEER's
rasearch programs in Aging and Taxation. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                              NEER Working Paper I3915
                                              November 1991

                     SOCIAL SECURITY AND MEDICARE POLICY
               FROM THE PERSPECTIVE OF GENERATIONAL ACCOUNTING

                                  ABS TRACT


     Our previous study (Auerbaoh, Gokhale and Kotlikoff 1991)
introduced the concept of generational accounting, a method of
determining how the burden of fiscal policy falls on different
generations. it found that fiscal policy in the U.S. is out of
balance, in terms of projected generational burdens. This means     that
either current generations will bear a larger share (than we project
under current law) of the burden of the government's spending or that
future generations will have to pay, on average, at leaat 21 percent
more, on a growth-adjusted basis, than will those generations who have
juat been born.
     These conclusions were based on relatively optimistic assumptions
about the path of social security sod Medicare policies, namely that
the accumulation of a social security trust fund would continue and
that Medicsre costs would not rise as a share of QP. In this paper,
we simulate the effects of realistic alternative paths for soCiel
security and Medicare. Our results suggest that such alternative
policies could greatly increase the imbalance in generational policy,
making not only future generations pay significantly more, but current
young Americans as well. For example, continued expansion of Medicare
in this decade alone could double the 21 percent imbalance figure if
the bill for this Medicare growth is shifted primarily to future
generations.

Alan Zr. Auerbach                             Jagadeesh Gokhale
Department of Economics                       Federal Reserve Board
university of Pennsylvania                     of Cleveland
3718 Locust Walk                              Cleveland, Ohio 44101
Philadelphia, PA 19104—6297
and NBER
Laurence Zr. Kotlikoff
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
                                       —1—




I. introduction

        Recent years have witnessed a growing skepticism about the use of rhe

fiscal deficit to gauge the stance of economic policy. Many economists as

well as noneconomists are questioning whether a single number, that relates

primarily to the government's current nash flow is the kind of measure needed

to understand the longer tens effects of fiscal policy on saving, investment,

end growth. They also ask whether the deficit can tell us how we are treating

different generations, both those currently alive and those yet to come.

Doubts about the deficit have been accentuated by the aging of the U.S.

population, with its ettandaot increase in the number of retireea dependent on

workers for pay—as—you—go spending and transfer programs.

        in recognition of these concerns about the demographic transition, the

U.S. federal government began, in 1983, to accumulate a large social security

trust fund to help finance the "baby boom" generation's social security

benefits. But this break with short—term pay—as—you—go financing also raised

new questions about uaing the unified federal deficit, which includes social

security, as a measure of fiacal policy. If funds for the future need to be

accumulated by the social security system, then shouldn't such accumulations

be excluded from the overall deficit measure? The federal government's

response, as expressed in the 1990 budget agreement, has been to exclude

social security from future calculations of the deficit. However, this has

not prevented public discuasion of the deficit inclusive of social security.

Nor has it put to rest the concern that government spending is now larger and

will continue to be larger and that taxes are now smaller and will continue to

be smaller than they would In the absence of the social security surpluses,

ic, ,   it has not put to rest the concern that the federal government is
"using" the large pay—as—you—go social security surpluses to offset large on—

budget deficits.

      This is but one example of the ambiguity 0f the deficit and the

deficiency of any single deficit measure as a gauge of the fiscal burden faced

by different generations. While one response to this deficiency has been to

construct different deficits for different porpoaes, such constructs are

clearly ad hoc in nature and require cootinuai 'refinements" to prevent

perverse results. For example, if the social security system is excluded from

the budget for deficit purposes, how does one deal with changes in income

taxes that are induced by changes in social security taxes: should such

changes in off—budget taxes he permitted to alter the on—budget deficit?

      The key economic question associated with fiscal deficits is: Which

generation will pay for what the government spends. However, no version of

the government's budget deficit provides this information. As we discuss

below, an increase in the deficit does not necessarily signal a shift in the

fiscal burden to future generations. Moreover, policies which dramatically

alter the intergenerational distribution of fiscal burdens may do so without

inducing any change whatsoever in the measured deficit.

      In an earlier paper (Auerbsch, Gokhale and Kotlikoff, hereafter ACK,

1991), we developed an alternative to the deficit —   generational   accounting —

and showed how this new approach could be used to ossess fiscal policy and its

distributional impact with respect to different generationa. Our previous

analysis stressed that generational accounts are quite informative shoot the

effects of changes in tax and transfer policies on the burdens of different

generations. This paper uses generational accounting to analyze potential

changes in the federal government's most important transfer program, the Old

Age Survivors, Disability and Health Insurance (OASDHI), which includes the
old—age Social Security pension system end Kedicare. This component of the

federal budget has grown much more tepidly than other components in recent

years. If current trends continue, OASDHI will continue tc grow relative to

the economy due to the increasing share of the elderly in the population and

the rapid increase in real medical costs.

      Before turning to such policy analysis, we briefly review the

generational accounting methodology, which is discussed more fully in AGE

(1991, 1992).



II. The Generational Accounting Approach

      The basic idea behind generational accounting is that generations

currently alive end those yet to be born must pay for the time—path of the

government's expenditures on goods and services less the external resources

the government has to cover these expenditures (its net wealth). This, in

words, is the government's intertesporal budget constraint. The constraint

reminds us of the zero—sum nature of paying for the government's expenditures;

if generations. currently alive pay less, generations yet to come will be

forced to pay sore. It also reminds us that changes in fiscal policy today

are likely to necessitate changes in the future. We express the government's

intertemporal budget constraint in present value, with the initial value of

government liabilities and the present value of future spending hcing equal to

the sum of the present values of each generation's burden. Emphasizing the

prescnt value burdons of different generations, regardless of the year in

which such burdens are isposed, neutralizes the timing problems inherent in

annual deficit measures, and allows us to sunusarize in a conpact form the

likely effects of fiscal policy on individuals through time.
                                      —4—


     The analysis is forward—looking, in that it calculates only the future

fiscal burdens that each generation faces. Because we ate interested in the

issue of generational imbalance in fiscal policy, we treat current and future

generations separately when analyzing a particular fiacal policy path. For

current generations, we calculate the burden under the particular fiscal

scenario   For future generations, we calculate the total preseut value of

payments required to balance the government's intertemporal budget constraint.

One cannot say how this aggregate burden on future generations will be

distributed across these future generations. For purposes of illustrating the

size of the burden likely to be imposed on future generations relative to that

likely to he imposed on current generations, we assume that the burden on each

successive future generation remains fixed as a fraction of the lifetime

income of that generaticn; that is, the absolute fiscal burden of successive

generations grows at the rate of growth of their lifetime incomes, which we

take to be the rate of growth of productivity.

     To calculate the burden faced by a member of an existing generation, vs

first project the net paynents to the government in each future year for a

representative member of that generation (distinguishing males and feitales)

and then take the present value of such payments. Ey net payments we mean all

taxes paid to, less all transfers received from, government at the federal,

state and local levels. Payments include not only direct taxes such as incceis

and property taxes, but also indirect business taxes, corporate taxes and

seignorage. Transfers include Medicare, Medicaid, Food Stamps, Social

Security Benefits, and so on.                                                    .4


     The present value calculation for each representative individual

discounts future payments not only for interest, bur alsn mortality: an

individual's future burden Is reduced by the probability that he or she will
    not be alive when that burden occurs   Given our assumption that members of

    each generation (distinguished only by sex) face the same survival
•

    probabilitiea, multiplying individual payments in each year by the

    generation's projected surviving population for that year provides a measure

    of that generation's payment, the separate components of which are benchmarked

    to aggregates from the bational Income and Product Accounts.

         Once burdens for current generations have been calculated, those faced by

    future generations are estimated as a tesidual, based on the iiscal balance

    requirement and the assumption that the remaining fiscal burden be borne

    proportionally. Policy changes affect the projected net payments faced by

    current ganerationa and, through the fiscal balance requirement, the burden on

    future generations aa well.

         Because the accounts are forward—looking, they don't consider the net

    payments made in the past. The present value of future-net payments, which

    are positive for young and middle—aged existing generations, are negative for

    older generations, who are largely retired and facing lower labor income taxes

    while at the same time receiving social security benefits and Medicare. Thus,

    the level of an existing generation's account does not indicate how well or

    poorly that generation has fared at the hands of the governzseot. We thetefore

    focus on the changes in each generation's account that are induced by

    alternative policies.



    III. Construction of Generational Accounts

        The construction of generational accounts is a two—step process. The

    first step entails projectiog each currently living generation's average taxes

    less transfers in each future year during which at least some members of the

    generation will be alive. The aecnnd step converte these projected average
net tax payments into a present value using an assumed discount rate and

taking into account the probability that the generations' members will be

alive in each of the future years (i.e. actuarial discounting for both

mortality and interest).

     in projecting each currently living generation's taxea and tranafers, we

considor first their taxes and transiers in the base year, in this case, 1989.

The totala of the different taxea and transfers in the base year are those

reported by the National Income and Product Accounts. As described in detail

in ACE (1991), these totals of base year taxes and transfers are distributed

to the different generations according to their ages and sexes based on cross—

section survey data. These data include the Bureau of the Census' Survey cf

Income and Plan Participation and the Bureau of Labor Statistics' Survey of

Consumer Expenditures. The distribution of future taxes and ttanafers by age

and sex is assumed to equal that in the current year with adjustments for

growth and projected changes in policy.

     Since the government already forecasts the totals cf its various taxes

and transfers for many yeats ahead, the sdditional work involved in

generational accounting is primarily in allocating these projected totals by

age and sex. Thus, although there are a few additional elements and the

requisite projections extend further into the iuture, generational accounting

uses mostly the same numbers the government uses only in a different manner.

     The calculations presented here assume a 6.00 percent real tate of

discount and a productivity growth rate of .75 percent. The tate of

productivity growth is based on recent 15.5. experience. The discount rate is

higher than the rate of return on government obligations, reflecting the fsct

that future government receipts and expenditures are risky.' The estimates       9



also incorporate the mortality probabilities embedded in the Social Security
                                         —7—


Administration's projections of the US, population by age and sex. As

discussed in ACK (1991). the absolute value of the generational accounts is

sensitive to the choice of rates of discount and growth as well as rates of

birth and death. But for many of the questions of interest, such as the

fiscal burden being imposed on future generations relative to that being

shouldered by current generations, the results are quite robust to reasonable

departures from baseline assumptions.

     As aentioned, inferring the fiscal burden on future generations requires

not only knowing the sum   total   of generational accounts of current

generations, but also the projected present value of the government's

expenditures on goods and services as well as the government's initial net

wealth position. As described in ACK (1991), the goverozaent'a net wealth is

estimated in e manner consiacent with the government sector deficit reported

in the National Income Accounts. The present value of government expenditures

is calculated by projecting current expenditures into the future taking into

account those expenditure elements which are sensitive to rhe demographic

structure. Fot example, our projections take into account the decline in per

capita spending on education that is likely to arise as the school—age

population declines relative to the total population.

     Our baseline geoerational accounts reflect policy as of 1989 (prior to

the 1990 budget agreement). They show that a newborn male faced a net payment

to the government of $73,700, reflecting present values of $85,300 of tax

payments and $11,600 of transfers received. For females. the cueparable

figures are $36,400 in net present value, comprising $54700 in taxes and

$18,300 in transfers.      The lower taxes for females priaarily   reflect   their

lower rate of labor force participation, and hence lower income and payroll

taxes. The higher transfers reflect both greater female longevity and the
concentration of female—headed households in circumstances of poverty.

Together, Medicare and social security account for nearly half of all

transfers received by males, and over a third of those received by females.

     Based on our estimates of initial government wealth and the projections

of the effects -of this baseline fiscal policy on existing generations, we find

that, as of 1989, generational policy wes out of balance in the sense that the

fiscal borden on future generations was 21 percent larger than that on 1989

male and female newborns, who are assumed to fall under the current policy

regime. As the net lifetime payments newborns are projected to make represent

almost 40 percent of their lifetime incomes, this imbalance in generational

policy translates into an added burden of nearly one tenth of the income of

members of future genererions.

     An alternative way of measuring how far the current regime is out of

generational balance is the change in any particular fiscal instrument that

would be necessary to bring this 21 percent excess to zero —   to    make the

"new" current policy sustainable without further adjuatment. Our calculations

suggest that an ieunediare and permanent increase in the average income tax

rate of 5.3 percent (just under 1 percentage point) would suffice.      If,

instead, payroll taxes wore used to equalize the burden, they'd have to rise

by 7.8 percent, or about i percentage point. Alternatively, a rise in sales

taxes of 10,2 percent (just over 1 percentage point) or a 14.3 percent rise

(nearly 4 percentage points) in capital income taxes would be required.

While any of these fiscal inatrunents (or many others) could be used to

provide intergenerational balance, each policy change would lead to a

different burden on currenr sod future generations. The most favorable to che

young end future generations are sales taxes, more ot which would be paid by

older individuals. At the other extrcmc, not surprisingly, are payroll taxes.
                                        —9—


Hence, generational balance iay be achieved with a range of lapacts on

particular generations



IV. Generational Accounting and Deficits

      The usefulness of generational accounting is immediately clear when one

compares the effects of specific fiscal polices on deficits and generational

accounts. Policies that change the pattern of generational burdens need not

affect the deficit, while other policies say change the deficit without

affecting the pattern of generational burdens. This is illustrated by Table 1

(reprinted from AGK 1992), which present simulations of the effects of four

different, but not unusual, policies.

      The first of these policies is a five—year, 20 percent reduction in the

average federal income tax rate, with the tax rate increased above its initial

value after five years to maintain s constant dcbt—to—GNP ratio. This policy

would raise the deficit and shift the fiscal burden to young and future

generations —   not   a surprising result. However, the second policy — an

immediate and permanent 20 percent increase in social security retirement sod

disability benefits financed on a pay—as—you—go basis by increases in payroll

taxes — would induce a quite similar shifting of fiscal burdens without any

change in the time path of measured deficits (including or excluding the

social security system). The third policy involves an equal revenue switch in

tax structure —   a   perosnent 30 percent cut in payroll taxes financed by

increased sales taxes — which, again, shifts generational burdens without

changing the deficit.

      The final policy illustrated in Table 1 involves the elimination of the

discount that presontly exists in the price of existing assets as a result of

investment incentives. Removing this distount (as would be sccosiplished by
                                         —10-.



extending the tax treatment of new assets to existing assets) is essentially a

windfall grant tc owners of existing capital. We assume in rho simulation

that this grant is paid for by a pernanent increase in capital income tax

rates, a policy shift that transfers resources from the young (who, on

average, have not yet accumulated significant wealth) to the old (who, on

average, have).

      As the simulations in this section indicate, the generational effects of

a variety of realistic policies can not be determined by looking at deficits.

We turn now io an exasiinstion of several social security and Medicare policies

which may actually be adopted through time.



V. The Generational Impacts of Social Poiiciea

A. Social Security's GASDI Program

     We first consider policies to alter the structure of the CASDI (non

Medicare) portion of the social security system. As a result of the increases

in payroll taxes mandated by the l93 changes. this program has in recent

years been running large cash flow surpluses of roughly 100 billion dollars

per year. While these sccuaulstions were planned to help offset benefit

payments in the decades to come, their existence, combined with historically

high payroll tax rates, has lent force to arguments for reducing payroll

taxes. However, cutting payroll taxes is not, in itself, a full description

of a fiscal policy       payroll tsx cuts alone would cause a violation of the

government's fiscal balance requirement. A complete policy specification also

requires a compensating change either in net gcvernment receipts or spending

(or both) .   This   sertion presents siculaticus ior foot such policies and their

effects on the fiscal burdens of different gonoratinns.
                                        —l1—


     The first of the four polities considered is a proposal to cut the social

security payroll tax rate over the next three decades and to increase the tax

rate thereafter. The   second   policy involves the same reduction in payroll

taxes (through the year 2020) as in the first simulation, but rather than

raise tax rates after 2020, this policy reduces social security benefits

beginning in that year by the same amount that payroll taxes would otherwise

have increased, The third policy entails the indirect dissipation of the

social eecurity trust fund though an increase in government spending over the

next three decades equal, on an annual basis, to the social security surplus.

Over these decades funds to pay for the increased government spending are

"harrowed' so that in 2020 the additional accumulated federal debt is equal in

megnitude to the social security trust fund. The fourth policy is an

immediate and permanent switch from psyroll tax finance to income tax finance

of social security.

     The first column of Table 2 indicates what reducing and then increasing

payroll taxes will do to the burdens placed on different generations. The

policy provides windfalls to Americans currently alive, with the exception of

the very old and the very young. Those currently aged 30 to 40 receive the

largest windfalls, roughly $3,000 for males and $1,500 for females, These

gsina tome at the expense of children currently uoder age 10 as well as future

individuals, if all future Americans are treated uniformly, up to the growth

adjustment, their lifetime net payments will rise by $6,100, in the case of

males and $3,000, in the case of females.

      Enactment of a policy that promises to raise future taxes to pay for

current tax cuts doesn't ensure that such taxes will actually be raised. The

government might use an alternative method to restore fiscal balance. For

example, the necessary increase in net payments eight take the form of a cut
                                          —1 2—



it-i social security benefits. Such a policy, depicted in the second column of

Table 2, reduces by about one third for males and by about two thirds for

females the gains enjoyed under the initial policy. Feuiales lose relstively

more because their share of social security benefits is larger than is their

share of payroll tax payments.

        The   third column in Table 2   shows what hsppeos if the federal goverronent

indirectly    dissipates   the social security surplus by raising its spending

beyond the amount projected in the haseline generational eccouots. In the

simulation, the government continues to accumulate its social security trust

fund, but it also borrows to pay for additional spending with the annual

amount of the borrcwing equal in size to the snnual social security surplus.

We assume this process of deficit—financed increased spending continues

through 2020, and that after 2020 the government taises income taxes to pay

interest less an adjustment for growth on the additional accumulated official

debt.

        This policy has quite different effects from those in the previous

simulations, since, unlike policies that do not change direct government

spending, increases in government spending nay eventuate in an increase the

ansi of all generational accounts, Mere, this added burden is borne by all

generations who will be alive to service the extra debt, with the greatest

burden on those currently young and those yet to be born. Mow this translates

into the net impact on each generation depends on the size and distribution of

the benefits of the added spending. Certainly if the benefits are spread over

only those currently alive, the unborn will lose,

        the final siauletinn in Table 2 shows the effects of a change in the

method of financing social security benefits. Over the years some have argued

that the connection between payroll taxes and 04301 benefits is sufficiently
                                     —13—



weak that there is little reason to rely on the payroll tax as a source of

finance. The policy change considered here would replace the payroll tax with

the income tax as the method of fiesnce, immediately and     perLilanencly. While
such a change has been advocated for a variety of reasons, including a desire

to use a more progressive source of revenue, our simulation considers only the

generational effects of the switch. We find that those under forty stand to

win, and those over forty stand to lose, because income     raxes   are levied on

incoee from assets as well as income from labor, and older individuals receive

a bigger share of asset income than labor incoee.

      The generational implications of using general revenue finance to pay

for social security are spelled out in the last column of Table 5. On

average. 60—year—old males and females would be forced to    pay $9,600 and
$5,600 more, respectively. Forty year—old males and females would suffer

respective losses of $4,400 end $1,300. In contrast, asles and females who

are now sge 10 would benefit by more than $3.000 each. The policy would also

represent more than a $2,000 lifetime net payment break to future generations.

     In sumleary. the results in this table show that one cannot simply analyze

the effects of a cut in payroll taxes —   it is necessary to specify what
replaces these taxes. The simulations suggest four possible routes: increased

payroll taxes in the future, reduced benefits in the future, reductions in

government spending, and replacement with income taxes. Each lies its own

effects on the generational fiscal burden.



B. l4edieare Policy

      Many observers have worried about the rising level of hoalth care costs

in the United States, which spends a much larger fraction of UN? on health

care than any other OFCD country. After the United States. Canada is the
                                      '-14—



country with the highest per capita health care spending, but the Canadians

spend almost 30 percent less per person. At present, about 12 cents of every

dcllar of U.S. output goes to health care, coopared with S cents in 1960. By

the turn of the century the figure is projected to be 17 cents. And if the

growth of health care is unabated, the figure will reach 37 cents hy the year

2030 (see Darman 1991).

      What explains the rapid growth in real per capita U.S. health

expenditures? Since 1960 slightly over half of the growth simply reflects

expanded use of health care services and facilities. Another third of the

growth is due to the price of medical care rising relative to the prices of

cther goods and services, And the remaining 11 or so percent of health

expenditure growth reflects the aging of the population. This aging of

America will, of course, intensify in the years ahead.

      The growth of health care expenditures hss potentially enormous

implications for government outlays and the well—being oi different

generations. Consider just rho federal government expenditure's on Medicaro.

Those payments currently ccnstiture 7 percent of Ictal federal outlays.

According to the Office of Management and Budget, Medicare is projected to

exceed 30 percent of the federal budget by 2025. To support Medicare at its

current levels alone, either the federal budget would have to grow iar beyond

its current level of about 20 percent of CNP or the rest of the budget would

have to decline by more than 20 percent in real cores.

      If Medicare's growth is not curtailed, how will its additional costs be

financed? Civen its cash—flow accounting, Medicare, like CASDI, will be

reporting cash—flow surpluses over stoat of this decade as the 1-13 (hemlth

insurance) component of payroll taxes grows. But by the end of the decade the

higher payroll tax receipts will fall short of rho increased Medicare
                                        —1 5—




spending,    leading, in abort order, to the exhaustion of the Medicare Truat

Fund.

         If and when the HI trust fund is dissipated, the government cay raise

payroll taxea, or may aimply "bortow" from the GASI (Old Age Survivor

Insurance) and DI (Disability Insurance) Social Security trust funds.

Incerfund social security borrowing has occurred in the paat, and would delay

the -eventual need to raiae payroll taxes, possibly until the burden of these

higher taxes fell primarily on generations not yet born, According to

Medicare's actuaries, the HI payroll tax may have to rise by anywhere from 6

to 16 percentage points. Since the combined employer—employee social security

payroll tax is currently just over 15 percent, the untnhihited growth of

Medicare expenditures could eventually require s doubling of social security

taxes,

         The generaiional accounts considered thus far were based on the

assumption <perhaps naive) that medical expenditures will grow no faster than

the rest of the economy      In light of the past growth of Medicare, Table 3

considers two alternative growth rates for Medicare expenditures over the

1990's. In the table Medicare outlays in the 1990's ore assumed to grow at

either a 2 or 4 percent higher rate than the rest of the economy. After the

rorn of the century the Medicare growth rate is assumed to equal the economy-.

wide growth rate. The 2 and 4 percent growth rates bracket the 2.77 rate of

growth of health spending in excess of 091' observed botween 1960 and 1969.

The 4 percent -growth rate is consistent with projections of sc iccresse, over

the decade, from 12 to 17 percent in the share of U.S. hcaith care spending

relative to ON?.

         For each growth rate there are three alternative financing scenarios.

The first is that futute generations pick up the entire bill for this decade's
                                        —16—


projected higher Medicare growth. The second is that the growth in Medicare

over the next decade is ultimately paid for by a reduction in Medicare

benefits starting in the year 2020. The third is that this decade's growth in

Medicare is matched, on an annual basis, with increases in HI payroll taxes.

        The three scenarios have markedly different implications fur both living

end unborn generations. Under the first scenario, the burden is entirely

shifted onto future generations; all living generations benefit froa the

growth in Medicare, because they don't have to pay for it. Depending on the

growth rate assumed, future generations end up paying from 10 to 23 percent

sore than in the base case. If Medicare growth is 4 percent, the absolute

increase in the bill handed cur male descendants is $19,400; it is $9,000 for

our female descendants. These additional burdens raise substantially the

ratio of totai net payments of the unborn to those of newborns. Rather than

paying 21 percent more then newborns, future generations in the 4 percent

growth scenario, end up paying almost 50 percent more than newborne!

         The second scenario given in columns 2 and 5, indicates what happens

if, instead of borrowing from the Social Security Trust Fund, Medicare pays

for its prospective near—term generosity with longer—term (after 2020) benefit

cuts.     In this case, individuals below age 50 lose, because of the net cuts in

Medicare benefits in their retirement. Note also that today's older

individuals experience the same large gains from Medicare growth as in the

previous financing scenario for the simple reason that, by assumption, the

projected Medicate benefit cuts don't begin for 30 years.

        The third financing sechanisie, which involves annual incteases in NI

payroil taxes to pay for the excess Medicare growth is explored in Columns 3

and 6. This scenario hurts so even larger fraction of thoee alive, but has

the smallest effect on members of future generations, whose net payments rise
                                      —17—


by toughly the same proportion as those for individuals age 30 and under. As

 in the previous cases, members of older generations, who have essentially

 retired and ceased paying payroll taxes, enjoy roughly the same gain from the

near—term growth in Medicare.

     Given the persistent growth of health care costs, one night ask how eiuch

more extreme ihese results would be if Medicare spending grew as a share of

GNP not for the next decade but, say, for the next three decades, We repeated

the simulations in table 3 under the assumption that Medicare grows at a rate

2% or 4% faster than GNP until 2020. Not surprisingly, the burden on future

generations grows considerably under these assumptions, hut the extent of this

growth depends on the policy being simulated.   If Medicare costs rise ,st a

rate 2% faster than GNP and benefits ace eventually cut (in 2020), the added

burden on future males would rise from $3,300 to $12.aoo; that on females from

$1,800 to $6,000. At the other extreme, the "worst case" scenario is when

Medicare grows at m 4% faster rate until 2020, end only future geoerations

pay. In this case, the added burden on future males rises from $19,400 to

$62,100; that on females from $9,000 ro $26,200. Given that our baseline

aimulatioos assign future males and females total fiscal burdens of $89,500

and $44,200, respectively, we see that sustained Medicare growth has the

pocenriai.of absorbing a significant share of the government's overall budget,



VI. Conclusion

     We have estimated that America's policy path, based on current law and

the assumption of balanced growth in gevetreeont spending, will place a roughly

21 percent larger growth—adjusted net tax burden on future generations than it

will place on Americans who have recently been horn, Rut ibis estimate is

based on what may be relativoly optimistic assumptions: that the social
                                     —18—


security system's projected cash—flow surpluses will continue to accumulate

and that Medicate spending will imseediately stabilize as a share of ONE'.

Those individuals coming in the future as well aa todays infants and young

children could end up paying considerably more under less uptioistic but

realistic alternative paths for sociai security and Medicare policies.

     Specifying a different path for payroll taxes or Medicare costs is not

enough to describe an alternative fiscal policy: one must also indicate how

the government will compensate for either of these changes in order to

preserve intertesiporal fiscal balance. Though we know some balancing response

must occur, the ultimate path cannot, of course ba known with certainty — we

have considered several alternatives in each case.

     The social security policies we have analyzed include ahort—term payroll

tax cuts financed by long—term payroll tax increases, future benefit cuts, or

general revenue finance, as wall as the dissipation of the iapanding social

sacurity "off—budget" surpluses through increased "on—budget" deficits. Our

simulations for Medicare consider alternative responaes to the continued

growth of Medicare expenditures as a share of ONF. The use of generational

accounting reveals, as deficit accounting cannot, the relative burdens that

these different policy responses place on different generations.
                                     —19—




                                  References



Auerbach, Alan J. , Jagadeesh Gokhale, and Laurence 3. Kotlikoff, 'Generational
     Accounts: A Meaningful Alternative to Deficit Accounting," in David
     Bradford, ad. Tar Policy and the Economy, National Bureau of Economic
     Research, volume 5, 1991, Pp. 55—110.

Auerbach, Alan J. ,Jagadeesh Gokhale, and Laurence J, Kotlikoff, "Generational
     Accounting — A New Approach to Understanding the Effects of Fiscal Policy
     on Saving," forthcoming Scandinavian Journal of Economics 1992.

Bohn, Henning, The Sustainability of Budget Deficits in a Stochastic
     Economy," unpublished working paper, Wharton School, July, 1991.

Darman, Richard, "Introductory Statement: The Problem of Rising Health Costs,"
     testimony presented before the Senate Finance Committee, Executive Office
     of the President, Office of Nsnagement and Budget, April 16, 1991, p.6.

Kotlikoff, Laurence 3., Generational Accounting — Knowing Who Pays, and When,
     for What We Std, New York, N.Y.: The Free Press, forthcoming 1992.
                                        —20—




                                      Table    1


                      Changes in Generational Accounts Arising
                          from Four Hypothetical Policies

                        (present value, thousands   of    dollars)


                            20 Percent           Shifting from       Eliminating
               5 Year     Social Security      Payroll to Sales      Investusent
              Tax Cut    Benefit In.crea       and Excise Taxes      Incentives
 Main
 Ages
    0           1.9            2.7                  1.0                 0.9
   10           3.2            3.9                 —1.3                 1.5
   20           2.2            5.5                 —6,5                 2.3
   30          —0.3            5.2                 —8.8                 2.1
               —2.7            2.4                 —7.5                 0,2
   50          —4.4           —2.7                 —3.9               —2.5
   60          —5.0          —10.2                  0.7               —4.7
   70          —2.6          —11.9                  3.4               —5.0
   80          —1.6           —7.3                  2.8                —4.0
Future
Generations     1.9            3.1                  0.4                 0,2

  Ages
    0           1.0            1.0                  3.5                 0.4
   10           1.7            1.5                  3.2                 0.6
   20           0.7            1.9                  1.5                 0.8
   30          —0.2            0,9                  1.8                 1.2
   40          —1.0           —1.0                  2.4                 0.6
   50          —1.9           —4.5                  3.1                —0.5
   60          —2.1          —10.0                  3,9                —1.8
   70          —1.5          —11.0                  3.9                —2.4
   60          —0.9           —7.5                  2.8                —2.4
Future
Generations     1.0            1.1                  3,8                 0.1
                                         —21—




                                        Table   2

         Changes in Generational Accounts from Four Social Security Policies

                         (present value thousands of dollars)


            Immediate Payroll   Immediate Payroll     Dissipating        Switching
                 Tax Cuts            Tax Cuts             the          from Payroll
               Financed by         Financed by       Social Security     to Income
          Future Tax Increags Benefit Reductions       Trust Fund       Tax Finanne
  Males
  Ages
    0              1.3                  0.3              4.1               —2.4
   10             —0.2                 —0.6              4.0               —3.6
   20             —2.3                 —1.8              2.9               —4.4
   30             —3.4                 —2,2              1.5               —1.0
   40             —3.2                 —2.5              0.6                   4.4
   50             —2.0                 —1.8              0.2                   8.4
   60             —0,7                —0.?                 0                   9.6
   70             —0,1                —0.1                 0                   7.7
   80                0                   0                 0                   4.5
Future
Generations        6.1                 3.8               5.2               —2.5

Females
  Ages
    0              0.6                 0.4               1.9               —2.0
   10             —0.3                —0.1               1,9               —3.1
   20             —1.4                —0.6               1.5               —4.7
   30             —1.7                —0.5               0.9               —2.0
   40             —1.5                —0.6               0.4                1.3
   50             —1.0                —0.5               0.1                4.2
   60             —0.4                —0.4                 0                5.6
   10                0                   0                 0
   so                0                   0                 0                2.2
Future
Generations        3.0                 2.2               2.4               —2.2
                                         —22—




                                        Table       3

              Changes in Generational Accounts from Medicare Policies

                         (present valne thousands of dollars)


                      2 Percent Growth Rate                  4 Percent Gxuwch Rate

            Future    Eventual          Pay—As—           Future    Eventual     Pay—As
          Generations Medicare          You—Go          Generations Medicare     You—Co
             Pay     Benefit Cut        Finance            Rev     Lenef it Cut Finance

 Ages
   0           —0.2            0.1            1.6         —0.5         0.3           3.4
   10          —0.4            0.2            2.1         —0.9         0.5           4.6
   20          —0.6            0.4            2.3         —1.4         0.8           4.9
   30          —1.0            0.7            1.6         —2.2         1.6           3.6
  40           —1.6            0.1            0.4         —3.5         0.1           0.7
   50          —2.1           —1,9        —1.6            —5.9        —4.2       —3.5
   60          —4.2           —4.2        —3.9            —9.2        —9.2       —8.5
   70          —3.6           —3.6        —3.5            —7.7        —7.7       —7.5
   80          —2.0           —2.0        —2.0            —4.3        —4.3       —4.3
Future
Generations     8.9            3.3            2.0          19.4        7.1           4.3

Females
Ages
     0         —0.3            0.2            0.7          —0.7        0.4           1.5
   10          —05             0.3            0.9         —1.2         0,7           1,9
   20          —0.8            0.5            0.7         —1.8         1.1           1.5
   30          —1.3            0.9              0         —2.9         2.0             0
   40          —2.1            0.3        —1.2             —4.7        0.6       —2.6
   50          —3.5           —2.0        —3.0             —7.8       —4,5       —6,6
   60          —5.5           —5.5        —5.3           —11.9       —11,9      —11.6
   70          —4,9           —6.9        —4,9           —10.7       —10.7      —10.6
   80          —2.9           —2.9        —2.9             —6.2       —6.2       —6.2
Future
Generations      4.2           1,6            0,8           9.0        3.8           1.9
                                    -23—




      As we discussed in our 1991 paper the appropriate discount rate to use
depends on the risk characteristics of the flows being discounted. (A similar
point has been made by Bohn 1991). If government receipts and expenditures
were roughly proportional to aggregate fluctuations in income, then thn
private sector discount rate, measured by the real befote—tax rate of return,
would seem the appropriate discount rate to use. We use a somewhat lower rate
to reflect the existence of countercyclical government policy, in principal,
one would also discount separate cosponents of expenditures and net receipts
using different rates.


    2Sec ACK (1992) for further discussion,
