NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES

THE APPOINTMENT-BOOK PROBLEM AND COMMITMENT,
WITH APPLICATIONS TO REFEREEING AND MEDICINE

Daniel

S. Hamermesh

Working Paper No. 3928

National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 1991

Jeff Biddle, George Borjas, Peter Schmidt, Rachel Willis, and
participants at seminars at several universities in Australia,
Italy and the U.S., and at the National Bureau of Economic
Research, offered helpful discussions of the ideas. I am deeply
grateful to the editors and administrative assistants who kept
and provided the records that made most of the empirical work
possible. The data are available from the author on diskette in
a LOTUS work file. This paper is part of NBER's research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3928
December 1991
THE APPOINTMENT-BOOK PROBLEM AND COMMITMENT.
WITH APPLICATIONS TO REFEREEING AND MEDICINE
ABSTRACT

Markets that involve customers waiting for services or goods in

queues whose length they cannot observe are studied. In these markets
suppliers truncate queues that become so long that they jeopardize the

supplier's future relations with the customer. The length of the
queue and the probability of truncation increase with the quality of
the supplier, and this implicitly defines the price that customers are

willing to pay for quality. Queue-jumping or nontruncation can occur
if monetary payments are made or if nonmonetary specific commitments

exist between a customer and a supplier. The predictions apply to any
activity where the queue is unobservable and transactions costs make
contracts or spot pricing uneconomic.

The theory is examined on a random sample of refereeing requests

by seven economics journals. Quality, measured by experience and
citations to the referee's work, lengthens the queue and increases the

probability of truncation. Monetary bribes affect queue discipline in
the expected way; and specific commitments, measured by past
publication in the journal and location at the editor's institution,
greatly affect the truncation rate, but have no impact on the rate of

servicing the queue. The implications for truncation are also
examined on a set of data describing doctors' willingness to accept
new patients, with much the same results as in the sample of referees.
Daniel S. Hamermesh
Department of Economics
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824
and NBER

Who more busy than he that hath least to do? (Thomas
Draxe, 1633)

It's (Toots Shor's restaurant] so busy that nobody goes
there any more. (Attributed to Yogi Berra)

I. Introduction and Motivation

A wide variety of economic activity consists of services
offered by individuals or firms who are unable to ration completely

using prices.

In each case the supplier is approached by a

customer demanding the service at a fixed price that may be below

that which clears the spot market. The purpose of the analysis
here is to examine the incentives facing suppliers, to infer how
differences in their characteristics affect how they treat demand,

and to study how their relations to their customers affect their
behavior.
There has been some study of markets where non—price rationing

of goods by the value of customers' waiting time takes place.
Deacon and Sonstelie (1985) analyzed how customers choose whether

to queue to purchase low—priced gasoline; Lindsay and Feigenbaum
(1984) studied the case of the British National Health Service, and

Nichols et al (1971) examined the demand for publicly—provided
services.

In those cases and numerous others, including waiting

for bank tellers, obtaining a table at a crowded restaurant, etc.,

the market allocates the scarce good or service partly along the

dimension of the value of the time of actual and potential
consumers. Consumers choose whether or not to enter the queue by
comparing their desire for the service to its observable full price

that includes its time cost.

1

In a variety of other markets that have not been studied the

nature of the available information prevents the customer from
estimating the time cost of the service. This gives suppliers the
ability to allocate places in the queue for the service. Moreover,
it offers them a second margin of choice, whether to deny customers

access to the queue, in addition to the choice about the rate of
service that they have when the customer can observe the time cost.

This phenomenon, the appointment—book problem, characterizes
behavior in a fairly broad range of markets. Physicians in private

practice ration their services to potential new customers by
imposing long waits for health examinations.

They may also

truncate the queue by having callers informed that they are not
accepting new patients. Senior attorneys perform work for some new
clients, but because their hourly billing rates are hard to change,

the market cannot ration their scarce time fully.

The time to

completion of a fairly routine legal transaction by a senior
attorney may be much greater than by a junior lawyer. The senior
attorney may also assign the task to a junior colleague or refer
the client elsewhere.
Markets outside professional services also provide examples of

waiting and truncation,

Very high-quality hair-dressers and

barbers schedule appointments with longer lead times than their
less well—known fellows.

Airlines maintain no—charge (to the

caller) telephone lines for making inquiries about reservations or

flights: The inquiry may be served immediately; the caller may be

put on hold and told to wait for the next available agent; or a
2

busy signal may be heard.1 This last response is equivalent to
truncation from the queue.
The economic questions of interest in this phenomenon are what

determine differences among suppliers in the length of the queue

they maintain and the rate at which they truncate the queue. To
what extent does suppliers' specific commitment to their customers

affect which ones are allowed into the queue? To what extent does

it determine the waiting time?

How are these affected by the

inherent quality of the supplier?

I focus here on what are in some sense small questions. The
larger questions ——- why suppliers fail to ration fully by price,

and why, given that failure, they ever cut off the queue ———

are

not answered. Why not let anyone who wishes remain in the queue,
thus reducing the fraction of periods when the queue is empty, and
thus when the service is not utilized? This may reflect a long-run
profit—maximizing desire to avoid antagonizing current or potential

clients; or it may be explained by suppliers' commitment to their
profession/skill •2

In the next Section I examine the behavior of a utility—
maximizing supplier of services who has two margins of choice by

which to affect the queue.

Of particular interest is the

derivation of the effects of supplier's quality on the expected
length of the queue (or waiting time) and the fraction of customers
1.

Frances Hamermesh and Paul Chen provided some of these

examples.

This is the kind of altruistic commitment discussed in
2.
Frank (1988).

denied service. Section III describes a new set of data, on the
behavior of referees for a group of economics journals, that was
collected especially for this project.

Section IV examines how

well those data are described by the predictions of the
appointment—book model, and Section V discusses queue—jumping and

examines the implicit market for quality. Section VI studies the

truncation issue on yet another set of data collected for this
study, this one describing physicians in a pre-paid health plan.
The conclusion indicates some extensions and considers the larger
question of why truncation arises.

IX. The Appointment-Book Model of Rationing
Assume the supplier's time is divided between providing the

service and all other activities. Each time period has T units,
and the supplier's expected utility is described by the function:

(1) U = U(T —
where

, ),

is the average number of units in the time period devoted

to providing the service, and

> 0,

U <

I assume

throughout

this Section that each customer requires the same amount of time
from the supplier. Clearly, a more general model could expand this

to make the quality of service, measured by the amount of time
devoted to a customer, subject to choice. With this simple utility

3. The model is couched in terms of utility instead of profit

maximization. This seems more consistent with the importance of
time use and the nature of many of the examples of professional
Nonetheless, if one assumes
services that motivate the paper.
suppliers are price-takers, the model can be revised mutatis
mutandis to yield similar results based on profit maximization so
long as there is a constraint on the supplier's capacity to serve
clients.

function the supplier just sets the marginal rate of substitution
between the two uses of time equal to one.

The rate of arrival of customers is exponential and is
described by the parainter A. The rate depends on the quality of
the supplier, Z, so that:

(2) A = A(Z), A >

0

and by assumption A <

In

this simplest model A has no effect

on the expected service rate, since the latter is chosen to
maximize (1). Without any denial of entry to the queue, L*, the
average waiting time in the queue, is:
L*

A(z)/( —

A(z)).

Even a very simple model generates the prediction that the average

waiting time is an increasing function of quality.

A model with exogenous general commitment requires that all
suppliers have (the same) commitment to deny entry into the queue
to those customers whom they cannot expect to serve in less than t

time periods. With this cut—off we obtain the customer's average
waiting time:

(3) L = a5texp(—at)dt/[l — exp(—at')],
and the supplier's mean rate of refusal:
(4)

p = exp(_at*),

4. Implicit in (2) is the assumption that all suppliers are
constrained to charge the same (below—market) price.
The model
could be modified to allow price to be correlated with Z, so long
as the negative effect of Z on A through price is less than its
direct positive effect.

5

where a =

[j - A)/i .

Since

.t

does not change with changes in A,

while higher Z increases A (though not by enough so that it exceeds

),

it

follows immediately that higher—quality suppliers have

higher L and p.

What if the degree of general commitment is subject to
suppliers' choice, and:
(1') U = U(T -

, , t),

with U3 < 0 to capture the notion that suppliers utility or
profits decrease with the maximum time a customer waits in the
queue?6

Together with the arrival rate A(Z), this assumption

generates an optimizing set of values of j,

t,

L and p.

Specifying general commitment in (1'), though, makes the optimizing

and t, and the resulting L* and p* functions of Z. Without any
a priori restrictions one cannot guarantee that higher Z continues

to increase L* and p, as in the model with t exogenous and the
resulting independence of

from the arrival rate. The effects of

Z on L and p, though, will always be in the same direction, given
the assumptions. If, as seems reasonable, the effects of higher Z
on

and t are sufficiently smaller than the direct positive

effect on p, we will continue to observe in the steady state that

higher—quality suppliers exhibit longer waiting times and higher
refusal rates.

5. The derivations are based on Xarlin and Taylor (1975).
6.

(1') could be written as a function of L instead of t

with the same resulting ambiguous conclusions.

One might assume further that suppliers' commitment means that

their utility is affected differently by changes in L and p that
result from altering t. If so, the standard model of exponential
arrival rates and fixed service times no longer applies. No formal

steady—state queuing result is possible. The response depends on
the extent of asymmetry in suppliers' attitudes about refusal and
waiting time.
I have said nothing thus far about specific commitment ——— who

gets served. The commitment not to make customers wait too long

has been general.

Yet with the ability to ration customers,

suppliers can discriminate in favor of those whose characteristics

they find more desirable.

For a given level of quality, if

specific commitment exists we should find that prior supplier—

customer ties will reduce the customer's waiting time and
probability of denial of entry to the queue.7

The problem is

similar to that noted by Wilson (1989) in the demand for electric
power, except that here the commitment is not forged by explicitly
priced contracts, but instead by nonpriced arrangements.

This discussion does not allow for the possibility that
consumers might circumvent the below—market price and/or specific

commitment by bribing the supplier to enter a closed queue or to
jump position in an existing queue. It is difficult to draw many

For a fixed bribe, though, we

inferences about queue—jumping.

should expect that the amount of queue—jumping that a supplier
7.
A simple example is airlines' practice of offering
preferred (frequent) customers special toll—free numbers for

booking tickets or obtaining flight information.
7

allows will be the minimum consistent with obtaining the bribe.

Larger bribes will generate larger jumps ahead in the queue and
larger drops in the refusal rate. For a smaller bribe one should
expect smaller changes.

I have assumed that the arrival rate is independent of L* and

p and depends only on the supplier's quality. What if, though,
customers recognize that higher—quality suppliers will generally

have longer queues and higher truncation rates?

maximizing supplier then chooses
customers' reactions.

The utility—

and t taking account of

In the steady state this generates an

equilibrium in which differences in L and p reflect both
suppliers' and customers' behavior and imply a market price of
quality. The gradients of L* and p with respect to quality will

be flatter than they would be if customers did not account for
suppliers' responses to differential arrival rates.

III. Refereeing as an Appointment-Book Problem
The main specific empirical example that I present is that of

refereeing scholarly papers for academic journals (in economics)

This activity clearly fits the appointment—book problem described
above. In most cases suppliers are not paid for their services, so
that any rationing of their time must be done by non—price methods.

Customers (journal editors) cannot observe the length of referees'

queues. The referees can be viewed as members of a community (of
professional economists), so that there may be general commitment

to the community (to the profession itself).

The degree of

specific commitment may vary depending on which journal requests

the referee's services. Finally, there are objective measures of

quality among professional economists that lend themselves to
representing Z.
There has been a huge amount of research by sociologists, and

more recently by economists, on the refereeing process. Most of
that study has been of the fairness and quality of the reviews.
Studies involving correlations between referees' opinions on the

same article or proposal and the re—refereeing of articles and

proposals (Cole et al, 1978; Peters and Ceci, 1982) have been

designed to determine whether the refereeing process can
distinguish quality among submissions.

Blank (1991) and many

earlier studies (e.g., Crane, 1967) have examined whether
refereeing outcomes differ between single— and double—blind trials;

and Laband (1990) studied the productivity of refereeing in terms
of subsequent citations to the published article.

There has been very little study of the refereeing activity
itself.

Evidence from physics (Zuckerman and Merton, 1971)

indicates that referees tend to be of higher quality on average
than the authors whose papers they read; but no research has been

conductedinto the allocation of time by referees. In addition to
examining a novel and fairly broad area of economic behavior, the
evidence here and in the next two Sections thus fills a gap in the
study of the organization of scholarly publishing.

There are no secondary data on referees' time use.

I

therefore asked editors of eleven journals to participate in the

following exercise. Based on a tabulation sheet (Appendix Table

9

Al), the editorial office was to keep a record of a very few
characteristics of referee reports resulting from the next fifty

requests on initial submissions of articles that were sent out.

The information allows me to determine L for each refereeing
request i, and whether t

t for the particular request.8 The

length of the paper, a measure of heterogeneity among the referee's

"customers," was also obtained, as was the referee's name.

Seven editors agreed to participate in the project, which
began in November 1989. Their journals include four that publish

articles in a variety of subspecialties (general journals, Gl
through G4), and three that publish in only one subspecialty each
(specialized journals, Si through S3).

I rank them in descending

order according to the rate at which articles in them are cited.9

By November 1990 all seven journals had returned the recording
forms. Of the 350 possible data points, 343 were usable: On three

the editor did not seek a report; one paper was withdrawn by its
author; one form was blank; and on one no page—length was recorded.

For one other request I was unable to construct one of the crucial

variables in the vector Z.

Given the nature of the sampling

procedure and the nearly Complete sample, the data set is a random
sample of refereeing at these seven journals.
8.

was calculated as the actual number of days elapsed

from the time the manuscript left the editorial office to the time
it was received back, minus seven days if the Christmas—New Year's
holiday intervened.

9. From Leibowitz and Palmer (1984).
I have designated the
one journal that was too new to be rated in that study as Si, based

on its immediate success in attracting attention from the
profession generally.
10

The editorial records were linked to a variety of indicators
that might describe referees' quality. These included X, years of

experience since the Ph.D., based in most cases on self—reported

information in the American Economic Association Membership
Directory. 1989.10 This standard measure of productivity should

proxy the same thing among these professionals. The names were
also linked to the Social Science Citation Index for 1989, and each

referee's citations by other scholars in 1989 were included in the

data set.

This measure of quality seems to be a more important

determinant of one outcome of quality differences among economists

dispersion in salaries -——

than

either counts of publications

or the status of the outlets of one's research (Hameronesh et al,
1982).

The density of citations is highly skewed; thus in

subsequent discussion I report this measure in dummy—variable form,
with CITS1O—49 equalling one if the referee was cited 10 through 49

times in 1989 (was well—cited), and CITSSO equalling one if he or

she received 50 or more citations (was heavily-cited). A final

possible set of proxies for Z is a vector of dummy variables
indicating the referee's employment. It includes: Top 20, if the
referee's school was rated among the twenty best graduate economics

departments in Boddy (1982); Cartel, if the school is included
among the roughly one hundred that exchange information on salaries

and employment; and Other academic, if not. (The excluded category
is non—academic employment.)
10.

For those individuals not listed in the Directory,

indexes of other organizations were consulted or the editors were
telephoned to supply the information.
11

The commitment measures were constructed to reflect the
referee's ties to the particular journal or to the profession
generally. The former, which can be viewed as measuring specific
commitment, include whether the author is at the same school as the

journal's editor, and whether he or she published in that journal

during the quinquennium 1986—1990. Measures describing possible
differences in general commitment to the profession (as represented

by these American scholarly journals) are the referee's sex and
whether or not the referee is located in North America.

Statistics describing the raw data and the constructed
variables are presented in Table 1 for each of three categories of

referees: Those who

the job (for whom t <

to referee (for whom t1

t*)

those who refuse

t*), and those who "j" the paper.

Seventy-eight percent of those asked to referee comply.

Among

"refusers" (seventeen percent of the sample) the mean time to
refusal is only 23 days (with a median of 17 days, and a seventy-

fifth percentile of 27 days), implying that truncation from the
queue occurs shortly after entry. The remaining five percent of

the sample who are "losers" pose some small difficulty for
interpreting the results. This group includes only those from whom

the editor requested the paper back or, in some of the seventeen
cases, who had not refereed the paper in at least eight months at
the time the

11.

recording sheets

were returned from the editorial off ices.1

Whether the paper should be viewed as having been

truncated from a very long queue that would eventually have been
served, or as in a Kafkaesque predicament without possibility of
escape, is unclear. The relatively small proportion of the sample
that is in this category means that it does not affect most of the
12

Many of the results on the determinants of

can be seen from

the differences among the means in Table 1.

Doers have less

experience than refusers (though more than losers) ;

they are less

likely to be well- or heavily-cited than the other groups, and are

less likely to be employed at the top 20 schools. Doers are more

likely to be employed by the school where the journal's editor
works and much more likely to have published in the journal than

refusers or losers.

Also, women are less likely to refuse to

referee, or to lose the paper, than are men. Finally, papers that
are refereed are shorter than those that are refused or lost.
Differences among journals are also evident from the means in

Appendix Table A2. Most interesting, except that G4 is out of
place, higher—quality journals use higher—quality referees.

A

similar quality gradient exists with respect to the institutions

where the referees are employed.

The Table also shows huge

differences among journals in some of the variables measuring
specific commitment: Journals G2, S2 and S3 rely very heavily on

their own authors, while G4 obtains much of the refereeing from

faculty employed around the editor's office.

Other control

measures also differ significantly among journals, e.g., the length

of submissions to Sl and S2.

IV. The Effects of Quality and Commitment
Before testing the model's predictions about the determinants

of L, time spent in the queue, and p, the probability of

conclusions; but the issue is not unimportant generally, as there
are obvious analogies in other appointment-book problems.
13

Table 1. Means and Btandard Deviations, by Category of Referae

CATEGORY
VARIABLE

LOSER

DOER

REFUSER

Same School

0.130

0.053

0.118

Published in Journal

0.368

0.140

0.118

Foreign

0.037

0.035

0.059

Male

0.881

0.965

0.941

Top 20

0.301

0.368

0.471

Cartel

0.424

0.351

0.412

Other Academic

0.164

0.140

0.059

CITS1O—49

0.368

0.474

0.588

CITS5O

0.104

0.211

0.118

20.94

29.97
(35.56)

19.71
(19.21)

Dummy Variables:

Continuous Variables:
Citations

(46.69)

Ph.D. Experience
Pages

Days

Number

of

Observations

Standard

16.24

18.28

14.47

(9.08)

(8.87)

(6.76)

31.12
(10.51)

26.4ê

27.05

(10.32)

(9.03)

54.98
(46.41)

(15.49)

269

22.91

57

17

deviations in parentheses below the continuous variables.

truncation from the queue, we need to show that the basic
assumption, .' (Z) >

0, is correct for this sample. Direct evidence

on a sample of 41 economists in one department based on variables
like those in the data set supports this assumption. The following

regression was estimated for the academic year 1987—88:

Referee tasks = 2.08 + .31X — .0095X2+ 1.76CITS1O—49 +

(1.34)

(.20)

(.0052)

(1.43)

= .52,

+16.98C1TS50, 2
(2.92)

where standard errors are in parentheses.

The mean number of

articles refereed was five; the (two) heavily—cited faculty
refereed four times the department's average, while the (eleven)
well-cited faculty refereed two more articles than their typical
colleague.

Perhaps most interesting, there is a significant

inverse quadratic in experience, with the peak refereeing at 16
years, not much different from the average experience in the sample
(14 years).

A. Effects on Truncation

The results on the effects of the quality and commitment
variables on

are presented in Table 2, columns (1) and (2),

which show the parameters of a multinomial logit relating category

of response to the variables listed.

Well- or heavily—cited

researchers are signifiàantly less likely to be doers, other things
equal.

Additional estimates also included the vector of three

variables denoting the referee's affiliation. For none of them did

the absolute value of the t—statistic exceed .5.

It is the

individual referee's achievements that affect p' and thus that
14

Table 2. Limited Dependent Variable Models, Referee Status*
I4ultinomial Logit

Probit

Probit

CATEGORY
VARIABLE
LUGER

DOER

Same School

DOER

DOER

1.119

0.868

0.707

0.882

(.630)

(.985)

(.302)

(.364)

Published in
Journal

1.435 —0.406
(.416) (.858)

0.627

Foreign

0.490
0.900
(.818) (1.30)

0.198

0.313

(.425)

(.479)

Male

—1.007 —0.459

CITS1O—49

—0.813

CITS5O

—1.123 —0.315

Ph.D. Experience

—0.0299 0.012

(.767) (1.288)

0.505

(.353)

(.695)

(.993)

(.456)

(.147)

(.055)

Ph.D. Experience2

0.0006 —0.0022
(.0012) (.0043)

0.045

—0.010

Pages

(.028)

(.015)

Journal Dummy
Variables
Log—likelihood
X2

df =

x2 (against

No

0.585
(.222) (.241)

—0.514 —0.559
(.348)

(.411)

—0.472 —0.320
(.200)

(.217)

—0.464 —0.398
(.278) (0.297)

—0.0056 —0.012
(.031)

(.034)

0.00021 0.00018
(.0008) (.0007)

—0.015 —0.013
(.0093) (.010)

Yes

Yes

—195.34

—146.11

—121.41

46.80

65.51
15

59.37

27.98

22.14

18

dummies only)

df =

343

15

9

9

343

326

Standard errors in parentheses. Each equation also includes
a constant term.

signal quality to the customer. Once these are accounted for,
proxies for quality that are based on external factors have no
impact. While there is some evidence of the expected quadratic in

experience, with additional experience first reducing, then
increasing the probability that the job is done, neither term nor
the pair jointly is significantly different from zero.

The commitment measures generate fascinating results.
Measures of specific commitment sharply affect whether the task is
completed. Being at the same school as the editor has the expected
positive effect, and having published in the journal significantly

increases the likelihood that the task will be done.

The two

measures of general commitment have insignificant effects on the
categorization (although women are somewhat more likely than men to

be doers).

Finally, there is some evidence of the effect of

heterogeneity among customers. Papers that are longer are more
likely to be "lost," though length does not significantly affect
whether the task is done.

As shown earlier, there are substantial differences among
journals in many of the measures; but because none of the "only" 17

losers was at several of the journals, dummy variables for
individual journals could not be included in the multinomial logit.

The insignificance of the parameters distinguishing losers from

refusers suggests that for purposes of examining p' these
categories can be combined. Dummy variables for the journals are
included in simple probits describing whether the task is done (the

probability 1

p).
15

The results are presented in column (3) for the entire sample,

and in column (4) for doers and refusers only.

They generally

corroborate the estimates of the multinomial logit. The magnitudes

of the specific commitment effects are substantial: Referees at
the same school as the editor are 12 percentage points more likely,

and those who have published in the journal are 11 percentage
points more likely than others to referee the paper.12

mean of 1 —

p

=

.78, these effects are very large.)

(With a

The

commitment and quality measures are jointly significant against an
equation containing only journal dummy variables.

B. Effects on Waiting Time

Ordinary least squares estimation of the effects of the
commitment, quality and other variables on the refereeing lag is

the most familiar way to examine the effects on L*.

These

estimates are presented in column (1) of Table 3 for the sample of
doers only. I do not discuss them here, mainly because they do not

reflect the analysis in Section II.

In a queuing model the

interesting questions involve the determinants of waiting time and
survival. These are described by models of hazard rates, where the

hazard is h(t) =

—dln(S(t)/dt, the escape rate from the queue

(containing at time t the fraction S(t) of the papers that arrived

12. An additional measure of specific commitment, whether the
referee was on the journal's editorial board, was also included in
some of the estimates. Its quantitative impact on the probability
of doing the task was tiny and insignificant, as was its effect in
the survival models estimated in the next Subsection. A similarly
small and insignificant impact is produced by an interaction term

that tests whether the effect of the editor being at the same
school is greater for younger referees.
16

Table 3. The Determinants of L*

OLS

Proportional

Foreign

(.201)

—0.078

1.292
(6.21)

(.154)

—0.527

23.36

(.349)

(14.63)

Male

—0.043

1.168

(.199)

(8.72)

CITS1O—49

—0.071

5.634

(.151)

(6.33)

CITS5O

—0.281

15.77

(.224)

(9.69)

Ph.D. Experience

—0.023

0.64

(.021)

(.92)

Ph.D. Experience2

0.00093
(.00045)

—0.026
(.019)

Pages

Weibull
Accel. Failure

—0.253

8.469
(8.53)

Published in
Journal

Only)

Hazards

VARIABLE
SaSe School

(Doers

0.789

—0.020
(.0071)

(.292)

—0.169
(.135)

—0.082
(.114)

—0.324
(.328)

—0.063
(.147)

—0.051
(.107)

—0.269
(.132)

—0.017
(.016)

0.00067
(.00033)

—0.015
(.005)
0. 0171

(.0008)

1.528**

d

(.091)

or Log—Likelihood

0.111

—1220.8

—298.45

47.05

43.18

42.24

x2(9) (against dummies) 16.46

19.40

27.50

x215

Standard errors in parentheses. Dummy
are included in all the estimates.
Evaluated at the means of the x.

variables

for the journals

at time zero) .

In

this model the hazard rate can be used to infer

the waiting time until refereeing. It thus provides an empirical
approach that is based in queuing.13

The empirical survivor curve, the relation of S(t) to time
measured in weeks, is shown for the sample of doers by the U marks

in Figure 1 (leaving off weeks after 34, to which only five
referees "survive) .

It is noteworthy that the median waiting time

is only 6-1/2 weeks, while the seventy-fifth percentile is 11
weeks.14 Among the 78 percent who complete the task, the typical

referee does so in fairly short order. Figure 1 also graphs the
Kaplan—Meier estimates of the hazard rate (denoted by (+)).

It is

clear that the hazard is not monotonic. Instead, it is increasing

up to the point where half the sample of doers has exited, and
fluctuating around an essentially constant value thereafter.

The nonmonotonicity of the hazard rate and the absence of a
single peak suggest that any simple parametric specification of the

baseline hazard will be incorrect.

I therefore estimate a

proportional hazards model. Column (2) of Table 3 shows estimates
of the parameter vector 1
5)

h(t,x) =

13.
(1988).

in:

h(O,t)e

For a good discussion of hazard models, see Kiefer
These models have been used by economists mostly to

examine the duration of unemployment (most recently, Meyer, 1990)

Additional applications have been to strike duration (e.g.,
Lancaster, 1972) and to job tenure (Dolton, 1991).

14. Given lags in the mails, the actual time that the paper
spends in the referee's hands is probably one week less than the
Figure indicates.
17

(/)

t (refereeing lag) in weeks

S(t) —÷-- h(t)

Figure 1. Survivor Function and Daily Hazard Rate, Doers

where x is the vector of variables included as determinants of the

hazard rates.

These estimates assume that each independent

variable has the same proportional effect on h regardless of the
duration in the queue. For any particular set of values of x the
hazard rate can vary freely. A negative coefficient implies that

increasing the particular variable reduces the hazard rate
(increases the waiting time).

Among the quality measures, the hazard rate is lower among

heavily—cited referees,

and somewhat lower, though quite

insignificantly so, among well—cited referees.

There is an

inverse—quadratic effect of experience on the hazard rate, with the

lowest hazard observed for referees with twelve years of experience

(somewhat below the sample mean for this variable) 15

As the

theory predicted, 8L*/aZ > 0.

The negative coefficients on the two measures of specific
commitment contrast sharply to their effects on the refusal rate

and cannot be predicted by a simple queuing model. One way of
rationalizing them is to note that these commitment measures may
also proxy heterogeneity in service times: Where the referee has
published in the journal, or works with the editor, the paper may

receive more careful attention and thus generate a lower escape
rate.

An alternative explanation is based on the possible

observability of L* (or at least of the response time to a specific

customer) and referees' response to it: By showing a willingness

15. A test of the joint significance of the two experience

variables yields x2(2) = 7.00; X295(2) = 5.99. Also, the variables
based on the referee's affiliation have no impact (x2(3) = 2.2).
18

to referee where specific commitment exists, but doing so without

undue alacrity, the referee slows the arrival rate from those
journals.
The general commitment variables also have negative effects on

waiting time.

Conditional upon completing the task, there is

essentially no difference in the hazard between male and female
referees, while the hazard rate is lower among referees outside
North America. The difference may reflect lack of commitment to
the profession in its North American incarnation. Alternatively,
it may be the mechanical result of postal delays: The twenty-three

day difference implied by the OLS estimate is not far from the
round—trip time of an air—mail letter.16 The proportional hazards

model also indicates the importance of heterogeneity in the
refereeing queue: The hazard is lower for longer papers. Those
that require more service time take longer to move through the
queue.17
16.
Another possible test of general commitment might be
constructed by comparing the coefficients of the dummy variables
for the S and G journals. Other things equal, one might expect
greater commitment to the field journals. With only seven journals
this is a rather stringent test; and the hazard rates are not
significantly lower at the general journals. However, the same
test on the coefficients of the dummy variables in the probits in
column (3) of Table 2 does suggest a slightly higher p among the
general journals.

17. Including losers as censored as of the date the paper was

recalled from them (as of the end of the sample period in some

cases) had only tiny effects on the . Similarly tiny changes were
produced if I treated all 17 losers as having refereed as of that
date, or if I viewed them as censored as of the longest duration
observed.
Censoring may be nonrandom; and it clearly affects
parametric estimates of the hazard function. It does not, though,
influence the estimates of the impact of the quality and commitment
variables.
19

The proportional hazards model is a relatively Unrestricted
way of examining the effects of x on the hazard rate of refereeing.

As a comparison to a more familiar form, though, column (3) of
Table 3 presents estimates of the vector f3 from a model in which
the baseline hazard is assumed to have a Weibull distribution. The

estimated

in (3) are quite close to those of the proportional

hazards model and merit little comment.

The baseline hazard

suggests that there is positive duration—dependence in refereeing:

As time passes, the probability that a referee will do the job,

conditional on eventually doing it, rises.

Once losers are

included in the Weibull estimates, though, the positive duration—

dependence is not significant. This suggests, and formal tests

verify, that the Weibull distribution does not provide a
satisfactory fit to this hazard. As Figure 1 shows, there is no

uniform duration dependence in this process; indeed, it is not
described well by any standard distribution.18

A final econometric issue is whether the variables in x
capture referee—specific heterogeneity.

If we had two or more

observations on each referee, or on many of the referees, we could

estimate the hazard function using individual effects. We cannot
do that satisfactorily here; nor could the kind of random sampling

18.
The
statistic
for
this
Kolmogorov—Smirnov
parameterization was 1.31, just above the 99—percent critical level
for a Weibull distribution with unknown parameters (D'Agostino and

Stephens, 1986, p. 147). A Gompertz distribution, a normal and a
logistic were also estimated. The first two fit much worse than
the Weibull distribution, while for the latter the Kolmogorov-

Smirnov statistic had the same significance as that from the
Weibull.
20

that is crucial to this project generate such data.

Fifteen

referees are, though, included twice in the sample of doers, and
one is included three times. A vector of dummy variables for these
people was included in reestimates of column (1), with a resulting

F(l5, 238) =

.87, insignificantly different from zero at any

conventional level. This admittedly very partial evidence suggests
that this kind of heterogeneity among suppliers is not a problem in

this sample.

One interpretation of the estimates of ap/az and 3L'/äz is
that they reflect referees trying to ingratiate themselves with

editors by doing the task promptly as an investment in their
careers. If so, L* and p would increase steadily, though perhaps
nonlinearly, with experience. That the quadratics in experience in
both Tables 2 and 3 have extrema near the sample mean of X suggests

this explanation is incorrect.
upon sample selection.

Another interpretation is based

If editors learn which referees respond

slowly (or refuse) and do not request their services, the fraction

of rapid respondents among referees included in the sample would
increase with experience.

That we observe the probability and

speed of response falling over the first half of the distribution

of referee's experience implies that this interpretation is also
wrong.

A more subtle and more serious potential problem arises from
the possibility that referees' quality reflects the heterogeneity
of customers because editors match papers that require more effort

with higher-quality referees. There is no way of examining this
21

effect in these data. However, I obtained another set of data from

journal Gl, a listing of all the referee—author matches over a
roughly one—month period in 1991. A contingency table showing the
citation counts for 1990 on each of the 129 matches (of 80 separate

submissions to the journal) is presented in Table 4.

These data show that the referees are far more widely—cited
than authors. Moreover, X2—tests over the entire Table reject the

hypothesis that the author—referee matches are random.

The

rejection, though, is based solely on the very few extremely
heavily—cited (more than 100 citations per year) authors. When
these 6 matches are deleted, the matching process appears random.
Whether the same conclusion would hold if data were available from

other journals is unclear. But the higher quality of referees at

Gl than at the other journals suggests the scope for matching
elsewhere is less than at Gl. If other editors behave as at Gi,
matching is even less important than the data in Table 4 indicate.

Heterogeneity in matching does not seem to be important, at least
along this dimension.

V. Queue Discipline, and the Price of Quality
A. Monetary Bribes to Change Suppliers' Behavior

Because one of the seven journals offers prompt referees a

small monetary incentive, we can infer the relative effect of
monetary incentives on waiting time.

(Payments of this sort are

offered by no more than ten percent of professional journals in
economics.) The journal (Gi) pays for completion within a nominal

22

Table 4. Author-Referee Matches by Citation Count
Referee
0—4

5—9

10—49 50—99 100+

TOTAL

Author
0—4

21

3

37

12

6

79

5—9

2

3

4

4

2

15

10—49

3

2

14

4

2

25

50—99

2

0

1

1

0

4

100+

0

1

0

2

3

6

28

9

56

23

13

129

TOTAL

x2-

=

1.

17.58;

statistics

all observations, categories 0—4, 5—9, 10—49,

50+; p =.04.
2.

x2(4) = 8.32; all observations, categories 0—9, 10—49, 50+;
p =.08.

3.

z2(4)

p >
4.

= 2.47;
.10.

excludes 6 matches on authors with CITES

1.49;
.10.

excludes 10 matches on authors with CITES

x2(2) =

p >

100;
So;

one month (in actuality, if the completed report is received at the

editorial office within six weeks of the date it was sent out) •19

If the discussion in Section II is correct, we should expect

the prospective payment to have its biggest effect on queue
discipline at the margin. That is, if the queue is very long, so

that t1 >> 42 days

(six weeks), the incentive should be

unimportant. In that case either t

t', so that the request is

truncated from the queue; or the paper remains in its place in the

queue. Obversely, if the queue is so short that the paper will be

refereed almost immediately anyway, the incentive will also be
unimportant. Only if the queue is such that the paper is on the
margin of being eligible to qualify the referee for payment will
the bribe induce a change in queue discipline.

Figure 2 shows Kaplan-Neier estimates of the daily hazard
rates for Gl, and for the aggregate of the other six journals, for

completion in 0—14 days, 15—28 days, etc., through 85—98 days.2°
(With only three manuscripts outstanding at journal Gi, the hazard

beyond 98 days is uninteresting.) Remarkably, the hazard rates are

nearly identical in the first two-week interval, and essentially
the same in all three biweekly intervals containing weeks 9 through

Based on conversation with the editor and editorial
19.
A small survey of economists
assistant, December 28, 1990.
suggests that the median time spent refereeing is such that the
hourly payment offered by Gl is only slightly above the minimum
wage rate in the United States.

20. The hazards for the other six journals in Figure 2 are
based on a sample that includes losers as censored observations.
If we include only doers, the hazard rate lies even closer to that
of Gl.
23

-c

0.03

>
0.02
0.01

8

10

t (refereeing lag) in weeks

_________

Figure 2

Others]

Hazard Rates at Journals Gl and Others

12

14.

The hazard rate at Gl is higher in the second and third

biweekly intervals (days 15-42) and lower in the fourth interval
(days 43—56) .

Moreover, these three hazards, and only these, are

more than one standard deviation apart, even with the very small

sample size at Gl.2

Paying to induce queue—jumping shifts

customers (refereeing tasks) just far enough ahead in the queue to
qualify the supplier (referee) for the bribe (honorarium).

The comparisons in Figure 2 do not account for the higher
quality of referees used by journal Gl than by other journals.

Holding quality (and the other variables included in Table 3)

constant, the hazard rate at Gl is higher than at every other

journal. The effect is not small: Compared to the average of
other journals, conditional upon submitting a report the same
referee responds two weeks more quickly to Gi.

Figure 2 reflects the gross effects of bribing referees.
Presumably speed increases partly because referees increase L and

p in their other (unpaid) refereeing tasks, partly because they

increase j

overall.

If all journals paid referees, only this

latter, probably small scale effect would be generated.

Each

journal wishing to bribe referees confronts the problem of setting

optimal prices in the face of unknown responses by suppliers of

refereeing services to its own and others' prices. The minimal

21. That the effect works by shifting the hazard around a
margin is analogous to Kennan's (1980) results on the effects of
paying unemployment insurance benefits to strikers after the strike
has lasted for some length of time, and to changes in hazard rates
out of unemployment around the time benefits are exhausted (e.g.,
Meyer, 1990)
24

reliance on such bribes thus far means that we are far from being
able to infer these optimal prices.

B. The Market for Quality Refereeing

Assume that the quality of each referee is known to the
customer—editor who assigns papers for refereeing, and that the
editor seeks to obtain a high-quality, timely evaluation of the

paper. This may result from a desire to produce a high-quality
journal of current interest as well as from the editors role as an

agent for gathering information for authors.

Assume that the

information contained in the proxies for quality, Z, is the same as

that available to editors. Then we can interpret the effect of an

increase in the value of one of these proxies as the price of
quality in this implicit market.

To derive the implicit price, ask the question: What is the

total effect of an increase in quality on the probability
distribution of time until service (by all suppliers, not just the

first referee to whom the paper is sent)? This distribution is
affected both by changes in waiting time and by changes in refusal

and loss rates, i.e., by aL*/aZ and by ap/3Z. I use the estimates
of the multinomial logit in columns (1) and (2) of Table 2, and of

the accelerated failure time model in column (3) of Table 3, to
infer these derivatives. (For all but the citations and experience
measures the variables in x are held constant at their means.)

I

assume that a paper that is returned by a refuser is sent out for

a second time 5 weeks after the first time (2 weeks in the
editorial office plus the 3—week mean time until refusal). Each
25

paper handled by a loser is sent to a new referee after 37 weeks (2

weeks in the editorial office plus the 35—week mean time until the
paper is viewed as lost)

Table 5 presents statistics describing the distribution of

completed service times until an editor receives one report.
Column (1) lists means and order statistics for the distribution
when the mean values of all variables are used. It shows that one
report can be obtained on the median paper in less than two months;

and for only ten percent of articles does it take longer than four

months to obtain a report.22

The long upper tail of the

distribution of waiting times is generated by the (small)
probability that the paper is sent to a loser.
The remaining columns in the Table evaluate the distributions

by comparing little- to heavily—cited referees, and fresh Ph.D.s
(experience of zero) to those with fifteen years of experience (for

whom the estimates in Tables 2 and 3 showed that L* and p* were
around the highest in the sample). Consider columns (2) and (3),
where only the referee's citations vary. Reliance on heavily—cited

referees increases the mean time until completion by 3 weeks. If

we add differences in experience (as in the comparison between
columns (4) and (5)), the implicit price of quality is a difference

in mean waiting times of 3—1/2 weeks.

Accounting for a one—week round—trip by mail, the difference
between columns (4) and (5) implies that a policy of using highest-

22. If we assume that editors seek two reports ab initio, the
median waiting time to receive both reports rises only to 80 days,
and the ninetieth percentile rises to 6.5 months.
26

Table 5. Distributions of Times to Obtain One Referee's Report (in
Days)

CH?RACTERISTIC8
Means

CITS < 10

CITS >

49

CITS < 10

X=0

CITS >

49

X=15

PERCENTILE
10

15

14

22

13

24

25

31

27

43

25

45

50

55

50

72

46

76

75

86

79

107

76

116

90

128

115

153

124

166

95

234

163

195

288

226

75

68

89

71

95

Doer

0.784

0.854

0.652

0.883

0.644

Refuser

0.166

0.104

0.317

0.044

0.316

Loser

0.050

0.042

0.031

0.073

0.040

MEAN
Probability
of:

instead of lowest-quality referees requires the payment of 38
percent in additional time costs. This is an unbiased measure of

the price of quality in this implicit market. If we assume that

the market is in equilibrium, and assume too that editors are
rational, we must conclude that this additional time cost is offset

by the better refereeing job done by higher-quality referees. The

additional lag is the price editors pay for obtaining better
reports 23

VI.

Truncating the Queue

To

in Medical Practice

examine whether the predictions of the theory of

appointment books carry over into an entirely different endeavor,

I obtained data describing physicians in private practice who
participate in a prepaid health plan in a midwestern metropolitan

area. The data describe only truncation, in particular, whether

the physician was not taking new patients at the time the plan
published its annual directory of participating members.

There are 321 primary-care physicians in the plan (family
practitioners,
pediatricians).

internists,

obstetrician—gynecologists,

and

Complete information was obtained on 264 (82

percent) • who form the sample used in this Section. The measure of

quality is experience, years since licensed in the state,

23.

Of course, much of the burden of the lag is borne by

authors, not by editors. Editors may know they face this trade—off
and do so willingly. It is hard to believe that authors have such

knowledge, though they may have information about the average

quality of referees at different journals and the average
refereeing lags. One might, though, view editors as the authors'
agents in obtaining comments from the profession in a way that
maximizes authors' utility.
27

essentially a measure of when the physician began practice.24
Since I do not observe who the potential patients are, I cannot
construct variables to distinguish between the effects of specific
and general commitment.

Instead, all of the other variables

M.D. compared to osteopath, family practitioner or internist
compared to others, female or male, outside or inside the central
part of the metropolitan area, and practicing at least part—time at

the local university medical school —-— can be interpreted either
way.

Also, some may be viewed as reflecting differences among

groups of physicians in arrival rates.

Columns 1 and 3 of Table 6 show the means of the variables.

The mean of p is about 20 percent, but is nearly 30 percent for

MDs alone. The average physician has been practicing around 16
years, but the range of experience is between 0 and 50 years. The
large majority of physicians are men, are not affiliated with the
university medical school, and are located in the central cities or

their adjacent suburbs.
The main results of this Section are contained in the probits

describing p, the probability that the physician is not taking new

patients. Consider the estimates of the impact of experience on
this probability, shown in columns 2 and 4 of Table 6. As a pair
the coefficients on X and X2 are jointly significant in the entire

sample and especially among MOs alone. (Adding higher—order terms

in X does not change the conclusion that p eventually decreases
24. The data are from American Medical Association Directory,
32nd edition, Chicago, 1990, and American Osteopathic Association,
Yearbook and Directory of Osteopathic Physicians, Chicago, 1990.
28

Table 6.

Means and Probit Estiaat•s, Doctors' Refusal of New
Patients
MDs

All Physicians

Mean

Variable

(1)

Family Practice.77
or Internist
In Town

.73

Parameter

Mean Parameter

(2)

(3)

1.16

.73

.76

.69
(.31)

.19

.94
(.30)

.17

.64
(.33)

17.14

.1274
(.055)

——

-.00202

(.26)

At University .22

.55
(.25)

Female

.19

.59
(.27)

Experience

16.21 .0945
(.045)

Experience2

——

—. 00158

(.00115)

(.00098)

MD

.61

1.00

——

(.25)

Log—likelihood

p*

1.25

1.23
(.33)

(.30)

.36

(4)

.201

—100.76

—76.62

264

162
.296

standard errors in parentheses. Each equation also contains a
constant.

with additional experience.)

In the entire sample and among MDs

alone 16 percent of the physicians are on the decreasing part of

the truncation—experience relationship.

The inverse U—shaped

relationship is consistent with the view that experience is a proxy

for qi.iality that determines the arrival rate of customers to
suppliers who are committed to offering a service without making

customers remain in line too long.

It is inconsistent with an

interpretation that physicians build up a practice, begin turning
away patients once they reach a full load that they somehow define,

and continue to do so to allow their clientele to diminish so that
they can reduce their labor supply as they near retirement.

Several of the control variables have significant impacts in

ways that are consistent with arguments based on specific
commitment (but also with heterogeneity in customers demand).
That in-town physicians and those associated with the medical
school are more likely to truncate their queues may reflect their
lesser likelihood of encountering their potential patients outside
their practices. The greater probabilities of truncation by family
practitioners and internists and by MD5 are consistent with tighter

markets for their services (and also with lower turnover of their

patients). Greater truncation by female physicians may reflect
their desire to allocate time to household production.25

Clearly, the results in this Section are not by themselves
convincing evidence of the importance of appointment—book markets.
25.

The higher truncation rate by female doctors is

independent of specialty. Also, using separate dummy variables for
all four specialties does not alter any of the results.
29

They do, though, corroborate the evidence from refereeing that the

effect of quality on the arrival rate of customers combines with
suppliers' commitment to generate differences in truncation rates.

Moreover, because there is no intermediary who might match more

difficult cases with higher—quality suppliers (these are all
primary—care physicians), there is even less possibility that the

matching of customers and suppliers is generating the results in
this example than in the sample of referees.

VII. Conclusions, and Other Applications

I have pointed out the existence of what I have called
appointment—book markets.

In them suppliers choose their

customers' waiting times and deny some customers entrance to the
queue for services. The latter choice arises because the customers
cannot obtain information about waiting times, and thus cannot make

the utility—maximizing choices that the suppliers, who are
generally committed to them, make on their behalf.

The model

predicts that higher—quality suppliers will exhibit longer waiting
times and will be more likely to deny customers entry to the queue.

They are less likely to deny entry to those customers with whom
past contact has created specific commitment, and they will also
serve those customers faster.

I examined this model using a unique set of data describing
the behavior of referees for economics journals. Several measures

of quality are positively correlated with the probability of
denying entry to the queue (refusing to referee) and with waiting

time (the lag in refereeing an article).
30

Measures of specific

commitment ———

the

recent publication in the journal and location at

institution

that houses the editorial office ---

have the

predicted negative effects on the refusal to referee, but have no

effect on waiting time.

This latter result cannot be explained

within a simple queuing model. The results on the probability of
denying entry to the queue are verified on a sample of physicians.

Consider first a specific normative implication of the
empirical results on refereeing. They suggest that most referees
are remarkably prompt, and that lags in the process result mainly
from delays generated by a small percentage of referees whom I have

called losers. Half (two-thirds) of the papers held longer than

four (six) months have been sent to losers.

To speed up the

process with only a small loss in quality, journal editors might

consider automatically truncating the long thin tail of waiting
times by assuming that any referee who holds a paper for four (or

six) months is a loser and sending the paper to another referee.
Authors' welfare would be increased by the elimination of the low-

probability, high—loss event of a very long wait; and editorial
offices would obviate the serious headaches of dealing with losers.

More important than guidelines for scholarly publishing are
the general implications of the appointment-book problem and the
subtler issues of suppliers' behavior. Perhaps chief among these

is the question of what generates general commitment ——- why do

suppliers truncate a queue that customers cannot see?

Some

impressionistic evidence that this is explained by businesses'

desires to invest in long—term relations with customers is the
31

failure to truncate queues for admission to certain tourist
attractions. For examples, at Disneyland and at the Empire State
Building, waiting occurs at a separate location from where tickets

are purchased, thare is no truncation, and the probability of a
long—ten relationship between customer and supplier is low. The

same behavior may characterize how employers handle job
applications:

To what extent do employers bother notifying

unsuccessful applicants that jobs have been filled?

Further

examination of this issue is crucial.

Another issue worth studying is whether welfare maxima are
reached in these markets.

For example, instead of truncating,

suppliers could simply announce the queue length and let customers

ration the service by the value of their waiting times.

Do

transactions costs prevent this; or is the failure due to the
monopolists' desires to control access to the service and offer
favors to those customers to whom they are specifically committed?

comparisons of differences in rationing schemes that suppliers
impose in response to different technical conditions could answer

these questions.

These in turn lead to studying how market

structure affects waiting times and trunction, and whether
suppliers invest in technical improvements that might enable
customers to ration the service themselves.26

26. Some evidence against the monopoly argument is provided
by the example of the Australian National Roads and Motorists'
Association, whose automated phone—answering system announces the
current response time to callers who are put on hold.
The
institution of automated branched phone—response systems is an
example of a technical improvement designed to overcome the
appointment-book problem.
32

Consumers' inability to see the full price of a service
because they cannot discover its time price generates unusual
behavior by suppliers.

It allows them more discretion than in

markets with only money prices, or with visible time prices, in
that they can discriminate among customers. It also, though, may
encourage them to turn away customers even though that may not be
short—run profit-maximizing. It may not even be long—run prof it-

maximizing if their actions are affected by a general feeling of
commitment to potential customers.

33

REFERENCES

Rebecca Blank, "The Effects of Double—Blind versus Single—Blind
Experimental Evidence from the American Economic
Reviewing:
Review," American Economic Review, 81 (1991), forthcoming.

Francis Boddy, "Rating of Economics Graduate Programs — 1982,"
unpublished report, University of Minnesota, 1982.
Stephen Cole, Leonard Rubin and Jonathan Cole, Peer Review in the
National Academy of
National Science Foundation.
Washington:
Sciences, 1978.

Diana Crane, "Gatekeepers of Science: Some Factors Affecting the

Selection of Articles for Scientific Journals," American
Sociologist, 2 (1967): 195—201.
Ralph D'Agostino and Michael Stephens, Goodness—of—Fit Techniques.
New York: Marcel Dekker, 1986.

Robert Deacon and Jon Sonstelie, "Rationing by Waiting and the
Value of Time," Journal of Political Economy, 93 (1985): 627—647.
An
Peter Dolton, "Job Separations, Job Tenure and Earnings:
Empirical Analysis," unpublished paper, University of Newcastle,
1991.

Robert Frank, Passions Within Reason. New York: Norton, 1988.
Daniel Hamermesh, George Johnson and Burton Weisbrod, "Scholarship,

Citations and Salaries," Southern Economic Journal, 49 (1982):
472—481.

Samuel Karlin and Howard Taylor, A First Course in Stochastic
Processes. New york: Academic Press, 1975.
John Kennan, "The Effect of Unemployment Insurance Payments on

Strike Duration," in National Commission on Unemployment
Compensation, Unemployment Compensation:
Volume 2. Washington: NCUC, 1980.

Studies and Research,

Nicholas Kiefer, "Economic Duration Data and Hazard Functions,"
Journal of Economic Literature, 26 (1988): 646—679.

David Laband, "Is There Value—Added from the Review Process in
Economics?: Preliminary Evidence from Authors," Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 105 (1990): 341—353.
Tony Lancaster, "A Stochastic Model for the Duration of a Strike,"
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 135 (1972): 257—271.

34

Stanley Liebowitz and John Palmer, "Assessing the Relative Impacts
of Economics Journals," Journal of Economic Literature, 22 (1984):
77—88.

Cotton N. Lindsay and Bernard Feigenbaum, "Rationing by Waiting
Lists," American Economic Review, 74 (1984): 404—417.

Bruce Meyer, "Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment Spells,"
Econometrica, 58 (1990) :

757—782.

Donald Nichols, Eugene Smolensky and T. Nicolaus Tideman,
"Discrimination by Waiting Time in Merit Goods," American Economic
Review, 61 (1971) :

312—323.

Douglas Peters and Stephen Ceci, "Peer—Review Practices of
Psychological Journals: The Fate of Published Articles, Submitted
Again," in Stevan Hamad, ed.
Peer Commentary on Peer Review.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982.
Robert Wilson, "Efficient and Competitive Rationing," Econometrica,

57 (1989): 1—40.
Harriet Zuckerman and Robert Merton, "Patterns of Evaluation in
Institutionalisation, Structure and Functions of the
Science:
Referee System," Minerva, 9 (1971): 66—100.

35

Appendix Table Al. Questionnaire for the Study of Refereeing Lags

DATE PAPER BENT TO REFEREE: MONTE _________

DAY

_______________

LENGTH OF PAPER (total pages):

REFEREE'S NAME: ____________________________________________

REFEREE' B AFFILIATION: _________________________________________
DATE PAPER RECEIVED BACK
FROM REFEREE:
TEE

MONTM ______________

REFEREE: DID: _______

DID

NOT: _______

DAY

__________

SUBMIT A REPORT

Appendix Table A2. Means of Variables, by Journal*
JOURNAL DESIGNATION

VARIABLE
Gi

G3

G2

G4

81

82

83

0.306
0.122
0.143
0.042
Same SChool 0.042
(.067) (.163) (.053) (.379) (.135)

0.140
0.020
(.163) (.020)

0.061
0.490
0.271
Published in 0.250
Journal
(.333) (.488) (.316) (.069)

0.420
0.540
(.465) (.551)

Foreign
Male

0.938
(.90)

Pop 20
Cartel

0

0.082
(.100) (.070)

0.083

(0)

0.184
(.189)

0.061
0.020
(.035) (.054) (.023)

0.020

0.896
0.939
(.930) (.895) (.966)

0.939

0.816
(.757)

0
(0)

0.940
0.820
(.791) (.939)

0.286
0.562
(.533) (.256)

0.062
(.053)

0.510
0.400
0.240
(.138) (.514) (.419) (.224)

0.271
0.449
(.333) (.465)

0.479

0.633

0.184

(.500)

0.306
0.340
0.400
(.759) (.297) (.279) (.408)

0.102

0.200

Other
Academic

0.062

0.122

0.292

(.033)

(.140)

(.289) (.103) (.135) (.233) (.163)

CITS1O—49

0.500

0.429

0.208

0.449

0.143
0.367

0.340

0.160

0.480

(.500) (.419) (.184) (.448) (.297) (.279) (.469)
CITS5O

0.292

0.122

0.021

0.143

0.122

0.100

0.060

(.200) (.116) (.026) (.138) (.108) (.116) (.061)
Citations

7.08 2247 28.18 15.32 15.56
43.79
24.65
(39.67) (24.79) (6.89) (22.24) (28.46) (15.40) (15.41)

19.80
18.00
10.37
14.74
15.77
18.16
18.54
Experience (16.33) (14.56) (15.45) (19.83) (9.27) (19.91) (18.20)
Ph.D.

Pages

32.78
23.26
33.43
25.45
22.29
22.26
27.58
(25.43) (25.26) (21.97) (22.00) (32.73) (33.28) (23.20)

Days

(45.37) (56.02) (50.10) (56.76) (90.60) (49.30) (40.76)
48
(30)

49

48

49

49

50

50

(43)

(38)

(29)

(37)

(43)

(49)

AMeans in parentheses are for doers only; others describe the
ntire sample.

