                  NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




          OPENNESS AND INFLATION: THEORY AND EVIDENCE




                          David Romer




                    Working Paper No. 3936




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          December 1991




I thank David Parsley and Brian A'Hearn for research assistance,
Laurence Ball, Kenneth Rogoff, Christina Romer, and seminar
participants at the Federal Reserve Board, Stanford University,
the University of California, Berkeley, and the University of
Texas for helpful comments, and the National Science Foundation
for financial support. This paper is part of NBER's research
programs in Monetary Economics and Economic Fluctuations. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper 3936
                                        December 1991



          OPENNESS AND INFLATION: THEORY AND EVIDENCE



                            ABSTRACT


     This paper points out and tests a straight forward but
previously unnoticed prediction of models in which the absence of

precomrnitment in monetary policy leads to excessive inflation.

Because unanticipated monetary expansion leads to real exchange
rate depreciation, and because the harms of real depreciation are

greater in more open economies, the benefits of surprise
expansion are decreasing in the degree of openness. Thus, under
discretionary policy-making, money growth and inflation will be

lower in more open economies. After presenting a simple
theoretical model demonstrating this prediction of the theory,

the paper examines the link between openness and inflation using
cross-country data. The data reveal a strong negative link
between openness and inflation.




                                        David Romer
                                        Department of Economics
                                        University of California
                                        Berkeley, CA 94720
                                        and NBER
                               I. INTRODUCTION


     In their classic paper, Kydland and Prescott (1977) demonstrate that the

absence of precommitment in monetary policy can lead to inefficiently high

levels of inflation. When   imperfect   competition or a distortionary tax system

causes the natural level of output to be suboptimal and when monetary policy

can affect real output, policy-makers have an incentive to attempt to    create

surprise inflation. But policy cannot on average be more expansionary than

price and wage setters expect. As a result, in a one-time game without

binding precommitment the equilibrium rate of inflation is inefficiently high

and output remains at its natural rate.

      Kydland and Prescott's paper has given rise to a vast theoretical

literature. The analysis of macroeconomic policy-making without preconunitruent

has been extended to multiple periods, stochastic environments, asymmetric

information, multiple policy-makers, multiple countries, and so on.1 Yet,

almost fifteen years after Kydland and Prescott's paper, there is virtually no

empirical evidence on the question of whether the mechanism identified by

Kydland and Prescott is important to actual inflations.2 One view, advocated




     1 For surveys, see Rogoff (1989) and Fischer (1990). An important
earlier paper is Phelps (1967).

     2 An important exception is the work of Alesina and others on "rational
partisan business cycles" (see, for example, Alesina, 1988). The results of
this work have been largely supportive of the predictions of a Kydland-
Prescott-style model extended to the case of multiple policy-makers (but see
Sheffrin, 1988)

                                          1
for example by Barro and Gordon (l983a), is that Kydland and Prescott's model

is a valuable model of actual monetary policies and that it gives significant

insights into a broad range of phenomena. The other extreme, argued by Taylor

(1983), is that there are institutions or mechanisms that largely eliminate

policy-makers' tendency to attempt systematically to cause surprise inflation.

Governments appear to be able to largely overcome the dynamic inconsistency

problem in other contexts; for example, it would not be correct to deduce from

the observation that governments generally do not make enforceable promises

concerning future tax rates on capital that in seeking to understand actual

capital taxation policies we should focus on the dynamically consistent

equilibria of one-time games. In the case of monetary policy, reputational

mechanisms (Barro and Gordon, 1983b) or the appointment of "conservative"

policy-makers (Rogoff, 1985a) could overcome the tendency toward inefficiently

high rates of inflation.

      The purpose of this paper is to demonstrate a prediction of models in

which the absence of precommitment in monetary policy leads to inefficiently

high inflation, and then to test that prediction. The source of the

prediction is straightforward. In his extension of the basic models of

dynamic consistency and monetary policy to open-economy settings, Rogoff

(l985b) notes that surprise monetary expansion causes the real exchange rate

to depreciate, and that this reduces the incentives to undertake expansion.

This observation is the source of Rogoff's result that international policy

coordination can be undesirable in the absence of precolnniitment: because

coordinated expansion by two countries cannot cause each country's currency to

depreciate against the other's, the incentive to expand --     and thus

equilibrium inflation -   - is   higher under coordination. To put it differently,

by coordinating their monetary policies, two countries in effect turn



                                           2
themselves into a single larger, and hence less open, economy; this decreased

openness reduces the harm of the real depreciation induced by surprise

monetary expansion, and thus raises equilibrium inflation. The same reasoning

leads directly to the prediction that I focus on in this paper: the more open

an economy is, the smaller is the incentive to expand, and so the lower is the

equilibrium rate of inflation. Thus models of inefficiently high inflation

arising from the absence of precominitment predict an inverse relationship

between openness and inflation.

      The core of theoretical models of monetary policy without precommitment

involves policy-makers' incentives to inflate. By testing a prediction of the

models concerning a determinant of the level of inflation, I am thus testing

the central element of these models. Indeed, an important source of the

appeal of these models is that they provide a candidate explanation of modern

economies' tendency toward what many perceive to be "excessive" inflation.

      The remainder of the paper consists of three sections. Section II

presents a simple model that illustrates the basic prediction that I seek to

test. Section III presents the empirical evidence concerning the relation

between openness and inflation.   I find that there is a quantitatively large,

statistically significant, and robust negative relationship between openness

and inflation, confirming the prediction of the theory. I consider several

alternative explanations of the relationship, but find that none appear to fit

the facts. I also find that the link between openness and inflation is absent

in the most highly developed countries; in these countries average inflation

rates are low and are unrelated to openness. The results thus suggest that

only a small group of developed countries have overcome the dynamic

inconsistency of optimal monetary policy. Section IV concludes.




                                        3
                           II. AN ILLUSTRATIVE MODEL


      In this section I present a simple theoretical model that demonstrates

that the benefits of a surprise monetary expansion are smaller in more open

economies, and hence that models of discretionary monetary policy predict that

inflation is higher in less open economies. The model is a straightforward

extension to an open economy setting of existing models of the macroeconomics

of imperfect competition with sticky prices (for example, Blanchard and

Kiyotaki, 1987, and Ball and Roner, 1990). Other models in the same spirit,

such as the one that Rogoff uses to show that international policy

coordination can be harmful, would yield the same prediction.


      Assumptions. Consider a country whose citizens consume a continuum of

differentiated goods and that imports fraction a of those goods. a thus

measures the country's degree of openness. Let e be the change from the

preceding period in the log exchange rate, p* the change in the log price

index for foreign goods in foreign currency units, and p the change in the

log price index for domestically-produced goods in domestic currency units.

Then the rate of consumer price inflation (that is, the change in the log

CPI), x, is given by


(1)           x —   a(e+p*) + (1-a)p

      Assume that an individual's utility from consumption is a CES

combination of his or her consumptions of the different goods, and let a < 1

denote the inverse of the elasticity of substitution between any two goods.

Because goods produced at home are imperfect substitutes for goods produced

abroad, an expansion of domestic output must drive down the relative price of


                                       4
domestically produced goods:


(2)               e +       p   -
                                    p   —   a(y-y*)

where y is the change in log domestic output and y* the change in log

foreign output.

        Assume that fraction f of domestic prices are flexible in the short

run and the remaining 1-f are rigid. (This could arise from overlapping

contracts or heterogeneous costs of price adjustment, for example. I discuss

below how f could be made endogenous.) Then


(3)               p —       f   +   (l-f)      *




where       and             are the rates of inflation of prices that are flexible in

the short run and those that are fixed, respectively.

        I assume that flexible prices are set according to


(4)               P-X—qY,
where upper case symbols denote log levels (rather than log changes) of the

corresponding lower case variables. Equation (4) states that the real prices

charged by firms that can adjust their prices ex post are increasing in

aggregate output. 4 measures the degree of responsiveness of the flexible

prices to output. For example, In the simple case in which labor is the only

input into production, the labor market is competitive, wages are flexible,

and there are constant returns,                       would be simply the inverse of the

elasticity of labor supply. Since, as will be seen below, initially prices

are at their equilibrium values, equation (4) also holds in changes:


 (4')
                        -
                            x—qy


                                                         5
          Finally, money demand is given by


(5)                  m-p— y,

where in      is   the change in the log money stock.                        (5) could arise from a cash-

in-advance constraint or from an assumption that money enters the utility

function; alternatively, it can be viewed simply as a short-cut way of

modeling aggregate demand.

          I assume that analogous equations describe the rest of the world, which

for simplicity I assume consists of a single country. Thus, letting a

denote a foreign variable:


(6)                       — ap* +          (l-a)(p-e)

(7)                  p* —     f*       +   (l-f)*
(8)                       -   x*   —



(9)                  rn*p* y*.

          If all prices were perfectly flexible (f—l), the equilibrium would be

p —   a   ,
                   — m*   ,   y        y* — 0   ,   and   e —   a   -   m*   .   Because of imperfect

competition, the equilibrium level of output is less than the socially optimal

level. Assuming that each good is produced by a separate firm, each firm's

ratio of price to marginal cost is 11(1-a) .                             Thus, at the flexible-price

equilibrium, the marginal impact of an increase in y on welfare (with the

real exchange rate held fixed), measured in units of real output, is                                    .   in
addition, changes in the real exchange rate, because they represent changes in

the real price of foreign goods, also affect welfare. Since the equilibrium

level of output is one and since the fraction of goods purchased from abroad

is a , the marginal welfare impact of a rise in e+p*-p (with y unchanged)


                                                          6
is -a
        Finally, following the standard practice in this literature, I assume a

direct cost to inflation. because it seems realistic, I assume that it Is CPI

inflation, rather than domestic price inflation, that is costly. Assuming

that the cost of inflation is associated with domestic inflation would not

change the central results of the model.                  I write the cost as c(x) and

assume c'(.) > 0, c"(.) > 0.


        The effects of a monetary expansion. Equations (l)-(9) can be used to

find the effects of an ex post monetary expansion --                that   is, an increase in

the money supply m with predetermined prices,                      (and *     ) already set.

The effects on output, domestic inflation, CPI inflation, and the real

exchange rate are given by:


                           (l-f)F(l-f) + 1(l-a)a+1f1
(a)
 10



 lOb
                           f[(l-f)j + f(i+O)3         + (l-f)aal
                dm



(c)
 10
                           dfE(l-f +       f(+a)1     +   (l-f)aa(l+f)


 lOd
                d(e+p*p)                (l-f)I(l-f) +     dfla
                     din




where


(11)                 —     [(1-f)   +   f1t(l-f) + (+)f]
Since       does not depend on the degree of openness a,                   it follows

immediately from (l0a)-(lOc) that the effect of a monetary expansion on output

is smaller in a more open economy, and that its effects on both domestic and



                                                  7
CPI inflation are larger. Thus the output-inflation tradeoff facing policy-

makers (measured as either dy/dp or dy/dx )      is   less favorable in a more

open economy. The impact of an increase in money growth on the real exchange

rate, in contrast, is independent of openness. But since the welfare cost of

a given real exchange rate depreciation is larger the more open the economy --

 since   a larger fraction of goods are purchased from abroad -   - real   exchange

rate depreciation provides a greater disincentive to expansionary monetary

policy in more open economies.

         The intuition for these results is straightforward. A monetary

expansion with sticky prices raises output at home relative to output abroad.

Inducing consumers to buy more domestic goods relative to foreign goods

requires that the relative price of domestic goods fall --     that   is, that there

be real depreciation.3 This depreciation affects inflation through two

channels. First, foreign goods prices are a component of the CPI, and so

depreciation directly increases CPI inflation. Second, depreciation raises

the costs of domestic firms. For example, if nominal wages are at all

flexible, the rise in the CPI causes wages to increase. Thus flexible-price

firms raise their prices by more than they would without the depreciation,

again increasing inflation.

         The more open the economy, the larger is the weight of foreign goods in

the CPI. Thus the impact of the monetary expansion on both CPI inflation and

domestic price inflation is larger in a more open economy. As a result, more

of the monetary expansion is translated into higher prices, and less into




       Note that, as long as domestically-produced goods consumed at home and
imports are imperfect substitutes, real depreciation is necessary even if the
country faces a perfectly elastic demand curve for its export goods. Thus the
central results of the model would also hold in a model of an economy that
produced services and protected manufactures for domestic consumption and
primary commodities for export.

                                         8
higher output.

       In addition, the more open the economy, the smaller is the impact of the

monetary expansion on foreign output. The reasoning parallels the analysis

above: when a is large, the home economy is small relative to the foreign

economy, and so the real appreciation for the foreign country has little

impact of foreign firms' prices, and hence little impact on foreign output.

Thus increased openness reduces the impact of a monetary expansion on both

home and foreign output. With the specific assumptions I have made, the net

effect is that the impact on the real exchange rate is independent of the

degree of openness. But, because foreign goods represent a larger share of

consumption in a more open economy, both the direct welfare cost of the real

depreciation and its impact on inflation (measured using either the CPI or

domestic prices) are greater in a more open economy.


       Equilibrium inflation. To complete the model it is necessary to specify

how      ,       ,   m    ,   and   m* are determined.   I assume that firms that set

prices before is         is known have the same objective function as firms that set

prices ex post. Thus, paralleling (4') and (B),


(12)             j-= E[x +      'y]

(13)                  — E[x* +      y*]
where E denotes expectations conditional on the information a'.ailable when

prices are set. Together with equations (1) -            (9),   (12) and (13) imply


(14)                 — E[m]


(15)                  —


       There are two requirements for equilibrium. The first is that


                                               9
expectations are rational. Since there is no uncertainty in the model, from

(14) and (15) this condition is simply                            —   rn   ,      m*   .   Thus in

equilibrium output equals its flexible-price level.

        The second equilibrium condition is that the monetary authority chooses

money growth optimally ex post, taking                                (and *) as given. This requires


                                                                      dx
(16)                    a       -       ad(e+p*-p)     —    c
                                                                 (x)

Together, (14) and (16) imply that in equilibrium (16) must hold at a point at

which         — m   ,       and hence y—O --           that      is, at the flexible-price

equilibrium. That is, expected inflation, and hence the growth rate of prices

that are set in advance, must adjust to the point where the monetary authority

does not wish to create additional inflation ex post. Similarly, the

condition for the equilibrium rate of money growth in the foreign country is



(17)                    a           +    (1   )d(e+P*P) —
                                                 dm*                  c'(x*)
(15) implies that this condition must hold at a point where * — m*

         Substituting (lOa), (lOc), and (lOd) into (16) establishes formally the

model's central prediction that increased openness reduces equilibrium

inflation. dy/dm is decreasing in a , and                                  a(d(e+p*-p)/dm] is increasing

in      a .    Thus the left-hand side of (16) is decreasing in a .                             In   addition,

dx/dm is increasing in a .                     Since       c'(x) and c"(x) are positive,
maintaining the equality as a rises requires that x fall.4


       Allowing the fraction of firms with flexible prices (    ), to be                    f
endogenous would strengthen these results. Suppose that it is costly for a
firm to retain the ability to adjust its price ex post, and suppose that this
cost varies across firms. One can show that in response to a given surprise
change either in m or in m* ,      a firm's desired price change is larger the
more open the economy (that is, d/dxn and d/dm* are increasing in a ).
The firm's incentive to adjust its price is therefore greater in a more open

                                                            10
       Because the basic mechanism through which increased openness reduces

equilibrium inflation is straightforward, the central results of the model - -

that   increased openness worsens the output-inflation tradeoff and lowers

equilibrium inflation --   are   quite robust. For example, assiuning that foreign

output and prices are unaffected by domestic monetary expansion does not

change these conclusions. The same is true of allowing the effect of domestic

output relative to foreign output on the real exchange rate and the welfare

benefit of increased output -    - both   of which are currently determined by a

the inverse of the elasticity of substitution between goods -     - to   be governed

by separate parameters. Similarly, the choices of whether it is CPI inflation

or domestic price inflation that is relevant for firms' price setting

decisions, for money demand, and for the costs of inflation are not important

to the model's conclusions.




economy. Under natural assumptions -- for example, that the distribution of
costs of having a flexible price is the same in the two countries and that the
variances of the surprise monetary shocks in the two countries are equal --
the fraction of firms with flexib1e prices will therefore be larger in the
more open economy. This would provide another channel through which increased
openness worsened the output-inflation tradeoff, and would therefore cause
increased openness to lower equilibrium inflation even further.

                                            ii
                                III. THE EVIDENCE


      In this Section I use cross-country data to test the prediction of the

theory that inflation will be higher in less open economies.


      Sample and Data. I focus on the modern exchange rate system that began

in 1973. Because the Bretton woods system that existed before 1973 limited

countries' ability to pursue independent monetary policies, the post-1973

regime appears to provide a better setting for testing the theory.

      I begin with as broad a sample of countries as possible. There is no a

priori reason to expect the predictions of the theory to apply only to certain

types of countries.5 And the basic variables that the theory focuses on --

inflation   and the import share - -   can   be measured, at least approximately,

with relative ease.     My basic sample therefore consists of all of the non-

centrally planned economies listed by Summers and Heston (1988) for whom data

on openness and inflation are available. This sample consists of 114

countries.6 I also investigate the relationship between openness and

inflation for a variety of narrower samples.




       In particular, the fact that many developing countries are on fixed
exchange rates does not provide a reason to exclude these countries from the
sample. For a worldwide fixed exchange rate regime like the Bretton woods
system, one can make a case that it could serve to coordinate or precoinmic
policy. But it is difficult to see how just a stated policy by a country that
it plans to hold its exchange rate fixed can serve as a precornmitment or
coordination device; certainly many countries with 'fixed" exchange rates
change their exchange rates ex post.

       Seven non-centrally planned economies listed by Summers and Heston are
excluded from the sample because of insufficient data. They are Afghanistan,
Angola, Chad, Cuinea, Iraq, Mali, and Mozambique.

                                             12
      National accounts data are from the International Financial Statistics

of the International Monetary Fund.7 Inflation is measured as the change in

the log CDP or CNP deflator. For countries for which this series is not

available, I use the change in the log Cr1 instead (this series is from IMF,

1986a). Openness is measured as the average share of imports in GDP or CNP

over the years beginning in 1973. Again, the standard IFS series is

unavailable for a few countries; for these countries I use an alternative

series also constructed by the IMF (IMF. 1988). Although the two measures of

imports are slightly differently conceptually (see IMF, 1988, pp. v-viii),

when both measures are available they are similar. Finally, data on real

income per capita --   which is used as a control variable in some

specifications --   are from Summers and Heston; I use the figure for 1980,

since this is approximately the mid-point of the post-1973 period and since

1980 is a benchmark year for Summers and Heston. Table Al at the end of the

paper presents the basic data used in the tests.


      Specification. A few countries in the sample have extremely high

average inflation rates. Thus the parameter estimates from a linear

regression would be determined almost entirely by a handful of observations.

A simple change that reduces the importance of the countries with extreme

inflation rates is to consider the log rather than the level of average

inflation. Thus my basic specification is a regression of the log of average




       The IMF does not provide data for Taiwan. These data (which are
comparable to the standard IFS data) are therefore taken from the Statistical
Yearbook of the Republic of China.

                                        13
inflation on a constant and the degree of openness.8

      My other specifications differ from the basic one by controlling for

other factors.   I consider three types of control variables. The first is

real income per capita; this can serve as a general measure of development,

and thus may capture a variety of factors that influence average inflation.

The second is a set of dummy variables for OECD membership and for various

regions; these too are likely to be correlated with factors that influence

average inflation. The third are dummy variables for the use of the CPI

rather than the GDP deflator to measure inflation and for the alternative

measure of openness; these capture any differences in the average levels of

the alternative measures. Note that the exclusion of any factor that could

potentially affect average inflation biases the coefficient on openness only

if the omitted factor is correlated with openness. Thus, since there is no

reason to expect such potential determinants of the average inflation rate as

political stability, the independence of the central bank, and so on to be

correlated with openness, the exclusion of variables capturing these

additional influences on inflation is unlikely to cause bias.9


      Basic results. Figure 1 and Table 1 present the results for the broad

sample of countries.




       Considering log inflation would not be appropriate if some countries
had very low average rates of inflation, since the logarithmic transformation
would give those countries undue weight in the regressions. No countries in
the sample have extremely low inflation rates, however; the lowest average
rate (Singapore's) is 3.6%.

       The alternative strategy of attempting to add measures of as many
political and economic determinants of the average inflation rate as possible
to the regression would result in a drastic reduction in the sample size.
Cukierman, Edwards, and Tabellini (1989) investigate the link between
political stability and inflation.

                                       14
     Figure 1 is a scatterplot of the wean rate of inflation since 1973

(measured on a logarithmic scale) against the degree of openness. The figure

shows a negative relationship between openness and inflation. The

corresponding regression is reported in the first column of Table 1. The t-

statistic on openness is -3.8: there is a statistically significant negative

relationship between openness and inflation, just as the theory predicts.

Moreover, the estimated impact of openness on inflation is quantitatively

large. The point estimates in Column 1, for example, imply an average rate of

inflation of 18% for a closed economy, 14% for an economy with an import share

of 25%, 11% for an import share of 50%, and 8% for an import share of 75%.

Finally, the fraction of the variation in inflation explained by the

regression is non-trivial: openness alone accounts for over ten percent of

the cross-country variation in average inflation rates.10

      The remaining columns of Table 1 investigate the robustness of this

result to some simple changes in specification. In Column 2 I add dummy

variables for the use of the CPI to measure inflation and for the alternative

measure of the import share. This change alters the results only trivially.

In Column 3 I also add log real income per capita to the regression. The

regression suggests that higher real income is associated with a modest

decline in average inflation. The estimated impact of openness on inflation




        As Figure 1 shows, two countries in the sample --   Singapore and
Leotho -- have average ratios of imports to CDP in excess of 100%. In the
case of Singapore, this simply reflects the facts that imports and exports are
measured in terms of gross value and CDP in terms of value-added, and that
value-added in Singapore is low relative to the gross value of imports. In
the case of Lesotho, the ratio in excess of 100% arises from the use of CDP
rather than CNP as the measure of output and the importance of labor income
earned abroad to that economy. Thus ratios of imports to GDP over 100% do not
indicate data errors. Nonetheless, one might be concerned that these few
extreme observations had an excessive influence on the results. Reestimating
the regressions with Singapore and Lesotho excluded, however, lowers the t-
statistic on openness only modestly.

                                       15
                                              0
              160%
                             0

                80   -       0                                          0
                                              0
                                      0
                                      o
  Inflation     40           o                        oo0
(log scale)                      EU
                                      0
                20-
                                      J:1JD
                                                                                         0
                                                                 Do0
                                                                0                    0
                10   -
                                   JD
                                  °E
                                                                                 D
                                                                                                 0
                                              oc?D0                                                          o
                                              o 0               oD
                                              o       o                 0                0
                5                                      0                                             o
                                 00                                                                      o
                                                  00                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                —
                     —
                                                                    I                        I       I                 I    I           I
                                          I       I        I

                         0            20                   40           60               80                      100       120   140   160%


                                                                                 Import Share (%)



                                                                FIGURE      1.   OPENNESS AND INFLATION
                                                TABLE 1

                              RESULTS FOR THE FULL SAMPLE



                                                     (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)

Constant                                          -1.730           4.744)          -1.375         -1.919

                                                  (0.117)          (0.118)         (0.471)        (0.718)


                                                  -1.006           -1.070          -1.019         -0.827
Openness
                                                  (0.266)          (0.272)         (0.280)        (0.266)


 Log Real Income                                                                   -0.049         -0.014

      per Capita                                                                   (0.061)        (0.099)


 Data Dummies Included?                              No             Yes              Yes             Yes


 Regional Dummies Included?                          No              No              No              Yes




 R2                                                  .114            .124            .129           .373


 S.E.E.                                              .671            .673            .674           .585

Standard errors arc in parentheses. Thc dependent variable is the log of the average inflation rate since 1973.
*Data dummies are dummy variables for the alternative measures of openness and inflation (described in the
text). Regional dummies" are dummy variables for South America, Central America, Africa, OECD
membership, and the major oil producers.
is again little changed.1'

      Column 4 reports the results of including dummies for OECD membership,

the major oil producers, South America, Central America (including the

Caribbean), and Africa. The coefficients on the dummies (which are not

reported in the table) confirm that there are differences in inflation rates

across regions. The dummy for South American countries is large (1.17) and

highly significant; those for Africa and Central America are of moderate size

(.20 and .30, respectively); and those for OECD membership and the oil

producers are small (.09 and .06). The null hypothesis that the coefficients

on the dummies are all zero is strongly rejected. The estimated link between

openness and inflation, however, is little changed: the coefficient is about

eighty percent of its previous value, and the t-statistic remains greater than

3.



      Robustness across samples. Table 2 investigates the results for a

variety of sub-samples. For each sample I report the results only for the

specification that includes log real income per capita and the dummy variables

for the use of alternative data sources. Exclusion of these control variables

or inclusion of the regional dummies has little effect on the results.

      Column 1 excludes countries with average inflation rates greater than

30% from the sample. The estimated coefficient on openness is smaller than

before, but the t-statistic remains in excess of 3. Thus the results do not

depend on a few countries with extreme inflation rates.

      Column 2 eliminates several types of countries whose monetary policies

are closely tied to those of other countries, and to whom the model thus does



        Because real income is an extremely poor index of development for the
major oil producing countries, all regressions that include real income are
also estimated with the oil producers excluded from the sample. This change
has no important effect on the results.

                                      16
                                                                           TABLE 2

                                                     RESULTS FOR NARROWER SAMPLES



                          (1)         (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)          (9)           (10)
                         High       Countries                                                                                                  18 Highly
                       Inflation    w/o Indep.                                                                                   18 Highly     Developed
                       Countries    Mon. Pol.       Good                                   South       Central                   Developed     Countries
                       Excluded     Excluded        Data        OECD         Africa       America      America        Asia       Countries     Excluded


   Constant             -1.558        -1.462       -0.469        6.857       -1.183        3.530       -4.613        -2_414        8.278        -2.404

                        (0.288)       (0.544)      (0.941)      (2.223)      (0.774)      (6.608)      (2.490)      (0.984)        (9.778)      (0.516)


   Openness             -0.534        -1.046       -1.548       -0.297       -0.337       -3.287       -1.771        -0.423        -0.096       -1.316
                        (0.172)       (0.314)      (0.595)      (0.605)      (0.358)      (1.893)      (1.804)       (0.488)       (0.790)      (0.284)


   Log Income           -0.076        -0.029       -0.136       -1.023       -0.133       -0.467        0.417        0.030         -1.187        0.116

    per Capita          (0.037)       (0.071)      (0.116)      (0.2.50)     (0.118)      (0.800)      (0.305)       (0.131)       (1.070)      (0.070)




   R2                     .184          .124         .104         .459         .206         .405         .298          .067          .077         .193


  SEE.                    .392         .712         .773          .460         .443         .885         .613          .644          .534         .644



  Sample Size             100           94           63           24            38           12           12           24            18            96

See notes to Table 1. Coefficients and standarderrol-s for the dummy variables for alternative measures of openness and inflation not reported. High inflation
countries are ones with average inflation rates greater than 30%. For the definitions of the samples used in Columns 2 and 3, see the text.
not clearly apply. Specifically, I exclude the members of the two Francophone

African monetary unions, the members of the European Monetary System, and two

countries (Liberia and Panama) that employ U.S. dollars rather than domestic

currencies. This change has virtually no effect on the coefficient on

openness, although the standard error does increase slightly.

      Column 3 restricts the sample to countries for whom reliable data are

available -   - specifically,   countries whose national accounts data receive a

rating of "C" or better from Summers and Heston, for whom the alternative

measures of inflation and the import share did not have to be used, and who

are not major oil producers. This sample consists of 63 countries. The point

estimates imply a larger impact of openness on inflation than does the

corresponding regression for the full sample (Column 3 of Table 1). The t-

statistic on openness, however, is somewhat smaller.

      Columns 4 through 8 of the table examine the relationship between

openness and inflation within regions (again considering the OECD as a

"region"). For each region, the point estimates offer support for the

predicted negative relationship. There is also no evidence that the

relationship differs across regions; the null hypothesis that the coefficients

on openness are equal for all regions cannot be rejected. Given the small

sample sizes, however, the coefficients for the regional sub-samples are

generally insignificant.

      The robustness of the result is not surprising. The 15 most open

economies in the sample all have average inflation rates of less than 14%, and

13 have rates less than or equal to the sample median of 11%. At the other

extreme, the 10 most closed economies include 6 of the 14 countries with

average inflation rates over 30%.       It is difficult to see what characteristic

differentiates such low inflation countries as Bahrain, Barbados, Guyana,



                                           17
Malaysia, Malta, Mauritania, the Netherlands, Papua New Guinea, Singapore,

Surinam, and Tunisia from such high inflation countries as Argentina, Brazil,

Ghana, Indonesia, Iran, Mexico, Nigeria, Peru, Sudan, Turkey, and Uganda other

than the fact that the former are quite open and the latter relatively closed.

      Although the results are generally robust across subsamples, there is no

evidence that the prediction of the theory holds for the most highly developed

countries. Consider for example the 18 wealthiest countries in the sample

other than the major oil producers.'2 Among these countries, there is

virtually no link between openness and inflation, although a two standard

error confidence interval also includes large negative values (Column 9 of

Table 2). More important, average inflation rates in these countries are low.

The average for the 18 is 8.7%, and the regression equation for the full

sample, even controlling for per capita income (Column 3 of Table 1),

underpredicts inflation for 17 of the 18.

      Outside this small group of highly developed countries, in contrast,

average inflation rates are high and are strongly related to openness.     The

average inflation rate for the set of 96 countries that excludes the highly

developed 18 is 18.9%. In this sample, controlling for per capita income, the

t-statistic on openness is -4.6, and the point estimates imply that for a

country with per capita income equal to the sample median, average inflation

falls from 21% to 8% as openness rises from 0 to 75% (Column 10 of Table 2).

Finally, openness accounts for a substantial fraction of the variation in

inflation among these countries: a simple regression of the log of average



     12 The countries (listed in order of 1980 per capita income) are the

United States, Canada, Norway, Luxembourg, Switzerland, Germany, France,
Denmark, Japan, Iceland, Belgium, the Netherlands, Sweden, Finland, Australia,
Austria, the United Kingdom, and New Zealand. For comparison, the next
wealthiest countries (again excluding major oil producers) are Hong Kong,
Italy, Trinidad and Tobago, Israel, Spain, Singapore, Ireland, Malta, Uruguay,
and Barbados.

                                       18
inflation on a constant and openness has an R2 of .17.

      Thus the data are consistent with the view that there Is a group of

approximately 15 to 20 highly developed countries that have found some means

of solving the problem of dynamic inconsistency of optimal monetary policy.

For these countries, average rates of inflation are low and are unrelated to a

measure of policy-makers' incentives to attempt surprise monetary expansions.

in the rest of the world, on the other hand, the problem of dynamic

inconsistency does not appear to have been solved: average rates of inflation

are much higher and are strongly related to the benefits of expansion.13


      Alternative Explanations. The natural interpretation of the negative

association between openness and average inflation is that greater openness

reduces policy-makers' incentives to undertake surprise monetary expansions,

and thus results in lower inflation. In this section I consider two

alternative explanations of this link.

      The first possibility is that openness is endogenous. The ratio of

imports to GD? depends not just on a country's size -   - the   variable emphasized

in the theoretical model --   but   also on the country's policy choices. It is

possible, for example, that countries that adopt protectionist policies also

adopt other policies benefiting special interest groups, and that this in turn

leads to large budget deficits and hence to high rates of inflation to




     13 For the sample that excludes the 18 highly developed countries, there
is no evidence either than average rates of inflation are declining in income
or that the link between openness and inflation weakens as income rises. In
this group of countries, average inflation is in fact increasing in average
income (Column 10 of Table 2). And when an interaction term between openness
and log real income is added to the regression, its coefficient is negative
and significant, suggesting that the inverse link between openness and
inflation becomes stronger rather than weaker as income rises. Thus the data
are not at all supportive of the view that the extent to which countries have
solved the dynamic inconsistency problem is a smoothly increasing function of
their level of development.

                                         19
generate seignorage revenues. If so, a negative correlation between openness

and inflation could arise through this channel rather than through the impact

of openness on policy-makers' incentives to pursue expansionary policies.

       To address this possibility, I reestimate the basic regressions by

instrumental variables, treating openness as endogenous and using a country's

land area (in logarithms) as an instrument. Data on land area are listed in

the final column of Table Al. A country's land area is not determined by its

current policies. Thus land area can reasonably be assumed to be uncorrelated

with the policy determinants of the ratio of imports to CD?. At the same

time, land area is strongly negatively correlated with openness. A regression

of the ratio of imports to GD? on a constant and log land area produces a t-

statistic on log land area of -9.5 and an R2 of 0.45.

       Table 3 reports the instrumental variables estimates. The IV estimates

of the impact of openness on inflation are in fact larger than the OLS

estimates. In the simple regression of the log of average inflation on

openness and a constant, for example, the IV estimate is -1.32 while the OLS

estimate is -1.01.   In addition, the IV estimates are always highly

significant. Hausman tests fail to reject the null hypothesis that the IV and

OLS   estimates are equal. Thus there is no evidence that possible endogeneity
of the import share is the source of the negative association between the

import share and average inflation.

       The second alternative explanation that I consider is that the negative

association between openness and inflation reflects considerations involving

the government budget and seignorage rather than the absence of precommitment

in monetary policy. The argument takes two specific forms. First, the amount

of revenue generated by a given tariff is increasing in the openness of the

economy. Thus the governments of smaller countries may obtain larger



                                       20
                                               TABLE 3

                        INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES ESTIMATES



                                                    (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)

 Constant                                         -1.615          -1.628          -1.388         -2.020

                                                  (0.161)         (0.159)         (0.474)       (0.746)


 Openness                                         -1.316          -1.395          -1.345         -0.994

                                                  (0.399)         (0.4 10)        (0.433)       (0.422)


 Log Real Income                                                                  -0.033         -0.010

      per Capita                                                                  (0.063)        (0.109)


 Data Dummies Included?                             No             Yes             Yes             Yes


 Regional Dummies Included?                         No              No              No             Yes




 R2                                                 .103            .112            .118           .371


 S.E.E.                                             .675            .677            .678           .586

See notes to Table 1. The equations are estimated by instrumental variables, treating openness as endogenous
and using log land area (along with the other right-hand side variables) as an instrument.
fractions of their revenues from tariffs, and may therefore rely less on other

sources of revenue, including seignorage. The result may be lower rates of

inflation.' Second, the elasticity of demand for domestic currency with

respect to the inflation rate may be higher in more open economies: greater

trade may make foreign currencies more easily available, and may therefore

make it easier for residents to obtain substitutes for domestic currency. If

this is the case, then the optimal tax rate on domestic currency --       the

inflation rate --     is   lower in more open economies.

      Although these budgetary arguments are not a priori implausible, three

pieces of evidence strongly suggest that they do not account for the negative

association between openness and inflation. First, tariffs and seignorage are

much more important sources of revenue for poor countries than for rich ones.

The average share of central government revenue in 1980 obtained from tariffs

is 3% for the 18 highly developed countries, 11% for countries with per capita

incomes between $4000 and $7300, 26% for countries with per capita incomes

between $1000 and $4000, and 32% for countries with per capita incomes below

$1000. Similarly, the average shares of revenue coming from seignorage for

these four groups of countries are 0%, 2%, 6%, and 8%, respectively. (IMF,

l986b, pp. 8-9, 24-25.)' Since the budgetary arguments rest on the

importance of these revenue sources, they predict that the link between

openness and inflation will decline as per capita income rises. This

prediction can be tested by adding an interaction term between openness and

log real income per capita to the regressions. If the link between openness




     14
          This   argument is made by Cukiernian, Edwards, and Tabellini (1989).

     ' Since per capita income is a very poor measure of development for the
major oil producers, these countries are excluded from the calculations.
Including them in either the $4000-$7300 or the $l000-4000 group has little
effect.

                                            21
and average inflation lessens as tariffs and seignorage decline in importance,

the coefficient on the interaction term will be positive.

     There is no evidence that the relationship between openness and

inflation becomes weaker as income rises. Despite the fact that the openness-

inflation link is absent among the most highly developed countries, for the

full sample the interaction term enters with a negative coefficient, contrary

to the prediction of the budgetary explanation of the results, In the

regression analogous to Column 3 of Table 1, for example, the coefficient on

the interaction variable is -0.37 (with a standard error of 0.28). The point

estimates imply an effect of openness on log inflation that increases from

-0.55 to -1.33 as 1980 real income per capita rises from the 25th percentile

($730) to the 75th ($5974) among the countries in the sample. The hypothesis

of no interaction cannot be rejected. Moreover, the data appear inconsistent

with the view that the effect declines substantially as real income rises.

Even if the true coefficient on the interaction variable were two standard

errors larger than the point estimate, the effect of openness and log average

inflation would change only by 0.41 as real income rose from its 25th

percentile value to the 75th percentile)6

      Second, the importance of tariff revenue, and the strength of the link

between country size and the use of tariffs, are much too small to account for

the size of the link between openness and inflation. Because even very small

countries obtain only moderate fractions of their revenues from tariffs, the

use of tariffs does not free these countries from the need to obtain




     16
        Excluding the oil producers (for whom per capita income is a poor
measure of development) changes these results only trivially. When the 18
highly developed countries are excluded, the coefficient on the interaction
term increases to -0.72 and becomes significant. With regional dummies
included, however, the coefficient remains negative but returns to being
insignificant.

                                       22
significant revenues from other sources. Consider for example a regression of

the fraction of central government revenue obtained from tariffs on a

constant, openness, the dummy for the alternative measure of openness, and log

real per capita income.'7 The coefficient estimates from this regression

imply that for a country with per capita income equal to the sample median, as

the share of imports in GDP falls from 60% to 20%, the fraction of the

government's revenue coming from tariffs falls from 27% to 18%; thus the

fraction coming from sources other than tariffs rises by about 13%. The basic

openness-inflation regressions (for example, Column 3 of Table 1), however,

imply that the same change in openness is associated with an increase of 50%

in average inflation. It is simply not plausible that this very large

increase in inflation could be the result simply of shifting away from tariffs

toward all other revenue sources. This could occur only if seignorage

revenues were only very slightly increasing in the inflation rate; as I

describe below, this does not appear to be the case. Thus it appears that the

tariff-based explanation can account for at most a small part of the openness-

inflation relationship.

      The third piece of evidence that the budget-based explanations of the

results are not correct is that the elasticity of money demand also does not

appear to vary in a quantitatively important way with the degree of openness.

Fair (1987) and Driscoll and Lahiri (1983) estimate money demand functions for




       8ecause of the obvious simultaneity problem -- increased reliance on
tariffs reduces measured openness -- the regression (like those in Table 3) is
estimated by instrumental variables, treating openness as endogenous and
employing log land area as an instrument. The data on tariff revenue are for
1980 and cover 97 of the 114 countries; they are from the IMF (1986b. pp. 24-
25)

                                      23
large groups of countries.18 Fair focuses on developed countries; his sample

consists of twenty OECD members and six less developed countries. He

estimates money demand with the interest rate entered both in logarithms and

in levels; the dependent variable is the log of the real money stock in both

cases. Driscoll and Lahiri consider twelve less developed countries. They

use the inverse of velocity as their dependent variable and inflation (rather

than the interest rate) as their measure of the cost of holding money, and

inflation is entered linearly.

      Table 4 presents simple regressions of these estimates of the interest

or inflation sensitivity of money demand on the degree of openness.19 The

results suggest a small and statistically insignificant effect of openness on

the slope of the money demand function. All of the estimated coefficients are

insignificant, and in one case the regression suggests that money demand is in

fact less elastic in more open economies. In addition, both Fair's and

Driscoll and Lahiri's estimates suggest that the elasticity of money demand is

small (less than 0.1), even in quite open economies.2° Thus the possible loss

of seignorage revenues is unlikely to be a central determinant of the average

inflation rate in most situations: over the retevant range, higher inflation



     18 The measure of money used by these authors is the sum of currency and
demand deposits rather than high-powered money, which is what is relevant for
seignorage. But the argument that the interest elasticity of the demand for
high-powered money is higher in more open economies appears to apply equally
well to the demand for currency and demand deposits.

     19 Fair's estimates are from his Table 1; Driscoll and Lahiri's are from
their Table 1. Adding the log of average inflation or the log of per capita
income to the regressions has no important effect on the results.

     20 To convert the fitted semi-elasticities in Column 2 into elasticities
it is necessary to multiply by the interest rate; since Fair enters the
interest rate in percent, for an interest rate of 15% the fitted values must
be multiplied by 15. For Column 3, the conversion factor is the product of
velocity and the inflation rate. Thus for inflation of 15% and velocity equal
to 5, the fitted values must be multiplied by 75. The resulting elasticities
are consistently less than 0.1.

                                      24
                                    TABLE 4

           THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN OPENNESS AND
              THE ELASTICITY OF MONEY DEMAND



                     (1)                        (2)                   (3)
                                              Interest
              Interest Elasticity        Semi-Elasticity      Inflation Sensitivity
             of Money Demand            of Money Demand       of Inverse Velocity
                 (Fair, 1987)              (Fair, 1987)    (Driscoll and L.ahri, 1983)

Constant          -0.0364                     -0.00073              -0.000031

                  (0.0153)                    (0.00190)             (0.000758)


Openness           0.0150                     -0.00787              -0.00161

                   (0.0428)                   (0.00606)             (0.00283)


R2                   .004                       .066                  .031



S.E.E.               .032                       .0039                 .00097
leads to little erosion of the money stock,2'

      In sum, both budgetary explanations of the link between openness and

inflation are contradicted by the fact that the link does not become weaker as

real income rises. In addition, the basic mechanisms underlying both

explanations appear much too weak to account for the magnitude of the

openness-inflation link: small countries obtain only moderately more revenues

from tariffs than large countries, and the elasticity of money demand is small

and is at most only slightly increasing in openness.




     21 The evidence from hyperinflacions (both historical and modern) also
suggests small inflation or interest elasticities of money demand. Despite
vast increases in inflation, real money holdings (and real high-powered money
holdings) typically fall by much less than a factor of ten in hyperinflations.
The estimates in Cagan's classic study, for example, imply that the long-run
inflation elasticity of money demand is generally less than 0.1 for inflation
rates less than 20%, and that the inflation rate that maximizes steady state
seignorage is typically not reached until inflation (measured as the change in
the log of the price level) reaches about 300% (Cagan, 1956).

                                       25
                               IV. CONCLUSION


      This paper demonstrates that average rates of inflation are lower in

more open economies. This relationship is statistically significant,

quantitatively large, and robust. It holds over a wide range of countries,

with the exception of a small group of highly developed countries in which

average inflation rates are low and unrelated to openness. Finally, the

relationship accounts for a moderate amount of the overall cross-country

variation in average inflation rates.

      The paper also proposes an explanation of this relationship. Because

unanticipated monetary expansion causes real exchange rate depreciation, and

because the harms of real depreciation are greater in more open economies, the

benefits of surprise expansion are a decreasing function of the degree of

openness. Thus if the monetary authorities' temptation to expand is an

important determinant of inflation --   that   is, if the absence of binding

precommitment is important to monetary policy - -   monetary authorities in more

open economies will on average, expand less, and the result will be lower

average rates of inflation. This interpretation of the results implies that

the most highly developed countries may have found some means of overcoming

the problem of dynamic inconsistency of optimal monetary policy, but that the

remaining countries of the world have not. The paper considers two other

candidate explanations of the inverse relation between openness and inflation,

one based on endogenous openness and one based on how governments' ability to

collect different types of revenue varies with openness, and finds that

neither fit the facts.




                                        26
      These findings suggest that models in which the absence of precommitment

in monetary policy leads to inefficiently high average levels of inflation are

essential to understanding inflation in most of the world. The results also

suggest that increased economic cooperation and integration, particularly

outside the most highly developed countries, should be viewed with caution:

in the absence of some mechanism to overcome the dynamic inconsistency

problem, increased integration may lead to large increases in average

inflation.




                                      27
                                     REFERENCES


Alesirta, Alberto, 1988.      "Macroeconomics and Politics." NBER Macroeconomics
      Annual 3: 13-52.
Ball, Laurence, and Rosier, David. 1990. "Real Rigidities and the Non-
       Neutrality of Money." Review of Economic Studies 57 (April): 183-203.
Barro,   Robert J., and Gordon, David B. 1983a. "A Positive Theory of Monetary
         Policyin a Natural Rate Model." Journal of Political Economy 91
         (August): 589-610.

Barro, Robert J., and Gordon, David B. 1983b. "Rules, Discretion and
      Reputation in a Model of Monetary Policy." Journal of Monetary
      Economics 12 (July): 101-121.

Blanchard, Olivier Jean, and Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro. 1987. "Monopolistic
      Competition and the Effects of Aggregate Demand." American Economic
      Review 77 (September): 647-666.

Cagan, Phillip. 1956. "The Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinflation." In Milton
      Friedman, ed., Studies in the quantity Theory of Money (Chicago:
         University of Chicago Press, 25-117.

Cukierman, Alex, Edwards, Sebastian, and Tabellini, Guido. 1989. "Seignorage
      and Political Instability." Mimeo, UCLA.

Driscoll, Michael J., and Lahiri, Ashok K. 1983. "Income-Velocity of Money
      in Agricultural Developing Economies." Review of Economics and
      Statistics 65 (August): 393-401.

Fair, Ray C.  1987. "International Evidence on the Demand for Money."        yjç
      of Economics and Statistics 69 (August): 473-480.

Fischer, Stanley. 1990. "Rules versus Discretion in Monetary Policy." in
      Benjamin M. Friedman and Frank H. Hahn, eds., Handbook of Monetary
      Economics (Amsterdam: North-Holland), vol. 2, 1155-1184.

International Monetary Fund. 1986a. International Financial Statistics
      Supplement on Price Statistics. IFS Supplement Series, no. 12.

International Monetary Fund. 1986b. International Financial Statistics
      Supplement on Government Finance. IFS Supplement Series, no. 11.

International Monetary Fund. 1988. International Financial Statistics
      Supplement on Trade Statistics. Supplement Series, no. 15.

Kydland, Finn E., and Prescott, Edward C. 1977. "Rules Rather than
      Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans." Journal of Political
      Economy 85 (June): 473-492.


                                          28
Phelps, Edmund S. 1967. "Phillips Curves, Expectations of Inflation, and
      Optimal Employment over Time." Economica 34: 254-281.

Rogoff, Kenneth. 1985a. "The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate
      Monetary Target." quarterly Journal of Economics 100 (November): 1169-
      1190.

Rogoff, Kenneth. 1985b. "Can International Monetary Policy Cooperation Be
      Counterproductive?" Journal of International Economics 18: 199-217.

Rogoff, Kenneth. 1989. "Reputations, Coordination, and Monetary Policy." In
      Robert J. Barro, ed., Modern Business Cycle Theory (Cambridge: Harvard
      University Press), 236-264.

Sheffrin, Steven N. 1988. "Two Tests of Rational Partisan Business Cycle
      Theory." Nimeo, University of California, Davis.

Suinniers, Robert, and Heston, Alan. 1988.  "A New Set of International
      Comparisons of Real Product and Price Levels Estimates for 130
      Countries, 1950-1985. Review of Income and Wealth 34 (March): 1-25.

Taylor, John B. 1983. "Comments." Journal of Monetary Economics 12 (July):
      123-125.




                                       29
                                 TABLE Al

                            BASIC DATA

                       Average
                       Share of                   1980 Real
                      Imports in      Average     Income per
                        GDP           Inflation    Capita,      Land Area
Countxy               since 1973     since 1973    U.S. S      Square Miles

AIgena&                  31.4%            9.9%       1998        919595
Argentina4                9.4           117.0        4342       1072067
Australia4                16.7            9.5        8349       2966150
Austriad                  35.6            5.0        8230         32375
Bha1flC                   91.0            4.8        9185           240
Bangladesha               17.0           12.9         540         55598
Barbadosa                 72.8           10.7        4454           166
Belgium4                  58.8            6.0        9228         11781
Benin                     38.9           10.3         534         43483
BoLivia4                  23.2          206.7         1529       424162
                          66.4           10.1         1477       231800
Brazil4                    7.4           74.1        3356       3286470
Buridna Fasos             40.7            8.8         358        105870
Burma                      8.9            5.5         483        261220
Burundi                   19.5            8.3         333         10747
cameroona                 24.3           10.2         875        183569
                          24.5            7.1        11332      3851809
Central Afr. RepY         13.9           10.7          487       241313
Chiled                    23.1           59.4         4271       292132
Colombia4                 13.7           21.6         2552       439735
Congo&                    55.0           10.9          981        132046
Costa Rica4               37.8           20.6         3031         19652
Cyprus4                   60.0            8.9         4282          3572
Denmark4                  33.2              8.1       9598         16631
Dominican Republic4       21.4           12.1         1868         18704
Ecuador4                  25.0           20.4         2607        109484
Egypta                    32.9            8.9          995        386900
El Salvador4              33.4           13.1         1410          8260
Ethiopia                  18.1              4.4        325        472432
Fijr4                     49.1              9.5       3005          7078
Finland4                  286               9.4       8393        130119
France4                   21.1            8.9         9688        211208
Gabon                     34.3           13.3         2973        103346
Gambiab                   56.5           14.9          556          4093
Gcrmanydi                 26.6            3.8         9795         9601(1
Ghana                     13.1           38.2          421         92100
Greece4                   27.6           16.2         4383         50961
Guatemala4                21.9            11.7        1952         42042
Guyana                    72.1            11.8        1623         83000
Haiti               34.4      6.0     696      10714
Honduras'           35.6      7.1    1075      43277
                    81.7      8.3    7268         398
Hong Kong
Iceland4            39.3     35.1    9285      39709
India4               8.1      7.8     614     1229737
Indonesia4          21.8     14.5    1063     735268
Iranc               18.3     16.2    2944     636293
Ireland4            56.6     11.1    4929      26600
lsrae4              57.5     75.3    6145       8020
                    22.9     13.8    7164     116500
italy4
Ivoiy Coasta        37.0     10.6    1110     124502
Jamaica4            49.3     16.8    1858       4411
                     12.9     4.3    9447     143574
Japand
Jordan              94.6      7.9    1885      37297
                    32.0     10.3     662     224960
Kenyad
Korea4              36.3     13.0     2369      38031
Kuwaitc              38.3     9.6    19454       6880
Lesothoa            117.8    10.7      694      11720
Liberia              55.7     7.8      680      43000
Luxembourg4          76.5     6.1    10173        999
Madagasca?           22.8    13.2      589     226660
Malawi               33.9    11.1      417      45747
Malaysia4            51.7     4.6     3112     128328
Malta4               91.6     4.2     4630        122
Mauritania           66.7     9.9      576     397953
Mauritius            57.1    13.3     14.84       787
Mexico4              10.8    32.8     4333     761600
Morocco4             31.4     8.4     1199     172413
Nepal                18.6     9.0      490      54463
Netherlands          50.7     4.6     9036      16041
New Z1alandd         30.8     11.6    7363     103884
Nicaragua            31.9    41.5     2012      50180
Nigera               32.5     13.8     441     489206
Nigeria              17.8     15.1     824     356700
 Norway4             42.7      7.7   11094     125049
 Omanc               41.7     10.4    6209      82030
 Pakistan4           20.1      9.7     989     310400
 Panama4             43.5      5.4    2.810     29761
 Papua New Guinea    49.4      7.1    1528     178704
 Paraguay4            21.9    15.7    1979     157047
 Peru4                20.4    49.5    2456     496222
 Philippines4         22.6    13.1    1551      115830
 Portugal4            38.5    18.7    3733       35550
 Rwandaa              18.6    10.1     379       10169
 Saudi Arabiac        35.3    10.0   11101     865000
 Scncgala             45.4    10.6      744      75954
 Sierra Leone         26.0    20.1     512       27700
 Singaporeb          163.8     3.6    5817         220
    Somalia'                    18.4    26.9    415    246199
    South Africa6               253     12.9   4286    471440
                                18.3    13.7   6131    194885
    Spain4
    Sri Lanka4                  38.3    12.4   1119     25332
    Sudan'                       15.8   21.2    652    967491
    Surinam                     57.6     9.4   3760     63251
    Swaziland'                  77.9    13.6   1079      6704
    Sweden4                     30.4     8.9   8863    173800
    Switzerland4                34.7     3.8   10013    15941
    Syria4                      29.8    13.5   3071     71498
    Taiwan4                     45.8     6.7   2921     13895
    Tanzania4                   23.5    15.9    353    364900
    Thailand4                   25.9     6.0   1694    198455
    Togo                        49.0     8.9    625     21925
    Trinidad & Tobagod           37.1   14.2   7161      1980
    Tunisia4                     40.4    8.2   1845     63379
    Turkey6                      12.8   32.2   2319    300947
                                  9.2   39.8     257    91343
    Ugandab
    U.A. Emiratesc               33.2   10.2   25646     32000
    United Kingdom6              27.2   10.6    7975     94247
    United States4                9.3    6.2   11404   3540939
                                 19.3   44.0    4502    68040
    Uruguay
    Venezuela                    24.3   14.0    4424   352143
    Yemen                        46.7   13.0     957   128560
    Zaire'                       39.6   43.2     224   905365
    Zambia                       39.6   17.5     716    290586
    Zinibabwe4                   27.7   10.4     930    150699


  Inflation computed using CPI data.
b
  Import share data from IMF (1988).
C
  Major oil producer.
     In good data sample.
