NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES

THE DEBT BURDEN AND DEBT MATURITY

Alessandro Missale
Olivier Jean Blanchard

Working Paper No. 3944

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
Decenher 1991

We thank Alberto Alesina, Stanley Fischer, Julio Roternberg and
Jean Tirole for comments. We thank the Bank of Italy for data,
and NSF for financial assistance. This paper is part of NBER'a
research program in Econonic Fluctuations. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #3944
December 1991

THE DEBT BURDEN AND DEBT MATURITY

ABSTRACT

At

low and moderate levels of government debt, there appears

to be little relation between the level of debt and its maturity.
But at high levels of debt,

a strong inverse relation emerges.

We start the paper by documenting this inverse relation for those
OECD Countries which have reached very high levels of debt.

We

then provide a theory of the joint movements of debt and maturity
which can explain both sets of facts.

It is based on the idea

that, at high levels of debt, the government may need to decrease
the maturity of the debt as debt increases, in order to maintain
the credibility of its anti-inflation stance.

Alessandro Missale
Department of Economics

Olivier Jean Blanchard
Department of Economics

M.IT.

M.1T.

50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02139

50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER

2

Maturity

Introduction
When one looks at OECD countries over the last 30 years, there appears to have
beenlittle systematic relation between the level of debtand its maturity. Oneset
of countries stands however in clear exception to this general statement, namely

.

those countries which have now reached debt-GNP ratios approaching or exceeding 100%. There, the increase in debt has been associated with a sharp reduction
in maturity. Our paper provides a tentativeexplanation for these two sets of facts.

In section

1, we look at debt and

maturity for the three countries, Italy, Belgium
and Ireland, which have alt reached high levelsof debt. For each, we construct an
effective maturity series. By effectivematurity, we mean the maturity relevant to
the effect of inflation on the value of the debt; thus for example, we treat foreign
and indexed debt as zero maturity debt (The motivation for such a definition of
maturity is given by the modelwe develop later). We document the strong inverse
relation between effective maturity and the debt-GNP ratio.
This leads us to develop in section 2 a simple model based on the now standard
idea of a reputation equdibnum A government which has nomina1 debt clearly
has an incentive to try to inflate it away so as to decrease the debt burdes It
will resist the urge if the rewards are small, and the cost

of a lost reputation is
high. Given that the rewards from unexpected inflation are increasing in both
the level of debt and its maturity the government will keep its no inflation pledge
credible by decreasingmaturity as debt increases Or more precisLi me 'naxnn urn

1. As has been noted by a number of authors (Calvo and Guidotti l1990b1) the US have exhib-

ited a positive relation between maturity and debt, with both maturity and the debt-GNP ratio
decreasing until the mid 1970's, and increasing since then. But the US appear to be very much

the exception, with most other countries exhibiting little correlation between debt and maturity
movements. A detailed reviewof the evidence for a number of OECD countries is given in Missale
[19911

3

Maturity

maturityconsistentwith a credible no-inflation pledge will decrease with the level
of debt.

The model developed in section 2 is a barebone model, with a number of strong
simplifying assumptions. In particular it postulates rather than derives a tax rule,
assuming taxes to be set so as to yield a constant level of debt in the absence of
unexpected inflation. In section 3, we endogenize the timing of taxes by allowing
for a tax smoothing motive. We derive the joint dynamics of debt and maturity
as a tbnction of an exogenous sequence of government spending, and show that,
again, nmximum maturity moves inversely with the level of debt.
In section 4, we conclude and relate our results to the recent research on debt
and maturity. In doing so, we take up the obvious loose end in our argument, the
fact that we have derived a theory of maximum rather than actual maturity. We
argue informally that, once the other motives explored in the literature are taken
into account, the maximum maturity is likely to be binding only at high levels
of debt. This explanation can thus potentially account for the two sets of facts
presented at the beginning, the existence of a clear relation between maturity
and debt at high levels of debt, and the absence of such a relation at lower levels.

A formalization is however left to future work.

1

Evidence from three countries

In 1990, three OECD countries, Belgium, Ireland and Italy, had (gross) debt to
GNP ratios around or above 100%, a number roughly twice as high as the OECDEurope average. We focus in this section on the evolution of debt and maturity in
those three countries since 1960 2 To do so, we constructtwo seriesfor each of

2.

A fourth countrp Greece, is fast on

its way to reach

those levels. We were unable however to

obtain detailed enough information on maturity and on Central Bank holdings, and thus have not
included Greece in our sample. The rough evidence

is

however consistent with the evidence for the

4

Maturity

the three countries. (Sources for the series and details of construction are given
in the appendix).
The first gives the "market holdings" of debt —that part of the government debt
held by the public rather than by the central bank or government agencies—,
as a proportion of GNP. Government debt held by the public rather than total

debt is the relevant tax base for unexpected inflation. The difference between
market holdings and total debt is sometimes substantial; in Italy, central bank
holdings were equal to 13% of GNP in 1960, going up to 40% in 1976 (through
monetization of the deficit), and back down to 13% in 1989.
The second givesthe "effectivematurity"of the debt. This effectivematurity is different from the conventionally measured maturity. What matters, from the point
of view of the theory we develop later, is the effect on the value of the debt of a
change in inflation. With respect to fixed rate nominal debt denominated in domestic currency, the official definition of maturity is fine. But European governments have issued substantial amounts of other types of debt over the last three
decades. One is price-level indexed debt; we assume all such debt to have zero
maturity. Another is foreign currency (or, in the recent past, ECU) denominated
debt; in Ireland for example, the share of such debt increased from 13% in 1960
to 50% in 1983 and now stands at 36%. We also assume all such debt to have zero
maturity, thus assumingimplicitly any inflation to be reflected one for one in currency depreciation Yet another is "financially"indexed debt, with the interest
rate on long term debt indexed to a short term rate. In Italy, the share of such
debt has increased from 0% in 1976 to 31% in 1989. For such debt, we use the

.

appropriate short rate as the relevant rate for purposes of computing maturity

.

three countries we locus on.

3. We see this assumption as a first approximation, which should be explored furthet both theoretically and empirically.
4. This last adjustment makes a substantial difference for Italy. Compare our effective maturity for

1900

1965

1970

::'""

75

100

125

1975

1985

YEARS

1989

L_MAT .DEBTJ

1980

—

IRELAND: DEBT RATIO (MARKET HOLDINGS)
AND EFFECTIVE MATURITY

I_MAT

MATURITY• EFFECTIVE AND
HOLDINGS) (MARKET RATIO DEBT ITALY:

I__MAT _.....DEBTJ

2.5

3.3

4.2

5.0

5.8

YEARS

BELGIUM: DEBT RATIO (MARKET HOLDINGS)
AND EFFECTIVE MATURITY

1985

-----DEBT

i9

I_LONG
1980

1975

1970

1965

1900

90

100

110

120

SECURITIES TERM LONG OF SHARES AND
HOLDINGS) (MARKET RATIO DEBT BELGIUM

S

Maturity

Ideally, one would like to compute effective maturity for market holdings of debt

rather than for total debt; the data on the maturity of the debtheld by the central
bank are however not easily available, and thus the effective maturity we report
is for total debt.
Figures 1 and 2 give the evolution of debt and effective maturity since 1960 for
Ireland and Italy respectively. Figure 3 does the same for Belgium since 1976, as
detaileddata before 1976 are not available. What is available for a longer period
of time is the share of long term debt. The behavior of that share since 1960 is
given in Figure 4.
All four figures

how that the sharp increase in the debt to GNP ratio, which

started in all three countries in the mid 70's, has been accompanied by an equally
pronounced decrease in effective maturity. In Belgium, the inverse relation between the share of long term debt and the debt-GNP ratio, both on the way up
and on the way down is striking. In all three countries, the effective maturity of
debt has decreased by half or more since the mid 70's. It is now very low, standing
at 3.6 years for Ireland, 0.8 years for Italy and 2.7 years for Belgium compared to,
for example, 6.1 years for the US or 7 years for the UK.
reports the results from simple regressions of maturity on debt for the
period 1960-1989. The dependent variable icr both Ireland and Italy is the logarithm of maturity. Given that maturity is not available for Belgium for the whole
sample, the dependent variable for Belgium is instead the share of long term debt.
Three regressions are presented for each country.
Table

1

The goal of the first regression is to answer the question of whether the two series
move together at low frequencies, of whether the two series are co-integrated.
Thus, it regresses log maturity (or the share of long term debt) on the log of the

Italy given in figure 2 below to that using the ethcial maturity of the debt, given in Alesina
119901.

et al.

Table 1. Maturity and Debt ; Ireland, Italy and Belgium

Country

const.

Ireland

7.0

Dependent variable: log(maturity)
Time
R2
log (DIY) log(ir)
-1.23

DW

t statistic

0.72

0.34

2.6*

0.85

0.82

2.9*

0.86

0.59

0.85

0.47

,2.8*

0.91

0.43

2.7*

0.89

0.18

(-8.9)

7.4

-1.24

-.17

(-12.2)

(-5.0)

2.5

-0.04
(-14.5)

Italy

10.8

-2.59
(-12.8)

10.7

-2.40

-0.31

(-14.3)

(-4.2)

2.7

-0.10
(-16.0)

Dependent variable: Share of long term debt
Country

const.

log(D/Y)

Belgium

.48

-.31

log(ir)

Time

R2

DWtstatistic

0.82

0.42

2,5*

0.82

0.42

2.5*

0.12

0.13

(-11.6)
.48

-0.31

-0.00

(-10.3)

(-0.1)

-0.52
(-2.3)

Sample period : 1960 to 1989. "t statistic" : t statistic of coefficient on lagged
residual, in a regressionof the first difference of the residual on the lagged level
and the lagged first difference.A star indicates significance at the 10% level.

Maturity

6

debt-ON?ratio; the statistic in the last column corresponds to the test of the hypothesis that the two series are not coiritegrated. In all three countries, debt is
highly significant. This is precisely what the eye saw in figures 1 to 4. In all three
countries however, the Durbin Watson statistic is iow, indicating that the relation is at most present at low frequencies,and raising the issue of cointegration.
In all three countries, the hypothesis of no-cointegration is rejected at levels of
confidence between 5% and 10%.
The goal of the second regressionis to explore the possibility that the correlation
is spurious, and that the decrease itt maturity is in fact due to the rise in inflation,
itself correlated with debt, It has indeed long been argued that, high inflation is
associated with higher inflation uncertainty,leading to higher risk premia on long
term nominal debt, and thus leading governments to stop issuing long term debt.
We have no doubt that this line of explanation is relevant, and that when inflation is very high, long nominal assets, private or public, disappear. But the second
regressionin table 1, which regresses log maturity (or the share of long term debt)
on the log of the debt-GNP ratio and on inflation shows that there is more to the
evolution of maturity in those three countries thansimplythe effect of inflation. In
all three, the debt-ON? ratio dominatesinflation, both quantitatively and statistically. In Ireland and Italy, inflation significantly decreases maturity. But there is
no discernible effect in Belgium. The basic reason why regressions favor the debtON? ratio comes from the evidence at the end of the sample. In the late 80's,
inflation has slowed down, while the debt-GNP ratio has only stabilized; and, like
the debt-ON? ratio, effective maturity has stabilized rather than increased back
to earlier levels.

The goal of the third regressionis to give some perspective on the strength of the
results by running the simplest possible horse race, a comparison of the first regression with a regression of the dependent variable on a time trend. The results vary
across the three countries. In Ireland and Italy, the time trend does as well as the
debt-ON? ratio. In Belgium in which effective maturity and debt have behaved

7

Maturity

very differently from smooth trends, the time trend does poorly in comparison to
the debt-GNP ratio.
Overall, the regression results confirm the visual impression given in the figures.
In all three countries, debt and maturity have moved in opposite directions over
the last 30 years; the relation is not there from year to year, but appears to be
present at low frequencies. This is the stylized fact which motivates the model
presented in the next two sections In those sections, we ignore the fact that the
relation disappears at low levels of debt; we return to it irs the last section.

.

2

Maturity, credibility and reputation

Our tentative explanation for the facts of the previous section is the following.
A government which has nominal debt clearly has an incentive to try to inflate
it away so as to decrease the debt burden. It will resist the urge if the rewards
are small, and the cost of a losf reputation is high. Given that the rewards from
unexpected inflation are increasingin the level ofdebt and increasing in maturity,

the government will keep its non inflation pledge credible by decreasing maturity
as debt increases.

The argument would seem to be a straightforward application of earlier models of
inflation, such as Barro and Gordon [19831. It turns out to be more, and, in the
process, to be more interesting. This is for two reasons, and both have long been
known to policy makers. The first is that a successful expropriation of debthold
ers through unexpected inflation decreases the need for revenues in the future
and thus reduces the incentive to inflate in the future. The second is that, once
5. The model below implies that other no.intlation commitment devices, such

as the credible corn-

mitrnent to a fixed exchange rate, allow for higher maturity at a given level of debt. We have thus
experimented for Italy with different EMS timing dummies, trying to capture such a commitment
effect, Our efforts were unsuccessful.

8

Maturity

the government has had recourse to inflation, it can from then on drastically decrease the maturity of the debt, again decreasingits temptation to have recourse
to inflation in the future. In other words, a strong burst of unexpected inflation
today removes most of the incentives to inflate tomorrow, and the government
can further reduce whatever incentives are left by decreasing the maturity of its
debt. But by reducing the need and the incentives to inflate, this in turn decreases
the punishment incurred by the governmentif it inflates today, and makes a reputation equilibrium harder to sustain. Our model shows the mechanisms at work,
and the role of maturity.
2.1 Debt accumulation,debt maturity and unexpected inflation
We want to capture two aspects of the problem faced by

the government. The
first is that, other things equal, a higher level of nominal debt leads to a stronger
temptation to inflate. The second is that, the higher the maturity of the debt, the
larger is the decrease in the mrket value of the debt associated with a given unexpected increase in inflation. We formalize the relation between debt, maturity
and inflation by the followingaccumulationequation:

D'=(1+r)(1—m(ir—E7r))D+G—T

(2.1)

D denotes the real value of debt at the beginning of period t, 0 and T denote
government spending and taxes during period t, r is the real interest rate, which
is assumed constant. Next period values are denoted by primes. The important
assumption is in the formalizationof the relation between maturity, unexpected
inflation and the value of debt. We formalize maturity by an index m, which gives
the effect of a given unexpected rate of inflationon the value of the debt.

A strict interpretation of this assumption is that the government can choose to
issue a combination of indexed debt —zero maturity nominal debt— and oneperiod maturity nominal debt. If the government issues only zero-maturity debt,

9

Maturicy

m is then equal to zero: there is no effect of unexpected inflation on the value of
the debt. If the government issues only one-period nominal debt, then mis equal
to one.

a more general interpretation, in
which m stands for the average maturity of debt, conceptually allowing debt to
be of maturity longer than one period. The reason why that interpretationis more
questionable is that, when the maturity of the debt exceeds one period, the sequence of unexpected inflation over the life of the bonds should appear in equation (2.1). This can be introduced, but at some cost in simplicity; we return to the
We shall feel free however to use informally

issue below.

In the rest of this section, we assume that government spending is constant, and
—this purely for notational convenience— equal to zero, We assume that taxes are
set so that debt remains constant in the absence of unexpected inflation: T =
r(1 — m(7r — E 7r))D + G = r(1 — m(7r — E-r))D. We shall allow for variations
in government spending and derive the optimal timing of taxation in the next
section; we shall show that this apparently ad-hoc rule is indeed the optimal rule
for the case of constant government spending. Replacing this expression for taxes
in (2.1) gives:

D' =(1—m(lr—E7r))D

(2.2)

Thus, under this tax rule, debt remains unchanged in the absence of unexpected
inflation. The effect of unexpected inflation is to decrease the value of the debt,
and the strength of the effect depends on m.

6. Note that, even under that assumption, (2.1> is only a linear approximation. In particular, it does

not exclude that

1

—

m(r — E it) is negative, clearly an absurd outcome,

inilacion can do is reduce the valueof the debt to zero.

as the most unexpected

JO

Maturity
2.2 The objective function of the government

Our specification of the objective function of the government follows tradition.
The government minimizes the expected present discounted value, V, of current
and future values of the one-period loss function L, discounted at rate The
one-period loss function is the sum of three terms:

.

L = (1/2)7r2 — b(ir —

Eir) + cT

(2.3)

The first two terms are familiar. The first reflects the costs of inflation, the second

the benefits of unexpected inflation, presumably through output effects which
need not be made explicit here. The third reflects the cost of taxation. The assumption that the loss is linear rather than quadratic in taxes is theoretically unappealing —as, in the small, deadweightlosses are quadratic in taxes—, and is made
for convenience. Allowingfor a quadratic term complicates the algebra but does
not affect the qualitative results. We return to this issue in the nextsection. Using

T = r(1 — m(7r — E7r))D, andequation(2.2), and replacing in (2.3)
L

(1/2)2r2 —

b(7r

—

E7r)

+ cr(1 — m(ir — Eir))D

gives:

(2.4)

The timing of decisions is the following. At time t, the government inherits D,
whose equation of motion is given by (2.2). The government decides on the maturity of the debt, m, for period t. This maturity is known to people whenthey form
their rational expectations. The government then chooses the rate of inflation for
period t.
Except for the dynamic complications introduced by the dynamics of debt and
the ability to choose maturity, the problem we have set up is standard. Clearly
the best outcome is the no-inflation outcome. But, in the absence of reputational
effects, the no inflation outcome is time inconsistent, and the outcome is positive

Maturity

11

rather than zero inflation. in what follows, we focus on the existence and characteristics of a reputational equilibria.So long as the government does not use
inflation, people assume that it will not do so in the future. lithe government relies on unexpected inflation, people then assume that it will act opportunistically
every period, choosing inflation every period so as to minimize V given people's
expectations.
2.3 Reputation and the maturity of the debt
Solving for the reputational equilibrium requires the derivation of the value of
the loss function under no cheating and thus zero inflation, and under cheating
and the subsequent loss of reputation. We derive them in turn.

lithe government does nor cheat—i.e does not attempt to inflate away the debt,
both inflation and expected inflation are equal to zero and the value of the loss
function, VR CR for reputation) is given by:
VR

= (1 + (1/5))LR= (1 + (1/ô))crD

(2.5)

The loss comes from the taxation required to service the debt inherited from (he
past, D. As debt is constant over time, VR is also constant over time.

the government inflates in the current period, it loses its reputation
for all future periods. To solve for the rate of inflation in the current period, we
solve for the equilibrium backwardin time.
If, instead,

Once a government has lost its reputation, it will want to choose a level of maturity equal to zero. The reason is simple: the higher the maturity of the debt, the
higher the incentive to inflate. Given the loss of reputation, this only leads people to anticipate higher inflation, leading in turn to higher actual and expected
inflation and an increased value of the loss function. When the maturity of debt
is equal to zero, debt is unaffectedby inflation and, under our assumptions about
taxes, remains constant forever. The minimization problem faced by the govern-

12

Maturity

ment is therefore the same every period. For example, for period "prime", the
period following the loss of reputation, the problem faced by the government is
that of minimizing:

= (1/2)ir'2 — b(7r' — E it') + crD'
as maturity, m', is set equal to zero. The rate of inflation—.--actual

and expected—

is thus given by

it' = E it' = b
implyingthat the present value of the loss function from next period on is given
by:

= (1 + (1/6))L' = (1 + (1/8))((1/2)b2+ crD')

(2.6)

Equation (2.6) is interesting in two respects. First, to the extent that inflation in
the current period reduces the real value of debt —i.e reduces D' below D—, the
burden of taxation and thus the value of the loss function is reduced for all [ii ture
periods. The returns to cheating can therefore be substantial. Second, because

the government can put maturity equal to zero, it can substantially reduce the
equilibrium rate of inflation. Indeed, if the only incentive to inflate came from
the presence of nominal debt, i.e if b were equal to zero, putting maturity equal
to zero would remove all incentives to inflate, leading to a zero equilibrium rate
of inflation in all future periods.
Consider now the minimization problem faced by a government who decides to
inflate in the current period. For the moment, take the decision about maturity,
m, as given. Given that people's expectations of inflation are equal to zero, the
government minimizes:

= (l/2)it2—bit+cr(l—mit)D+(l/(1+))Vc'
= (1/2)it2—bit+(1+(1/S))(1—mit)crD+(1/2)(b2/8)

13

Maturity

V'

by its value from (2.6) and D' by
where, in the second line, we have replaced
its value from (2.2). Solving for the inflation rate gives:
it = b + (1 + (1/5))crmD

(2.7)

The inflation rate is an increasingfunction of b, the effect of unexpected inflation
on outputand of c, the weightgiven to the burden of the debt in the loss function.
More interestingly for our purposes, the inflation rate is an increasing ul.jnction of
maturity and of the level of the debt. Replacing it by its value from (2.7) in the
expression above gives the present value of the loss frmnction under cheating and
the attending loss in reputation:

V = —(1/2)[b + (1 + (1/ö))crmD}2 + (1 + (1/6))crD + (1/2)(b2/öJ2.8)
We can now solve for the conditions under which the government will prefer

not to inflate. This requires that the value of the loss from not cheating VR be no
greater than V, the value under cheating. Using (2.5) and (2.8), and rearranging
gives the following condition:

rnDcr <
This conditioncan in turn

b(/

—

)/(1 +

)

solved for the maximum maturity, call it

m, con-

sistent with zero inflation:

m=

- )]/[cr(l + )D}

The maximum maturity is a decreasing function of the debt level

(2.9)

.

Indeed, in

7. This assumes that 5 is less thsn one. Note that (1/5) is the present value of one unit" from next

14

Maturity

our model, the incentive to inflate is proportional to the product of m and D.
For reputation to remain an equilibrium when D increases, in has to decrease to
leave the product of the two constant. As long as the coefficient b, which reflects

the incentive to inflate for other reasons than debt reduction, is positive, m* is
positive: thereis always a maturity short enough to sustain the zero inflation equilibrium. Note also that if b is equal to zero, so that the only incentive to inflate is
to reduce debt, then there exists no positive maturity which can sustain the reputation equilibrium; this is because in that case, the government can, by choosing
zero maturity after having cheated, fully avoid being punished in the future.

2.4 An assessment
We have shown that, when a government wants to keep its zero inflation stance
credible, the maximum maturity of the debt will be a decreasing function of the

level of debt. We can think of three ways in which our initial model should be
extended.
The first is the relaxation ofthe assumption that only current unexpected inflation
affects the value of the debt. This assumption is correct, we indicated, only if the
maturity of the debt is between zero and one period. But it is difficult to decide
what the unit period of this model stands for (time between "policy decisions" ?),
arid thus whether the assumption is reasonableor not. It probably is not. A more
attractive assumption is that the value of the debt depends on revisions of not
only current but also future inflation, with the effect of future inflation a function
of the maturity structure of the debt. This is a conceptually straightforward —if
substantially more complicated— extension, which does not appear to affect the

period on, so that the condition S <

1

can be stated, somewhat loosely, as the condition

that the

present value of the future matters more than the present. We assume this condition to be satisfied
in our discussion.

15

Maturity

qualitative results derived above nor to give particular insights 8 Thus we do not
develop it further.

The second is that while our facts haveshown a strong inverse time series relation
between the level of debt and its maturity, our model generates in equilibrium a
constant level of debt. Our result is that of an inverse relationacross steady states,
not across time. This raises the issue of whether we can generate the time series
relation between debt and maturity which is observed in the data. This is the
extension we take up in the next section.

The third is that what we have developed is a theory of maximum rather than
actual maturity. To turnit into a theory of actual maturity requires the assumption
that, at least over some range, the government prefers longer to shorter maturity
nominal debt. We take up the issue in the last section.

8. We have expiciredthe case sere the government issues a combination of indexed, one-period
and two-period nominal bonds. Then the equation of motion for debt can be written as:
(1

D' =

+ r)(1 — mi(ir — Eir) — mz(E'2r' — Er-'))D + G — T, with m1 and m2 two parameters

capturing the maturity structure of the debt. The change in the value of debt from the beginning of

the current period to the beginning of the next depends both on unexpected inflation in the current
period, which affects the real value of both one-period and two-period bonds, and on the revisions
of inflation for the next period, which affect the value of the two-period bonds issued this period
(which become one-period bonds at the beginning of the next period>.
In the equilibrium we characterized in the text, it was clear that once the government had cheated,

it had an incentive to reduce the maturity of debt to zero. This is in general no longer the case here.
Once the government has inflated and lost reputation,

all newly issued debt should, for the same

reasons as in the text, be of zero maturity. But, after cheating, the government still has some oneperiod debt (two period bonds issued in the previous period) outstanding. The value of that part of
the debt can be further reduced by inflation. Thus, in the period following cheating. the maturity
of the debt usually remains positive, and inflation is higher than in the case studied in the text

16

Maturiry

3

Dynamics of debt and maturity

3.1 Introducing tax smoothing

In the previous section, we assumed a loss function linear in taxes together with
an ad-hoc tax rule, relating taxes to interest payments on the debt. Given the
linearity of the loss function, had we allowed instead for endogeneity of the timing of taxes, the outcome would have been either indeterminate or pathological,
with all taxes all raised in the first period or indefinitely postponed. To get a non
trivial determination of the timing of taxation, we thus modify the one-period loss
function, which becomes:

L = (1/2)7r2+ (b/2)(k — (7r

—

Eir))2 + (c/2)T2

(3.1)

This differs from the loss function in the previous section in two ways. The first
and important one is that the loss is quadratic in taxes. This is the assumption
which will deliver tax smoothingand non trivial debt dynamics a, The second and
less important modifrcationis that the second term is also quadratic —rather than

linear— in unexpected inflation. We make this assumption (which is standard in
the literature) mostly for symmetry; assumingthe loss to be linear in unexpected
inflation does not affect the qualitative results below, The government minimizes
the present discounted value of L, at rate 6. To avoid any other motive than tax
smoothing for the timing of taxes, we assume that the discount and the interest
rates are equal, that 6 = r.
9. We would not want to argue that the increase in debt in the countries we studied earlier is fully

explained by tax smoothing. Pan of it probably is; throughout the 1970's, most countries probably
expected the future to be brighter than it turned out to be, and thoughtof deficits as largely cyclical.

Pan of it probably comes from the inability in most political systems to quickly adj ust to more difficult
dmes. See for example Roubini and Sachs 11987] for some empirical evidence. The overwhelming
reason to use tax smoothing as a theory of debt dynamics here is its convenience,

17

Maturity
Debt accumulation is characterized in the same way as before:

D'=(1+r)(1—m(ir—Eir))D+G—T

(3.2)

Government spending is howeverno longer assumedconstant. G varies over time,
following an arbitrary but deterministic process. 1fJ It is convenient for the analysis below to introduce permanent government spending,

G, defined as the an-

nuity value of current and future spending, discounted at the interest rate

G

(r/(1 + r))[(1 + r)8GJ

r:

(3.3)

We assume that the behavior of G is such that

the infinite sum above is always
finite. We shall use below the relation between G, and G which follows from the
definition of G:

(G' — G) = r(G — G)

We

(3.4)

ar now ready to derive the joint behavior ofmaturity and debt consistent with

a zero inflation equilibrium.We proceed as before, first deriving inflation and taxes

under reputation and under cheating, then characterizing the maximum maturity
consistent with the reputation equilibrium, and its relation to the level of debt.
3.2 Inflationand taxes under reputation
In the reputational equilibrium, the government does not attempt to inflate the
debt away, and both actual and expected inflation are equal to zero. The oneperiod loss function is thus given by L = (b/2)k2 + (c/2)T2, and the debt accumulation is given by D' = (1 + r)D + G — T. The only decisionleft to the

10. Ailowing for a stochastic process,as desirableas it may be, substantially complicates the analysis.
We have been unable to make progress in that direction.

J8

Maturity

government is that of the timing of taxes, and, under the assumption that the
discount arid interest rates are equal, the solution takes the simple form:

T=TR=rD+G

(3.5)

Not surprisingly, tax smoothing and the absence of uncertainty imply that taxes
are constant over time, at level TR . Equivalently, they are set equal to interest
payments on the debt plus permanent government spending. While taxes remain
constant, permanent spending and debt change over time. Equation (3.4) gave
the behavior of permanent spending, and together with equation (3.5) implies

that debt in turn follows:

D'—D=(G—G)=(G+rD—R)

(36)

Debt increases when permanent spendingexceeds currentspending, that is when

'.

current spending is unusually high in comparison to spending in the future.
Replacing taxes by their value from equation (3.5) gives the (constant) value of
the loss function under reputation, VR

VR

(1+ (1/r))LR = (1+ (1/r)){(b/2)k2+ (c/2)(R)2]

(3.7)

3.3 Inflationand taxes under cheating
To characterize the value of the loss function under cheating, we again solve back-

wards, starting in period "prime", after the government has used unexpected inflation to reduce the debtburden.
Once the government has inflated, and lost reputation, it has, just as in the previ-

11. See B2rro [1979] for further analysis oldie dynamic implications of tax smoothing.

19

Maturity

ous section, an incentive to reduce maturity to zero, so as to reduce the actual and
the expected inflation rates. Having done so, it must choose taxes and inflation,
Given the nature of the maximizationproblem, those are chosen to be the same

in period prime and all future periods, and they are given by:

= rD' + G'
= bk
Tax smoothing impliesconstant taxes at level

i

(3.8)
(3.9)

from period prime on. The level

depends on the value of permanent spending and government debt after the government has cheated. Because of the zero debt maturity, inflation does not depend
on the level of debt, and is positive only to the extent that the government has
other motives than debt repudiation for wanting to generate unexpected infla-

th

tion, i.e. to the extent that both b and k are different from zero. Replacing
constant inflation rate and the constant taxes in the loss function at time prime
gives:

V'

(1/2)(1 + (1/r))[b(1 + b)k2 + c(rD' + G')2}

(3.10)

Workingback to the current period, the government which decides to inflate minimizes:

V = L + (1/(1 + r))Vc'

Using (3.10) and (3.2), V can be expressed as a function of, in particular, current maturity, current taxes and current inflation. For the moment, we take the
decision about maturity, m, as given; the government has only two decisions left,
taxes and inflation, which, from the first order conditions, are characterized by:

T=T=r(1—mir)D+G
= b(k — it) + cT(1 + r)mD

(3.11)
(3.12)

20

Maturity

The government sets taxes at the same level as the level it intends to set them in
future periods,
this in turn implies that taxes are set according to the second

i;

equality in (3.11). Inflation is set so as to equalize the marginal cost of inflation
on the left in (3.12) to the two marginal benefits of unexpected inflation on the
right, The first is the benefit in increasedoutput. The second is the marginal effect

of inflation on debt, (1 + r)mD times the marginal resource cost of taxation,

cT, = cT. Solving those two equations for inflation gives:
—

bk + c(1

+ r)mDIR

1+b+c(1+r)r(mD)2

(3 13)

where tR is the constant level of taxes that the government would levy in the
reputation equilibrium,which we derived earlier. Note that the effect of maturity

on inflation is now ambiguous. To understand why, return to equations (3.11) and
(3.12). For a given permanent level of taxes, higher maturity implies a stronger
incentive to inflate and higher inflation. But, for a given rate of inflation, higher
maturity decreases the level of permanent taxes, decreasing the marginal cost
of taxation and the incentive to inflate. For maturities high enough, the second
effect may dominate, leading to a decrease in the rate of inflation with an increase
in maturity. The value of the loss function under cheating, T/ can be obtained
by replacing ir by its value from (3.13) and T by its value from (3.11). It is not
particularly nice or intuitive, and we do not report it.

3.4 Debt and maximum maturity
We can now derive the maximum value of maturity consistent with reputation.
We first consider the differencebetween VR and V0 for a given value of m. From

the results above and some manipulation, this difference is proportional to:
—

V

c<

(bk)2(1
—2rc(1

—

r + b)

+ r)bk(mD)

(3.14)

21

Maturity

-rc(1 + r)[c(l +

r)i - (bk)2](mD)2

Note that in this expression,only two variables have time indices, m and D. The
level of taxes under reputation, TR, depends on the initial level of debt and the
initial value of permanent spending, but is constant over time. All the other elements are parameters. We define the maximum maturity, m', as the maximum
value of in consistent with reputation being an equilibrium, with the right hand
side of (3.14) being non negative. Noting that the expression is a second degree
polynomialin the product mD, it is easy to show the following:
For low enough values of permanent taxes, reputation is an equilibrium indepen-

dent of the level of debt —the initial level of which however affects the value of
permanent taxes in the first place—, and of the initial level of maturity. When this
is the case, maturity must be determined by other considerations than those considered in this model. The condition for this to happen is that the determinant
of the second degree polynomialon the right hand side of (3.14) be negative, in
which case

—

is

positive for all values of m:

2R < (1c(1 +r +r)(1b)(bk)2
+ b)
—

—

3 15

For higher values of permanent taxes, there is a maximum maturity consistent

with reputation 12,
12. The algebra is

as follows. For higher values of permanent taxes, condition (3.15) does not hold,

and the determinant of the polynomial is positive. There are therefore two roots, and two cases to
consider depending on the sign of the coethcient of the term in in2, —rc(1 + r)D2 [c(1

r)T —

(bk)2).

If [c(1

+ r)1'

(bk)2]

> 0, which is a stronger condition than for the determinant to be

pos.

itive, the polynomial is concave in m, and has one negative and one positive root, say m5 and

rn2 respectively. Hence the polynomialis positive for values of m between m1 and m2, and the

22

Maturity

The maximum maturity is decreasingin the level of debt. This follows from the
observation that m and D enter (314) always as a product, and that starting from
given values of m and D which are such that the right hand side is equal to zero,
the product must remain constant for reputation to remain an equilibrium. Thus,
using this result and equation(3.6), our model implies the followingdynamics of
debt and maximum maturity:

(GG)=(G+rD—)
m' =

A(TR)/D

\

where can be shown to be a decreasingfunction of the permanentlevel of taxes.
Thus, a sustained period of unusually high spending indeed leads to a sustained
increase in debt and a sustained decrease in maximum maturity.

4

From maximum to actual maturity

We started this paper by documenting the striking inverse relation between debt

and maturity in those countries which have reached high debt-GNP ratios over

maximum maturity consistent

th reputation

is given by m2.

If[c(1 r)T — (bk)2] < 0, which mayhold even if the determinant
convex and has two positive real roots, say
values of rn less than

of m less than

m

and

is positive, the polynomial is

m2 m1. As the polynomial is positive for

ns and greater than rn2 reputation would appear to hold both for values

rn and forvalues greater than rn. Using (3.13) howevet it can be shown that

values of to equal to or greater than rn2 imply a negative terminsi value of debt, i.e. a negative
value of(1
less

—

rnsr)D, and thus are unacceptable. Thus, the relevantroot is

than rn1 are required to maintain repurstion.

rn and values of m

Maturity

23

the last two decades. We then provided,in two steps, a theory of the joint movements of debt and the maximum feasible maturity, m, based on the idea that
maturity of the debt can be used by the government to maintainits anti-inflation
credibility.

In this final section, we turn to the obvious missing part of the argument. What
we have derived is a theory of maximum maturity, not of maturity itself. Indeed,
in our model, the government is indifferent to choosing any maturity below mn',
and thus could well choose zero effectivematurity debt all the time, either in the
form of very short maturity nominal debt or in the form of indexed bonds —of
any maturity. To turn it into a theory of actual maturity, we need to argue that
the government prefers longer to shorter maturity debt, with the implication that
the government will always choose the longest feasible maturity, thus will always
choose m. Or we need to argue that the government, in the absence of reputation
considerations, has a preference for a specific finite maturity. Then, as long as debt
is not too high, actual maturity is equal to that prefered maturity, but at higher
levels of debt, the maximum maturity consistent with reputation becomes the
binding constraint. This line of explanation can potentially explain both the lick
of a relation at low levels of debt as well as the emergence of an inverse relation
at higher levels. But are there plausible arguments for why the government may
prefer long to short maturity debt, or has a prefered finite maturity ? Two lines of
research on the maturity ofgovernment debt have been recently explored and are
directly relevant.
First, a number of authors have emphasizedthat short maturity debt must be refinanced ofren; this is not only costly, but also leads to a heightened risk of crisis.
This idea has been recently formalized by Giavazzi and Pagano [1990] and Alesina

et al. [1990], and leads to the conclusion that governments should issue long marunty debt. The notion of maturity implicit in those models is however different
from that used in this paper. "Financially indexed debt" for example, i.e. long term
debt paying an interest rate tied to the short rate —such as has been issued in Italy

Matsry

24

over the last 10 years— has a long maturity from the point of view of confidence
crises: it only needs to be refinanced infrequently. But it has a short maturity from
the point of view of the effect of inflation on its value, The same is true oflong indexed or foreign currency bonds. In other words governments can —and do— use

debt instruments which reduce the risk of confidence crises but are sufficiently
immune to unexpected inflation to allow the government to maintain a credible
anti-inflation stance. Thus, this line of explanation does not provide a convincing
argument for why a government would, other things equal, prefer longer maturity
—in the sense of this paper— to shorter maturity debt.

A second approach has been exploredby Fischer [1983], Bohn [1988] Calvo and
Guidotri [1990a], Calvo and Guidotti [1990b]. Quoting Fischer [1983): "The
best of all possible worlds, if governments acted optimally, might be one in which
the governments had the option of imposinga capital levy (by inflating) in emergencieslike wars". That approach suggests that in the absence of explicitly contingent debt, there will be an optimal elasticity of debt to unexpected inflation, thus
a prefered effective maturity, achieved through a combination of the maturity of
nominal debt, and a mix of nominal, indexed and foreign currency denominated
debt. This prefered maturity is likely to also vary with the level of debt. If it decreases more slowly with the level of debt thandoes the maximum maturity above,
themaximum maturity will be binding only at high levels ofdebt. We find this line
of reasoning attractive, and do nor see conceptual difficulties in integrating contingent contract and reputation aspects. We have however been unable at this
stage to construct a model which achieves such an integration in a tractable way.

25

Maturity

Appendix Data sources and Data construction.
For all three countries, data for GD? was obtained from National Accounts,
OECD, and data for CPI inflationwas obtained from Main Economic Indicators.

Data on debt were constructed as follows.
.1

Italy

Data on market holdings of debt for the period 1983-1989 were obtained from
Bollettino Statistico, Banca d'Italia, Servizio Studi, various issues. For the period
1960-1983,the source was Morcaldo andSalvemini [1984]. Data on the maturity
composition of debt were kindly provided by the Banca d'ltalia, Servizio Studi.
"Debt" refers to Central Government debt and does not include guaranteed debt.
It includes only marketable debt, thus excluding Post Office deposits. Even though
those deposits usually have a specified maturity, they are redeemable on demand,

at a penalty rate, thus making difficult the computation of average maturity.
The effective maturity was computed as follows:
(1) Foreign currency denominated debt, inclusive of ECU denominated bonds
and bills (Certificatide Tesoro in Euroscudi and Buoni del Tesoro in Euroscudi

respectively), and price level indexed bonds (Certificatidel Tesoro Reali; one issue

in 1983),

was assigned zero maturity.

(2) Financially indexed debt, namely floating rate bonds (Certificati del Tesoro a
Tasso Variabile) was assigned the maturity corresponding to the time remaining
before the adjustment of their coupons. Floating rate bonds bear annual or semiannual coupons. To take into account the imperfection in the indexation mechanism, the maturity computed above was augmented by the lag —2.25 months—
between the determination of the reference rate and the beginning of the entitlement.
(3) The earliest redemption date was used to compute effectivematurity for bonds

Maturity

26

with put options (Certificati del Tesoro con Opzione).

.2

Ireland

Data on public debt and its maturity were obtained from Finance Accounts and
from Statistical Yearbook, Department offinance, Stationery Office, Dublin, various issues. Dataon Central Bank's holdings were obtained from Central Bank of
ireland Quarterly Bulletin, various issues.
"Debt" refers to Central Government debt. The conventional definition of National Debt suffers from double counting, in that it includes liabilities of the Exchequerto itself, Thus, deductions were made to eliminate such double counting.
Market holdings of debt were obtained by deducting Central Bank and Government Holdings from the corrected National debt series.

The effectivematurity was computed as follows. In general, bonds for which the
maturity date within the year was not known were given a maturity date ofJuly 1
for that year. In addition:
(1) The latest redemption date was used to compute effective maturity for bonds

with call options
(2) Foreigncurrency denominated debt was assigned zero maturity.

.3

Belgium

Data on public debt and its maturity were obtained from Situation Generale du
Tresor Public, Chambre des Representants, various years, and from Annuaire
Statistique de ía Belgique, Institut National de Statistique, Ministere des Affaires
Economiques,various years. Data on Central bank holdings were obtained from
Bulletin de Ia Ban que Nationale de Belgique. Market holdings were obtained

the Central Bank or by the "Fonds des
Rentes", the institution performingopen market operations.
by deducting government debt held by

27

Maturity

Effective maturity was constructed as follows. In general, bonds for which the maturity date within the year was not known (Emprunt Special, Emprunts Prives,...)
were given a maturity date ofJuly 1 for that year. In addition:
(1) Foreign currency denominated debt was assigned zero maturity.
(2) The earliest redemption date was used for bonds with a put option. The latest
redemption date was used for bonds with a call option.
(3) Variable interest rate certificateswere excluded from the computation of effective maturity, as we could not find what instrument was used for indexation
purposes. (Those bonds representedless than 3% of market holdings in 1985, less

than 2% in 1989).
(4) The share of long term debt was defined as the share of fixed rate securities
denominated in domestic currency with maturity at the time of issue of 4 years or
longer.

References
Alesina, A., Fran, A., and Tabellini, G., 1990, Public confidence and debt management: a
model and a case study of italy, PublicDebrManagement:Theory and History pp. 94—
124, Rudiger Dombusch and Mario Draghi editors, CEPR and Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.

Barro, R., 1979, On the determination of public debt, Journal ofPolitical Economy 87(5),
940—971.

Barro, R. and Gordon, D., 1983, A positive theory of monetary policy in a natural rate
model, Journal ofPoliticalEconomy 91(4), 589—610.
Bohn, H., 1988, Why do we have nominal government debt
Economics pp. 127—140.

?,

Journal ofMonetary

Maturity

28

Calvo, G. and Guidotti, F, 1990a, Indexarion and maturity of government bonds: An exploratory model, Public Debt Management: Theory and History pp. 52—93, Rudiger
Dornbusch and Mario Draghi editors, CEPR and Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Calvo, G. and Guidotti, F, 1990b, Optimal maturity of nominal government debt, mimeo,
IMP
Fischer, S., 1983, Welfare aspects of government issue of indexed bonds, Inflation, Debt
and indexarJon pp. 223—246, Rudiger Dornbusch and Mario Simonsen editors, MIT
Press, Cambridge.

and Pagano, M., 1990, Confidence crises and public debt management, Public
Debt Management:Theory and Historypp. 125—152,Rud iger Dornbusch and Mario
Draghi editors, CEPR and Cambridge UniversityPress, Cambridge.

Giavazzi,

F.

Missale, A., 1991, Debt and maturity: The evidence, rnimeo MIT
Morcaldo, G. and Salvemini, 0., 1984, Ii debito pubblico; analisi deli' evoluzione nd
periodo 1960-1983 e prospetrive, Rlvisra di Politics Economics.
Roubini, N. and Sachs, J., 1987, Political and economic determinants of budget deficits
in industrial democracies, mimeo, NBERWP 2682.

