NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES

THE RUSH TO FREE TRADE IN THE DEVELOPING WORLD:
WHY SO LATE? WHY NOW? WILL IT LAST?

Dani Rodrik

Working Paper No. 3947

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 1992

Prepared for the World Bank research project on Political Economy
of Structural Adjustment. I am grateful to Stephan Haggard, Jim
Leitzel, David Eliwood, Steven Webb, and seminar participants at
Harvard, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, World Bank, and
Berkeley for comments. The paper was written while I was a
National Fellow at the Hoover Institution, to which I am also
grateful. This paper is part of NBERS research program in
International Studies. The findings, interpretations, and
conclusions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research or the
World Bank, its Executive Directors or the countries they
represent.

NBER Working Paper #3947
January 1992

THE RUSH TO FREE TRADE IN THE DEVELOPING WORLD:

WHY SO LATE? WHY NOW? WILL IT LAST?
ABSTRACT
This paper asks why developing country policymakers have
been so reluctant to undertake trade reform until the 1980s, and
why many of them have embraced open trade policies so

wholeheartedly since then. To answer these questions, the paper
develops a hexristic index of the "political cost-benefit ratio"

(PCBR) of policy reform. The PCBR is a measure of the amount of
redistribution of income generated for every dollar of efficiency

gain achieved by reform. Judged by this index, trade reform
performs very poorly: liberalization typically leads to five
dollars of income being reshuff led within the economy for every

dollar of net efficiency gain. However, when the liberalization
is undertaken at a point of deep macroeconomic crisis and in
conjunction with stabilization policies, the value of the PCBR

index falls dramatically. This explains why trade reform is
politically so difficult in normal times, and why times of crisis
provide an opportune moment for undertaking structural reforms.

The paper concludes by evaluating the sustainability of the
reforms of the 1980s.
Dani Rodrik
Hoover Institution
Stanford University

Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and Harvard University
and NBEP.

THE RUSH TO FREE TRADE IN THE DEVELOPING WORLD:

WHY SO LATE? WHY NOW?

I.
A

WILL IT LAST?

Introduction
paper on the political economy of trade liberalization in developing

countries must address at least two puzzles. First, why has trade
liberalization in these countries been traditionally so contentious? There is
probably no area in economics where professional opinion is so united: warts
and all, free trade is seen as superior to protection by the vast majority of

the economics profession. The attraction of free trade resides at one level
in the theoretical elegance of the principle of comparative advantage- -which,

as Paul Samuelson once put it, is the only proposition in economics that is at

once true and non-trivial)- But even when the theory is complicated by
second-best considerations under which trade restrictions can become
efficiency enhancing, most economists remain in favor of free trade on

practical grounds. Yet import-substitution policies relying on trade
restrictions have been the orthodoxy among developing country policymakers for
much of -the post-war period. Until recently, policymakers have systematically
resisted advice from academics and lending agencies to open up their economies
to international competition.2
The second puzzle has to do with the qualifier in the previous sentence.

1. Samuelson was challenged by a mathematician colleague with disdain for
economics to come up with such a proposition, and confesses to being at a loss
until he came up with the principle of comparative advantage. That it is
true, Samuelson pointed out, need not be explained at great length to a
mathematician. That it is non-trivial, he said, was evidenced by the long
history of errors committed by individuals who had not understood it.
2. On the general subject of the political economy of policymaking in
developing countries, the reader is referred to Bates (1988), flaggard and Webb
(1990), Meier (1991), and Rodrik (l992b).

-2-

Since the early 1980s, developing countries have flocked to free trade as if

it were the Holy Grail of economic development. Turkey, Ghana, Morocco.
Bolivia, Mexico, and more recently scores of other countries in Latin America,
Asia and Africa have made considerable progress in dismantling their
protectionist trade regimes, doing away with import licenses and quantitative

restrictions. Argentina and brazil have begun the same process in the last
couple of years. Even India appears to have embarked on the road of trade
liberalization after decades of heavy-handed dirizism. Table 1 provides

capsule summaries of some of the more significant reforms. Together with the
historic transformation and opening of the Eastern European economies, these

developments represent a genuine revolution in policymaking. The puzzle is:
why now, and why so many countries all at once?
The key to these two puzzles might appear at first to be one and the

same. The reasons for the recent conversion to outward orientation must be
sought, at least initially, in the dissolution of the forces and motives that
led policyinakers to resist the reforms in the past. However, I shall argue

that this line of reasoning does not take us too far. The reasons for the
free-trade bandwagon are more or less sui eneris, and derive from the
intense, prolonged macroeconomic crisis that surrounded developing countries

during the l980s. This crisis resulted in the overshadowing of the
distributional considerations that had blocked trade reform until the l980s.
A combination of special circumstances made governments eventually choose
openness over further restrictions, the latter being the "normal" outcome
historically during crises brought on by unfavorable external circusmtances.

.3.

Table 1: Recent Trade Policy Reforms in Selected Developing Countries

Argentina

Tariffs reduced starting in October 1988. Import licensing
abolished except for 22 items (vehicles and parts). In 1991, a
three-level tariff structure was introduced (zero, 11 percent
and 22 percent).

Bolivia

Trade regime is overhauled in 1985, and quantitative
restrictions (QRs) are eliminated. As of April 1990, two basic
tariff rates exist: 5 percent for capital goods, and 10 percent
for others.

Brazil

Major trade reform announced in March 1990 as part of the
Collor stabilization package. Almost all QRs are to be phased
out and replaced by tariffs. The average tariff was reduced to
25 percent in 1990 (from 37 percent). An average tariff rate
of 14 percent is sought by 1994.

Chile

Substantial reform after 1973, with elimination of QRs and a
uniform tariff rate of 10 percent (except for motor vehicles)
achieved by 1979. The uniform tariff was raised to 35 percent
briefly during the macroeconomic crisis of the early l980s, but
was subsequently reduced to 15 percent.

Chana

Import licensing substantially liberalized and a uniform tariff
introduced for most imports.

Indonesia

Continued trade reform since 1986. 8y end-1988, only around 20
percent of imports (by value) subject to licensing.

Jamaica

QRs eliminated and tariffs lowered to 20-30 percent for most
items.

Mexico

Substantial liberalization of QRs since mid-1985. Few import
licensing requirements remain. Tariffs reduced to an average
of 11 percent by 1988. Maximum rate is 20 percent. Accession
to GATT in 1986.

Morocco

Significant reduction in protection since 1983 through the
elimination of some QRs and the reduction of tariff rates.
Maximum tariff reduced from 400 percent to 45 percent.

Nigeria

Trade liberalization initiated in 1986. Import licensing
system reformed and substantial cuts undertaken in tariffs.
(continued on

next

page)

-4-

Table 1: Recent Trade Policy Reforms in Selected Developing Countries (cont.)

Pakistan

In July 1988, a reform program initiated providing for a shift
from non-tariff measures to tariffs. Import licensing
eliminated for wide range of products. Maximum tariff reduced
to 125 percent (from 225 percent).

Peru

The newly elected Fujimori government embarked on a
stabilization package in August 1990, including
substantial trade reform. All QRs were eliminated, and the
tariff system was simplified to include three rates (15%, 25%,
and 50%) only. In March 1991. the top rate was reduced to 20%.

Senegal

Most QRs removed during 1986-88; selective reductions in
tariffs.

Tunisia

Licensing removed from more than one half import items by mid1990. Maximum tariff reduced to 43 percent (from 220 percent).

Turkey

General trend towards liberalization since 1980. Substantial
liberalization of QRs and licensing procedures.

Venezuela

Comprehensive import liberalization introduced in 1989. Most
import prohibitions abolished and tariffs reduced to a maximum
rate of 50 percent (from 80 percent). Accession to GATT in
1990.

Sources: Whalley (1989), Williamson (1990), World Bank (1989), UNCTAD (1991),
and national sources.

-5-

The reasons that developing countries initially adopted import-

substitution policies and widespread trade restrictions are well known. Such
restrictions were perceived early on as necessary by nationalist policymakers,
as well as many development economists, for laying the basis for

industrialization and development. A temporary period of protection was
required for infant industries to grow and become competitive. Over time, the
problems with the infant-industry argument became increasingly evident. The
negative examples were the countless cases of infant industries that refused

to mature in old age, and spawned inefficiencies throughout the economy. The
positive examples were the East Asian tigers (South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore
and Hong Kong), where the early administration of outward oriented policies

were yielding spectacular results by the 1970s. Yet despite the accumulating
evidence, trade reform remained sporadic and was often reversed.
To understand why, we need to understand what trade policy does and how

it affects different groups in society. A large part of this paper is devoted
to presenting a framework in which such an analysis can be carried out.

I

will discuss the channels through which commercial and exchange rate policies

work, and highlight their respective distributional impacts. My main theme in
this part of the paper will be that the central political difficulty in
undertaking trade reform is the exceedingly high ratio of redistribution to

aggregate gain that trade reform typically generates. The "political costbenefit ratio" of trade reform, to be defined more precisely below, is

generally very high. This, I will argue, is the source of the contentiousness
of trade policy in normal times.

The second part of the paper turns to the reforms of the 1980s. As
mentioned previously, I wilL argue here that it is the pervasive crisis of the

-6-

1980s that enabled these reforms. Desparate policymakers packaged reforms in
the

fiscal,

monetary, and exchange-rate areas--which were intimately linked to

the crisis--with reforms in commercial policies--which were by and large only

incidental. The depth of the crisis reduced distributional considerations to
second-order importance, and eliminated previous resistance.

This raises the question of the sustainability of the reforms. If and
when normal times and politics as usual return, will these reform not be
undercut by the re-emergence of the previous distributional coalitions? In
the last section of the paper, I will suggest some reasons for being more

hopeful. The status-quo bias which helped entrench the previous polidy regime
is now likely to work in reverse. Provided macroeconomic stabilization proves
successful and inflation and external balances are brought under control, it
will not be easy to backtrack from the reforms.

2. Trade Reforii, Distribution and

Econoaic

Efficiency

We start by reviewing the standard partial-equilibrium analysis of trade
liberalization. The general-equilibrium analysis- -to which we must
necessarily resort when reform involves more than a few items--is more
complicated, but the wrinkles involved need not concern us for the moment.
The next section will extend the analysis in the general-equilibrium
direction.
Figure 1 shows the domestic demand and supply (S) schedules for an

import-competing commodity, say steel. Let the import restriction take the
form of a quota, with only a specified amount of imported steel allowed in tile

country. To simplify further, we assume that the home economy is small in the

world

market for steel (that is, it takes the world price for steel as given)

-7-

and that domestically produced and imported steel are perfect substitutes for

each other. Let us fix the exchange rate at unity. The (fixed) world price
is indicated in the diagram by p. Adding up horizontally the domestic supply
with the import quota, we get the supply curve faced by domestic consumers

(Sq) inclusive of imports. The intersection of domestic demand with Sq (point
C) gives us the domestic price of steel in equilibrium,

The gap between

and p* is the protection provided to the domestic industry by the quota.

It also represents the unit rent created by the quota. These rencs accrue
typically to holders of import licenses who get them through, depending on the
context, political connections, bribery, or sheer luck.3

Now consider the consequences of eliminating the inport quota. If
domestic consumers can import as much steel as they want at price p, the new,
free-trade equilibrium is found at the intersection of the domestic demand

schedule with the perfectly flat world supply schedule (point D). The

domestic price falls from d to p* Consequently, imports and domestic
consumption increase, while domestic production decreases and quota rents

vanish. The reform enhances the efficiency of resource allocation:
previously. resources worth Pd were tied up in the domestic steel industry; by
releasing these resources and increasing imports at price p', a net gain can
be achieved.

We can carry out a detailed welfare analysis of the reform to see who
loses, who gains, and by how much. There are three groups of interest here:

In rare cases, the government auctions import iicenses to highest bidders.
In this instance, quota rents accrue to the government in the form of revenue
from the auction.
3.

-8users of steel4, domestic producers of steel, and license holders. The lower
panel of Figure 1 shows the consequences for each of these groups. The gain
to users of steel (or the economy in general) is captured by the area under

the demand curve, ACDH. The loss to steel producers is the area under the
domestic supply curve, ABCH. License holders in turn lose the quota rents
amounting to the area BCEF. This leaves a net efficiency gain to the economy
from removing the quota which amounts to the sumof two triangles, BFC and
CUE.

At this point in the analysis the economics professor usually stops and
rests his case, feeling smug after this unassailable demonstration of the

superiority of free trade. I would guess that most students are left a bit

uneasy the first time they are subjected to this logic. For what is striking
about the analysis is perhaps less the end product- -

the two triangles of

efficiency gains- -but the massive transfers of income from one group to
another- -

the rectangles that appear or vanish- -which are necessary to get

there. License holders and steel producers lose out on chunks of income while
consumers (who may include downstream producers using steel as an input) gain
by a magnitude which barely exceeds these losses, leaving a net efficiency

gain that amounts to two paltry triangles. In other words, the ratio of net
gain to redistribution that is involved is quite small.

Economists have long been aware of the links between trade policy and

income distribution. Some of the most fundamental theorems of trade theory

4. Since steel is an intermediate product, these consumers will typically be
producers as well. The demand curve for steel reflects the derived demand for
the commodity, taking into account all the inter-industry links up the
processing chain, including the consumers of the final products which use
steel (eg., cars).

-9-

concern precisely the distributional consequences of free trade (e.g., the

Stolper-Samuelson [l9Ld) theorem). Development economists have spent much
effort trying to ascertain whether these consequences are normatively
desirable or not- -that is, whether free trade improves equity. A good recent
analysis is the study by Bourguignon and Morrisson (1989). which contains both

cross-country regression analyses and case studies: The main conclusion of
Bourguignon and Morrisson is that protection has a' negative effect on income

distribution.5 More to the point, they find that the effect of trade policies
on distribution is quantitatively very significant, even though their measure

of trade policy is crude and subject to error. Everything else held constant,
they find the income share of the richest 20 percent of the population to be
higher by 4-5 percentage points in highly protectionist countries, where
protectionist is defined by a mean effective rate of protection greater than
30 percent.

What this suggests, then, is that the prospect of too much redistribution

may be the central political difficulty in trade reform. From the perspective
of policymakers, the pure reshuffling of income must be counted as a political

cost. In politics, rents and revenues that accrue on a regular basis create
entitlements. Whether viewed as desirable or not, taking income away from one
group is rarely easy for a politician to accomplish. And while most policy

5.
However, there is an alternative way of interpreting this evidence.
Recent studies have shown that growth-damaging policies are more likely to be
undertaken in countries where the distribution of income is skewed, at least
where democratic regimes are concerned. See Alesina and Rodrik (1991, 1992)
and Persson and Tabellini (1991). Hence causality may well go in the other
direction, i.e. from inegalitarian distribution to high levels of trade
protection.

-10-

reforms undercut such entitlements, trade reform does so with a vengeance. Of
course, the efficiency benefit of the reform is itself a source of political
gain: it amounts to an increase in the size of the national pie, representing
the improvement in the well-being of at least some groups in society at no
cost to others.
Such considerations can be formalized by devising an index of the

'political cost-benefit ratio" (PCBR) of policy reform. We-define this index
as follows:

(1) PCBR —

1 jA incomeI - net

-x

2

gain

net gain

where "net gain" stands for the efficiency gain of the reform, j indexes
groups (or individuals) in society, and "t incomes" is the change in the

income of group j. Note that net gain can also be expressed as j( incomes).
The numerator is the sum of the absolute values of the income effects of the
policy on different groups (net of the efficiency gain), and therefore is a

measure of the total redistribution resulting from the policy. We divide this
by two to get rid of the double-counting. In this way, the numerator becomes
equivalent to the sum of losses suffered by the groups adversely affected by

the reform. Hence, the numerator captures the political cost of the reform,
while the denominator captures its benefit. The index is meant to quantify
the notion that, for any amount of increase in the size of the national pie,
the more reshuffling of Income that is required to achieve that increase the

more costly is the change to policymakers. More specifically, the PCR index

-11-

answers the following question: how many dollars of income are shuffled from
one group to another for every dollar of net efficiency gain?
While the index is meant to be nothing more than a heuristic device, it

is possible to give it a solid theoretical foundation. Suppose for example
that the policymaker wants to maximize a conventional, utilitarian social
welfare function, subject to the constraint that no group of individuals is

made worse off by the reform compared to the status quo. The policymaker has
at his disposal only distortionary subsidies and taxes to undertake the

requisite compensation. Then the cost-benefit calculus undertaken by the
policymaker will bear a certain similarity to the index discussed above. In
fact, we can view the PCBR index as representing a special case of the

problem just stated. The appendix provides a formal statament of this and
more details.

Our index has the property that its values will range between 0 and

infinity. When a policy is purely redistributive and achieves no net gain,
the value of the index goes to infinity. When a policy increases some groups'
incomes without taking income away from any other group (that is, when it is

Pareto efficient), the index takes a value of zero. The latter case
corresponds to the economist's proverbial "manna from heaven"; it would be
politically very desirable if it could be made a reality.
We know already from the preceding discussion that trade reform will

perform poorly when judged by this index. To see how poorly, let us try to
relate expression (1) to parameters of relevance to trade reform. We
distinguish, once again, among consumers, import-competing producers, and

rentiers. Let m denote import volume, q import-competing production, c total
consumption of the importable, p the domestic price of the importable, p* the

-12-

world price, and t the (ad valorem) tariff-equivalent of the trade restriction

initially. To a first-order approximation, the income effects of trade reform
can be summarized as follows6:
-

consumers:

cp

producers:

qp

renders:

mp 3- tp*&n

net gain:

tpm.

(Note the identity m — c

-

q.)

Therefore, our index can be written as

follows:

-cp

(2) PCR

tp

m

1

—

- - 1i6t

where p is the share of imports (at border prices) in domestic consumption and

c is the absolute value of the import demand elasticity. The expression on
the right-hand side relates the PCBR index to recognizable parameters. We
note that the index is increasing in t, p, and .

Table 2 shows the range of values that the PCBR index can take under
plausible combinations of these parameters. We fix the import demand
elasticity at 2 (which is relatively generous) and vary the other two
parameters.

We find that in most reasonable circumstances the PCBR lies

above 5. In words, an index of 5 indicates that for each dollar of net income
generated, five dollars of income are being reshuffled among different groups

in the economy. This puts us much closer to the "pure redistribution" case

6. The approximation is based on calculus, that is it ignores some
interaction terms.
It wilt be more accurate the smaller the trade reform.

-13-

than the Pareto-efficient case. Put bluntly, trade reform is politically
inefficient.7

Table 2: Plausible Values of the PCR
Index Under Trade Reforii ( — 2)
t

.2

.5

.7

.1

25.0

10.0

7.15

p .2

12.5

5.0

3.57

.4

6.25

2.50

1.79

In fact, things are typically worse. By its very nature, trade
liberalization creates a lot of winners whose identities cannot be discerned

beforehand. That is because the general-equilibrium ramifications of reform
cannot be all sorted out with perfect foresight. After reform, some
enterpreneurs in import-substituting sectors will transform themselves into
successful exporters; some new, unanticipated export opportunities will be

created. It is only after reform takes roots that the full configuration of
gainers and losers becomes evident. This kind of uncertainty leads to a
systematic bias against policy reform: reforms that would receive adequate

7. To the extent that rent-seeking behavior dissipates some of the rents of
trade protection, the efficiency gains of reform may be larger than those
measured here. However, the rent-seeking literature generally exaggerates
these gains. If individuals can waste resources in competing for the rents
generated by, say quotas they can also waste resources in lobbying the
government for the re-imposition of quotas that have been taken away.
Altering the incentives for rent-seeking behavior goes beyond simple changes
in the levels of trade protection.

-14-

political support after the fact may fail to receive support beforehand as
long as some of the gainers (or losers) from reform cannot be identified ex

ante (Fernandez and Rodrik 1991). Hence, the uncertainty surrounding the
distributional effects compounds the immediate difficulties raised by the
distributional consequences themselves.
These arguments raise the question: if trade reform is politically so

costly, why is it ever undertaken? The maintained assumption behind the PCBR
index is that altering the distribution of income is politically costly. This

to

need not always apply. In particular, policymakers may

reshape

distribution- -or be indifferent to it- -following a transformation in political

regime or a change in the underlying configuration of power. Indeed,
historically sharp changes in trade policy have almost always been preceded

(or accompanied) by changes in the political regime. This was true of the
first significant move to free trade in modern history, the repeal of the Corn
Laws

in

England in 1846, a move that reflected the growing political power of

urban interests over landed interests. It was also true of the most
significant case of reform in the developing world until the l980s, the

reforms that took place after Pinochets coup in Chile in

1973.

More evidence

on this will be discussed below in section 5. Not all political
transformations result in trade reform; but sharp changes in trade policy are
typically the result of such transformations.

What

about

the gradual, steady liberalization in the developed world

under the aegis of the GAIT during the post.war period? It s harder to
credit political regime changes for this process. The

political

acceptability

-15-

of these reforms derived instead from the joint influence of two factors: (i)
the gradualist nature of the reforms, and (ii) a favorable external

environment in the form of unprecedented economic growth. The latter served
to mask the distributive consequences of liberalization, and allowed everyone

to share in the benefits of recovery and, later on, increased prosperity. The
gradual nature of the liberalization, meanwhile, ensured that these

distributive effects would remain second-order relative to the consequences of
overall economic growth. The lesson is a simple, but valuable one: the
congruence of gradualism with increasing, all-around prosperity provides the
most comfortable environment for trade reform.8

3. A. Closer Look

at

the Distributive Con.sequemces of Trade Reform

Since trade reform and distribution are so closely related, it is helpul to

have a framework for analysis in which the links are laid out. As the reforms
in question are across the board, the framework should acommodate economy-wide

(that is, general equilibrium) repercussions. This section provides a sketch
of such a framework.
We begin by distinguishing among three sets of commodities and services:

(i) importables; (ii) exportables; (iii) non-tradables. We associate with

each of these groups an "average" domestic price, denoted by n' . and
respectively. This classifications is meant to be exhaustive; that is, all

Of course, the two need not be unrelated. Growth may be fostered by the
on-going liberalization. But given the lags and uncertainty involved, the
relationship is unlikely to be exploitable for political purposes.
8.

-16-

Table 3: A Matrix for Trade

relation to
world price

commodity domestic
price
group

importable

m —
—

exportable

non-tradable

p

Policy

ep(l+t)

ep/(l+t)

--

Analysis

typical goods
or services

income group
most directly
affected

intermediates,
capital goods,
consumer durables

IS industrialists;
import license
holders; organized
labor

cash crops,
light manuf.

agric. producers;
export-oriented
entrepreneurs

construction,
informal sector,
labor services

informal sector;
unorganized labor

Notes: e: exchange rate (home currency per foreign currency);
tm: tariff equivalent of all import restrictions (including license
premia);
tax equivalent of all export restrictions;
prices with asterisks denote world prices (in foreign currency).

commodities and services produced in the economy should fit in one of these

categories.9 Table 3 shows the typical commodities that are classified under
these headings; intermediate goods (such as chemicals) and capital goods, for
example, are typically importables,
The table also shows how the domestic price of each aggregate relates to

the relevant world price. The domestic price (in pesos) of importables equals
their world price (in dollars) multiplied by the exchange rate (defined as

9.
Some commodities can be simultaneously imported and exported. raising a
difficulty as to whether they should be classified as importable or
exportable. With sufficient disaggregation, this will normally not be a
serious problem in the context of developing countries.

-17-

pesos per dollar) times one plus tm, the tariff equivalent of all import

restrictions. Under t we include not only duties and other taxes, but also
the ad-valorem price equivalent of quota restrictions and other non-tariff

measures. In fact, tm itself is usually not directly observable when trade
restrictions, as so often, are primarily of a non-tariff nature. It can be
"recovere& by comparing the price of domestic products with the price of
close substitutes on world markets. The domestic price of exportables (e.g.,
coffee or clothing) is related to the world price in a similar manner, where
the export tax t)( captures the ad-valorem price equivalent of all export

restrictions. We note that an import tariff increases the domestic price of
importables- -the price paid by consumers and received by producers- -while an

export tax reduces the domestic price of the exportable.
Finally, note that prices of non-tradables do not bear any systematic
relationship (at least in the context of trade policy) to prices of similar

goods on world markets. Since haircuts and cement are normally non-tradable
(the first because of restrictions on labor mobility, the second because of
transport costs) there is no arbitrage relationship that would pin down

domestic prices in relation to foreign prices)0 Hence, p is determined
exclusively by domestic demand and supply. We should note that the most
important category of non-tradables is labor services. The wage rate is
consequently the most important non-tradable price.
Table 3 also shows the identities of the income groups whose fortunes are

10. There are always exceptions: Venezuela exports cement to Florida as it is
cheaper to transport cement via the ocean than it is to bring it overland by
train or truck. In fact, in late 1991 cement producers in Florida were trying
to bring antidumping action against Venezuelan exporters.

-18-

most closely tied to each of these prices. Hence, the incomes of importsubstituting industrialists, import-license holders, and often of organized

labor are determined in the first instance by m' the importable price. The
price of exportables, p,, serves the same purpose for agricultural producers

and export-oriented entrepreneurs. The non-tradable price p determines
income in the informfl sector and of unorganized labor.

Now, each of these groups' well-being is determined not only by the price

they receive for their production. Other prices matter too, since these
affect input costs and consumption costs. Real incomes are determined,
therefore, by relative prices and not the absolute level of any single price.
To draw the links between trade policy and distribution, we have to ask how
specific relative prices are affected by trade policy.

But which relative prices? Since we have three prices in our economy.
there are only two relative prices that are of independent interest, but many

different ways of expressing them. For reaaons that will be clear shortly, it
is convenient to focus on: (i) the relative price of importables to
exportables, and (ii) the relative price of "tradables" to non-tradables.
These two relative prices are key to the resource allocation effects of trade
policy, and any political-economy analysis must begin with them.

Using the definitions in Table 3, the first of these can be expressed as
follows:

(3)

* *
m'x — (Pm/Px)G

+

t)(].

+

tx)

The second relative price is obtained by lumping imporcables and exportables

-19-

into a basket called tradables. Formally, the price of tradables, t' is a
weighted average of

(4) Pt —

and

[ep(l+tm)ja[ep/(l+tx)])

—

e[p(l+tm))a[p/(l+tx)jl0,

where a is the weight on importables. Our second relative price is then given
by the ratio of prices of tradables to non-tradables:

(5) t/P —
This ratio is also called the "real exchange rate".
From an economic standpoint, the distinction between these two is useful

because each has a distinct effect on resource allocation, Changes in
are associated inversely with changes in an economy's openness: the higher
this relative price, the smaller is the share of imports and exports in
national income (ceteris paribus) and the greater the level of import-

substituting production. On the other hand, changes in

are typically

associated with changes in the trade (or current account) balance: the higher
this relative price, the more positive the trade balance (again ceteris

paribus). These resource-allocation effects also define the criteria by which
the success of conunercial policy and of exchange-rate policy should be

measured: successful trade liberalization will increase the ratios of imports
to CNP and exports to CHP on a sustained basis; successful devaluation will
reduce the trade deficit (or increase the surplus) without affecting domestic

levels of inflation and unemployment. Finally, the two relative prices have
distinct distributional consequences. The first relative price captures
distributional conflict within tradables sectors, whereas the second focuses
on distribution across the tradables-non-tradables cleavage.

-20-

Armed with these two relative prices, we are now ready to analyze the
consequences of trade policy for the real incomes of different groups in

society. For each policy in question, we ask how these relative prices are
affected, and read the implications for different groups with the help of the
classification in Table 3.

(a) Commercial policy. The term commercial policy captures the set of
policies that have direct implications for the domestic prices of importables

and exportables. In terms of our schema, these are policies that affect the
relative price Pm/Px• As shown in (3), these are import and export taxes of
various sorts, including quantitative restrictions, licensing, advance
deposits on imports, prohibitions, and (often) commodity marketing boards.
Note that the relative price of importables and exportables does

depend on

the exchange rate, as e enters both the numerator and the denominator and

cancels out. That is, exchange rate policy is distributionally neutral as
between import-competing and export-oriented interests (see the discussion
under (C] below however).
Secondly, we note the symmetry in the way that import and export taxes

enter equation (3): import tariffs and export taxes have identical effects.

A ten percent export tax has the same effect on m'x -and hence on the
openness of the economy and on distribution within tradables- -as a ten percent

11. This result, known as the Lerner symmetry theorem, is surprisingly
general. All that it requires is that the trade balance be insulated from the
effect of the tariff or tax, as would obtain when p is perfectly flexible or
e is adjusted to maintain the trade balance unchanged. Often, however, and
especially in the short run, macroeconomic equilibrium may fail to obtain, and
the symziietry may break down. The claims made in this paragraph lose their
force when this is the case. See the discussion below on compensated and
uncompensated trade liberalizations.

-21-

import tariff, and vice versaj2 This demonstrates that import protection
imposes a penalty on exporters that is identital to

a

direct export tax.

Conversely, an export tax benefits import-competing interests. The logic
works for subsidies also, as long as one keeps in mind that a subsidy is a

negative tax. Hence, an export subsidy takes away some import protection and
hurts import-competing interests as much as a direct reduction of protection.
Finally, we note that commercial policy per se has no direct distributive
consequence for groups that derive their income from non-tradables, such as

unorganized labor (or the informal sector). From (5) we can see that a
reduction in the import tariff would tend to increase the real incomes of

labor (as t'n is reduced), but only as long as the nominal exchange rate (e)
remains unchanged. If the import liberalization is packaged with a
devaluation (see below), the effect on labor is ambiguous.

The situation may be quite different with respect to organized labor in

import-competing industries. High profits in these industries may be shared
with labor unions and be reflected in wage premia relative to the rest of the

economy. The relaxation of import controls will bite into these labor
"rents", and hurt these groups directly.

(b) Exchange rate nolicy. Exchange rate policy affects a different
relative price, that between jj,. trad.ables and non-tradables. This can be

seen in expression (5) in which e enters the numerator. This is an important
distinction between commercial policy and exchange rate policy, and is often

Sometimes this equivalence is stated in a different way: a ten percent
increase in tariffs is identical to a ten percent increase in the export tax.
As a moment's reflection will show, this does not follow from (3), unless
and tx are initially zero.
12.

-22-

missed in general discussions of "trade policy". At the risk of being
repetitive, the distinction is summarized in Table 4. A devaluation increases
the donestic price of tradables and, ceteris paribus, raises

Unlike

commercial liberalization, a devaluation is likely to squeeze unorganized
labor and reduce real wages in terms of tradables (provided wages are

determined predominantly by conditions in the non-tradable sector). The
reduction in real wages is the flip side of the increase in competitiveness

brought about by devaluation. Also, a devaluation affects all tradable
sectors symmetrically: both import-competing and export-oriented interests
benefit from it, while commercial liberalization pits these two sectors
against each other.

With respect to real wages, one point bears stressing. It is useful to
distinguish between two concepts of the real wage: the product real wage and

the consumption real wage. The first is the nominal wage divided by the price
of tradables, and it is the one that determines the competitiveness of

domestic tradables. The second is the nominal wage divided by an aggregate
price index that includes prices of non-tradables; the latter measures the
purchasing power of wages and is the more appropriate index of workers' well-

being. If non-tradables are sufficiently important in workers' consumption
basket and wages rise sufficiently more than prices of non-tradables, it is
possible that consumption real wages increase as a consequence of devaluation
while the product reel wage falls.

-23Table 4: Coercial Policy vs. Exchange Rate

Policy

relative
price affected

commercial
policy

p0/p

exchange rate
policy

Pt/pn

Policy

resourceallocation effect

openness

trade balance

distributive
effect

import-competing
vs. exportoriented interests

all tradables
vs. non-tradables;
real wages

Moreover, unlike conunercial policy which can be made effective by fiat,

the economic success of exchange rate policy depends on the response of p (or

wages). We see from (5) that the

value

of the real exchange rate

depends both on e and on p. For an increase in the nominal exchange rate to
bring about an increase in the real exchange rate (i.e., to achieve a real

depreciation) we have to ensure that p does not rise proportionately. Now,
as mentioned above, p is determined by domestic supply and demand conditions.
Making exchange rate policy effective, therefore, requires restrictive demand

management policies which do not allow p (or wages) to rise along with e.
This is the source of the oft-repeated admonishment to developing countries
that exchange rate devaluation (expenditure switching) should be coupled with
restrictive monetary and fiscal policies (expenditure reduction) to have an

effect on the external balance. Economic "effectiveness" calls for income
redistribution.

(c) Devaluation when forein exchange is rationed. We have dram a sharp
distinction between commercial policy and exchange rate policy, both in terms

-24-

of distributive and resource-allocation impacts. There are circumstances,
however, under which the distinction disappears and a devaluation becomes

identical to commercial liberalization. This occurs when foreign exchange is
rationed by the government and there exists a black market for foreign
exchange.

In the presence of a black market, there are at least two exchange rates:
an official exchange rate, call it e, at which only a limited number of
transactions are carried out due to rationing by the central bank; and the
black market rate, eb, which represents the marginal cost of foreign exchange
and to which importers must resort in order to satisfy their needs in excess

of the official allocation (naturally, eb >

e).

This is shown in Figure 2.

Exporters must turn in their foreign exchange receipts at the lower price ;.

Hence, domestic prices of importables and exportables are now given by: m —

ebprn(l+tm) and Px —

P/(tx)

The relative price of importables to

exportables becomes:

(3') m'x — (eb/e)(p/p)(l+tm)(l+tx)
where the exchange rates have not canceled out (cf. (3)). The gap between e
and eb represents rents that accrue to those who get access to dollars at the
official rate (since these dollars are worth the black market price).
Therefore, foreign currency rationing creates a situation that is entirely

analogous to the imposition of a trade restriction. This can be seen from
(3'): an increase in the exchange-rate premium (i.e., a larger gap between eb
and e) works just like an increase in tm or tx.
Now consider a devaluation of the official rate (an increase in e).
This prompts an increase in the supply of foreign exchange, as exporters

-25-

respond by increasing their activity. As shown in Figure 2, that in turn
leads to a decrease in the black-market exchange rate. The net effect is a
fall in eb/e, which amounts to a fall in the price of importables relative to

the price of exportables (see [3')). Now the devaluation has worked just like
commercial liberalization, and will have all the same resource allocation and

distributive consequences. In particular, the rents accruing to those with
acce,ess to official dollars will diminish. This is the case of a "trade-

liberalizing devaluation". By increasing the availability of foreign
exchange, previously rationed, the devaluation allows more exports and more
imports.. Import-competing groups that would normally benefit from a
devaluation are now hurt.
(ci) ComDensated and uncompensated trade liberalization. Consider a

reduction in import barriers. In the medium to long run, there is no reason
the liberalization should have an adverse effect on the trade balance; even in
the absence of adjustments in the exchange rate, endogenous changes in nontradables prices will generally be enough to return the economy to external

balance. In the shorter run, things may be a bit more complicated if p is
not sufficiently flexible, or, what amounts to the same thing in most

contexts, if the operation of labor markets is plagued by rigidities. To make
the point as starkly as possible, let us assume that p is fixed and does not
adjust once import barriers are lifted.
By inspecting (5) we note that a reduction in tm will reduce the

numerator of

and hence appreciate the real exchange rate. This makes

domestic production less competitive and can be expected to deteriorate the

external balance. Intuitively, cheaper imports replace domestic output, An
endogenous reduction in n would insulate the external balance from the ffect

-26-

of the liberalization. In its absence, the government can achieve the same
insulation by undertaking a devaluation. An increase in e raises the

numerator in p/P and prevents the appreciation of the real exchange rate and
the loss of competitiveness. With a compensating devaluation of this sort,
the effects of liberalization are limited to those discussed under (a) above.
The devaluation gives an added boost to exporters and alleviates some of the
squeeze on import-competing groups.

The alternative is to do nothing on the exchange rate front. This is the
option that has been selected during the 1980s by many governments fighting

triple-digit (and higher) inflation. (Examples are Bolivia, Mexico, and
Israel.) The reason is that, in a high-inflation environment, stability in
the nominal exchange rate may be needed as an anchor for the domestic price

level. A devaluation may be perceived as too risky, lest it unleash
inflationary expectations.

Clearly, the exchange rate cannot be targeted on the domestic price level

the external balance simultaneously. When it is targeted on the former, a
compensating devaluation is ruled out. Consequently, the liberalization
imposes a magnified squeeze on import-competing interests to the benefit of

non-tradable sectors. The ensuing deterioration in the current account
balance can continue as long as there are capital inflows willing to sustain

it. Living beyond one's means in this fashion can even create a sense of

euphoria. But politically this can be dangerous. Powerful importsubstituting interests are more likely to opppose vigorously an unconipensated

liberalization than a compensated one. In Chile, for example, the early
stages of liberalization during 1975-78 took place in the context of a

depreciating real exchange rate. Industrialists started to complain in

-27-

earnest only after 1979 when the real exchange rate started to appreciate.
Similarly in Mexico liberalization during 1985-87 did not have detrimental
effects on industry thanks to a depreciating exchange rate; starting in 1988,
when the peso was stabilized and the trade reform speeded up, the
liberalization began to bite considerably more.

4. Distributive Consequences for the State
We have left out of the discussion so far a very important claimant on

national income, the state (or the bureaucracy). Policymakers' willingness to
undertake trade rçform is often shaped as much by the perceived impact on the
fiscal resources of the state or on the wealth of well-placed bureaucrats as

by the pressure from below. We close the analysis of distribution by
discussing briefly the main channels through which trade policy channels
resources to and from the state.

First and most directly, import and export taxes are a source of revenue

for the public treasury. Trade taxes (including the profits of marketing
boards) play a particularly important role in the poorest countries where such
revenues can make up between a quarter and a half of central government

income. Under most circumstances, trade liberalization may be expected to
reduce these revenues. But there are a couple of important exceptions to this
rule. First, the initial stages of trade liberalization usually involve the
elimination of quantitative restrictions and often their replacement by

tariffs. Such tariffication should be expected to channel resources that

previously ended up as quota rents towards public coffers. Secondly, when
trade restrictions get too high and overvaluation of the exchange rate becomes
extreme, trade taxes are typically dissipated in smuggling and other illicit

-28-

activities. Correcting such problems can lead to a sharp increase in
government revenue despite the overall liberalization. A significant example
of this took place in Ghana after 1983.
Exchange rate policy also has important implications for government

finance, but the effects tend to be more subtle. Since exchange rate policy
aims at changing the price of tradables relative to non-tradables, the income
effect on the public sector can be found by answering the following question:

are non-traded goods and services a j source of income for the government or
not? When it is, as when payroll taxes constitute an important component of
government revenue and much of public spending goes to purchase tradables
(military hardware, for example), a devaluation will leave the state sector

poorer. When it is not, as is the case in oil producing economies, the public

sector benefits from a devaluation. Turkey and Venezuela are good examples of
the former and latter, respectively. Sometimes the question is put
differently: is the government a net seller or buyer of dollars vis-a-vis the

private sector? Useful as a first approximation, this question betrays a
partial-equilibrium logic where a general-equilibrium one is needed.
As discussed above, much of trade policy is concerned with the creation

and elimination of rents (Krueger 1974). These rents are often captured by
individual bureaucrats. A government offcial. who is entrusted with the
disposition of scarce import licenses or foreign currency is endowed with a

very valuable resource. Whether he cashes in on this resource by accepting
bribes or simply basks in the self-importance created by his job, asking him

to give up willingly on this resource may be asking too much. This explains
why restrictive trade regimes and foreign exchange crises often create a
powerful lobby within the government in favor of their continuation, and why

-29-

successful implementation of reforms may require the replacement of the middle

echelons within the economic bureaucracy. Indonesia, which substituted a
Swiss inspection firm for its customs bureaucracy, is a good case in point.

5. Why Has There

Been So Much Trade

Liberalization Lately?

We now turn to the second puzzle stated at the outset of the paper: if trade
reform is politically so difficult to undertake, why are so many countries
doing it flow? The mystery is heightened when we consider that the current
wave of trade reform is taking place in an environment least conducive to its

success. For high inflation blunts the impact of relative-price changes
achieved by trade reform and recession makes the required resource
reallocation more costly.

Our focus on the distributional consequences of trade policy provides one

potential key to the puzzle. Perhaps the powerful interests that benefited
from protection and had successfully blocked reform have been weakened by the

debt crisis of the 1980s. If so, we can explain the general move towards
liberal policies. But the argument would require a demonstration that import.
competing interests, the ones most severely hurt by reform, were weakened

disproportionately. Such an argument would be difficult to construct. Of
course, the debt crisis highlighted the urgency of earning foreign exchange

and may have thus increased the political strength of exporters. But by the
same token, the need to conserve foreign exchange must have played into the

hands of import-substituting groups. The crisis of 1982 and the ensuing
macreconomic mess were costly all around. It is not at all evident that
import-competing groups bore the brunt of the effects and that they
systematically lost out on the political front.

-30-

On the international scene, there were two clear winners: the World Bank

and the IMF. The crisis forced developing countries to line up at the gates
of these Bretton Wood institutions, pleading for the imprimatur that would

unlock debt rescheduling arrangements and new capital flows. The renewed
importance of these institutions gave unprecedented salience to their orthodox
arguments on economic management, i.e., the need for trade liberalization,

realistic exchange rates, and conservative monetary and fiscal policies. The
bargaining was especially one-sided in Africa, where governments were poorly
endowed with the technical expertise to evaluate and reshape standard
prescriptions and lacked powerful patrons among rich countries which would

help moderate World Bank and IMF demandsJ3
That the World Bank and the IMF became uncommonly powerful vis-a-vis

developing country governments during the 1980s is indisputable. Yet it would
be a mistake to picture the process of policy reform as one where orthodox
economic policies were externally imposed on unwilling policymakers. In some
African cases, this characterization may come close to being true--witness,

for example, the cycle of reform and reversal in Zambia. But more often than
not, reform has had a significant home-grown component, exceeding on ocassiom

the World Bank's or the IMF's expectations and stipulations. The Mexican
liberalization since 1987, for example, has been more ambitious and has
proceeded faster than some World Bank officials thought was prudent at the

time. The recent Argentine, Brazilian, and Indian conversions cannot be
credited to the Bretton Woods institutions either; these large countries have

13
For a recent study of the World Bank's relations with governments, see
Mosley et al. (1991).

-31-

a long history of avoiding and evading P,ank conditionality on liberalization.

External actors have played at best a modest role in initiating recent
reforms.

The bulk of the credit must go instead to the dire economic circumstances
in which most developing countries found themselves as a consequence of the

prolonged macroeconomic crisis of the 1980s. The experience of high inflation
arid negative growth year after year eventually prepared the ground for

embracing an entirely new set of policies. The continued deterioration in
economic conditions shaped a general consensus that something had to be done.
Put differently, the perceived overall gain from restoring the economy's
health became, after a point, so large that it swamped distributional
considerations. 14

This point can be demonstrated by using the PCBR index developed

previously. We will show that the political cost-benefit ratio of trade
reform declines dramatically when it is introduced in the context of

stabilization policy. Consider then a trade reform that is part of an overall
economic stabilization package. The stabilization aims at reducing inflation
and reviving the economy by eliminating the foreign-exchange stranglehold. We

14. Witness for example the following description of the Ghanaian experience:
"Rent seekers who can control import licenses are usually a potent source of
opposition to devaluation, but the crisis had become so bad in Ghana that the
group benefiting from administrative allocation of foreign exchange was
extremely limited. Indeed, by the early 1980s, the economy had deteriorated
to such an extent that even senior government officials, who normally benefit
from access to imported goods even in times of shortage, reported that they
were going hungry and were concerned that they could not find food for their
families" (1-lerbst, 1991). For a formal model on the benefits of crisis for
economic reform, which closely parallels the argument here, see also Drazen
and Crilli (1990).

-32-

leave for later the question of why trade reform is included in the package
alongside the standard fiscal and monetary measures; suffice it to say that in
practice when trade reform arrived it did so as part of an overall

macroeconomic package of this sort. Now, stabilization differs from trade
liberalization in one key respect: unlike trade liberalization, it holds the

promise of generating benefits that will be shared by all, Few coherent
interest groups can be identified that are meD gainers from triple-digit
inflation and economic collapse, and hence few interest groups that do not

stand to benefit from an end to both)5 Moreover, the deeper the crisis, the
larger the overall net benefits from recovery.

The PCBR index for this reform can be calculated by tracking the effects

of both the liberalization and the stabilization. Let us denote the acrossthe-board benefit of stabilization by -y, the percentage increase in net income

that accrues to all groups in the economy as a result of stabilization. -

is

a proxy for the depth of the crisis (as well as for the likely success of the

stabilization). Further, let 9 denote the share of consumption of importables
in CNP, and w the percent reduction in the price of importables relative to

exportables as a consequence of the reform. The PCBR index for the
stabilization-cum-liberalization package can now be expressed as:

15. This does not mean that stabilization does not generate distributional
conflict; see Alesina and Drazen (forthcoming) for a model based on such
conflict. But in this model (and in reality) the conflict over stabilization
is based not on who gains and who loses from stabilization, but on who gains
more and who gains less. Therefore the distributional conflict is of a lower
order of magnitude than in the case of trade liberalization.

-33-

1

(6) PCBR

It

-

pt

+ [-y/w9]

is now a matter of simpl.e algebra to demonstrate that when the all-around

benefit of stabilization (-1)

is

large it swamps the redistributive aspect of

the trade refärm. Table 5 shows how the PCBR index falls sharply with y•

Jhen

—

0,

the PCBR index takes its usual high value- -5.0 under the present

parameter combinations. In the presence of a stabilization program that
promises to make all groups better off by 10 percent (

— 0.1), the index

plummets to 0.69. With -y — 0.25, the index declines further to 0.30. Note
that since relatively small increases in the growth rate of an economy can
cause large jumps in the level of the present-discounted value of income, an
expectation that a successful stabilization will increase well-being by 10-25

percent is not far off the mark)6
Hence trade reform can suddenly start to look politically attractive if:
(a) it is perceived as an integral part of a stabilization package, and (b)
the macroeconomy stands engulfed in a deep crisis.

16. Let the stabilization increase the growth rate of the economy by only one
percentage point, from zero to 1 percent. Assume that individuals have a time
discount rate of 8 percent. Then, this relatively small increase in the
growth rate translates into a 14.3 percent increase in the level of
individuals' wealth (present discounted value of income).

-34-

5: The PCR Index with

Table

:

-y

PCBR

:

0
5.00

Stabilization-cull-Trade

0.10

0.25

0.50

1.00

0.69

0.30

0.16

0.08

Reforli

Note: t—.5. —.2, —2, 9-..4, w—.2

The argument that economic crisis can help reform is consistent with the
evidence (scanty as it is) from earlier decades also. A recent World gank
research project has analyzed liberalization episodes in 19 developing
countries during the post-war. pre-debt crisis period (Papageorgiou et al.
1.990). Table 6, taken from this research, lists 13 cases of trade reform that
is classified by the principal authors as "strong" and "fast" reform episodes.
The table shows that the vast majority of these reforms--lO out of 13--took
place in the context of either a change in political regime or a generalized

perception of complete economic collapse, or both. The close association
between economic collapse and reform is even more evident in the 1980s, where
a significant amount of each has occurred: I know of no significant case of
LDC trade reform in the 1980s that did not take place in the context of a
serious economic crisis.

Two questions remain to be answered. First, why did the changes in trade
policy take the form of liberalization rather than of closing up? After all,
the logic of the argument is symmetric with respect to trade policy "reforms"

in either direction. Second, why were trade reforms packaged with
stabilization, if the relationship between trade policy and the debt crisis is

-35-

incidenta1?' That is, why did policymakers perceive a need for commercial
policy reforms on top of monetary, fiscal, and exchange-rate reforms?

Table 6: The Correlates of Trade Reforn

"strong" and "fast"
reform episodes

Argentina
Chile
Chile
Greece
Indonesia
Israel
Peru
Philippines
Singapore
Spain
Sri Lanka
Turkey
Yugoslavia

year

change in
political regime

x

1976
1956
1974
1953
1966
1952
1979
1960
1968
1977
1977
1980
1965

x
x

perception of complete
economic collapse

x
x
x
x
x

x

x
x
x
x

Source: Papageorgiou et al. (1990).

The answer to the first question is that the countries concerned for the

most part initially did choose to regulate rather than to liberalize. This
reaction constituted the traditional response to foreign-exchange crises: when
dollars become scarce, LDC policymakers impose rationing and tighten

quantitative restrictions. And this is what happened in the early stages of
the

debt

crisis. Turkey, which entered its debt crisis early in 1977, mucked

around with halfway measures for two-and-a-half years until it decided to

17.

For an argument that the

(1992a)

relationship

is indeed incidental, see Rodrik

-36-

liberalize in 1980. Mexico, started to liberalize in earnest in late 1987
(hut some of the measures were announced in 1985- -still three years after the

debt crisis hit). Peru was an extreme case of turning inward under Garcia,
until the Fujimori government took over. Brazil and Argentina took the better
part of the decade before they decided to liberalize. Hence, liberalization
was selected only after the alternative had been tried repeatedly and
discredited. The crisis called for something new; import controls .ere not it.
The second issue- -the packaging of stabilization with liberalization- -

is

more mistifying. One factor, related to the above, was that the crisis had
discredited the entire pattern of previous economic policymaking, including

the commercial policy regime. To have credibility, policymakers had to make a
clear break with the past, and this included doing away with the import-

substitution regime. It may be too much to assume that the policymakers
themselves were fully aware of the distinctions, and of the full Set of causal
relations among the trade regime, the macroeconomic stance, and the economic

crisis. Also, we must give credit to the World Bank for having invented and
successfully marketed the concept of "structural adjustment", a concept which

packaged together microeconomic and macroeconomic reforms. Structural
adjustment was sold as the process that countries needed to undergo in order

to save their economies from the crisis. For governments that bought into the
package, the distinction between sound macroeconomic policies that maintain
external balance and stable prices, on the one hand, and policies that
determine openness, on the other, was obfuscated.

-37-

6. Sustaining the Reforms
The argument made in the previous section is perhaps not very encouraging with

respect to the sustainability of trade liberalization into the 1990s. If the
argument is correct, the reforms were enabled not by the dissolution of
powerful import-competing coalitions, but by a deep economic crisis-necessarily of a temporary nature--which relegated distributional issues to
second place behind the need to stabilize the macroeconomy. Once the cr.isis
is over and politics as usual returns, will these coalitions not reassert

themselves and demand a return to import protection? Possibly so. But there
are reasons to think that it will not be easy for policynakers to turn their
backs on the reforms.

The experience of Chile provides an instructive example. During the
1970s, a radical trade reform was imposed on Chilean business from above by a

repressive dictatorial regime impervious to interest-group pressure. By the
early l980s, import-substitution policies had been replaced by a simple

uniform tariff of 10 percent (motor vehicles being the sole exception). With
the return of democracy at the end of the decade, a reasonable guess might
have been that protectionist business interests would rise to the occasion and
push for a return to some of the old policies under which they had prospered

Yet nothing of the sort happened. In fact, during the presidential election
campaign in the fall of 1989, the trade regime never became an issue. All
major groups, it would seem, were ready to live with free trade.
One reason that the open trade regime has not been challenged in Chile is

the comparative success of its economy. When many of its neighbors are
reeling under tripie-digit inflation and negative growth, Chile has managed to
keep its Inflation rate at or below 20 percent and has been growing steadily

-38-

at 5 percent per year. Why mess with success?
One lesson from the Chilean experience, then, is that when policies are

demonstrated to "work" they will gain legitimacy. When the economy starts to
recover and inflation is firmly under control, some of the success- -rightly or

wrongly- -will be attributed to the open trade policies. Indeed, probably the
most important determinant of the sustainability of the liberalization will be

the success of macroeconomic stabilization. In countries where inflation and.
external imbalances are brought under control, the reform package, including
its commercial component, will have legitimacy and will be resistant to

political attack. Bolivia can be cited as an additional example here: the
memory of the successful 1985 stabilization after a hyperinflation has created

a political consensus on the desirability of liberal trade policies. Where
stabilization fails, on the other hand, the trade reform too will be prone to
reversal.

A second lesson from the example of countries like Chile and Bolivia is

that all policies create constituencies for their continuation. Outwardoriented policies generate new profit opportunites for entrepreneurs, some of
whom may have been engaged only in import-substituting activites prior to

reform. As new, previously unpredictable export activities appear, a new
class of export-oriented businessmen is created. These entrepreneurs now have
a stake in the new policy regime, and will fight any attempted reversal. The
distributional complications discussed in the first half of the paper now
operate in reverse: going back to protection will be difficult precisely
because so much (re)redistribution will be involved.
Such status-quo bias will help enlightened policymakers stick with open

trade policies. But there are also things that the policymakers themselves

-39-

have done to avoid reversal. Governments in many countries have been
imaginative in devising strategies for institutionalizing the reforms.

Mexico, for example, first bound its tariff rates under the GATT and then

began negotiations with the U.S. to enter a free trade agreement. By making
reversal extremely costly, these actions have helped solidify the reforms.

The appropriate strategies naturally depend on the context. But some helpful
ones include: adopting a uniform tariff to make individual tariff rates less
susceptible to special-interest pleading from business; re-organizing the
economic bureaucracy to reduce the power of officials that benefited directly
from the previous licensing and rationing system18; a credible export subsidy
program to ensure that an interest group with a stake in outward orientation

is brought into existence quickly. I have discussed these and other
strategies at greater length elsewhere (see Rodrik, 1989a, 1989b, 1992c, and
Panagariya and Rodrik, 1991).
Creative policymakers will no doubt come up with more of these

strategies. But institutional innovation notwithstanding, a point made above
bears repeating: nothing will help sustain open trade policies more than a
stable macroeconomic environment. The success of the recent reforms,
therefore, will ultimately depend less on their own direct effects than on the
success of macroeconomic policy.

18. Onis (forthcoming) provides a good discussion of some of these
institutional innovations in post-1983 Turkey: "The post-1983 governments
aimed explicitly at weakening the role of the traditional bureaucratic elites
Installing a mangerial bureaucracy in the form of a select group of U.S.
educated technocrats, recruited from outside the ranks of traditional
bureaucracy, hence largely independent from both societal and intrabureaucratic pressures, has been perceived as a necessary condition for the
consistent implementation of the economic program.

-40-

APPD1X

We

begin by defining a conventional, utilitarian social welfare function

U t)

U1(1

t),

stands for various subsidies (and taxes) -available to the policymaker

where

for undertaking compensation, t is the generic trade policy instrument, and

U1(.) stands for group (or individual) is utility function. Note that
utility functions are reduced-forms defined directly over the policy

instruments. Since

will generally be distortionary, U(.) and V(.) have

their standard interpretation as in the public-finance literature.
The policymaker selects the tax/subsidy scheme to ensure that no group is

made worse off subsequent to a trade reform than in the status quo. Denoting
the status-quo level of utility of group i by U,

his

problem can be written

as follows:

(1) Max V(a1

ak; t) s.t. U1(a1

t)

Uk(al

k t)

(a1)

Uk.

The associated Lagrangean expression is given by:

£ — V(a1

where

ak; t) + Ejtj[U(a1

°k

t) -

are the Lagrange multipliers (p 0). We assume that V(.) is

sufficiently well-behaved that the second-order conditions fot this problem

-41-

are satisfied. Let (o(t)) represent the solution to this problem. We can
then derive the maximum-value function V*(t):

V*(t) —

V(o(t)

c(t); t)

To the policymaker who must compensate the losers by using distortionary
taxes and subsidies, the net benefit of trade reform is now given by

dV*(t)/dt. By the envelope theorem,

dV*(t)/dt —

—

aL/at

3V(.)/at

+

Mj1aUi(.)/ot].

We now note that the constraints in (1) will bind in the post-reform
equilibrium only for those groups that are made worse off, and will not bind

for the winners. Hence

0 for beneficiary groups;

Mi —

I

> 0 for losing groups.

Consequently, we can write dV*(t)/dt as:

(2) dV*(t)/dt —

aV(.)/at

+

(losers)

The first term here is simply the efficiency gain of the reform, and for a
reduction in t

will

normally be positive. The second term represents the cost

of compensating the losers: it is the weighted sum of utility losses suffered
by those groups adversely affected by the reform, with the weights being the

Lagrange multipliers. Note that these multipliers summarize the (marginal)

-42-

resource cost of compensation. For an efficiency enhancing-reform, the sign
on the second term is always opposite to that on the first.
The E'CBR discussed in the text can now be seen to represent a special

case of the calculus expressed in (2), with gains and losses measured in

income rather than utility terms. The denominator of the PCBR is the first
term of (2). The numerator. which equals the sum of losses, is the second
term of (2), with all

that are positive set equal to unity.

-43-

RE.FERENCS

Alesina, Alberta, and Allan Drazen, forthcoming, "Why Are Stabilizations
Delayed?" American Economic Review.
Alesina, Alberto, and Dani Rodrik, 1991, "Distributive Politics and Economic
Growth," NBER Working Paper No. 3668.

Alesina, Alberto, and Dani. Rodrik, 1992, "Distribution, Political Conflict and
Economic Growth: A Simple Theory and Some Empirical Evidence," in Alex
Cukrerman et al. (eds), The Political Economy of Business Cycles and Growth,
Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, forthcoming.
Bates, Robert H. (ed.), 1988, Toward a Political Economy of Development: A
Rational Choice Perspective, Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Bourguignon, Francois, and Christian Morrisson, 1989. External Trade and
Income Distribution, Paris, Development Centre of the OECD.
Drazen, Allan, and Vittorio Grilli, 1990, "The Benefits of Crises for Economic
Reforms," NBER Working Paper No. 3527.
Fernandez, Raquel, and Dani Rodrik, 1991, "Resistance to Reform: Status Quo
Bias in the Presence of Individual-Specific Uncertainty," American Economic
Review, December.
Haggard, Stephan, and Steven Webb, 1990, "The Political Economy of Structural
Adjustment," research proposal, The World Bank, December.
Herbst, Jeffrey, 1991, "Exchange Rate Reform in Ghana: Strategy and Tactics,"
in Robert S. McNamara Program Tenth Anniversary Publication, Economic
Development Institute, World Bank.
Krueger, Axne, 1974, "The Political-Economy of the Rent-Seeking Society,"
American Economic Review 64(3).

Meier, Gerald K. (ed.), 1991, Politics and Policy Making in DevelopLn
Countries, San Fransisco: ICS Press.
Mosley, Paul, Jane Harrigan, and John Toye (eds.), 1991, Aid and Power: The
World Bank and Policy-Based Lending, vols. 1 and 2, London: Routledge.
Onis, Ziya, forthcoming, "Redemocratization and Economic Liberalization in
Turkey: The Limits of State Autonomy," Studies in Comparative International
Development.
Panagariya, Arvind, and Dani Rodrik, 1991, 'Political Economy Argueiits for a
Uniform Tariff," NBER Working Paper No. 3661.
Papageorgiou, Dei.etris, Areane Choksl, and Michael Nichaely, 1990,

-44-

Liberalizine Forejen Trade. Lessons of Experience in the Developing World,
Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell.
Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini, 1991, "Is Inequality Harmful to
Growth?," NBER Working Paper.
Rodrllc, Dani, 1989, "Promises, Promises: Credible Policy Reform via
Signalling," The Economic Journal. vol. 99, September [1989a]

___________ 1989. "Credibility of Trade Reform: A Policy Maker's Guide," fl
World Economy, vol. 12, no. 1, March (1989b1.
-___________ , 1992, "The Limits of Trade Policy Reform in LDCs," Journal of
Economic Perspectives, Winter, forthcoming [1992a].
____________ 1992. "Political Economy and Development Policy." European
Economic Review, January, forthcoming (l992b1.
____________ 1992, "Conceptual Issues in the Design of Trade Policy For
Industrialization." World Development, March, forthcoming [l992c1.
Stolper, Wolfgang. and Paul Saizuelson, 1941, "Protection and Real Wages,"
Review of Economic Studies, 58-73.

Whalley, John, 1989, "Recent Trade Liberalization in the Developing World:
What is Behind It, and Where is It Headed?" National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper No. 3057, Cambridge, Mass.
Williamson. John, 1990. The Progress of Policy Reform in Latin Americs,
Washington, D.C. : Institute for International Economics, Policy Analyses in
International Economics 28, 1990.
World Bank, 1989, Strengthening Trade Policy Reform. vol. Ii, Washington, D.C.
UNCTAD, 1991, Trade and Development Report, Geneva, Switzerland.

-45-

FIgure 1: Trade Refor.

and Income

Distribution

A

p

/;\

*
H

D

Distributional effect of removing quota on imports:
import-competing producers:

-ARCH

import license holders:

-BCEF

rest of the economy:

+ACDH

NET CAIN:

BFC + CDE

-46-

Figure 2: Foreign Currency Rationing and Multiple Exchange

Rates

Ps/$

S
eb

e

b
quantity of
foreign currency

