                  NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




       SHOCKING ASPECTS OF EUROPEAN MONETARY UNIFICATION




                         Tamim Bayoumi

                       Barry Eichengreen




                    Working Paper No. 3949




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          January 1992




Bank of England and University of California at Berkeley.
respectively. We wish to thank Peter Kenen and Jeff Frankel for
providing useful. comments on an earlier draft. This paper does
not necessarily represent the views of the Bank of England. This
paper is part of NBER's research program in International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                           NBER Working Paper I#3949
                                           January 1992




                SHOCKING ASPECTS OF MONETARY UNIFICATION



                                ABStRACt

      Data on output and prices for 11 EC member nations are

analyzed to extract information on underlying aggregate supply
and demand disturbances using a VAR decomposition. The coherence

of   the   underlying shocks across countries and the speed of
adjustment to these shocks are then compared to the results from

US regional data. We find that the underlying shocks are
significantly more idiosyncratic across EC countries than across
US regions, which may indicate that the EC will find it more
difficult to operate a monetary union. However a core of EC

countries, made up of Germany and her immediate neighbors,
experience shocks of similar magnitude and cohesion as the US

regions. EC countries also exhibit a slower response to

aggregate shocks than US regions, presumably reflecting lower

factor mobility.



TarnimBayoumi                               Barry Eichengreen
Bank of England                             Department of Economics
Threadneedle Street                         University of California
London      EC2R SAM                        Berke1ey, CA 94720
England                                     and NBER
I. Introduction

     From all appearances the process of European monetary unification (EMU)

continues to gather momentum. Nearly four years have passed since the last

significant realignment of exchange rates of EMS members. All significant

controls on   capital   movements among member countries have been removed.

Discussions of the establishment of a European central bank and a single

currency are proceeding apace.      If the current time table is observed the
transition will have been completed by the end of the decade.

     At the same time there remain serious questions about the advisability of

EI4U, voiced in the most recent round of.discussions by the governments of

Britain and Spain. By definition, EMU involves a sacrifice of monetary

autonomy. In response to country—specific shocks, governments will no longer

have the option of adopting a monetary policy which differs from that of the

union as a whole. Insofar as monetary policy is useful for facilitating

adjustment to disturbances, adjustment problems may grow more persistent and

difficult to resolve.

     These concerns are reinforced to the extent that one believes that

completion of the internal market will place new limits on the use of fiscal

policy. Not only will individual governments have lost autonomy over the use

of seigniorage to finance budget deficits but, insofar as the 1992 process

renders factors of production increasingly mobile, constraints will be placed

on their ability to impose tax rates significantly different from those of

their neighbors. Limits on their ability to tax in the future will limit

their ability to run budget deficits in the present; hence alt important
                                       —2—


fiscal instruments may be constrained.i/ The sacrifice of monetary autonomy

is all the more serious.

      The weight that should be attached to these arguments depends on the

incidence of shocks. If disturbances are distribute symmetrically across

countries, symmetrical policy responses will suffice1 In response to a

negative aggregate demand shock that is common to all EI4U countries, for

example,   a common policy response in the form of a collunon monetary and fiscal
expansion   should be adequate. Only if   disturbances are distributed
asymmetrically   across countries will there be occasion for an asymmetric

policy response and may the constraints of monetary union bind. This has been

widely understood, of course, since the seminal work on the theory of optimum

currency areas by Mundell (1961).

      In light of the attention attracted by EMU, we possess remarkably little

evidence on the incidence of shocks to the European economy. In this paper we

therefore analyze data on output and prices for 11 EC member nations in order

to extract information on aggregate supply and aggregate demand disturbances.

We use the structural vector autoregression approach to isolating disturbances

developed by Blanchard and Quah (1989), as extended by Bayoumi (1991). We

examine the time-series behavior of real GDP and the price level. To recover

aggregate supply and demand disturbances, we impose the identifying

restrictions that aggregate demand disturbances have only a temporary impact


  /   The argument that deficit spending will be constrained follows from the
observation that investors will hesitate to purchase the additional bonds
issued by a jurisdiction running a budget deficit if the implied debt service
exceeds its capacity to raise revenues, the force of this argument is
disputed. For reviews of the debate see Eichengreen (1990a), Bayoumi and
Russo C1991) and Goldstein and Woglon, (1991).
                                     —3—

on output but a permanent impact on prices, while aggregate supply

disturbances permanently affect both prices and output.

     In assessing the magnitude of disturbances to the European economy, a

metric is required. Here the United States provides an obvious standard of

comparison. The U.S. is a smoothly functioning monetary union, Its local

authorities possess fiscal autonomy. It can be divided into regions that

approximate the economic size of EC nations, and supply and demand

disturbances to each region can be calculated. If it turns out, tot example,

that supply shocks are less correlated across U.S. regions than across EC

members, then there can be no presumption that asymmetric shocks will

necessarily threaten the success of EIW. If on the other hand shocks to EC

countries are significantly more asymmetric than shocks to U.S. regions, then

adoption of a single currency could give rise to serious problems.

     The empirical framework allows us not just to identify aggregate supply

and demand disturbances but to examine the sconomys speed of adjustment.

Comparing the responses of U.S. regions and EC nations provides suggestive

evidence on the structural implications of the single market. If the

responses of (1.5. regions are more rapid than those of European countries,

this would suggest that creation of a unified internal market, like that which

the U.S. possesses, will encourage factor mobility and create other mechanisms

facilitating the ECs adjustment to shocks. U.S. evidence is useful therefore

for gauging the extent to which monetary unification and the rest of the 1992
                                      —4—


program is likely to accelerate the response to shocks, as argued by

Commission of the European Communities (1990).2/

     The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews

the theoretical literature on optimum currency areas and what it says about

asymmetric shocks, It surveys previous empirical work on the issue. Section

III sets out the framework used to identify supply and demand disturbances.

Section IV describes our data and its properties, while Section V reports the

results of the statistical analysis. Section VI concludes.



II. Optimum Currency Areas: Theory and Evidence

     The point of departure for the literature on optimum currency areas was

Mundell (1961).3f Hundell observed that an exchange rate adjustment which

permitted the pursuit of different monetary policies in two countries (the

U.S. and Canada) was of little use if the disturbance in response to which the

policies were adopted depressed one region within both nations (say, Western

Canada and the Western United States) while simultaneously stimulating other




  1/ This change in response could take place through a number of different
mechanisms. Horn and Persson (1988) suggest that EMU, by increasing the
credibility of policymakers' cormiiitment to price stability, might enhance wage
flexibility. Commission of the European Communities (1990) argues similarly
that EHU, by increasing the credibility of fiscal authorities' commitment not
to bail out depressed regions, will encourage workers in such areas to
moderate wags demands. Marsden (1989) suggests that increased product market
integration, by reducing product market power at the national level, will make
the derived demand for labor more price elastic, rendering wage setting more
responsive to market conditions. Bertolla (198B) presents arguments
suggesting that once exchange rates are immutably fixed, workers will respond
by adjusting on other margins, notably interregional migration.
  3/ Here we review only selected aspects of the literature on optimum
currency areas as they bear to the issues at hand. A more comprehensive
survey in Ishlyama (1975).
                                     —5—


regions within both (say, Eastern Canada and the Eastern U.S.). In this case

there exists an efficiency argument for toning One currency area comprised of

the western portions of the two nations and a second currency area comprised

of their eastern portions. In response to this disturbance, the western

regions can then adopt one policy, the eastern regions, another, and the

exchange rate between them can adjust accordingly, while preserving the

advantages of a cozmnon currency in the form of reduced exchange rate risk and

lower transaction coats within the Eastern and Western regions. In Mundell's

framework, then, the incidence of disturbances across regions is a critical

determinant of the design of currency areas.41

     One strand of subsequent literature explored the determinants of the

incidence of shocks. Kenen (1969) highlighted the degree of industry or

product diversification as a determinant of the synnetry of disturbances.

When two regione are highly specialized in the production of distinct goods

whose relative prices are affected very differently by disturbances, he




  ff Syamietry of shocks is not the only criterion for the choice of an
optimal currency area, other factors such as the cost of operating an
independent currency, size of trade with other regions, and (possibly)
siuniiarity of public preferences are also important. When comparing the
current EC with the US, however, many of these differences are relatively
small. In particular, both regions represent continent—wide indutrial areas
with a high degree of internal trade and similarly sized populations.
Accordingly, this paper will focus on the issue of the symmetry and size of
the underlying shocks in EC countries as compared with those across Us
regions.
                                     —6—


argued, asymmetric shocks are more likely than when the two regions have the

same industrial structure and produce the same goods.5/

      A second direction taken by the subsequent literature analyzed mechanisms

other than exchange—rate—cum—monetary policy that might facilitate adjustment.

Following Heads (1957), Hundell emphasized labor mobility. The geater the

propensity for labor to flow from depressed to prosperous regions, he argued,

the less the need for different policy responses in the two regions to prevent

the emergence of pockets of high unemployment. Ingram (1913) noted that even

where labor remains imperfectly mobile, capital mobility has typically reached

high levels.fl/ Hence capital flows can substitute for labor migration as a

mechanism for reallocating resources across regions. But physical capital

mobility eliminates the need for labor mobility only under restrictive

assumptions ./

        Given that markets for labor and physical capital cannot respond

instantaneously to region-specific shocks, a number of authors have analyzed

market mechanisms and policy measures that can insure against region—specific

risk. Atkeson and Bayoumi (1991) explore the extent to which finincial


  /   Commission of the European Communities (1991) presents evidence on the
similarly of industrial structure across EC countries and argues that product
market integration will increase the scope of intra—industry trade, rendering
national industrial structures increasingly similar over time. Frugman (1991)
suggests in contrast that completion of the internal market may lead to
greater regional specialization and thereby magnify geographical differences
in industrial structure.
  k/ The essence of this argument appears also in scitovsky (1967).
  1/ Essentially, constant returns to scale in production are required. If
technology exhibits increasing returns, a shock which requires the expansion
of one sector at the expense of another may require the intersectoral
reallocation of both factors of production for full efficiency to be achieved.
See Eichengreen (l991b). A taxonomy of cases is provided by Helpman and
Krugman (1985).
                                           —7—



capital   mobility   can    substitute for physical capital mobility. In their

model,   agents   can diversify away the risk of region—specific shocks by holding

financial assets whose returns are uncorrelated with region-specific sources

of labor and capital income. Sache and Sala—i—liartin (1991) have suggested

that regional problems can be alleviated through transfers of purchasing power

from   booming to depressed regions accomplished by federal fiscal systeme.
This   creates   a presumption that currency areas   should coincide with fiscal

jurisdictions.

       This   predominantly theoretical literature suggests an agenda for

empirical research: (i) identifying the incidence of shocks, (ii) isolating

their underlying determinants, and (iii) analyzing the market and policy

response. A remarkable feature of the scholarly literature —— and of the

debate over EMIl ——    is   how little empirical analysis has been devoted to these

quest ions.

       One approach to gauging the extent of asymmetric shocks has been to

compute the variability of real exchange       rates, since changes in relative
prices   reflect shifts in demand or supply affecting one region relative to

another. Poloz (1990) compared regional real exchange rates within Canada

with national real exchange rates between France, the U.K., Italy and Germany.

He found that real exchange rates between Canadian provinces were more

variable than those between the four EC countries. Since Canada runs a

successfully monetary union, the implication is that the EC should be able to

do the same. Lichengreen (1990a) extended Polors analysis to four U.S.

regions (using consumer price indices for the North East, North Central, South
                                     -8—


and West) and 10 EC member states, reaching a different conclusion. He found

that real exchange rates within the EC have been more variable than real

exchange rates within the U.S., typically by a factor of three to four.      De

Grauwe and Vanhaverbeke (1991) similarly considered real exchange rates of

regions within European nations. Using data on unit labor costs for Germany,

France, Spain, the UK and the Netherlands in 1977—85, they found that real

exchange rates were significantly less variable within European countries than

between then. One interpretation is that the European Community is

significantly further from being an optimum currency area than existing

European states.

     In a related analysis, Eichengreen (l990a) analyzed the covariance of

real share prices in Toronto and Montreal and in Paris and Dusseldorf. In

theory, the prices of equities should reflect the present value of current and

expected future profits. If shocks are asymmetric, profits will rise in one

market relative to the other. Real share prices in Toronto and Montreal were

found to move more closely together than real share prices in Dusseldorf and

Paris. There was strong evidence of convergence between Paris and Dusseldorf

over time, but even in the l9SOe the ratio of real share prices between Paris

and Dusseldorf was five times as variable as the ratio for Toronto and

Montreal.

     A limitation of these approaches focusing on relative prices, as pointed

about by Eichengreen (1990a), is that they conflate information on the

syirnetry of shocks and on the speed of adjustment. If real share prices in

two regions move together, this may indicate either that the two regions
                                           —9—



experience    the same shocks or that capital is quick      to   flow from the region

where the rate of return has fallen to the one where it has risen. Similarly,

if the relative prices of the products of two         regions show little   variability,

this may   reflect      either that their product markets experience the same supply

and demand    disturbance.     or that factors of   production are quick to flow out of
the region where prices have begun to fair and into the region where they have
begun to rise, thereby minimizing relative price variability.
       This   has led   other authors to focus on the behavior of output rather than
prices.    Cohen and Wyploez (1989) were first to use the time-series behavior
of output to investigate the asymmetry of shocks4/ They transform data on
real GD!' for France and Germany into sums and differences, interpreting
movements in the sum as symmetric disturbances, movements in the difference as
asymmetric disturbances. They remove a trend component from the sum and the
difference using a variety of time—series techniques, and interpret the
standard deviation of the detrended series relative to the standard deviation
of   the original series as a measure of the contribution of temporary

disturbances to overall variability. They find that symmetric shocks are much

larger than asymmetric shocks. (In other words, the variability of the sum is

larger than the variability of the difference.)           By their interpretation,

symmetric shocks are predominantly permanent, while asynetric shocks are

predominantly temporary. (Detrending the sum eliminates much of its

variability, while detrending the difference has a smaller effect.)




  8/ Weber (1990) has extended their analysis to other EC countries.
                                       — 10 —




     The limitation of this approach focusing on output is much the sane as

that focusing on prices. Observed movements in real CDP reflect the.combined

effects of shocks and responses. Using this methodology it is impossible to

distinguish their separate effects.2/

     Independent evidence on the response to disturbances may permit one to

back out information on the syimnetry and magnitude of shocks. Recent

investigations have focused on the responsiveness of labor markets. OECD

(1985) assembled studies comparing interregional labor mobility within the

U.S. and within BC nations. Its tabulations suggest that mobility within the

U.S. has been two   to   three tines as high as mobility within European nations.

In a more recent study, Do Grauwe and Vanhaverbeke (1991) found a much higher

degree of interregional labor mobility in Northern European countries such as

Germany, the UK and France than in Southern countries like Spain and Italy.

While they do not provide comparisons with the U.S., their numbers are

consistent with those of the OECD study.

     The problem with such evidence, again, is that a high degree of observed

labor mobility may reflect either an exceptionally responsive labor market or

exceptionally asymmetric regional labor market shocks. Eichengreen (l990b)

therefore estimated time—series models of regional unemployment differentials



  9f De Grauwe and Vanhaverbeke (1991) study the variability of output across
regions within European nations, arguing that this holds economic policies
constant. But since it fails to hold the responsiveness of market adjustment
mechanisms constant (such as, for example, internal migration and wage
flexibility), which may themselves vary across regions, it remains difficult
to distinguish disturbances from market responses. Etchengreen (1991)
estimated models of internal migration for Britain, Italy and the United
StateS and similarly found support for the hypothesis of great labor mobility
in the U.S.
                                      — 11   —




for both Europe and the United   States. He examined the speed   with   which

unemployment   in EC countries converges to its long—run relationship to SC—wide
unemployment, compared to the speed with which regional unemployment rates in
the U.S. converged to the U.S. average. The results suggest that    regional

unemployment   rates adjust to one another about 20 per cent more rapidly in the
U.S. than national unemployment rates adjust to one another within the EC.
     Given   the costs of migration, the movement of labor is a plausible

mechanism mainly for adjusting to permanent shocks. Work on responses to

temporary disturbances has focused on portfolio diversification and fiscal

redistribution. Using data for U.S. regions, Atkeson and Bayoumi (1991)

estimate that recipients of capital income succeed in using portfolio

diversification to insure against a significant proportion of region—specific

income fluctuations, but that recipients of labor income do so only to a very

modest extent.

     On the effects of fiscal federalism, Sachs and Sala—i—Martin (1991)

conclude that the U.S. fiscal system offsets about a third of a decline in

regional personal incomes relative to the national average. In other words,

when incomes in one U.S. region tall by $1 relative to incomes in the nation

as a whole, the fall in tax payments by that region to Washington, D.C. plus

inward transfers from other regions via the expenditure side of the government
                                         — 12 —




budget is about 3) cents. Disposable income therefore falls by only 67
cents .10/
     These studies uniformly point to the conclusion that adjustment to

region—specific shocks, whether by markets or policy, is faster in the U.S.

tban in Europe. Hence, the lesser variability of output and prices across

regions in the U.S. than across nations in Europe may reflect either faster

response to larger, more asymmetric shocks in the U.S., or faster      response to
smaller, less asyimuetric shocks in the U.S. The approaches utilized in
previous studies thus fail to provide enough information to distinguish
disturbances    from responses.




III. Methodoloav

     It is for   this reason that we take an alternative approach to    identifying
disturbances.    Our point   of   departure is the familiar aggregate demand and
aggregate supply diagram, reproduced as the top panel in Chart 1. the
aggregate demand curve (labelled AD) is downward sloping in the price output

plane, reflecting    the fact that lower prices, by raising money balances, boost

demand. The short run aggregate supply curve (SPAS) is upward sloping,

reflecting the assumption that wages are sticky and hence that higher prices




  .12/ Using different econometric methods, von Hagen (1991) has suggested
that regional coinsurance in the U.S. is closer to one tenth than one third.
In either case fiscal redistribution across U.S. regions is much more
extensive than across EC member nations. In terms of the automatic stabilizer
response to cyclical movements within regions, Atkeson and Dayoumi (1991)
present evidence that the behavior of US regions and EC countries is similar.
                                         Chan I
                     The Aggregate Demand and Supply Model

                                       (z)Tbe Model

                                         LRAS




                      P




                                           V          Output




        (b) A Demand Shok                                 (c) A Supply Shxk


                  IRAS                                            LRAS LRAS
Pñces                                     Prices




   rr
                                                P
    p
                                                1'

                                               P.




                          Y•   Ouput                                 V r Y-   Ouiput
                                         — 13   —




imply    lower real wages. The long run supply curve (LRAS) is vertical, since

real wages adjust to changes in prices in the long run.fl/

        The effect of a shock to aggregate demand is shown in the left half of

the lower panel. The aggregate demand curve shifts from AD to AD', resulting

in a move in the equilibrjLum from initial point A to the new intersection with

the short run curves, D. This raises both output and prices. As the

aggregate      supply curve becomes more vertical over tine, the economy moves
gradually from the short run equilibrium 0' to its new long run equilibrium,

         This movement along the aggregate demand curve involves the return of

output to its initial level, while the price level rises to a level which is

permanently higher. (Depending on the price mechanism, there could be some

cycling around the new long rum equilibrium.) Hence the response to a

permanent (positive) demand shock is a short term rise in output followed by a

gradual return to its initial level, and a permanent rise in prices.

        The   effect of a supply shock is shown in the right—hand bottom panel of
the   chart. Assume that the long run level of potential output rises, say

because of a favorable technology shock. The short— and long—run supply

curves move rightwards by the same amount,          as shown   by SRAS' and lAths'. The

short    run   effect, raises output and reduces prices, shifting the equilibrium

from A to 5'. As the supply curve becomes increasingly vertical over time,

the economy moves from 5' to S', implying further increases in output and

reductions in prices. Unlike demand shocks, supply shocks result in permanent


  fl/ Although this is usually thought of as a closed economy model, it can
be extended to include trade and the exchange rate. Textbook descriptions of
the model include Dornbusch and Fischer (1986) Ch. 11, and Hall and Taylor
(1908)   Ch.   4—5.
                                                        —14—



changes      in output. Zn addition, demand and supply have therefore different

effects on prices; positive demand shocks raise prices while positive supply

shocks reduce them.

          This   framework is          estimated   using a procedure proposed by Blanchard and
Quah (1989) for decomposing permanent aqd                    temporary shocks to a variable using
a   VAR, as extended by Bayoumi (1991).fl/ Consider a system where the true

model      can   be represented by an infinite             moving average representation of a
(vector) of variables, X, and an equal number of shocks, .                          Formally, using
the   lag operator L, this can be written as:




      —   Aott   +
                     A1 c_   +   A211.2 + A3t_
      -                                                                                        (2.1)




where the matrices A1 represent the impulse response                    functions   of the shocks

to the elements of X.

          Specifically,          let     be made   up   of change in output and to the change in

prices, and let                  be demand and     supply shocks. Then the model     becomes




  fl/    Quah (1991) discusses the issue of identifying restrictions for VARs.
An important assumption which is required to ensure uniquenoss of the
decomposition is that the underlying series (growth and inflation in this
case) are fundamental in a Wold sense, as pointed out by Lippi and Reichlin
(1990).
                                             — is —




            •                  dt
        —
            E'       a1 a32j
                     a211   aj c,                                                    (2.2)




where       and Pt represent the logarithm of output and prices, Edt and            are

independent supply and demand shocks, and a111 represents element at, in natrix

A1.

        The framework implies that while supply shocks have permanent effects on

the level of output, demand shocks only have temporary effects. (Both have

permanent effects upon the level of prices.) since output is written in first

difference form, this implies that the cumulative effect of demand shocks on

the change in output (alt)          must be zero. The model implies the restriction,




 Eaiii          0.                                                                 (2.3)




      The model defined by equations (2.2) and (2.3) can be estimated using a

vector autoregression. Each element of                can be regressed on lagged values

of all the elements of X. Using B to represent these estimated coefficients,

the   estimating       equation becomes,
                                                              — 16   —




      a B1X.1 t
                82X1.2 +              ...      I 8n't-n   +

      a (I—B(L))e
                                                                                                  (2.4)
      • (I +     8(L)     t       8(L)2   ..
                                          i-



      a      +   Diet_i       +   Dzet_z + D3e.3      * .-



where e1 represents the residuals from the equations in the vector

autoregression. In the case being considered, e is comprised of the

residuals of a regression of lagged values of Ay and Apt on current values of

each in turn; these residuals are labeled                                and ept. respectively.

          To convert equation (2.4) into the model defined by equations (2.2) and

(2.3), the residuals from the VAR, et, must be transformed into demand and

supply shocks, e• Writing e = C, it is clear that, in the two—by—two case

considered, tour restrictions are required to define the tour elements of the

matrix C. Two of these restrictions are simple normalizations, which define

the variance of the shocks Cdt and                               A third restriction comes from

assuming that demand and supply shocks are orthogonal.fl/

          The final restriction, which allows the matrix C to be uniquely defined,

is that demand shocks have only temporary effects on output.14/ As noted

above, this implies equation (2.3). In terms of the VAR                             it implies,


    III          The   conventional normalization ie that the two variances are set
equal     to unity, which together with the assumption of orthogonality implies
CC I. where E is the variance covariance matrix of ey and ep. However,
when we wish to calculate the variance of the shocks themselves, we report
results using the normalization Cc = r, where r                             is
                                                    the correlation matrix of
e  and ep. These two normalizations gave almost identical paths for the
sriocks, except for a scaling factor, and hence are used interchangeably.
  UI This is where our analysis, based on the work of Blanchard and Quah
(1989). differs from other VAR models. The usual decomposition assumes that
the variables in the VAR can be ordered such that all the effects which could
be attributed to (say) either at or b are attributed to whichever comes first
in the ordering. This is achieved by a Choleski decomposition (Sims, 1980).
                                         — 17   —




       d,11 d121 011 Cl2   0.                                                 (2.5)
 1.0   d211 d221 c21 c22




This   restriction allows the matrix C to be uniquely defined and the demand and

supply shocks to identified.fl/

       Note that   this restriction   affects the response of output to the two

shocks, but says nothing about their impact on prices. The aggregate—demand—

aggregate—supply model implies that demand shocks should raise prices in both

the short and long run, while supply shocks should lower prices. Since these

responses are not imposed, they can be thought of as over—identifying

restrictions useful for testing our interpretation of the results.




IV. Data

       Annual data on real and nominal GDP spanning the period 1960—SB were

collected from the OECD Annual National Accounts for the 12 members of the EC.

This same source provided an aggregate measure of output and price performance

for the EC as a whole.16/ These same data were collected for 11 additional

OECD countries six EFTA nembers (Sweden, Switzerland, Austria, Finland,

Norway and Iceland) plus the United States, Japan, Canada, Australia and New


  15/ Note from equation (2.4) that the long run impact of the shocks on
output and prices is equal to (I—D(l)). The restriction that the long run
effect of demand shocks on output is zero implies a simple linear restriction
on the coefficients of this matrix.
  16/ Two different measures of the EC aggregate are available from the OECD,
one based on conversions of local currency data using 198S dollars, and a
second based on a weighting of the EC real CDP and GOP deflator indices.
Since the two data sets gave very similar results, only those based on 1985
dollar exchange rates are reported.
                                      — 18   —




Zealand.    For each country growth and inflation were calculated as the first

difference of the logarithm of real GOP and the implicit GDP deflator. The

CDP deflator was used to measure prices since it reflects the price of output

rather than the price of consumption. This distinction is particularly

important for regional U.S. data since the integration of the domestic goods

markets minimizes differences in regional CPIs.17/

       For U.S. regions, annual data on real and nominal gross state product

were collected for 1963—86. The gross state product series, produced by the

U.S. Commerce Department, is described in the Survey of Current Business (May

1968). It measures gross output produced by each state and hence represents

the regional equivalent of the gross domestic product series in the OECD data

set. The data were aggregated into the eight standard regions of the United

States used by the Bureau of Economic Analysis, namely New England. the Mid-

East, the Great Lakes, the Plains, the South East, the South West, the Rocky

Mountain states and the Far West. As is the case for EC countries, these

regions differ in considerably in size; the Rocky Mountain region is smallest,

with under 3 percent of U.S. population, while the Mid—East, South East and

Great Lakes each contain around 20 percent of the U.S. population. Growth      and
inflation for each region were calculated in the same way as for the OECD,

namely as the first difference in the log of real gross state product and of

the gross—state—product deflator.

       Before analyzing these data, it is useful to consider them in unprocessed

form. Table 1 shows standard deviations and correlation coefficients for the



 fl/     For evidence and comparisons with Europe, see Lichengreen (1990a).
  Table 1. Standard Deviations and Correlation Coefticients
with Anchor Areas: Logarithmne of Raw Data



                         Growth                 Inflation
                  Stan 0ev correlation    Stan 0ev Correlation




Germany              0.022       1.00        0.017      1.00
France               0.018       0.74        0.031      0.47
Belgium              0.022       0.73        0.024      0.57
Netherlands          0.022       0.79        0.028      0.68
Denmark              0.025       0.67        0.023      0.69
United Kingdom       0.021       0.54        0.052      0.48
Italy                0.023       0.52        0.054      0.33
Spain                0.027       0.56        0.044      0.26
Ireland              0.022       0.09        0.050      0.49
Portugal             0.034       0.57        0.074     —0.07

                                   U.S. Regions

Mid—East             0.025       1.00        0.020      1.00
New England          0.031       0.94        0.020      0.98
Great Lakes          0.040       0.88        0.022      0.98
Plains               0.027       0.85        0.023      0.94
South East           0.027       0.76        0.022      0.72
South West           0.022       0.40        0.035      0.89
Rocky Mountains      0.024       0.27        0.024      0.84
Far West             0.033       0.66        0.018      0.96


Notes: All variables are measured in logarithms, so that
0.0.27 indicates a standard deviation of approximately 2.1
percent.
                                         —19-


logarithm of the growth in output and of inflation across the countries of the

EC and the regions of the United States for the full data period.18/ The

correlations are measured with respect to Germany in the case of the EC and

the Mid—East in the case of the US. Jj/      The standard deviations indicate

that output fluctuations have generally been somewhat smaller across EC

countries than across US regions, while inflation variability has been higher

in Europe. The correlation coefficients indicate that output growth is

generally more    highly   correlated across US regions than EC regions, although

two   regions   (the Southwest and the Rocky Mountains) have relatively

idiosyncratic behavior. For inflation, the correlation coefficients are much

more highly correlated across US regions than EC countries, presumably

reflecting the existence of a conison currency.

      tables 2 and 3 extend the analysis of correlations across EC countries

and US regions, respectively. They report the share of the variance of output

growth and inflation explained by the first principal component (the

orthogonal component most correlated with the underlying series) for different

groups of countries or regions over several time periods. The results confirm

the greater coherence of price and output movements among U.S. regions than

among EC countries. For the full period, the first principal component

explains 74 per cent of the variance in output movements for U.S. regions but



  )j/ Since the data are in logarithms, a standard deviation of 0.012 implies
an average deviation of 1.2 percent.
  fl/ Germany is the largest economy in Europe, and has played the anchor
role in the ERI4, making it the obvious standard for comparison. The Mid—East,
which is the most important region in the US financially and, arguably,
economically, is taken as the analogous "anchor" region of the US. These
choices are retained in all subsequent analysis.
       Table 2. Percentage of Variance Explained by the First
      Principal Component Across Different Groups of countries:
                               Raw Data




                           Other     EC       Pen-      EFTA   Control
                    ECU      11     core      phery            Group


                                          Growth

Full Period          57      42      73            49    43      49

1963—71              40      39      73            35    51      49
1979—79              62      39      82            49    43      53
1980—88              44      46      54            42    42      57

                                     Inflation

Full. Period         59      54      64            70    53      57

1963—71              44      37      46            38    42      36
1972—79              39      46      58            52    44      59
1980—88              73      61      82            69    68      58




  Notes: Since the percentage of variance explained varies with the
number of countries in the group, it is not useful to compare the
results from the first two columns with those in the subsequent
columns. The control group comprises US, Japan. Canada, Australia,
New Zealand and Iceland.
                                        -20—


only 57 per   cent   for EC countries. For inflation the comparable figures are

92 and 59 per   cent.
     For both   the   U.S. and the EC the first principal component explains the

largest share of the variance in output in the 1970s, the smaLlest share in

the 1960e. This presumably reflects the fact that all countries and regions

experienced an unusually severe recession following the first oil shock. For

both the U.S. and the EC the first principal component explains the largest

share of the variance in inflation in the 1960s, presumably reflecting the

extent to which price—level trends in both the U.S. and Europe were dominated

by disinflation after 1980.

     Table 2 contrasts the behavior of output and prices in the SC and with

that in the 11 other industrial economies in our sample. Although the first

principal component explains a larger share of the variance of output in the

EC than in the other industrial countries, this is due to the similar reaction

of EC members to the oil shock and to other events in the 1970s, rather than

to the EMS and first steps toward completion of the internal market in the

1980e. In contrast, there is weak evidence of the effects of the EMS in the

larger share of the variance of inflation explained for the EC than for the

other economies in the 1980s.

     The failure to discern a large difference in the coherence of output

movements between the EC 11 and the other industrial economies reflects

divergent movements not among what might be regarded as the "core members of

the EC (Germany. France, Belgiuui, Luxembourg, the Nether'ands and Denmark) but

between the core and the EC periphery' (the U.K., Italy, Ireland, Greece,
          Table 3. Percentage of Variance Explained by the
          First Principal Component Across Different Groups
                           of U.S. Regions




                        All Ei.ght        Six             Six
                           U.S.          "Core"       'Peripheral"
                         Regions         Regions        Regions


                                        Grow-tb

Full period                  74             85                73

1966—72                      79             89                78
1973—79                      92             94                92
1980—86                      78             92                74

                                       Inflation
Full period                  92             93                92

1966—72                      84             90                83
1973—79                      70             77                67
1990—86                      98             99                99


  Notest the core regions comprise the Mid—East, New England,
Great Lakes, Plains, South East and Far West, the peripheral
regions the Mid—East, Plains, South East, South West, Rocky
Mountains and Far West.
                                       —21—     -




 Portugal   and Spain). In each sub—period, the first principal component

 explains much less of the variance in output growth among peripheral

 countries, and generally less for inflation. The coherence of price and

output trends among the EFTA countries is similar to that among the members of

the EC periphery. The final column of Table 2 reports the results for a

control group, made up of the five countries in our sample which are not

members of the EC or of EFTA plus Iceland. Iceland, an EFTA member, is

included in the control group in order to make the number of countries in each

group equal.ZQ/ Again, the behavior of this control group is not

dissimilar from that of the EC periphery.

      Table   3 reports analogous breakdowns for the United States. The second
column, which excludes the Southwest and Rocky Mountains, can be thought of as
the U.S. "core.fl/ The third column, which excludes the Great Lakes and
New England, is intended to simulate a U.S. periphery." The second column

confirms that output movements are more closely synchronized, most notably in

the l9BOs, when the Southwest and Rocky Mountains are removed. This

presumably reflects the very different composition of production in these two

regions (dominated by oil in the Southwest and by other minerals and raw

materials in the Rocky Mountain states). There is less difference in the



  fl/ We include six regions in each column to preserve the same number of
regions and therefore render our principal—components analysis as consistent
as possible. Since growth and inflation rates are relatively variable in
Iceland, and since its supply and demand shocks are fairly loosely correlated
with those of other countries, its inclusion will tend to make shocks to other
countries appear coherent compared to the control group. For details, see
Bayoumi and Eichengreen (1991).
  fl/ We show below that the two excluded regions respond differently to
shocks than does the rest of the U.S.
                                         — 22 —




behavior    of inflation, as if the integration of product markets encompasses

even those regions where the composition of local output is different.

        The third column confirms that the picture is reversed when the Great

Lakes and New England are removed. Compared to table 2, however, the contrast

between columns is quite small, substantiating the view of greater coherence

of price and output trends among U.S. regions than within the EC and among

other countries.



V. Results

        To identify supply and demand disturbances, we estimated bivariate VARs

for each country and region in the sample. In all cases, the number of lags

was set to 2, since the Schwartz Bayesian information criterion indicated that

all of the models had an optimal lag length of either one or two.2.a/ A

uniform    lag of two was chosen   in order to preserve the symmetry of the

specification across countries. For the EC and other countries, the

estimation    period was 1963—88, while for US regions it was 1966—86. For the
OECD    countries, the estimation period   includes a potential change in regime,

namely   the break—up of the Bretton Woods fixed exchange rate system in the
early 1970s. However, Chow tests of the structural stability produced no
evidence    of a shift in the early 1970s. Limited analysis using data sets
which    excluded the Bretton Woods period showed similar   results to those

reported.


  fl/ We also estimated yAMs with three lags because, in contrast to the
Schwartz Bayesian statistic, the Akaike information criterion showed the
optimal lag to be above 2 In some of the models; this specification produced
very similar results.
                                      — 23 —




     In   nearly every case, the estimation and simulation results accord with

the aggregate—demand—aggregate—supply framework discussed in section III. The

"over—identifying restriction" that positive aggregate demand shocks should be

associated with increases in prices while aggregate supply shocks should be

associated with falls in prices was generally observed. In only 3 of the 30

data cases was it impossible to interpret the results using the aggregate—

demand—aggregate—supply framework, namely Norway, Ireland and the Rocky

Mountain region of the United States.

     chart 2 illustrates the results. It shows the output and price impulse-

response functions for the EC and the U.S. as a whole.fl/ The impulse

response functions for output shown in panels (a) and (b) illustrate the

restriction   that aggregate demand shocks have only temporary effects on the

level of output while supply shocks have permanent output effects. Positive

demand shocks produce a rise in output initially, which then gradually returns

to its baseline levslt in contrast, positive supply shocks produce a steady

rise in output to a new higher equilibrium level. The impulse—response

functions for prices shown in panels (c) and (d) indicate that the over—

identifying restriction is satisfied. While both aggregate supply and

aggregate demand shocks have long—run effects on the price level, demand

shocks produce a gradual rise in prices over time, while supply shocks produce

a steady decline in prices, as predicted by aggregate_demand—aggregate—supply

framework.



  21! These results were obtained by estimating ThRs on aggregate data for
the U.S. and EC, not by aggregating results obtained using regional U.S. and
national European data.
                                        Chart 2 - Impulse Response Functions for the E.C. and U.S.
         (A)                                                              (B)
                Impulse Response    of Output                                        Impulse Responseof Output
                                                                                     United States
                European Community
• 0030                                                                0.030


                                                                      0.025
0.025

                                                                      0.020
0.020
                                                                      0.0 IS
0.015
                                                                      0.010

0.010
                                                                      0.035



0.
0.G.                                                                  -DAiS




         (C)                                                             (D)
                                                                                    Impulse Response   of Prices
              Impulse Response of Prices
                                                                                    United States
              European Community                                        0.03
005      —

0.04                                                                    0.02
         -                                           Demand    shk                                                      Demand shock
                                                                                I


-0.01     -                                                            -003
-002
                                                                       •a
-0.03
         H       ''                                                    -0.05
-0.0-1   —
          :                                                            •0.06
                      —
-0.05    j                -.
                               --               Supply shock                                                       Suppl>TslibZk
.o                                                                              -
                                                                       -0.08
.a07     j
                                       — 24 —




        Three additional features of the impulse—response functions stand out.

(1) Demand shocks are more important than supply shocks for output in the

short run. (By construction, they become progressively less important over

time.) No such regularity holds for prices.      (2) The impulse—response

functions for the U.S. appear to show a faster response to shocks than the EC

data.     C3) In contrast to the results for speed of response, the magnitude of

response is remarkably similar for the U.S. and the Ec, implying that the

underlying shocks may be of a similar magnitude. (These are issues to which

we will return below.)

        chart 3 displays the underlying demand and supply shocks for the EC and

U.S. aggregates. In the case of the EC, large negative disturbances to supply

are evident in 1973—197S and 1979—80, corresponding to the two oil shocks,

along with a large negative supply shock in 1968 which is more difficult to

interpret. The demand disturbances illustrate the different response of the

EC to the first and second oil crises; there is a large positive demand shock

in 1971, while from 1980 onwards demand shocks are negative. In the case of

the U.S., the effects of the oil crises are also clearly evident, whiLe the

rapid recovery of the 1980. seems to be associated with a series of positive

supply shocks (perhaps reflecting supply—side friendly tax cuts). There is a

major negative demand shock in 1982, corresponding to the policy of

disinflation pursued by the Federal Reserve System.

        We now turn to the results for individual EC countries and U.S. regions.

We first examine the correlation of aggregate demand and supply shocks across

EC members and standard U.S. regions in order to identify similarities and
Chart 3. Aggregate Demand and supply shocks for the U.S and E.C




  -3



  -3

            41    63    67    69    II         73    fl    77        15    II        SI    (1    97




       -2




       -3


             63    61    (7    St        fri    11    13        fl    15        II    II    •3    (7
                                      — 25   —




differences   between the two groups. We next consider comparisons over tine in

order to study whether the shocks to the CC have become more correlated as a

result of macroeconomic policy convergence. Finally, we compare the magnitude

of underlying demand and supply disturbances in Europe and the (7.5. and

contcast their speed of adjustment.



     Correlations. The first column of data in Table 4 shows correlation

coefficients measuring the correlation of supply shocks in Germany with those

in other EC countries. German supply shocks are highly correlated with those

experienced by four of its close neighbors: France, the Netherlands, Denmark

and Belgium. Alt four have correlation coefficients of 0.5—0.7, while the

other six EC countries (the UK, ttaly, Spain, Ireland, Portugal and Greece)

have lower correlations, on the order of —0.1 to +0.3.       The bottom half of

the table shows the same results for U.S. regions, with the Mid—East taken as

the U.S. center analogous to Germany in the EC. The data display a similar

pattern but with higher correlations than those of EC countries. The three

u.s. regions neighboring the Mid—East (New England, the Great Lakes and the

South East) have correlations of over 0.65, while the other four regions (the

Plains, the Rocky Mountains, the Southwest and the Far West) have lower

correlations. The correlation between the Far West and the Mid—East is still

relatively high (over 0.5), but that between the Southwest and the Mid—East    is

negative (presumably reflecting the importance of the oil industry in states

Like Texas and Oklahoma).
  Table 4. correlation Coefficients Between Anchor Areas and
               Other Regions: Underlying Shocks



                                Supply               Demand
                                Shocks               Shocks


                                    EC Countries

Germany                          1.00                 1.00
France                           0.54                 0.35
Belgium                          0.61                 0.33
Netherlande                      0.59                 0.17
Denmark                          0.59                 0.39
United Kingdom                   43.11                0.16
Italy                            0.23                 0.17
Spain                            0.31                —0.07
Ireland                         —0.06                —0.08
Portugal                         0.21                 0.21
Greece                           0.14                 0.19

                                    U.S. Regions

Mid—East                         1.00                 1.00
New England                      0.86                 0.79
Great Lakes                      0.81                 0.60
Plains                           0.66                 0.50
South East                       0.30                 0.51
South West                      —0.12                 0.13
Rocky Mountains                  0.18                —0.28
Far West                         0.52                 0.3]




Notes The correlation coefficients refer to the entire data
period: 1962—88 for the EC data and 1965—86 for the US regions.
                                     — 26 —




     In   effect, then, both the EC and the US can be divided into a core" of

regions characterized by relatively synvsetric behavior and a "periphery whose

disturbances are more loosely correlated with those experienced by center. As

in Europe, the U.S. "cpre is made up of areas that are neighbors of the

center region (the onl' exception being the Far West).

     The results for demand disturbances, reported in columns 2 and 4, are

more difficult to characterize. All of the correlations for Ec countries are

in the range —0.l—+0.4. As with supply disturbances, there is some evidence

that demand disturbances are more highly correlated across core countries than

among the members of the EC periphery. The simple arithmetic means of the

respective sets of correlation coefficients are 0.31 and 0.10. The "core—

periphery" distinction is less strong, however, for the demand shocks than for

the supply shocks.

     The correlation of regional demand disturbances for the U.S. is higher

than the analogous correlation for Europe. This is what one would expect

insofar as U.S. regions are members of a monetary union and should therefore

experience similar monetary and (perhaps) fiscal shocks. The other three

members of the U.S. core (New England, the Great Lakes and the South East) all

have correlation coefficients with the Mid—East excess of 0.5. The Far West

and the Plains have correlation coefficients of more than 0.33, while the two

remaining regions (the Southwest and the Rocky Mountains) have more

idiosyncratic demand shocks.

     chart 4 juxtaposes the correlation coefficients of demand shocks (on the

vertical axis) and the correlation coefficients supply shocks (on the
      Chart 4. Correlation of demand and supply
       shocks with anchor areas


    Correlation of supply and demand disturbances
     with German supply and demand disturbances


    0.9

    09
    07
    0.5

    0.5
                                                             Da.mwk
    0.4

    0-a                                                      0 Belgium
                                                   g
    0.2                                                      °
     0-I
                                c1d °ltiiy                       Nethalajids


      0-
                       Irciand
            -               a                 °Spain
    -0.2    -




    -0.3                p        i   p

           -0.3        -0.1          0.      0.3       0.5         0.7            0,9

                                          Supply


    Correlation of U.S. Supply and demand disturbances with
    supply and demand disturbances of mid-east region

     09
                                                                       New Englanc
     0.8                                                                  -
                                                                                  I
     0,7-
                                                                       Girs Lts
     0.8•                                                                     0
                                             Pla4ns
     0.5-                                     0                   0
                                                                      SeraPh East
0    0.4
                                                             FarWcsl

      ::                Souihwcsl
                       0
      0.1-

           0-
     -0_I -

     4-2'
     '0--j)'
            -0.3
                   p

                       '0.'
                                     i
                                     01
                                              II'!!,,
                                          Mountain


                                              03       0.5         07             0,9


                                             Supply
                                     — 27 —




horizontal   axis). (The top panel is for Germany and the other EC countries,

while the lower panel is for the Hid—East and other U.S. regions). While the

distinction between "core" (with highly correlated supply shocks) and a

"periphery" is evident in both panels,. it is also clear that the U.S. regional

data are characterized by higher corrqlations.                               -




     In   Table S the correlations between demand and supply shocks are

summarized using principal components analysis. Results are reported for

three successive subperiods as a way of exploring the extent to which supply

and demand shocks to EC member countries have grown more similar over time.

The first two columns compare the 11 EC members with 11 other industrial

economies. For the full sample period, the EC countries have more correlated

aggregate supply and aggregate demand shocks. The first principal component

explains 31 to 33 percent of the variance for the 11 EC countries; for the

others it explains only 26 percent. This pattern of higher correlations among

EC countries generally holds for subperiods. There is, however, little or no

evidence of convergence over time. There is no apparent tendency for the

difference in the percentage of the variance explained for the EC and for the

other 11 industrial countries to increase over time.

     In columns 3 to S the results are extended to distinguish the EC core

(Germany, Trance, Belgium, the Netherlands. Denmark and Luxembourg), the EC

periphery (the UK, Italy, Spain. Portugal. Ireland and Greece). and a control

group of countries belonging to neither EFTA or the EC cthe U.S., Japan,
      Table 5. Percentage of Variance Explained by the First
           Principal Components for Geographic Groupings



                                                EC
                             Other      EC    Pert—   Control    U.S.
                     ECu      11       Core   phery   Group     Regions


                                     Supply Shocks

Full Period           33      26        54      32      33        49

1963—71               34      33        39      40      42        53
1979—79               44      41        63      41      51        65
1980—88               35      37        62      41      47        68

                                     Demand Shocks

Full Period           31      26        53      36      41        51

1963—11               30      34        SB      30      37        44
1972—79               40      38        50      49      48        49
1980—88               40      34        54      43      56        75




  Notes: The control group comprises US, Japan. Canada, Australia,
New Zealand and Iceland. Th. sample period ii 1962—88.
                                      — 28 —




Canada, Australia, New Zealand and tceland.24/ The countries of the EC

core have more correlated supply and demand shocks than either the periphery

or the control group.    The difference is   most striking   for   supply shocks: the
first   principal component explains 54 percent of the variance for the core EC
countries, compared to 32 percent for the periphery. and 33 percent for the
control group. In fact, the first principal component actually explains a
slightly lower percentage of variance for the EC     periphery than for the

control    group. this is true for both supply and demand shocks and for the
full data period. There is little indication, moreover, of convergence by.
newcomers to the EC —— in other words, of a tendency for the correlation of
disturbances among members of the EC periphery to rise over time compared to
the correlation of disturbances among members of the control group.
        The sixth column shows the results for the eight U.S. regions. Their

correlations are similar to those for the EC core but significantly higher

than those for the EC periphery and the control group. The correlations are

considerably higher when the Southwest and Rocky Mountains are excluded than

when all 8 u.s. regions are included. When the Great takes and New England

are excluded, the correlations fall. Thus, the correlation of supply and

demand disturbances across U.S. regions is sensitive to precisely what regions




  24/ Luxembourg (which is otherwise excluded from the analysis due to its
small size) was included in order to make the number of countries equal across
groups. Iceland, which is a member of EFTA, was included in the control group
for similar reasons. It should be stressed that the results from principal
components analysis depends upon the number of series involved in the
                                                               the EC 11 with
comparison. Hence it is not useful to compare the results for
(say) that of the six EC peripheral countries.
                                     — 29 —



are   included. The core EC countries are consistently near the bottom of this

range defined by the correlations for these subsets of U.S. regions.

      To summarize, the results for both the U.S. and EC suggest that it is

possible to distinguish core regions for which jupply and demand shocks are

highly correlated, and a periphery in which the, correlation of shocks is less

pronounced. In each case the core is comprised of regions neighboring the

center region Ccermany in the case of the EC, the Mid—East in the case of the

U.S.). Whether one compares the 8 U.S. regions with the 11 EC members or

limits the comparison to the EC and U.S. cores, disturbances tend to be more

highly correlated in the U.S.fl/ only if one compares the core EC

countries with all 8 U.S. regions are the correlations of similar magnitude,

although it should be recalled that in the case of demand shocks the higher US

correlations may reflect the impact of uniform economic policies.



      Size of Shocks. In addition to looking at the symmetry or correlation of

shocks across regions, our methodology can also be used to estimate their

relative size. The Larger the size of the underlying shocks, the more

difficult it may be to maintain a fixed exchange rate, and the more compelling

may be the case for an independent economic policy response. This is

particularly true of supply shocks, which may require more painful adjustment.




  fl/ This is particularly true if one takes into account the fact that
several of the peripheral U.S. regions are quite small. Together the Rocky
Mountains and Southwest contain less than 12 percent of the U.S. population.
                                      — 30 —




     Table 6 reports the standard deviations of the aggregate demand and
aggregate supply disturbances for EC countries and US regions.j/ For the

EC, the magnitude of supply shocks, like the correlation of supply shocks,

suggests the existence of two distinct groups of countries. The core

countries, Germany, France, Belgium, the Netherlands nd Denmark, all have

standard deviations in the range of 0.01—0.02 (1—2 percent per annum). The

standard deviations for the periphery (the United Kingdom, Italy, Spain.

Portugal, Ireland and Greece) all range from 0.02 to 0.04. (2-4 percent per

annum). Broadly speaking, then, the peripheral countries experience supply

shocks twice as large as the core countries.

        The supply shocks to U.S. regions are similar to those experienced by the

EC core and uniformly lower than those of the EC periphery. The standard

deviation for the U.S. Southwest, which at 0.019 is the largest for any U.S.

region, is still lower than that for any of the members of the EC periphery.

There is also some indication that the U.S. regions, particular those in the

core, experience smaller supply shocks than members of the EC core;      5 of the B

U.S. standard deviations are below    0.15,   compared to only 1 of S for the EC

core.

        The results for demand shocks, shown in the right hand columns, are more

difficult to interpret. Demand shocks in the EC core are slightly smaller

than those to the EC periphery. Germany and France, for example, have the

lowest standard deviations. Further generalization is difficult, however.




  fif These are calculated using the modification of the VAR decomposition
discussed in footnote 14.
       Table 6. standard Deviations of Aggregate Supply
                  and Aggregate Demand Shocks


                               Supply             Demand
                              Shocks              Shocks


                                   EC Countries

Germany                        0.017                0.014
France                         0.012                0.012
Belgium                        0.015                0.016
NetherlandS                    0.017                0.015
Denmark                        0.011                0.021
United Kingdom                 0.026                0_oil
Italy                          0.022                0.020
Spain                          0.022                0.015
Ireland                        0.021                0.034
Portugal                       0.029                0.023
Greece                         0.030                0.016

                                   U.S. Regions

Mid—East                       0.012                0.019
New England                    0.014                0.025
Great Lakes                    0.013                0.033
Plains                         0.016                0.022
South East                     0.011                0.013
South West                     0.019                0.018
Rocky Mountains                0.018                0.015
Far West                       0.013                0.017




Notes: All variables are measured in logarithms, so that 0.27
indicates a standard deviation of approximately 2.7 percent.
                                     — 31   —




The most surprising comparison is between the U.S. and the EC. The U.S.

regions have   somewhat larger demand shocks than the SC countries.

     This is not just a reflection of larger aggregate disturbances to the
U.S. as a whole; the standard error for the U.S. aggregate, using QECO data,

is 0.153. lower thanthat for most SC countries. The high.variability of

demand affecting U.S. regions may therefore reflect the greater specialization

of industrial production in the U.S. (For data on the concentration of

industry within the US see Krugman (1991), Appendix D). This supposition is

supported by the magnitude of demand disturbances in different U.S. regions.

The largest demand disturbances are those for the Great Lakes, Hid—East,

Plains and New England regions, all of which are relatively specialized, while

the Southeast and Far West, which are more sectorially diversified, have lower

variability. If this interpretation is correct, the evidence suggests that

completion of the internal market in Europe may well magnify aggregate demand

disturbances by leading to increased specialization.

     Charts 5(a)—(d) juxtapose the size of disturbances against their

correlation with that of the center country or region. The vertical axis

measures the standard deviation of the disturbance, while the horizontal axis

shows the correlation Panel 5(a) shows the results for supply shocks to EC

countries, 5(b) the results for supply shocks and US regions. Panels 5(c) and

5(d) show the same results for the demand disturbances. The panels are

plotted using the same scales to aid comparison. The supply disturbance

panels vividly illustrates the different behavior of the core and periphery

for both the SC and the US. It is also clear, however, that the shocks
                                            Chart 5. The size and correlation
                                        of the demand and supply disturbances
         Standard deviation arid correlation of aggTegatc                          Standard dcviation and correlation of aggregate
                     supply disturbances (or EC countries                                supply disturbances for U.S. regions
     0.04
    0.038
                                                                                     0024
    0031
    0.034
                                                                                     0.034
    0032                                Gqt.cc
                                              0
                                             a
    0.020
                                U.K.0                                                0-024
    4.02$
    0.024
    0022                btt.s           a
                                            Italy OSpoin
     0.02 -                 0

                                                                                                                                                     New
    0.016 -                                                      0BeIgi.m.            Doll
    Doll                                                                              0.014-                                      Fweai

     0.0 'I•lIl••I••lT
               -




              -0.3     .0.1        01             0.3      0.5
                                                                 Fra
                                                                    0.7      0.9
                                                                                      0 on-
                                                                                       0.0
                                                                                             •        -0'          0'     03
                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                  SC.ILIWM* 0

                                                                                                                                     05     0.7
                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                Oct. lake.

                                                                                                                                                         0.9
                                            Correlalion                                                                       CovTeIaüon




    Standard deviation and correlation of aggregate                                   Standar&dcviation and correlation of aggregate
          demand disturbances for EC countries                                            demand disturbances for U.S. regions
     0.04                                                                           0.04-
    0.030                                                                          0.030
    0.038
                      hrJ.nd
                                                                                   0..
                        a                                                          0.034                                          Otcea Lake.
                                                                                                                                      0
    0.03?
     0.03                                                                           003
0   0.020                                    tgd
                                             0
    0026                                                                           0.03•
                                                                                                                                                 0
    0024                                                                           0024
    0.022
                                  UK.                   • Dawipok
                                                                                   0 032                                         a
     002                            0                                               0 02
                                                                                                            Saiw
    00I                                                                                                        0               0 $aatha.t
    0016
                                 holy
                                        0/ Setha.,.t
                                                   0 10t181W11
                                                                                   0.0I0
                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                        FuWa.i
    0014               Sm                                                          0004          Mnansan

     o   oc-                                                                       0.012
         00                                                                         00
              -C)      -01        Dl              03       01       01       0.0         43          .l      0.'        0.)      05        0?         0.0
                                                                                                                   Cite a lion
                                            Cone I. lion
                                      — 32 —




hitting   the 175 periphery are much smaller than those hitting the EC periphery,

making the lack of correlation with the anchor region somewhat less of an

issue. The data for the demand disturbances, on the other hand, show

relatively little pattern, although the relatively large shocks experienced by

US regions is evident.




     Speed of Adjustment to Shocks.    In addition to isolating underlying

disturbances,   our procedure permits one to compare the responses of economjes

to shocks.    This can be done by looking at the impulse response functions

associated with the structural VMs. Two issues of particular interest can

then be addressed. how does speed of adjustment by EC countries characterized

by relatively low factor mobility but adjustable exchange rates compare with

speed of adjustment by U.S. regions characterized by high factor mobility but

fixed exchange rates? Is there evidence of consistent differences among EC

countries associated with openness or other structural characteristics?

     Charts 6 and 7 display the impulse response functions for output for the

EC countries and (1.5. regions. In Chart 6 the responses to supply shocks are

shown; the top panel displays the impulse responses for the core EC countries,

the middle panel the responses for the remaining EC economie9, and the bottom

panel the responses for U.S. regions.j/ A noticeable feature is the

faster speed of adjustment for the U.S. regions despite the lack of the

exchange rate instrument within the US currency area. The bulk of the

adjustment to supply shocks by U.S. regions occurs within 3 years; for EC


  fl/ The larger scale required for the EC periphery is another illustration
of the relative large shocks they experience.
                     Chart 6 - Impulse response functions
                                Supply shocks


                    EC core countries
  0_os —




                         /
                             /                --


           -:          1/'         /




   050             EC other countries
   0.09                ——          IRkLAlD
   001                 —._.
                                   elfin
                                   OTALT
                         —                         —
                                   POIIUGAL
           -           —           ADI


                             /-
   006 -                                       —
   0.03
   004 -
                                 --- c.
                                     -
   0.0).



   •001
   •0.02
   .0.03




                       U.S. regions
o.(            -
0.04

0.03




.001                                                   I— —FARWF.ST
                                                       I—--— MID FAST
-0 02                                                  I ——
                                                          ——
                                                            Sfllfl1I WEST
                                                              I4OCAY MOVNTAO4.
                                                        — - 504/ni FAfi
           —                                               .— (IRIATI.AKF3
                                                              H.AINSSTATFJ
-004
                                      — 33   —




countries   it typically takes substantially longer. A simple measure of the

speed of adjustment is the ratio of the impulse response function in the third

year to its long run level. A high value would indicate a large amount of

adjustment, a low value relatively glow adjustment. The average value of this

statistic across US regions is 0.94, as opposed to 0.72 across EC countries.

Interestingly, the average value for the EC core is also somewhat higher than

that for the periphery.

     Chart 7, which displays the impulse response functions to demand shocks,

shows a similar pattern. Again, the US regions appear to exhibit

significantly faster responses than EC countries do. One measure of the speed

of this adjustment is to take the value of the impulse response function after

5 years, with a low value now representing speedy adjustment. The values of

the statistic are generally lower across US regions than EC countries,

confirming the visual impression.

     These VAR decompositions have allowed the analysis to proceed

considerably further than simple comparisons of growth and inflation rates

permit.     The distinction between EC core and periphery is much less clear when

the raw data are analyzed. For example, the standard deviations of

untransformed GDP growth rates for Italy and the U.K. are quite similar to

those for Germany and France, while U.S. regions tend show relatively large

variability in output growth. Our decomposition, by differentiating supply

and demand disturbances from responses, allows the sources of this variability

to be identified more precisely. Differences among countries and regions in

the extent to which output variability and its sources are correlated with
Chart 7 - Impulse Response Functions to a DemaM shock


               Impulse response functions
  0 016

  0-oil
  0.012

  0.010

  0 005



  0.004

  0.002

  Q-I
  -0.002

  -0.001




                  Impulse response lunctions
                  EC other cownijes
   o021
   0.021
   0.020
   0.011
   0-016
   0,0I4
   0.012
   0.010
   0.00I
   0.006
   0.004
   0.001


   -0.002
   -0.004



                  Impulse response functions
                  Demand shocks to eight US regions
      0.04


      003                                             — -PASWtiT
             —:
              -
              -
                      \                               —-—MIDEAST
                                                      —  soum wrn
              -                                       — — — RtXXYM0UNTAD4.
      0.02   —
              •- _L
                                                      — fltflIEAST
                                                      —.—   (flAT AIM
                                                      —. — I&Atfl STAlLS
              :                                             NEW H4UL AND
      0.0I


      0.00
             H

     -0.0I
             —E




     -002
                                      — 34   —




analogous variables in the center country or region are less striking in the
raw data than in the transformed series, rendering the former more difficult

to interpret. Moreover, the calculation of the impulse response functions

allow us to analyze the different set of- issues revolving around speed of

adjustment to shocks which cannot be addressed using the raw data.




VI. Summary and Implications

     In this paper we have used structural vector autoregression to identify

the incidence of aggregate supply and demand disturbances in Europe and to

analyze the EC economies' response. A strong distinction emerges between the

supply shocks affecting the countries at the center of the European

Community —— Germany, France, Belgium, the Netherlands and Denmark —— and the

very different supply shocks affecting other EC members ——    the   United Kingdom.

Italy. Spain, Portugal, Ireland and Greece. Supply shocks to the core

countries are both smaller and more   correlated   across neighboring countries.

The demand shocks experienced by the core countries are also smaller and more

intercorrelated, although the difference on the demand side is less dramatic.

there is also little evidence of convergence in the sense of the core—

periphery distinction becoming less pronounced over time.

     Our analysis of the Nuerican monetary union similarly suggests the

existence of an economic core comprised of the Eastern Seaboard, the Midwest

and the Far West, along with a periphery comprised of the Rocky Mountain

states and the South West. Shocks to the U.S. core and periphery show

considerably more coherence than shocks to the analogous European regions.
                                       — 35 —




Only   if EC core is compared with the entire U.S. (core and periphery together)

are the magnitude and coherence of aggregate supply and demand disturbances

comparable. However, the US does contain two (relatively small) regions, the

South West and the Rocky Mountains, whose underlying disturbances are

relatively idiosyncratic.

       Our impulse response functions indicate that the US regions adjust to

shocks more quickly than do EC countries, despite the lack of the exchange

rate instrument. This finding, which holds for both aggregate demand and

aggregate supply shocks, plausibly reflects greater factor mobility in the

United States than in Europe.

       What are the policy implications of this analysis? First, our finding

that supply shocks are larger in magnitude and less correlated across regions

in Europe than in the United States underscores that the European Couwiunity

may find more difficult to operate a monetary union than the United States.

Large idiosyncratic shocks strengthen the case for policy autonomy and suggest

that significant costs may be associated with its sacrifice. Our finding that

the adjustment to shocks is faster in the U.S. than in Europe, presumably

reflecting greater factor mobility in the U.S., underscores this point.

Moreover, the finding that U.S. regions experience relatively large demand

shocks compared to their European counterparts suggests that completing an

internal market may heighten regional economic specialization and thereby

magnify another source of   shocks.   This may create another set of adjustment

problems for the European   economic and monetary union.
                                         — 36 —




      Second, the   strong distinction   that emerges in our analysis between on
the   one hand a core of EC members that experience relatively small, highly—

correlated aggregate supply disturbances and on the other a second group, what

we have called the members of the EC periphery, whose supply disturbances are

larger and more idiosyncratic, is consonant with arguments that have been

advanced for a two—speed monetary union (e.g. Dornbusch 1990). Our analysis

of disturbances suggests that the EC core (Germany, France, Belgium,

Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Denmark) experience shocks of roughly the same

magnitude and coherence as do U.S. regions. This supply-shock distinction

suggests that Germany and its immediate EC neighbors come much closer than the

Community as a whole to representing a workable monetary union along American

lines.
                                     — 37 —




                                  References

Atkeson, A. and T. Bayoumi. (1991). "Do Private Markets Insure hgainst Regional
Shocks in a Common Currency Area —— Evidence from the US. - unpublished
manuscript, University of Chicago.

Bayoumi, Tamim (1991). "The Effects of the ERM on participating Economies,"
unpublished manuscript, International Monetary Fund.

Bayoumi, Tamim (1991) and Hassimo Russo (1991), •Fiscal Policy and EHU", paper
presented at a conference "European Economic and Monetary Union," Barcelona,
1—5 July 1991.

Bayouni, Tamim and Barry Kichengreen (1991), "Is There a Conflict Between EC
Enlargement and European Monetary Unification?" unpublished manuscript, Bank
of England and University of California at Berkeley.

Hertola, G. (1988), "Factor Flexibility, Uncertainty and Exchange Rate
Regimes," in Marcello de Cecco and Alberto Giovannini (eds.), A European
Central Bank?, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.95—119.

Blanchard, Olivier and Danny Quah (1989), "The Dynamic Effects of Aggregate
Demand and Supply Disturbances," American Economic Review 79, pp.655—673.

Cohen, Daniel and Charles Wyplosz (1989), "The European Monetary Union: An
Agnostic Evaluation," CEPR Discussion Paper No. 306.

Commission of the European Communities (1990), "One Market, one Money: An
Evaluation of the Potential Benefits and Costs of Forming an Economic and
Monetary Union," European Economy 44 (october).

De Grauwe, Paul and Wim Vanhaverbeke (1991), "Is Europe an optimum Currency
Area? Evidence from Regional Data," CEPR Discussion Paper No. 555.

Dornbuech. Rudiger (1990), "Two—Track EHU. Howl" in Karl Otto Pohl et a]..,
Britain and EMU, London; Centre for Economic Performance, pp.lO)—ll2.

Dornbusch, P. and S. Fischer (1986), Macroeconomics: 3rd Edition, McGraw Hill.

Eichengreen, Barry (1990a), "Is Europe an Optimum Currency Area?" CEPR
Discussion Paper No. 478, forthcoming in Herbert Grubel (ed.), European
Economic Integration: The View from outside, London: Macmillan.

Eichengreen, Barry (l990b), "One Money for Europe? Lessons from the U.S.
Currency and Customs Union," Economic Policy 10, pp.118—187.

Eichengreen, Barry (1991), "Labor Markets and European Monetary Unification,"
unpublished manuscript, University of California at Berkeley.
                                    — 38   -




Goldstein. Morris and C. Woglom (1991). "Market-Based Fiscal Discipline in
Monetary Unions: Evidence from the U.S. Municipal Bond Market." unpublished
manuscript. International Monetary Fund.

Hall, ft. and 3. Taylor (1968), Macroeconomics: Theory, Practice and Policy,
New York: Norton.

Helpman, Elhanan and Paul Krugman (1985). Market Structure and Foreign Trade,
Cambridge: MIT Press.

Horn, H. and Torsten Pereson (1988), "Exchange Rate Policy. Wage Formation and
Credibility," European Economic Review 32, pp.1621—1636.

Ingram. James (1973), "The Case for European Monetary Integration," Princeton
Essays in international Finance no. 98 (April).

Ishiyanla,Toshihide (1975), "the Theory of Optimum Currency Areas: A Survey"
11W Staff Paper 22. pp.344—383.

Lippi, K. and L. Reichlin (1990), "A Note on Measuring the Dynamic Effects of
Aggregate Demand and Supply Disturbances", unpublished manuscript.

Kenen Peter B. (1969), "The Theory of optimum Currency Areas: An Eclectic
View," in Robert A. Mundell and Alexander K. Swoboda (eds). Monetary Problems
of the International Econp!ny (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Krugman, Paul (1991), Economic Geography and International Trade, Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press.

Marsden, D. (1989), "occupations: The Influence of the Unemployment
Situation," in W.T.M. Molle and A. van Mourik (eds.), Wage Differentials in
the European Community, Avebury: Cower, pp.lO5—l39.

Meade, James (1957), "The Balance of Payments Problems of a Free Trade Area,"
Economic Journal 61, pp.379—396.

Mundell, Robert (1961), 'A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas," American
Economic Rev]   pp.657—GGS.

OECD (1985), Flexibility in the L.abor Market. Paris: OECD.

Poloz, Stephen S. (1990). "Real Exchange Pate Adjustment Between Regions in a
Common Currency Area,' unpublished manuscript, Bank 01 Canada.
                                                           Discussion of P.
Quah, Danny (1991) "Identifying Vector Autoregressions. A
Englund, A. Vredin and A Warne: Macroeconomic Shocks in Sweden 1925—86",
unpublished manuscript, London School of Economics, September.
                                        — 39 —



                                       "Fiscal Policies and Optimum Currency
Sachu,   .3. and X. Sala 1. Martin, (1991j                       at a
                             and the United States", paper given
Areast Evidence from Europe                                           1 and 2,
conference .5tabliShiflg a central Bank", Georgetown university, May
1991.
                                         of Balance_Of_Payments Adjustment,"
Scitovsky. Tibor (1967). 'The Theory
Journal of political Ecol)9i!YL 75, pp.52)531.

                               MacroeconO(fliCS and Reality," EconOn,etriC 48, pp.l
Sims, ChristOpher (1980).
49.
                              Arrangements in a Monetary Union       Evidence from
von Hagen. .i. (1991) -Fiscal
                                  Indiana University.
the US", unpublished manuscript,
                                           and Adjustment problems in the EMS:
Weber. A. (1990) 'EMIJ and Asylimletries
                                    Discussion Paper No. 448.
Some Empirical Evidence". CEPR
