                   NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




           IS THERE A CONFLICT BETWEEN EC ENLARGEMENT
               AND EUROPEAN MONETARY UNIFICATION?




                         Tamim Bayoumi

                       Barry Eichengreen




                     Working Paper No. 3950




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          January 1992




This paper is part of NBER's research program in International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                            NBER Working Paper #3950
                                            January 1992




             IS THERE A CONFLICT BEIWEEN EC ENLARGEMENT
                 AND EUROPEAN MONETARY UNIFICATION?


                                ABSTRACT'


     Recent proposals for enlarging the European Community to
include the EFTA countries raise the question of whether the new

members   should   participate in a European Monetary Union. In

part, the issue hinges on the incidence of aggregate supply and.
demand disturbances. We use data on prices and output and a VAR

decomposition to analyze this issue empirically, grouping
economies according to the magnitude of the disturbances, their

cross-country correlation, and speeds of response. This leads us

to distinguish an EC "core" (made up of Germany and its immediate

neighbors) and an EC periphery (made up of the UK and the

Southern European members of the Community). Austria, Sweden and
Switzerland behave more similarly to the EC core than do Norway,

Finland and Iceland. This suggests that the case for EMU

participation is stronger for Austria, Sweden and Switzerland

than for the other EFTA countries.




Tamim Bayoumi                               Barry Eichengreen
Bank of England                             Department of Economics
Threadneedle Street                         University of California
London EC2R 8AH                             Berkeley, CA 94720
England                                     and NBER
I. Introduction


         The European Community faces many bumps on the road to monetary
unification. At the time of writing, debate centers on the degree of

policy convergence that is a prerequisite for 5MG. Germany and itS
immedj.ate neighbors, such as the Netherlands, insist that economic policies

must be closely harmonized before nations form a monetary union. In

contrast, the countries of Southern Europe, led by Italy, maintain that

policy convergence can be deferred to the period following the transition
to EMIl. This dispute has given rise proposals for a two—speed EMIl, in

which countries whose policies are already closely harmonized form a

monetary union immediately, but the others initially remain outside.1

         If the problem were not already complicated enough, there is the
issue of EC enlargement. Austria's application for full EC membership,

outstanding since 1988, has received a "fundamentally positive" evaluation
from the EC Commissioner for External Affairs.2 Sweden applied for

membership in July 1991, and its application has also been greeted

favorably. Thus, the European Community will probably have at least two
new members by l995.       Finland is likely to submit its application in the
spr.ng   of   1992, and Norway, Switzerland and Iceland cannot be far behind.4

         The implications for EMIl are far from clear. Does the prospect of

EC enlargement strengthen the North's case for two—speed EMU or the South's

argument for moving establish a single currency for the entire Community?
If the two—speed option is to be pursued, should the former EFTA countrieS


          See for example Dorribusch (1990).

     2 See Lodge (1991).

          Economist Magazine (1991), p.56.

        Admittedly, Norway, Switzerland and Iceland remain deeply divided
over the issue, SC membership was the dominant issue in Norway's September
1991 local elections, in which the Center Party and Left Socialist Patty,
both anti—EC, scored significant gains. The position of the Nordic EFTA
countries and of Iceland are discussed by Hamilton (1990) and Gylfason
(1990), respectively.
join at the first or second stage?
      Discussion of this question should weigh the benefits of EMU
membership against the costs. The benefits, about which we have little to

say in this paper, take the form of the convenience and efficiency of

transacting in one rather than several nationalcurrencies. The costs are
associated with the need for the members of a monetary union to run

identical monetary and similar fiscal policies.5 The weight that should be

attached to this imperative depends on, among other things, the incidence

of shocks. If disturbances are distributed symmetrically across countries,
symmetrical policy responses will suffice. In response to a negative
aggregate demand shock, for example, that is common to all EMU countries, a

common policy response in the form of a simultaneous monetary and fiscal

expansion would suffice. Only if disturbances are distributed
asymmetrically across countries will there be occasion for an asymmetric

policy response and may the constraints of monetary union bind.6

      In a previous paper (sayoumi and Eichengrsen, 1991), we analyzed
output and price data for EU member nations in order to extract information

on aggregate supply and demand disturbances. We used this information to

examine the correlation of disturbances across Ec member countries, and

compared that correlation with that exhibited by disturbances to different

regions within an existing monetary union (the United States).7 In this
paper we extend the analysis to the EFTA countries as a first step toward

exploring the implications of sc enlargement for EMU.



        The extent to which fiscal convergence is a necessary corollary of
monetary union remains a debated point. See Eichengreen (1990a), Ssyoumi
and Russo (1991) and Goldstein and Woglom (1991).

     6 This point has been widely understood since the seminal work on the
theory of optimum currency areas by Wundell (1961).

        We found that aggregate supply shocks to U.S. regions are smaller
than shocks to Ec countries, and that they are sore closely correlated.
Our results also indicated that U.S. regions adjust to shocks more quickly
than do Sc countries, despite the lack of the exchange rate instrument,
plausibly reflecting greater factor mobility in the U.S. than in Europe.
These findings suggest that the Sc may find it more difficult than the U.S.
to run a monetary union.
      We use the structural vector autoregression approach to isolating

disturbances developed by Slanchard and Quah (1989), who examined the time—
series behavior of output and unemployment. But as in Bayoumi (1991), we
instead use data on output and prices, which attows us to interpret the

results in terms of the familiar aggregate—demand-aggregate-supply diagram.

Supply disturbances are distinguished from demand disturbances by imposing

the identifying restriction that aggregate demand disturbances have only a

temporary impact on output, while aggregate supply disturbances have a
permanent effect (both have permanent effects on the level of prices). In
addition to identifying the underlying disturbances, our methodology allows

us to look at the response to these disturbances, and hence allows us a

measure of the speed of of the economy's adjustment to such shocks.

      The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II sets
out the framework used to identify supply and demand disturbances. Section

III describes our data and its properties, while Section IV reports the

results of the statistical analysis. Section V summarizes our findings and

the light they shed on EC enlargment and EMU.



II. Methodolooy
      Our methodological point of departure is the familiar aggregate

demand and aggregate supply diagram, reproduced as the top panel in Chart
1. The aggregate demand curve (labelled AD) is downward sloping in the

price output plane, reflecting the fact that lower prices, by raising money
balances, boost demand. The short run aggregate supply curve (SAAB) is

upward sloping, reflecting the assumption that wages are sticky and hence
that higher prices imply lower real wages. The long run supply curve

(tARS) is vertical, since real wages adjust to changes in prices in the
long run.8



        Although often thought of as a closed economy model, the analysis
can be easily extended to include trade and the exchange rate. Textbook
descriptions include Oornbusch and Fischer (1986) Ch. 11, and Hall and
Taylor (1988) Ch. 4—5.
                                          Chuti




                                /
                      The Aggregale Demand and Supply Model

                                       (a) The Model




                              /
                                         LRAS
                  Pnccs
                                                       SRAS




                       p




                                            Y          Output




         (b) A Demand Shock                                   (c) A Supply Shock


                    LRAS                                               LRAS LRAS
Prices                                     Prcs



    V
    p.
                                                  P
     P
                                                  p.

                                                  V



                      YY      Output                                      Y Y Y Output
          The effect of a shock to aggregate demand is shown in the left half

of the lower panel. The aggregate demand curve shifts from AD to AD,
resulting in a move in the equilibrium from initial point A to the new

intersection with the short run curves, D'. This raises both output and

prices. As the aggregate supply curve becomes more vertical over time, the
economy moves gradually from the short run equilibrium D' to its new long
run equilibrium, D' '.     This   movement along the aggregate demand curve

involves the return of output to its initial level, while the price level

rises to a level which is permanently higher. (Depending on the price
mechanism, there could be some cycling around the new long rum

equilibrium.) Hence the response to a permanent (positive) demand shock is
a short term rise in putput followed by a gradual return to its initial

level, and a permanent rise in prices.

          The effect of a supply shock is shown in the right-hand bottom panel

of the chart. Assume that the long run level of potential output rises,

say because of a favorable technology shock. The short— and long—run

supply curves move rightwards by the same amount, as shown by SPAS' and
LP.AS'.     The short run effect raises output and reduces prices, shifting the
equilibrium from A to 5'. As the supply curve becomes increasingly
vertical over time, the economy moves from S to 5'', implying further

increases in output and reductions in prices. Unlike demand shocks, supply

shocks result in permanent changes in output. In addition, demand and
supply have therefore different effects on prices; positive demand shocks

raise prices while positive supply shocks reduce them.

          This framework is estimated using a procedure proposed by Blanchard

and Quah (1989) for decomposing permanent and temporary shocks to a

variable using a VAR, as extended by Bayoumi (l991). consider a ayatem
where the true model can be represented by an infinite moving average


        Quah (1g91( discusses the issue of identifying restrictiona for
VARs. An important assumption which is required to ensure uniqueness of
the decomposition is that the underlying series (growth and inflation in
this case) are fundamental in a Hold sense, as pointed out by Lippi and
Reichlin (199D).

                                          4
representation of a (vector) of variables, X, and an equal number of

ahocks,               Formally, using the lag operator L, this can be written as'



           A0c + Aict_i      +
                                 A2e,_2 +
                                                                                       (2.1)
       =
           EL Aist
           1.0




where the matrices A1 represent the impulse response functions of the
shocks to the elements of X.

            Specifically, let               be made up of change in output and to the change
in prices, and let                  be demand and supply shocks. Then the model becomes




                      a111   a121   cdt
                                                                                       (2.2)
                 .0   a21 I a221




where y1 and Pt represent the logarithm of output and prices, 5dt and                      are
independent supply and demand shocks, and 1li                  represents element a11 in

matrix A1.
      The framework implies that while supply shocks have permanent effects
on the level of output, demand shocks only have temporary effects. (Both
have       permanent effects upon the level of prices.) Since output is written
in     first difference form, this implies that the cumulative effect of demand

shocks on the change in output )5y1) must be zero. The model implies the

restriction,




 Eat1 = 0.                                                                             (2.3)
 1=0
        The model defined by equations (2.2) and (2.3) can be estimated using
 a vector autoregression. Each element of               can be regressed on lagged
values of all the elements of X. Using B to represent these estimated

coefficients, the estimating equation becomes,



               +   82X2 + . . . + 8,,X.0 + e
    =
        (I-8)L)1e0
    =   (I •+ 8(L)   +   8(L)2 + .
                                                                                    (2.4)

            Diei + 02e1_;       +
                                     03t3   •




where e1 represents the reeiduals from the equations in the vector

autoregression. In the case being considered, e1 is comprised of the
residuals of a regression of lagged values of Ay and Ap on current values
of each in turn; these residuals are labeled                and e0 respectively.
        To convert equation (2.4) into the model defined by equations (2.2)
and (2.3), the residuals from the VAR,                must be transformed into demand

and supply shocks, s. Writing e1                Cc', it is clear that, in the two—by—
two case considered, four restrictions are required to define the four
elements of the matrix C. Two of these restrictions are simple
normalizations, which define the variance of the shocks               and ç.    A

third restriction comes from assuming that demand and supply shocks are

orthogonal.10

        The final restriction, which allows the matrix C to be uniquely




      10 The conventional normalization is that the two variances are set
equal to unity, which together with the assumption of orthogonality implies
cc = S. Where S is the variance covariance matrix of the shocks e and e
However, when we wish to calculate the variance of the shocks themshvea, '
we report results using the normalization Cc = F, where F is the
correlation matrix of e and e .   These two normalizations gave almost
identical paths for the shock!, except for a scaling factor, and hence are
used interchangeably.

                                                6
defined, is thst demand shocks have only cemporary effeccs on output.11

As noted above, this implies equation (2.3). In terms of the VAR it

implies,


           d12 c11 c11 —   -                                            (2.5)
 =oL'-'21i d22 c21 c2 —



This   restriction allows the matrix C to be uniquely defined and the demand

and supply shocks to identified.12

        Note that this restriction affects the response of output to the two

shocks, but says nothing about their impact on prices. The aggregate—
demand—aggregate—supply model implies that demand shocks should raise

prices in both the short and long run, while supply shocks should lower
prices. Since these responses are not imposed, they can be thought of as
over—identifying restrictions useful for testing our interpretation of the

results. 13



III. Data
        Annual data on real and nominal GOP spanning the period 1960—88 were
collected from the OECD Annual National Accounts for each of the 12 members

of the SC and for six EFTA members: Sweden, Switzerland, Austria, Finland,




     11This is where our analysis, based on the work of Blanchard and Quah
(1989), differs from other VAR models. The usual decomposition assumes
that the variables in the VAR can be ordered such that all the effects
which could be attributed to (say) either a1 or b1 are attributed to
whichever comes first in the ordering. This is achieved by a Choleski
decomposition (Sims, 1980).
     12Note from equation (2.4) that the long run impact of the shocks on
output and prices is equal to )I—8(l)). The restriction that the long run
effect of demand shocks on output is zero implies a simple linear
restriction on the coefficients of this matrix.

     13Blanchard and Quah use output and unemployment in their VAR, with the
same identifying restrictions on the effect of shocks on output. Since
unemployment would be expected to move in the same direction in response to
both demand and supply shocks, their implied over—identifying restriction
has less power than the one used in this paper.
    Norway and Iceland (data on Lichtenstein, the seventh member of EFTA, were

4   unavailable).14   For each country growth and inflation were calculated as

    the first difference of the logarithm of real GD? and the implicit CD?

    deflator. The GD? deflator was used to measure prices since it reflects
    the price of output rather than the price of consumption.

          Chart 2 displays the standard deviations of inflation and GD? growth

    over the sample period for each of the countries.15 Countries located

    toward the bottom, left—hand corner of the box have relatively low output

    and inflation variability, and are therefore obvious candidates to join in

    a monetary union. In addition to Germany, which would undoubtedly form the

    focal point for any such union, the corner includes her SC neighbors,

    France, Belgium, the Netherlands and Denmark. It also contains several

    EFTA countries, Austria, Sweden, Norway and, arguably, Switzerland.
          Table 1 reports acme summary measures of the correlation across SC

    countries of inflation and output growth. As in our earlier paper, we
    divide the SC into a "core" comprised of Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany,

    the Netherlands and Luxembourg, and a "periphery" comprised of Treland,

    Italy, Greece, ?ortugal, Spain and the U.K. Table 1 reports the share of
    the variance of output growth and inflation explained by the first

    principal component (the orthogonal component most correlated with the
    underlying series) for the two subgroups of SC countries and for the six
    SFTA members.

          On the basis of the raw data, the EFTA countries look more like the

    SC periphery than the SC core. For the full period, the first principal




         14 This same source provided an aggregate measure of output and price
    performance for the EC as a whole. Two different measures of the EC
    aggregate are available from the GECD, one based on conversions of local
    currency data using 1985 dollars, and a second based on a weighting of EC
    real GD? and GD? deflator indices. Since the two data sets gave very
    similar results, only those based on 1985 dollar exchange rates are
    reported.

             Iceland is excluded from the chart because the variance of both
    growth and inflation, at G.042 and G.l3l, are so much larger than any of
    the other countries.

                                          B
                Chart 2 - Standard Deviations of
                     Inflation and Growth



                                                                           Greece
     0.035                                                                   U
                                                                                     U
                                                                                 Portugal


      0.03
r                  Switzerland
                                              Spain
2
()                    Denmark
     0.025
                                         Finland
                                                                 Italy
                                                             U
                Germany            Netherlands
                  U          U                         U Ireland
                   U Belgium                            U
      0.02       Ausnia                                  U.K.
                                 U U France
                       Sweden
                                          Norway
     001:                          I
         0.01         0.02        0.03     0.04       0.05          0.06         0.07       0.08
                                            Inflation
           Table 1. Percentage of Variance Explained by the First
          Principal Component Across Different Groups of Countries:
                                  Raw Data


                      KG Core          KG Periphery        EFTA

                                   Growth
Full Period              73                  49                43
1963—71                  73                  35                51
1972—79                  82                  49                43
1980—88                  54                  42                42
                                 Inflation
Full Period              64                  7D                53
1963—71                  46                  38                42
1972—79                  58                  52                44
1980—88                  82                  69



Notes: The EC core comprises Germany, France, the Netherlands, Belgium,
Denmark and Luxenburg. The KG periphery contains the UK, Italy, Spain,
Portugal, Ireland end Greece. EFTA contains Switzerland, Austria, Sweden,
Norway Finland and Iceland.
component explains slightly under half of the variance of output in both

EFTA and the E periphery, while almost three quarters of this variance is
explained in the case of the EC core. The results for inflation over the

full period are more difficult to interpret. For the period as a whole,
EFTA have the lowest share of the variance in their inflation rates

explained by the first principal component.
      To illustrate trends over time, Table 1 also reports the percentage

of the overall variance explained by the first principal component for
three distinct time periods. For both the sc and EFTA the largest share of

inflation is explained in the 1980s, presumably reflecting the extent to
which price—level trends were dominated by disinflation after 1979. In the

case of output, for the Ec countries the first principal component explains

the largest share of the variance of output in the l970s, the smallest

share in the 1960s. The unusual coherence of output fluctuations in the
l970s presumably reflects the fact that all countries experienced an

unusually severe recession following the first oil shock. Interesting,
this is not the case for EFTA, perhaps because it includes an energy

exporter (Norway) as well as net energy importers.
       From these comparisons of the unprocessed data, it would appear that
whatever criteria are used to determine whether the countries of the EC

periphery are included from the start in EMU should also be applied to the

EFTA countries when they join the community.



IV. Results
      Bivariate VANs were estimated for each Ec and EFTA country in order

to identify their aggregate demand and supply disturbances and associated
impulse response functions. The number of lags was set to two in all the

VANs since the Schwartz sayesian information criterion indicated that all




                                      9
of the models had an optimal lag length of either one or two.16 A uniform
lag of two was chosen in order to preserve symmetry of specification across

countries. For all countries the estimation period was l963_88.17
         In almost every case the estimation and simulation results accord
with the aggregate—supply-aggregate—demand framework discussed in Section

II. The "over—identifying restriction" thmt positive aggregate demand
shocks should be associated with increases in prices while aggregate supply
shocks should be associated with falls in prices was generally observed.

In only two of the 18 cases considered here, namely Norway and Iceland, was

it impossible to interpret the results using the aggregate—demand—

aggregate—supply framework.
         By way of illustration, Chart 3 shows the impulse response functions
for output and prices obtained from the EC aggregate data. These
illustrate the identifying restriction. Positive demand shocks produce a

temporary rise in output, which then gradually returns to its baseline

level, while a positive supply shocks produces a steady rise in output to a

new higher equilibrium level, Both aggregate supply and aggregate demand
shocks have long—run effects on the price level, with (positive) demand

shocks producing a gradual rise in prices over time and supply shocks

producing a steady decline in prices. This is exactly the pattern

predicted by the aggregate-supply—aggregate—demand framework sketched
above.

         The estimated aggregate demand and supply shocks for the EC aggregate

are shown in Chart 4. Large negative disturbances to supply are evident in




     16 We also estimated VAPs with three lags because, in contrast to the
Schwartz Bayesian statistic, the Akaike information criterion showed the
optimal lag to be above two in some models. This specification produced
very similar results which consequently are not reported here.

     17 This period includes an obvious change in regime, namely the break-
up of the Bretton Woods fixed—exchange—rate system in the early l970a.
Chow tests for structural stability produced no evidence, however, of a
structural break in the early 1970s. Limited analysis using data sets
which excluded the Bretton Woods period produced similar results to those
reported.

                                       10
Chart 3 - Impulse Response Functions for the E.C. and U.S.

           Impulse Response of Output
           European Community
 0.030


 0.025


 0.020


 0.0 15


 0.0 10


 0.005


 0.000




          Impulse Response of Prices
          European Community
  0.05
  0.04                                       Demand shock
  0.03
  0.02
  0.01
  0.00
 -0.01
 -0.02
 -0,03
 -0.04
                  S
 -0.05
 -0.06                - - - --          Supply shock
 -0.07
p
t
&




U)
0
0
U)
>1               0'
Cl
Cl
U)
-c

-o
—


0
0
0
p



     —   C   —


U
 1973—75 and 1979—80, corresponding to the two oil shocks, together with a
negative supply shock in 1968 which is more difficult to interpret. The

demand disturbances illustrate the different response of the EC to the
first and second oil crises1 there is a targe positive demand shock in
1977, while from 1980 onwards demand shocks are negative.

      Having illustrated the nature of the estimation results, we now use
the results to look at the relative performance of the EC core, the EC

periphery and EFTA. We look first at the correlation of the underlying

disturbances across countries, and then at the size of these shocks.

Finally, we compare the spped of adjustment across countries.


      1. Correlations

      A major factor in determining the advantages of joining a common
currency area is the correlation of underlying shocks. If shocks are
highly symmetric across countries, then the loss of the exchange rate

instrument is relatively unimportant, whereas if shocks are highly

idiosyncratic the problem of adjustment may be more complicated, justifying

different policy responses by different countries. Table 2 summarizes the

cross—country correlations of demand and supply shocks for the Ec core, the

EC periphery and EFTA, again using principal components analysis. As in
Table 1, the results are reported for the full sample and, to illustrate
trends over time, for three successive subperiods.

      For the period as a whole both supply and demand shocks are more

highly correlated within the Ec core than within the EC periphery or EFTA.

The values for the EC periphery and EFTA are rather similar. This first

bit of evidence suggests, then, that there may be special grounds for an
EMU of the core countries not shared by either the Ec periphery or EFTA.

      When aggregate supply and demand disturbances are estimated

separately for successive subperiods, the picture is complicated. The

aggregate supply shocks indicate that the performance of the EFTA countries

may have been moving away from that of the EC periphery and towards the Ec


                                     11
     Table 2. percentage of Variance in Supply and Demand Shocks
                  Explained by First Principal Component


                      EC Core          EC Periphery       EFTA


                                Supply Shocks
Full Period              54                     32           29

1963—71                  39                     40           36
1972—79                  63                     41           49
1980—88                  62                     41           45

                                Demand Shocks

Full Period              53                     36           36

1963—71                  58                     30           44
1972—79                  50                     49           44
1980—88                  54                     43           32



Notes: The EC core comprises Germany, France, the Netherlands, Belgium,
Denmark and Luxenburg. The EC periphery contains the UK, Italy, Spain,
Portugal, Ireland and Greece. EFTA/Germany contains Switzerland, Austria,
Sweden, Norway, Finland and Iceland
core. This plausibly reflects the growth of trade and financial relations
between the leading SC economies and EFTA. For aggregate demand shocks,

the opposite appears to be the case; shocks to EFTA seem to have grown

increasingly heterogeneous over time,    leading it to   more closely resestbie

the EC periphery. This trend in demand shocks may reflect the convergence
of SC monetary policies caused by the SEN and its earlier incarnation, the

"snake," in contrast to the floating exchange rate policies followed by

most members of EFTA since the break—up of the Bretton Woods fixed exchange

rate regime in the early l970s.18

      These summary statistics disguise large divergences in behavior among
countries within each group. Chart S displays the correlation coefficients
for both demand and supply disturbances between individual EC/EFTA
countries and Germany)9 The correlation coefficient for demand shocks is

on the vertical axis, while that for supply shocks is on the horizontal

axis. Countries clustered near the top, right—hand corner of the box,

which exhibit high correlations with Germany, are prime candidates for

joining it in a monetary union. The correlations of aggregate supply
disturbances are of particular interest, since demand shocks are more

likely to reflect government policy and therefore to be endogenous to the

exchange—rate regime.
         Belgium, Denmark, France and the Netherlands all have supply

disturbances which are highly correlated with Germany's. In addition,
their demand disturbances are also reasonably highly correlated with

Germany's. Two EFTA countries --     Austria   and Switzerland ——   are   close

behind    these members of the EC core in the "race" toward the upper right—



     15 More recently, the EFTA countries have tended to link their
exchange rates to those of the SEN. Hence as more data become available,
this trend may reverse itself.

         Germany is the largest economy in Europe and has played a
leadership role in the ERM, making it the obvious standard for comparison.
Here the results for tuxenbourg are not reported, since it is such a small
economy.

                                        12
            Chart 5 - Correlations of the Demand
           and Supply Disturbances with Germany


    0.6                                          Iceland
                                                     U

    0.5

                                                                          Denmark
    0.4
                                                                      France.
                                                                                 U
    0.3                                                      Austria      Netherlands
                                                                  U
c                                                Portugal
    0.2                                Greece          Sweden                 Belgium
                                       U.K..         'U
                                                 Italy .         Switzerland
                                                     Finland

      0                                                  Spain
                         Ireland
                            U
                                                            I
    -0.1


    -0.2
             • Norway
              I     I              I       I                      I       I
      -0.4   -0.3 -0.2   -0.1      0       0.1     0.2     0.3   0.4     0.5    0.6     0.7
                                          Supply
hand part of the box.20 On the basis of these correlations, Austria and

Switzerland would seem to be prime candidates for monetary union.

       The other four EFTA members, Sweden, Finland, Iceland and especially
Norway, would seem to be less promising candidates for monetary union.

Sweden and Finland are in the middle of the sample in terms of the

correlation of their disturbances with Germany's. For Norway, the energy

producer in our sample, both disturbances are negatively correlated with
those of Germany, while in the case of Iceland, the demand disturbances are

relatively highly correlated with those of Germany but the supply

disturbaoces are not.
        Thus, the cross—country correlation of disturbances creates a

stronger presumption in favor of EMU participation for some EFTA countries
——   Austria   and Switzerland —— than for others -— Sweden, Finland, Norway

and Iceland. Still, except for Norway, the case for EMU membership on
theme grounds im at least as strong as that for such members of the £0

periphery as the UK, Greece and Spain.



        2. Size of Shocks
        In addition to looking at the symmetry or correlation of shocks
across regions, our methodology can be used, as described in Section II, to

estimate their relative size.21 The larger the underlying shocks, the
more difficult it may be to maintain a fixed exchange rate, and the more

compelling may be the case for an independent policy response. This is

particularly true of supply mhocks, which often require more painful

adjustment.
        The standard deviations of the aggregate demand and supply




     20 A surprising case is Iceland, whose supply disturbances are only
loosely correlated with Germany's, but whose demand disturbances exhibit a
high correlation over the sample period.

     21These are calculated using the modification of the VAR decomposition
discussed in footnote 10.

                                         13
    disturbances are displayed in Chart 6.22 Prime candidates for monetary
    union are countries countries with small disturbances located toward the

    bottom, left—hand corner of the box. The members of the EC core ——

    Germany, France, Belgium, the Netherlands and Denmark -— are all located
    near that corner. All have Supply chocks with standard deviations in the

    range of 0.01—0.02 (1—2 per cent per annum). In contrast, the standard
    deviations of the supply shocks for the EC periphery (the U.K., Italy,

    Spain, Portugal, Ireland and Greece) range from 0.02 to 0.035 (2—3 1/2 per
    cent per annum). Thus, as pointed Out in Bayoumi and Eichengreen (1991),
    the peripheral countries experience supply shocks twice as large on average
    as the core countries.

          The patterns exhibited by demand shocks are less coherent. Still,
    demand shocks to the EC core appear to be distinctly smaller than those

    experienced by some members of the EC periphery, notably Portugal and
    Ireland.

          Three EFTA members ——   Austria,   Sweden and Switzerland ——   reside   in

    the same general neighborhood as the members of the EC core. Within this

    group, Austria and Sweden have particularly low standard deviations.

    Norway is an interesting case since while it has relatively small supply
    disturbances, its demand disturbances are relatively large, making it

    difficult to classify. Finland appears to be located in the EC core, while

    Iceland has such large underlying disturbances that they have been excluded
    from the diagram.

          Thus, the magnitude of shocks as well as their correlation with

    Germany a suggest that several EFTA members, namely Austria, Sweden and

    Switzerland, are good candidates for EMIl. Only in the case of Iceland does

    this part of our analysis give rise to reservations. As with the
    correlation of disturbances, the magnitude of shocks provides a generally


         22 Since the variables are measured in logarithms a standard deviation
    of (say) 0.012 implies a variation of 1.2 percent. Iceland is again
P   excluded because the standard deviations of its demand any supply shocks,
    at 0.082 and 0.037, are so much larger than the other countries in the
    analysis.

                                             14
    Chart 6. The Correlation and
Size of the Underlying Disturbances

                (a) Supply Disturbances
                                                          I Icd.nd

                                                Greece
       0.03
                                                         I P.oncg.I

                                            UK.
  C0
                                                  luly • I Spn
       0.02
                                  rc!2nd
                                    I                      I
                                                         Ferlwrd       -
                                                                      W,IJzr.n

                    •et'Y
                                                               .
                                                           Sweden
                                                                                    Netheralirds

                                                                                 IRlgirnr
  C                                                                Ar
                                                                    U fli
                                                                             • Frznce
       0.Or




                        .0.2            0            02               04         0.8           0.8
                                  Correlation with Germany

                (b) Demand Disturbances
       0.a-


                                   S treInd

       0.03             I Norwsy
                                                          i Ponug.t
   C
   0
                                                   I Einlsnd

        002                                                           . Denrrrett
   o                                                 IWrL,rI4nd
                                                  UK.          • Aorrr,.
                                    15           Bctganr'\IN0etr1fld5

        00                                           ISweden




              -04           -02             0            02           04            06             08
                                   Correlation with Germany
                   Table 3. The Size of the Underlying
                 Aggregate Supply and Demand Disturbances
                           (Standard Deviations)



                                  Supply              Demand


EC Core
   Germany                         .017               .014
   France                          .012               .012
   Netherlands                     .017               .015
   Belgium                         .015                .016
   Denmark                         .017                .021

SC Periphery
   UK                              .026                .017
   Italy                           .022                .020
   Spain                           .022                .015
   Portugal                        .029                .028
   Ireland                         .021                .034
   Greece                          .030                .016

EFTA
   Switzerland                     .018                .019
   Austria                         .012                .017
   Sweden                          .016                .010
   Norway                          .015                .030
   Finland                         .021                .024
   Iceland                         .038                .079

Notes: The data are in logarithms, hence a number such as .012 represents
a standard deviation of 1.2 percent.
stronger basis for EMU membership for the ErA countries (excluding
Iceland) than for the EC periphery, the UK, Italy, Spain, Ireland and

Portugal.
      It is illuminating to contrast the standard deviationa of the supply

and demand shocks in Chart 6 with the standard deviations of inflation and

output growth in Chart 2. When countries are grouped as in Chart 2

sccording to the variability of inflation and output growth, most EFTA
countries appear to form part of the core of the SC, and thus would be

considered ready to enter any monetary union which was formed. When the
variability of aggregate supply and demand shocks, as in Chart 6, is taken

to measure suitability for entry, as we have argued is more appropriate,

the EFTA countries look considerably more mixed, with only Austria and

Sweden (the two countries who have formally applied to join the EC) firmly

in the core, Switzerland in an intermediate position and Norway and Finland

being grouped with the EC periphery.


      3. Speed of Adjustment to Shocks
      Our procedure also permits one to compare the reactions of economies

to shocks. This can be done by looking at the impulse—response functions
associated with the VANs. The slower the speed of adjustment to a given
disturbance, the greater the welfare costs. For a given configuration of

disturbances, then, countries with particularly slow speed of adjustment,
sbsolutely and relative to countries like Germany certain to participate

EMIl, are the least plausible candidates for immediate membership.

      chart 7 displays the impulse—response functions for aggregate demand

shocks for the SC core, SC periphery and EFTA, respectively, while Chart 6

shows the impulse responses for aggregate supply shocks. To aid

comparison, we have superimposed on each chart the impulse—response

function for the SC aggregate.

      Chart 7, which shows the response to a demand shock, is simple to

interpret: countries with impulse—response functions above and to the right


                                       15
Chart 7 - Impulse Response Functions to a Demand shock

             Impulse response functions
   0016
   0 014

   0012
   Onto
   0008


   0.004

   0 002



   .0002
   .0004




              Impulse response functions
              EC other countries
    0.024
    0 022
    0.020
                                           — — IMPLANt
    0.018                                        Gap-Fe'
                                                 TOM_V
    0.016                                  ———   PORTIJOAL
    0014                                   — -   SPAIN

    0012                                         U'
    0010
    0,008


                \
    0,006
    0004
    0002
                                                           -
   .0002
   .0,004




            EFFA countrics
 0.020
 0022
 0,020
 0.010
 0.0 6
 0.0)0
 0.012
 0010
 0000
 0000,
 010)1
  0002
  0000
 .0002
 -0.004
                Chart 8 - Impulse response functions
                              Supply shocks


                EC core countries
 0.05 — -


 0.04   —


                      /
                    / .—.._..
 0.03   —




 0.03   —




 0.01   -

 0.05   -.

             EC other countries
0.09
008               ———        POKIUCAL
0.07
0.09
                  — nrc
                  —
                             UK.        —      —
0.05                        ..— .- _—-
0.04                  ,,_



-0.0l
-0.02
-0.03



                 EFTA Countries
 0.05       —


 0.04       —


 003




 000        —

                                    — .iC       ———

 001                                — — — Swrdcn — —
                                        Sw.Innd — Fnlnd
 002
of the aggregate tend to adjust more slowly than average, while countries
with impulse—response functions below and to the left of the heavy line

respond more quickly. With the exception of France, all of the members of
the SC core show relatively fast response to demand shocks. The results
for the SC periphery are more mixed. While the UK, Italy and Ireland

respond slightly faster than the SC aggregate, Oreece, Portugal and spain
all respond more sluggishly. The responses of the EFTA countries resemble

the SC core more closely than the SC periphery, despite the cycling in the
estimated responses of Austria, Finland, and switzerland. With the
exception of Iceland, their impulse—response functions are below those for

the SC aggregate, as are most of those for the EC core, although the

cycling indicates some temporary overshooting when output falls following a
positive demand shock, magnifying the transitional costs.
      The impulse—response functions for supply shocks must be interpreted

differently. In contrast to the case of demand shocks, where output

returns ultimately to its initial level, in the case of supply shocks the

long—run change in output differs across countries. One measure of speed

of adjustment is the ratio of the impulse response of output in the third

year to its long—run level.23 A high value indicates relatively fast

adjustment, a low value relatively slow adjustment. The average value for

this statistic is 0.72 for all SC countries, with the average for the SC

core (0.82) being considerably higher than that for the SC periphery

(O.63).24 As night be expected from a comparison of Chart 8, in their

speed of adjustment to supply shocks the SFTA countries more closely

resemble the SC core than the SC periphery. Indeed, the average value for
SFTA countries (0.98) is actually somewhat larger than for the SC core.




     23 While somewhat arbitrary, this measure is relatively simple and
intuitive. The same calculations, when undertaken for the fifth or seventh
year following the shock, pointed to essentially the same conclusions.

     26 Note that the SC average is a gjghted avetage of the figures for
the two subgroups, since there are different numbers of countries in the
two groups.

                                     16
V. Summary and Implications
      In this paper we have used structural vector autoregression to

identify the incidence of aggregate supply aod aggregate demand
disturbances in Europe and to analyze the EC economies response. Central

to our snalysis is a distinction, emphasized by Bayoumi and Eichengreen
(1991), between aggregate supply and demand shocks to the countries at the

center of the European Community —— Germany, France, Belgium, the
Netherlands and Denmark —— and the very different shocks atfecting other EC

members. Supply shocks to the EC core are both significantly smaller and
significantly more correlated across countries. The same is true of demand

shocks. There is little evidence of convergence in the sense that this
core—periphery distinction is becoming less pronounced over time.

Moreover, the core—periphery distinction is reinforced by evidence that the

core countries adjust more quickly to supply and demand disturbances alike.

      The EFTA countries are not readily grouped with either the EC core or

the EC periphery. In some respects they mors closely resemble the core:

this is true, for example, of their speed of response to both aggregate
supply and aggregate demand shocks. In other respects they more closely

resemble the EC periphery: this is true of the intra—group correlation of
both supply and demand shocks. This last fact —— a low intra—group
correlation -—   highlights   the extent of heterogeneity within EFTA. Some

EFTA members (Austria, Sweden and Switzerland) display aggregate supply and
demand disturbances that are both relatively small and relatively highly

correlated with those of Germany. Finland and Norway display somewhat

larger disturbances and, especially in the case of Norway, they are

relatively poorly correlated with Germanys, making them more similar to
some of the periphery countries in the EC. Finally, Iceland experie

nces much larger underlying disturbances than any other country considered
in the sample.

      What are the implications of the findiogn reported in this paper for

the debate over monetary union? Advocates of two—speed EWU will derive


                                        17
some comfort from our finding of a clear distinction between an EC core and
an EC periphery, aLthough the information reported here is obviously not
sufficient to make or break their case. Those who believe that all 11 EC

members can proceed rapidly toward completion of EMU will be reassured to

learn that enlargement of the Community to include the EFTA countries does
not pose an obvious challenge to their position. The EFTA countries as a
whole exhibit behavior midway between that of the EC core and that of the

EC periphery. If the U.K., Italy, Greece, Spain and Portugal are qualified
to join the EMU, so too, judged in terms of the disturbances they

experience and their capacity to respond, are Austria, Finland, Iceland,
Norway, Sweden and Switzerland.

      In a sense, however, our analysis suggests that the EC core, the EC
periphery and EFTA are not the relevant categories f or discussions of EMU

membership. EFTA is more logically divided into two subgroups: Austria,
Sweden and Switzerland belong with the EC core, while the same is not

clearly true of Norway, Iceland and Finland. If the EC proceeds with two—

speed EMU, this suggests, one should expect to see more vehicles in both
the fast and slow lanes.




                                     18
                              REFERENCES

Bayoumi, Tamim (1991),   'The Effects of the ERM   on Participating
Economies," IMF WP/91/86.
Bayoumi, Tamim and Barry Eichengreen (1991), "Shocking Aspects of European
Monetary Unification," unpublished manuscript, International Monetary Fund
and University of California at Berkeley.

Bayoumi, Tamim and Massimo Russo (1991), "Fiscal Policy and EMU," paper
presented at the conference on "European Economic and Monetary Union,"
Barcelona, 1—5 July.
Blanchard, Olivier and Danny Quah (1989), "The Dynamic Effects of Aggregate
Demand and Supply Disturbances," American Economic Review 79, pp'655-673.
Dornbusch, Rudiger (1990), "Two—Track EMU, Now!" in Eon Otto Pohl et al.,
Britain and EMU, London: Centre for Economic Performance, pp.103—il2.
Dornbusch, Rudiger and Stanley Fischer (1986), Macroeconomics, New York:
McGraw Mill, third edition.

Eichengreen, Barry (1991), "Is Europe an Optimum Currency Area?" CEPN
Discussion Paper No. 478, forthcoming in Merbert Grubel )ed.), European
Economic Integration: The View from Outside (London: Macmillan).

Economist Magazine (1991), "Finland: Europe Aho," 14—20 September, pp.58—
57"

Goldstein, Morris and 0. Moglom (1991), "Market—Based Fiscal Discipline in
Monetary Unions: Evidence from the U.S. Municipal Bond Market," unpublished
manuscript, International Monetary Fund.
Gylfaaon, Thorvaldur (1990), "Iceland on the Outskirts of Europe: The
Common Property Resource Problem," in EFTA )ed.), EFTA Countries in a
Chancing Europe, Geneva: EFTA, pp.81—95.
Nail, Robert and John Taylor (1988), Macroeconomics: Theory. Practice and
Policy, New York: McGraw 'ull, third edition.

Mamilton, Carl B. (1990), "The Nordic EFTA Countries' Options: Community
member or a Permanent EEA Accord," in EFTA (ed.), EFTA Countries in a
Changing Europe, Geneva: EFTA, pp.97—i27.
Lippi, M. and L. Reichlin )l99D), "A Note on Measuring the Dynamic Effects
of Aggregate Demand and Supply Disturbances," unpublished manuscript.

Lodge, Ian (1991), "Big Step Towards Full EC Membership," Financial Times,
9 October, p.5.2.

Mundell, Robert (1961), ""A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas," American
Economic Review, pp.657—665.

gush, Danny (1991) "Identifying Vector Autoregressions. A Discussion of P.
EngLund, A. Vredin and A Warne: Macroeconomic Shocks in Sweden 1925—86",
unpublished manuscript, London School of Economics, September.

Sims, Christopher (1980), "Macroeconomics and Neality," Econometrics 48,
pp.1-49.




                                      19
