                                NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




       TWENTY-TWO YEARS OF THE NBER-ASA QUARTERLY ECONOMIC
 OUTLOOK SURVEYS: ASPECTS AND COMPARISONS OF FORECASTING PERFORMANCE




                                         Victor Zamowitz

                                           Phillip Braun




                                      Working Paper No. 3965




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 1992




Prepared for the Conference on New Reseatvh on Business Cycles, Indicators and Forecasting. The
authors thank Ray Fair, Chistopher Sims, Allen Sinai, James Stock, Mark Watson. and the participants
in the discussion at the NBER meeting on May 4, 1991 for helpful comments; christopher Cuip for
research assistance; Cynthia Davis for typing; and the NEER for financial assistance. This paper is
part of NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                     NBER Working Paper #3965
                                                                     January 1992



           TWENTY-TWO YEARS OF THE NBER-ASA QUARTERLY ECONOMIC
    OUTLOOK SURVEYS: ASPECTS AND COMPARISONS OF FORECASTING PERFORMANCE


                                                    ABSTRACT

        The National Bureau of Economic Research, in co-operation with the American Statistical
Association, conducted a regular quarterly survey of professional macroeconomic forecasters for 22 years
beginning in 1968. The survey produced a mass of information about characteristics and resultsof the
forecasting process. Many studies have already used some of this material, but this is the first
comprehensive examination of all of it.
        This report addresses several subjects and produces findings on each, as follows:
        (1) The distributions of error statistics across the forecasters: the dispersion among the individual
predictions is often large and it typically increases with forecast horizon, as do the mean absolute (or
squared) errors.
        (2) The role of the time-series properties of the target data: the more volatile the time series, the
larger as a rule are the errors of the forecasts.
         (3) The role of revisions in "actual" data: forecast errors tend to be larger the greater the extent
of the revisions.
         (4) Differences by subpcriod: there is little evidence of an overall improvement or deterioration in
forecasts between the l970s and the 1980s.
         (5) Combining the individual forecasts into group mean or 'consensus" forecasts: this generally
results in large gains in accuracy.
         (6) Comparisons with a well-known macroeconometric model: the group forecasts are more
accurate for most but not all variables and spanS.
         (7) Comparisons with state-of-the-art time series models: the group forecasts and at least half of
the individual forecasts tend to outperform Bayesian vector autoregressive models in most (but not
all) cases. The univariate ARIMA forecasts arc generally the weakest.


Victor Zamowita                                                      Phillip Braun
Graduate School of Business                                          Kellogg School of Management
University of Chicago                                                Northwestern University
1101 East 58th Street                                                Leverone Hall
Chicago. IL 60637                                                    Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
                                      1. Introduction


       Human action has always been to a large extent oriented to the future. Since

ancient times, man hoped to outwit fate and survive by magic divination; he also hoped to

outwit nature and others by shrewd calculation. Attempts to predict the future, therefore,

are as old as magic, but they are also as old as commerce, saving and investment. Their

motivation must have always been largely economic, despite the inevitable frustrations of

economic forecasting.

       Great foresight in business matters is presumably highly profitable and rare. Its

possessor will do well to exploit it directly for personal enrichment, hence should not be

inclined to offer its products to the public in the open market. An economist who

perceives competitive markets as working with reasonable efficiency should not expect any

forecasts of stock prices or interest rates to be both freely traded and consistently much

better than average. Forecasting macroeconomic aggregates such as real ON? and its major

expenditure components is likely t have less potential for direct profitability than

forecasting financial variables. Hence, it is presumably less vulnerable to that old American

 adage rebuking expert advisers: "If you're so smart, why ain't you rich?' (cf. McCloskey

 1988).

          For reasons explained in part 2 below, macroforecast assessments, to be interesting

 and robust, should cover a broad range of forecasters, variables, and economic conditions.

 The forecasts must be explicit, verifiable, and sufficient to allow a responsible appraisal.
                                            2

Unfortunately, most of the available time series of forecasts are short and none are free

of some gaps, discontinuities and inconsistencies. Relying on a small sample of specilic

forecasts from an individual source risks overexposure to isolated hits or misses due to

chance. It is therefore necessary to concentrate on a set of forecasts from numerous and

various sources. This is likely to improve the coverage by types of information and methods

used as well.

       The way to collect the required data is to conduct regularly, for a sufficiently long

time and with appropriate frequency, a survey that would be reasonably representative of

the professional activities of macroeconomic forecasters. A joint project of the National

Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) and the Business and Economic Statistics Section

of the American Statistical Association (ASA) had the purpose of accomplishing just that.

The NBER-ASA survey assembled a large amount of information on the record of

forecasting annual and quarterly changes in the U.S. economy during the period 1968:4-

1990:1 (86 consecutive quarters). It reached a broadly based and diversified group of

persons regularly engaged in the analysis of current and prospective business conditions.

Most of the responding economists came from corporate business and finance, but

academic institutions, government, consulting firms, trade associations, and labor unions

were also represented. The forecasts covered a broad range of principal aggregative time

series relating to income, production, consumption, investment, profits, government

purchases, unemployment, the price level, and interest rates. The surveys also collected
                                             3

data on the methods and assumptions used by the participants and on the probabilities they

attached to alternative prospects concerning changes in nominal or real GNP and the

implicit price deflator.
       The NBER-ASA data have their shortcomings, the main of these being probably the

high turnover of participants and large frequency of gaps in their responses. The collected

data represent a mixture of public and private predictions. The survey members, generally

professional forecasters, were identified by code only. Their anonymity helped to raise the

survey response rates but may have had otherwise ambiguous consequences (encouraging

the independence of judgment? reducing the sense of individual responsibility?).

       The initiative to develop and maintain the quarterly NBER-ASA survey was strongly

motivated by the desire to make it "the vehicle for a scientific record of economic forecasts'

(Moore 1969, p. 42.5). The expectation that such a survey would be of considerable service

to both the profession and the public was shared by Moore with others who helped to

implement his proposal (including one of the authors of this paper who had the

 responsibility for reporting on the NBER-ASA survey during the entire period of its

 existence). In retrospect, it seems fair to say that the assembled data do indeed provide

 us with rich and in part unique information, which can help support much needed research

 on the potential and limitations of forecasting economic change.

        Twenty-two years of a survey that attracted numerous responses from a varietyof

 sources each quarter add up to a mass of information about the processes and results of
                                              4

macroeconomic forecasting. Although many studies have already used some of this

material, much of it was, and still is, to be explored. This report is the first to examine all

the variables included in the NBER-ASA forecasts, for all horizons and over the entire

period covered. It concentrates on the properties of the distributions of summary measures

of error, by variable and span of forecast, viewed against the background of descriptive

statistics for the predicted time series. Other subjects of interest include the role of

characteristics and revisions of "actual" data in the evaluation of the forecasts; differences

by subperiod, roughly the 1970s vs. the 1980s; the relationship between the individual and

group mean or "consensus" forecasts from the surveys; the comparative accuracy of the

survey results and predictions with a well-known macroeconometric model; and comparisons

with forecasts from state-of-the-art multivariate and univariate time series models.

       Part 2 of this paper examines some general problems and history of forecast

evaluations and surveys. Part 3 presents the NBER-ASA data and the methods used. Parts

4 through 7 discuss the results of the analysis and form the core of the paper. Part 8 draws

the conclusions.




                    2. The Diversity of Forecasts and Their Evaluation

2.1 Some Reflections on Predictability and Uncertainty

  It is readily observed that, at any time, predictions of a given variable or event can and

in general do differ significantly across forecasters.      Indeed, modern macroeconomic
                                              5

forecasts display a great diversity, which must be taken into account in thinking about how

to assemble and evaluate the related data.

       Although changes in the economy are predicted primarily to meet the demand for

forecasts by public and private decision makers, they are also predicted to test theories and

analytical methods and to argue for or against points of policy. Some conditions and

aspects of the economy are much more amenable to prediction than others. Furthermore,

individual forecasters differ with respect to skills, training, experience, and the espoused

theories and ideologies. They compete by trying to improve and differentiate their models,

methods, and products. They respond to new developments in the economy and new ways

to observe and analyze them. In sum, there are both general and specific reasons for the

observed diversity of forecasts.

       Comparisons among forecasts that are differentiated in several respects are difficult

yet unavoidable. The quality of a forecast is inherently a relative concept. Common

standards of predictive performance must therefore be applied to properly classified

forecasts along each of the relevant dimension.

       Surely, the main value of a forecast lies in its ability to reduce the uncertainty about

the future faced by the user. In general, a forecast will perform better in this regard the

smaller and closer to randomness its errors are. However, the value of a forecast depends

not only on its accuracy and unbiasedness but also on the predictability of the variable or

event concerned. Some events and configurations of values are common, others are rare.
                                               6

Where the probability of occurrence for the forecasting target is high, uncertainty is low and

prediction is easy hut not very informative; where that probability is low, uncertainty is high

and prediction is difficult but potentially very valuable (ci. Theil 1967).

       For example, total stocks of the nation's wealth and productive capital normally

change little from one month or quarter to the next, barring a catastrophic war or a natural

disaster, and so can be predicted with small relative errors. Much the same applies to

other typically "slow" stock variables such as total inventories of goods or monetary

aggregates and the overall price level (but not in periods of rapid inflation!). In contrast,

income and expenditure aggregates represent "fast" flow variables, some of which, e.g.,

corporate profits, investment in plant and equipment, housing starts, and change in business

inventories are highly volatile over the short horizons and apt to be very difficult to forecast

accurately. Rates of change in indexes of price levels fall in the same category.

       There are also situations that are unique or nearly so where no objective or

subjective probabilities based on past history or experience are believed to apply and 'true"

(nonergodic) uncertainty rules (as in Knight 1921, p. 233). According to Keynes (1936, p.

149), "Our knowledge of the factors which will govern the yield of an investment some years

hence is usually very slight and often negligible," yet businessmen must make decisions to

make or buy plant and equipment despite this recognized state of ignorance. In economics,

as in history, statistical-stochastic methods have limited applicability (cf. Hicks 1979; Solow

1985). Forecasters cannot afford to be deterred by such considerations and assume some
                                              7

predictability throughout, never full uncertainty.      Across many variables, uncertainty

depends on the "state of nature" (more explicitly, on the state of the econoniy or the phase

of the business cycle). Thus, it is much easier to predict continued moderate growth once

it is clear that the economy entered a period of sustained expansion than it is to predict the

occurrence and timing of a general downturn after the expansion has tasted for some time

and may be slowing down.

       Influential public macroforecasts could in principle be either self-invalidating or self-

validating. Thus, if the government believed a forecast of a recession next year, it might

succeed in stimulating the economy so as to make the expansion continue. On the other

hand, if consumers generally came to expect a recession because of such a forecast, they

may each try to protect themselves by spending less nowand dissaving later when the bad

times arrive.    Businessmen, acting on similar expectations, may reduce investment

expenditures and financing, production, and inventory costs. But such actions, although

individually rational, would collectively help bring about the recession no one wants.

        Indeed, an early theoretical monograph on forecasts of general business conditions

concluded, on these grounds, that they cannot be accurate, particularly if they are made

public (Morgenstern 1928). However, it is not necessarily true that a known forecast must

be falsified by agents' reaction to it, even if that reaction does affect the course of events.

Conceptually, the reaction can be known and taken into account for bounded variables

 related by continuous functions (Grunherg and Modigliani 1954).' But the public prediction
                                              8

can he correct only if the corresponding private prediction is correct, which of course is

often not the case. Forecasting remains difficult whether or not its results are published.

The premise of a generally shared belief and confidence in a commonly held forecast is so

unrealistic as to deprive the theoretical exercises based on it of much practical interest.




2.2 A Brief History of Forecast Appraisals and Su'eys

       Qualitative judgments about contemporary levels of, and changes in, general business

activity are among the oldest economic data. A compilation of such records provided

partial evidence for the NBER work on identi'ing and dating the business cycles of history

(Thorp 1926; Burns and Mitchell 1946). A look at these "business annals" that go back to

the 1830s reminds one of the importance of public perceptions and expectations concerning

aspects of the general economic and financial activity: employment, production, prices,

interest rates.

       This expectational element in the dynamics of economic life has probably long

attracted great attention of students of current events and men of affairs.

It has not much concerned those early theorists who have been preoccupied with problems

of long-run static equilibrium. But some prominent economists in the classical tradition

stressed the role in business cycles of variations in expectations and "confidence" (Marshall),

or hypothesized the occurrence of sequences of overoptimism and overpessimism (Pigou),

or attributed to bankers and entrepreneurs predictive errors resulting in malinvestments
                                            9

(Hayek). Keynes and some of his later followers elaborated on the destabilizing role of

uncertainty. Along with the formal models of interacting economic processes came the

theories of expectation formation, first that of adaptive and later that of rational

expectations. In the last twenty years or so, incomplete information and expectational

errors acquired prime importance in models of economists of various persuasions

(monetarist, new-classical, new-Keynesian). The corresponding literature grew rapidly.

       Lack of quantitative data has long hampered the progress of economics, causing

empirical work and tests to lag well behind the formulation of theories and hypotheses.

Numerical data on forecasts and expectations are particularly scarce, except for the very

recent period of great expansion in economic and financial prediction and consulting

activities. Hence, the literature on macroeconomic forecasting has a brief history, although

it too grew rapidly of late.2

       The first forecasting services in the United States to gain considerable success date

back to the years immediately preceding World War I and the 1920s. They used lead-lag

relationships to predict business cycle turning points, relying mainly on the tendency of

stock prices to lead and short-term interest rates to lag business activity. The sequence,

 best-known as the Harvard "ABC" curves, had a basis in theory and fact but it was a

 crudely oversimplified predecessor of the indicator system subsequently developed at the

 NBER. It performed rather well in the period 1903-14 and in the depression of 1920-2 1,

 and it would have applied generally in recent times as well (cf. Moore 1969), but the
                                              10

Harvard service failed to foresee the onset and extent of the Great Depression, which

doomed this and the related forecasting efforts. A 1988 post-mortem study, using the

Harvard data and modern vector autoregressive (VAR) model techniques, concludes that

the large declines in output that followed the 1929 stock market crash were not forecastable

(Dominguez, Fair, and Shapiro 1988). This, however, is disputed by a very recent paper

that applies the Neftci sequential-analysis method to the Harvard index (Niemira and Klein

1991).

         Monthly forecasts from six sources, 1918-28, were scored for accuracy in Cox 1929,

to our knowledge the first methodical appraisal of ex ante predictions of U.S. business

activity. Cox found evidence of a moderate forecasting success despite the poor showing

at the 1923-24 recession.

         The earliest compilation of quantitative macro-forecasts, so far as we can tell, was

the informal survey conducted since 1947 by Joseph Livingston, the late syndicated financial

columnist based in Philadelphia. Twice a year he collected predictions of such variables

as industrial production and the consumer price index and summarized the results in a

business outlook column published in June and December. The forecasters were mostly

business and financial economists but also some academics. The Livingston data represent

a unique source of valuable information on forecasts for the early post-World War II

period, and in the 1970s they began to be widely used in research, primarily on price

expectations. But Livingston adjusted his published "consensus forecasts" (means of the
                                            11

collected individual predictions) in an attempt to take into account any large revisions in

the actual data that may have occurred between the mailing of his questionnaire and the

submission of his column to the press. arlson 1977 recalculated the semiannual Livingston

forecasts of CPI and WPI inflation rates for 1947-75 from the original data so as to reflect

properly the timing of the predictions and the information incorporated in them.4

       As quantitative macroeconomic data and forecasts began to accumulate in the 1950s

and 1960s, valid examinations of the accuracy and properties of the latter became

increasingly possible (Okun 1959; Theil 1961, 1966; Suits 1962, Stekler 1968). A

comprehensive NBER study initiated in 1963 resulted iii a systematic collection and

appraisal of annual and quarterly, public and private, judgmental and econometric forecasts

of important economic aggregates and indexes as well as such events as business cycle

peaks and troughs (Zarnowitz 1967, 1972; Fels and Hinshaw 1968; Mincer 1969; Moore

1969; Cole 1969; Evans, Haitovsky, and Treyz 1972; Haitovsky, Treyz, and Su 1974).

       In 1968, a regular quarterly survey of general economic forecasts was established at

the initiative of Geoffrey Moore, then president of ASA, to be conducted co-operatively by

the NBER and the Business and Economic Statistics Section of the ASA.5 This was the

 first major organized effort to build up reliable information about the potential and

 limitations of short-term aggregative economic forecasts, which would provide a broad base

 for research and improvements in this field. The ASA has "agreed to carry out the surveys

 for a period long enough to assure accumulation of useful experience and evidence," while
                                            12


the National Bureau "has assumed responsibility for the tabulation of forecasts, computation

of error statistics and other measures, and research in evaluating the results and their

analytical implications" (Zarnowitz 1968, pp. 1-2). The co-operation was to last 22 years.

One measure of its success is that in 1990 the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia

undertook to continue the survey essentially in the same way as it was conducted by the

NBER and the ASA.



            3. The NBER-ASA Survey; Characteristics. Measures. and Data

3.1 Coverage

       Table 1 identifies each of the variables covered by title, source, symbol, the

Commerce series number, and the form in which we use the data. in the period 1968:4-

1981:2 (column 5), direct forecasts were made for seven nominal indicators and three real

indicators; also, predictions for GNP in constant dollars were derived from those for GNP

in current dollars and the implicit price deflator. In the period 1981:3-1990:1 (column 6),

direct forecasts were made for six nominal and eleven real variables. Seven major

expenditure components of real GNP, the consumer price index, Treasury bill rate, and

corporate bond yield were added to the list; four nominal series (expenditures for consumer

durables, plant and equipment, and national defense, and change in business inventories)

were dropped.
                                           13

      The change in 1981 resulted from new initiatives taken by the NBER in the

preceding year. A special questionnaire mailed to a long list of professional forecasters

(both the past and present survey participants and others) collected much useful

information about the reactions to the design and uses of the NBER-ASA survey, the

improvements suggested, and the assumptions and procedures favored. There was strong

sentiment for expanding the survey by including several additional variables. The problem

was how to comply with these wishes without either losing the essential continuity or

overloading the survey and risking discouragement of future participations. An advisory

committee helped make the desirable changes.6

       A large number of individuals participated in the earliest surveys but many were not

prepared to fill out a detailed questionnaire each quarter and soon dropped out. Of the

more than 150 persons who responded to the survey at one time or another, many had

sporadic records and some submitted incomplete questionnaires. To exclude such

occasional forecasters, we decided to use only

the responses of those who answered at least 10 surveys, providing information for most

variables and horizons. Note that the surveys need not be consecutive; had we required

long records of uninterrupted participation, few respondents would have qualified.

       Table 2 shows how this selection was accomplished and with what results. Using the

forecasts of spending on consumer durables for 1968-81, the number of respondents fell

from a total of 156 to 86 in the sample, but the average number of surveys covered per
                                             14

respondent was greatly increased (e.g., doubled from 11 to 22 according to the medians).

The average number of respondents per survey was reduced but slightly, remaining above

40. The variability of coverage over time was lowered considerably throughout (cf. columns

I and 2).

      The participation rates in the surveys were much smaller in 1981-90 than in 1968-81.

In terms of the forecasts of real nonresidential investment, the number of respondents fell

from a total of 74 to 29 in the sample. Again, however, the selection process achieved

relatively good results. The retained forecasters averaged about 20 surveys, more than

double the number for all survey participants. The median number of surveys covered per

respondent declined just from 21 to 18. Here too the relevant dispersion measures were

all substantially reduced (cf. columns 3 and 4).

       Finally, the sample for the total period 1968-90, based on forecasts of the

unemployment rate, consists of 111 out of a total of 159 persons. The coverage of surveys

per respondent ranges from 10 to 70, with a mean of about 28; the corresponding figures

for respondents per survey are 12-67 and 37. Here the dispersion statistics show relatively

small declines in the transition from all" to "sample" (cf. columns 5 and 6). All in all, the

turnover among the survey participants was considerable, which should be remembered

when looking at the results of our study.7
                                            15

3.2 Forecasters' Affiliations and Methods

      In 1968-80 the questionnaire asked the participating forecasters about their primary

affiliation but later the question was dropped. As illustrated in table 3, academic

economists represented on average about 7 percent and government economists about 8

percent of the membership (lines 5 and 6). All other respondents, except for a few from

labor unions and trade associations, came from the business world. Manufacturing

accounted most of the time for at least one third and up to 40% of the participants;

commercial banking and other financial institutions for one fifth or more; consulting and

research firms also for 20% or more in 1975-80,   less   in earlier years (lines 1-4).

       These distributions resemble those for the universe of business forecasters as

represented by the respondents to the annual economic outlook surveys of the National

Association of Business Economists in 1975-89. Here from one third to more than 40%

of respondents were in the industrial economy (manufacturing, energy, utilities), 25-30% in

finance, 12% or more in consulting and research, 4% in other private services, and 6-12%

 in government and academia. The assessments of some of the NABE surveys looked for

 but found no systematic differences in forecasting performance between these industry

 groups.8
       Another question asked regularly through 1981 concerned the relative importance

 the survey participants assigned to each of several items on a short list of forecasting

 methods or tools. Business economists use a variety of procedures to predict the major
                                             16

expenditure components of GNP, combine these predictions in nominal and teal terms, and

check and adjust the resulting forecasts for consistency with logic, theory, and the currently

available information. This "informal GNP model' is an eclectic and flexible approach with

large elements of judgment (Butler and Kavesh 1974). Over 70% of the NBER-ASA

survey respondents reported using it and over 50% on average ranked it first (table 4,

column 1). About one-fifth of the group favored econometric models, whether own or

outside, and one-fourth had their own econometric models (not necessarily comprehensive

and first-ranked). Users of outside models accounted for more than 40% of the early

members and more than half of those in the late 1970s and early 1980s (columns 2 and 3).

       Leading indicators were employed by about 70% of the survey membership in 1968-

70 but later that share declined closer to 50%. They were ranked second by most

respondents. Similar majorities referred to anticipations surveys, which generally were given

lower ranks. Other methods, such as time-series models, were specified by fewer than 20%

of the participants and preferred by about half of them (columns 4-6).

       These findings leave no doubt about one point, namely that the listed methods were

predominantly used in various combinations. Very few individuals preferred any one of

them so as to exclude the others. Presumably there is a good reason for this in that the

different methods tend to complement each other. For example, new reading on monthly

cyclical indicators and the latest results from an investment or consumer anticipations survey

may be used to modify forecasts from econometric models or the informal approach.
                                            17

      There seems to be little or no systematic relation between the forecasters' rankings

of the methods and the accuracy of their predictions, allowing for the difference between

the targeted variables, spans, etc. This is suggested by cross-sectional (survey by survey)

regressions of individual forecast errors on dummy variables representing the first-ranked

methods as well as by comparisons of properly standardized average errors over time

(Zarnowitz 1971; Su and Su 1975). The lower panel in table 4 (lines 5-8) presents average

root mean square errors (RMSEs) for groups classified by their self-declared
methodological preferences. These measures are based on a large number of individual

forecasts of rates of change in nominal and real GNP, IPD inflation, and the levels of the

unemployment rate; they omit occasional forecasters and aggregate across predictions for

the current quarter and three quarters ahead. The differences between the RMSEs are

generally small and of uncertain significance.9




3.3 Basic Measures of Error in Forecasts of Changes and Levels

       For series with upward trends, e.g., GNP in current and constant dollars and the

implicit price deflator, the most relevant forecasts are those of percentage change. Let the

current survey quarter and the four quarters that follow be denoted by t = 1,...,5,

respectively. The most recent quarter for which data are available precedes the date of the

survey (t = 0). Then the predicted average changes refer to 0-1, 0-2, ... 0-5, and the

implied marginal (or intraforecast) changes refer to 0-1, 1-2, ... 4-5.
                                               18

         For approximately stationary series such as the unemployment rate, real inventory

 investment, and real net exports, the most relevant forecasts are those of levels in the

 original units. They refer to quarters 1,...,5.

         Our data consist of more than 17,000 individual time series of forecasts defined by

source, variable, and horizon. For example, for 1968-90, there are 111 respondents in our

sample, reporting on seven variables over five spans each, which yields 3,885 series (   111

x 7 x 5; but consideration of four marginal changes for five of these variables adds another

subset of 2,220 series). The tables below record the distributions of thesummary measures

of error across these individual series for each variable, period, and horizon covered. We

distinguish three measures - the mean error (ME), the mean absolute error (MAE), and

the root mean square error (RMSE)— and compute for each several location and dispersion

statistics.   These include means, standard deviations, medians, interquartile ranges,

skewness, and kurtosjs (denoted by M, SD, MD, bR, SK, and KU, respectively). Not all

the detail of this compilation can be presented here, of course, but it is available for

purposes of verification and further research.



3.4 Data Revisions and Forecast Accuracy

       Some of the variables covered by the surveys, such as the consumer price index and

the interest rates, are subject to few or no revisions. Others, notably the aggregates and

indexes taken from the national income and product (NIPA) accounts, are revised
                                              19

 frequently and some of the revisions are large. An old but still controversial issue is which

 revision or vintage of such data should be used in evaluating the accuracy of forecasts. The

 preliminaiy figures are most closely related to the latest figures that were available to the

 forecasters, but they may themselves be partly predictions or °guesstimates" and may

seriously deviate from "the truth" as represented by the last revision of the data. On the

other hand, the final data may be issued years after the forecast was made and may

incorporate major benchmark revisions. That the forecasters should he responsible for

predicting all measurement errors to be corrected by such revisions, is surely questionable.

       Appraisals of forecasts differ: some are based on early data (e.g., Zarnowitz 1967),

others on late data, generally pre-benchmark revisions (e.g., McNees 1979; Zarnowitz 1985).

Judgmental forecasts that rely heavily on recent preliminaiy figures may look best when

compared with early data; econometric model forecasts that incorporate long series of

revised data may be more favored by evaluations using later vintages.

       Table 5 shows, for the NBER-ASA percentage change forecasts of GNP, RGNP, and

IPD, the MAEs and RMSEs obtained by comparisons with 15-day, 45-day, early July, and

late July data. In general, the errors tend to increase monotonically the more revised the

data are, but there are exceptions. However, the differences between the successive error

measures in each segment and column of the table are relatively small, typically less than

1/10 of one percent. This is fortunate because it suggests that the choice of which vintage

of the data to use may not be so critical. But larger differences may occur in particular
                                             20

 suhperiods and offset each other over the total period covered. Our results certainly do

 not detract from the importance of measurement errors in the forecasting Context, which

 has been demonstrated to be large (Cole 1969).

       To save space and avoid relying on the extremes of either very preliminary or

 repeatedly revised data, we shall henceforth use the 45-day estimate in most of our text

references and all of our tabular presentation. But no single data vintage is an optimal

standard here; the choice of any is inevitably more or less arbitrary and too restrictive.




              4. Forecasts of Nominal and Real GNP Growth and Inflation

4.1 Graphical Comparisons of Predictions

       A convenient way to relate visually the distributions of survey forecasts and the

actual data is to plot the former in form of box diagrams and the latter as a Continuous

series, quarter by quarter, to common scales. Charts 1-3 apply this device to predictions

of nominal and real GNP growth and JPD inflation rates. There is one graph for each

variable and horizon. The midpoint of each box marks the location of thegroup's mean

forecast, the top and bottom mark the mean one standard deviation. A longer vertical

line bisects each box and connects the highest and the lowest forecasts recorded on the

same occasion. A heavy curve superimposed upon the array of the boxes and vertical lines

represents the actual outcomes (45-day estimates).
                                              21

         The graphs make it clear that the curves cross most of the boxes. This means that

the realizations fall within I SD of the mean or 'consensus' predictions most of the time.

However, some large declines in actual values are widely missed or underestimated, which

shows up as boxes lying conspicuously above the troughs or valleys in the curves. Similarly,

widespread underpredictions of some large actual rises show up as boxes situated below the

local peaks for concentrations of high values. Occasionally, the actual would even he

missed by all respondents to the survey, as seen in instances where the entire vertical line

of forecasts lies above or below the curve.

         These errors are clearly associated with business cycles. Chart I shows clusters of

large overestimates of real GNP growth in all major slowdowns and recessions covered:

1969-70, 1973-74, 1981-82, and 1985-86.     It also shows clusters of large underestimation

errors in all recoveries and booms: 1972, 1975, late 1980, 1983-84, and 1987. So

overprediction of growth occurs mainly when the economy weakens and declines,

underprediction when it strongly rises. Both types of error can be seen as particularly

pronounced and persistent in forecasts with longer spans.           Overall, the errors of

overprediction in bad times tended to be larger than those of underprediction in good

times.

         Chart 2 shows that inflation was at times widely underpredicted in 1969-71, even

though it was then fairly stable. In 1973-74, a period of supply shocks and deepening

recession, inflation rose sharply and was greatly underestimated by most survey participants.
                                             22

 Here the curves can he seen to rise above most of the boxes and even to peak above the

 highest forecasts for the longer horizons. The same tendency to underpredict also prevailed

 in 1976-80, though in somewhat weaker form. In this period inflation rose more gradually,

while the economy first expanded vigorously and then, in 1979-80 experienced another oil

shock, a slowdown, and a short recession. In between, during the recovery of 1975-76,

 inflation decreased markedly and was mostly overestimated. Another, much longer

disinflation occurred in 1981-85, a phase which followed the shifts to a tight monetary policy

in late 1979 and included the severe 1981-82 recession and then a strong recovery. Here

again most forecasters are observed to overpredict inflation. Finally, in 1986-89 inflation,

which began to drift upward, was generally well predicted most of the time (except in the

mid-quarter of 1987 when it dipped suddenly and was overestimated).

       In sum, there is also a cyclical pattern to the errors of inflation forecasts.

Accelerated inflation was associated predominantly with under-prediction, disinflation will

overprediction errors.

       Chart 3, which compares the forecast distributions and actual values for nominal
GNP growth rates, shows a broad family resemblance to the corresponding graphs for real

ON? growth in Chart 1. For example, both nominal and real growth tended to be

underpredicted in such boom years as 1972 and 1983 and overpredicted in such recession

years as 1974 and 1981-82. But inflation expectations and their relation to real growth

forecasts are also important here. Predictions of nominal GNP are often helped by inverse
                                              23

correlations between the changes in IPD and RGNP, and the associated offsets between

the forecast errors for the two variables. (This has been noted before, see Zarnowitz 1979,

p. 15.) Thus, in the inflationary recession of 1973-74 associated with the first occurrence

of major supply and oil shocks, real growth was overpredicted and inflation underpredicted.

The reverse combination of too low RGNP and too high IPD forecasts can be observed in

the recoveries of 1974 and 1983-84. However, there are also episodes of positive

correlation, e.g., in 1981-82 both real growth and inflation were overpredicted, which

resulted in nominal growth forecasts that turned out much too high.



4.2 Distributions of Summary Measures of Error

        Table 6 presents the statistics on the distributions of the mean errors in the sampled

NBER-ASA survey forecasts of GNP, RGNP, and LPD. For the forecasts of average

changes in GNP, the means are all negative, but the corresponding medians have mixed

signs. The averages for the marginal change errors are predominantly positive. The

dispersion measures (SD and LOR) are very large relative to the averages. Thus, these

statistics (line 1-4) fail to show clearly any dominant under- or overprediction bias. Similar

observations can be made about the real GNP forecasts (lines 7-10).                However,

underestimation errors definitely prevail in the inflation (IPD) forecasts. Here all the

averages, M and MD, are negative, and the relative size of the corresponding SD and IQR

figures is less.
                                               24
          The M and MD statistics tend to increase monotonically in absolute value with the

 length   of the span, strongly for the forecasts of average change, less so for those of the

 marginal change. The SD and IOR statistics tend to be much larger the longer the span

and the more remote the forecast target, for each of the three variables. (Cf. lines 1-4, 7-

 10, and 13-16.)

          There is evidence that the distributions for GNP and RGNP are skewed to the left

(i.e., SK < 0), with medians larger than the means. For IPD, SK is very small throughout

and M and MD are very close. (Cf. lines, 5, 11, and 17.)

          The distributions for GNP and RGNP show large values for kurtosis,indicating the

presence of long thick tails (for the normal distribution, KU = 3). Again, the situation is

very different for JPD where the KU statistics are very low. (Cf. lines 6, 12, and 18).

       Tables 7 and 8, each of which has the same format as table 6, show the distribution

statistics for the mean absolute errors and the root mean square errors, respectively. The

RMSQs are, of course, larger than the corresponding MAES, and the statistics in table 8

are generally larger than their counterparts

in table 7 (e.g., they average about 30-60% higher for the GNP measures). Otherwise, the

two sets have very similar characteristics, which can be summed up as follows.

       For both the MAES and the RMSQs of the individual forecasts, the means and

medians increase with the span regularly, strongly for the average changes, less so for the

marginal changes. The main reason is that errors cumulate over time,
                                            25

but it is also true that the more distant target quarters are predicted somewhat less

accurately than the near ones. The dispersion statistics SD and IQR also increase as the

forecast horizon lengthens, except for the marginal !PD errors.

       SK > 0 everywhere here and the SK statistics are generally large for GNP and

RGNP but small for IPD. Consistently, the MDs tend to be smaller than the MEs. The

distributions tend to be skewed to the right.

       Several of the KU statistics for GNP and RGNP are quite large. Little kurtosis is

observed in the IPD forecasts, except for the shortest ones.

       We conclude that the survey respondents tended to underestimate inflation but not

(or in any event much less) the nominal and real GNP growth rates. The IPD forecast

distributions were more nearly symmetrical and had fewer outliers than the distributions for

GNP and RGNP.



4.3 Individual vs. Group Mean Forecasts

      Combining corresponding forecasts that come from different sources or use different

techniques tends to produce significant gains in accuracy. This is by now well known from

many studies, including some based on the NBER-ASA surveys.'0 In what follows we

extend and update the evidence on this point.

      Averaging all predictions in each survey for a given variable and horizon results in

a time series of group mean (or median) forecasts. These are often called "consensus"

forecasts, whether or not there is much actual consensus among the respondents. The

group mean predictions based on our GNP, RGNP, and IPD sample forecasts have
                                               26

 considerably smaller errors than the average individual respondent, as shown by

 comparisons of the ME, MEA, and RMSE entries in Table 9 (ci. columns I and 4, 2 and

 5, and 3 and 6). The absolute or squared errors tend to increase with thespan of forecast

 for both individuals and group means, but less so for the latter.

        For each individual time series of forecasts, a series of group mean forecasts has

 been computed with a strictly matching coverage in terms of the survey dates and target

characteristics. Table 10 shows the locational statistics for the distributions of the ratios of

the individual RMSEs to the corresponding group RMSEs. These measures indicate that

the group mean forecasts were more accurate than about 75% of the sampled respondents'

forecasts. Thus, most of the first or lower quartile (Q) ratios are close to one (but some

for RGNP are lower); most of the median (02) ratios are 1.1-1.2; and most of the third or

upper quartile (Q3) ratios are 1.3-1.5 (cf. lines 2-4, 7-9, and 12-14). These distributions are

bounded from below (any ratio > 0) and are heavily skewed to the right (e.g., the entries

for the best forecasts in Table 10 are 0.5-0.9, those for the worst forecasts are 3-7).

       The ratios of the individual to the group RMSES, unlike their numerators and

denominators, do not depend systematically on the length of the forecast or distance to the

target quarter. Also, the diversity of the individual forecasts by source, variable, and

horizon is greatly reduced by the normalization with the group means. Thus, the ratios for

the same quartiles are not very different for GNP, RGNP, and IPD.
                                             27

4.4   Some Overall Accuracy and Variability Measures

        The preceding tables offer some insight into the structure of errors calculated from

the survey forecasts but not into their relative levels. The latter will he assessed by

comparisons with benchmark predictions from time-series models selected to fit the

characteristics of the variables concerned and with forecasts from other sources. But first

we take a quick look at the average values of the outcomes for the target series so as to

gain some idea about the orders of magnitudes involved.

        Columns 7-9 in table 9 show, successively, the means, standard deviations, and root

mean squares of the actual percent changes in the targeted variables. The absolute values

of the average errors in the individual forecasts and, a fortiori, in the group mean forecasts

are generally very small compared with the average actual changes, particularly for GNP

and IPD (cf. columns 1 and 7). The average RMSES of the individual forecasts are about

30-37% of the RMSVs for the nominal GNP growth and inflation and 68-72% of the

RMSVs for the real GNP growth rates (cf. columns 3 and 9). The RMSEs of the group

mean forecasts are about 23-29% of the RMSVs for the nominal GNP growth and inflation

and 5 1-53% of the RMSVs for real GNP growth (cf. columns 6 and 9).



4.5 Have Any Forecasters Exceled Consistently?

        Each forecaster in our sample of 111 was ranked by accuracy of his or her

predictions, separately for each forecast target as defined by the date of the survey (t),
                                                  28

 variable, and span (e.g. for the GNP 0-1 predictions made in 1970:1). Let         be the rank

 of the i-th respondent in the time        t   survey, which increases from the smallest to the

 largest squared error. The number of surveys covered per respondent (m3 varied widely

across the individuals, and the number of respondents per survey (n1) varied widely across

time (see table 2, column 6). In view of this variability, it was necessary to normalize the

ranks by the number of participants in the particular survey. This is done by calculating

R, = lOOrd/nI. The best forecast in each set would have r11 = 1 and hence

    = 100/n1; the worst forecast would have r, = n1 and hence R1              100. This setup

permits us to consider the question: How stable were the accuracy rankings of the

forecasters over time?

        When the ranks are aggregated across the corresponding sets for each individual,

measures of central tendency and dispersion are obtained that characterize the distributions

over time of the ranks. Thus, for a given variable and span, the overall rank of the i-tb

forecaster is R.         1/rn R., and the corresponding standard deviation equals


[1/rn       -RJ
                     fl/2.
                             We compute such means, SDs, medians, quartiles, and ranges for

each of the 111 individuals covered. Table 11 presents simple averages of some of these

measures in columns 1-4. For example, the grand mean (M) in column 1 represent

  = 1/111       R..
            I    I

        In addition, columns 5-10 in Table 11 summarize the distributions across
                                              29

individuals of the mean normalized ranks R.. The selected statistics include SD,

quartiles, and extremes. For example, here SD = [1/111         (R - )2 )•12(column 5).

       The entries in column I are all very close: 53-55 for GNP, 52 for RGNP, 54-59 for

IPD. The corresponding medians (not shown) are similarly clustered but 1-2 points larger.

En fact, there is very little variation between the entries in any column of table 11. That

is, the distributions of the normalized ranks are very similar for any of three variables

covered, and for any of the five spans.

       Typically, any forecaster would rank high at some times and low at others. Indeed,

the average range of 85-90 (column 4) is close to the maximum range possible for the R1

ranks (which cannot exceed 99 and would not be much larger than 90 for relatively small

values of ne). The forecaster's rank would fall in the center half of the distribution (i.e.,

in the interquartile range IQR) nearly 50% of the time, and within SD of the mean

perhaps up to 66% of the time (columns 2 and 3). There is no evidence of a high

skewness or a high kurtosis in these distributions. To sum up, the forecasting performance

of any individual relative to others is likely to be highly variable over time.

       On the other hand, the dispersion of the corresponding forecasts and their errors

across the individuals will tend to be limited by the commonality of the targets of the

forecasters, and of the information and methods available to them. The correlations

between the forecasters' errors are expected to be positive and may be high. Our measures

presumably reflect all these regularities. Interestingly, the standard deviations in column

2, are 26-28, those in column 5 are only 9-12 (note that the definition of the former
                                              30

includes time t explicitly, while the definition of the latter does not). Similarly, the IQRs

in column 3 are 45-50, those implied by columns 7 and 9 are 9-15; and the corresponding

total ranges are 85-90 and 30-59 (cf. columns 4 and 6-10). These numbers seem consistent

with the results obtained in some previous studies indicating that fluctuations over time

contribute more than differences across forecasters to the overall variation in forecast errors

(see Zarnowitz 1974, pp. 578-79).

       For each of the forecast targets identified in lines 1-15 of table 11, the ranks

according to R1 form a relatively tight cluster between the values of Q1 and 03 that

average 47 and 59, respectively (columns 7-9). A quarter of the group performed poorly

relatively to the others, with R values ranging from well above 60 to 100 (columns 9-10).

However, our attention centers on the top-ranking quarter, with R values averaging in

the 30s and 40s (columns 6-7). The latter can be said to have exceled with respect to the

given categoiy of forecast targets.

       All these subsets, of course, consist of individuals who are coded and identifiable.

It is important to ask next what the correlations of the ranks are between the different

variables and spans. For example, do those who predicted best the growth of real GNP

also tend to excel in predicting inflation? Do those who rank high in forecasting over the

shortest horizons also rank high in forecasting over the longer horizons?

      Table 12 indicates that the answers to these questions are on the whole positive.

The correlations among our normalized ranks, both across the variables for each span (lines
                                                31

1-3)   and across the spans for each variable (lines 4-13), are all positive and sufficiently high

not to be due to chance. Forecasters who predict relatively well (poorly) any one of these

targets are also likely to predict well (poorly) any of the other targets. Not surprisingly, the

correlations are higher the more closely related are the forecast targets. Thus, they are

higher for ON!' and RGNP than for RGNP and IPD, and higher for successive spans, e.g.,

0-1 and 0-2, than for more distant spans, e.g., 0-1 and 0-5. Similar results have been found

for other variables and periods, and for marginal as well as average change forecasts (cf.

Zarnowitz 1984, pp. 17-19).



4.6 Comparisons with BayesianVector Autoregressive           (BVAR) Forecasts

         We use a BVAR model with five variables: RON!', IPD, M2 (broad money supply),

LI (the composite index of leading indicators), and TBR (the three-month Treasury bill

rate). TBR is a level series, the others are series of growth rates. The model is estimated

on quarterly series, each taken with six lags. The data are the presently available ones, i.e.,

they incorporate all revisions, and in this sense the forecasts based on them are cx post.

But the forecasts are generated sequentially, using only the information preceding the date

of the forecast.

         Unlike the forecasters who can take advantage of the early information provided by

the monthly and weekly time series released during the survey quarter, the BVAR model

does not draw on any such data. On the other hand, unlike the BVAR model, which is
                                              32

based on the present, revised series, the forecasters work under the disadvantage of having

access only to the latest preliminary data, that is, data that contain measurement errors

which are yet to be eliminated by revisions.

       Because the quarterly data for the survey quarter (1) are not known to the

forecasters, our first approach was to impute the same lack of knowledge to our BVAR

model. Here, then, the shortest prediction is for 0-1, the longest prediction is for 0-5. But,

as pointed out by Christopher Sims during the conference, this approach (now called

"variant A") ignores any effects on the survey forecasts of the most recent economic news.

Since the knowledge of the news on balance presumably helps the forecasters, variant A

in this respect handicaps our BVAR, as it would more generally any model based strictly

on quarterly time series only.

       For this reason, we also present the results of alternative calculations ("variant B"),

which assume full knowledge of the actual values in quarter 1, or effectively perfect

foresight. Here for 0-1 the error of the BVAR model is identically zero, and no

comparisons with the survey forecasts are available; the shortest prediction is for 1-2. Thus,

the two variants represent contrasting extremes: in A there is no knowledge, in B there is

full knowledge of period I values. Variant B handicaps the real-life forecaster who has only

partial and indirect knowledge of the target variables in the current (survey) quarter.

       It follows that the truth about the relative accuracy of the individual forecasts from

the surveys and the BVAR forecasts falls somewhere between variants A and B. Table 13
                                            33

provides the evidence, showing in columns 1-3 that the measures of error of BVAR-A for

spans 0-1, 0-2, ... etc. are approximately equal to the corresponding measures of error of

BVAR-B for spans 0-2 0-3, ..., etc., respectively (compare lines I and 7, 2 and 8, and so

on). As would be expected, the RMSE ratios in columns 4-8 are throughout lower for

variant A than variant B, when comparing entries for the corresponding spans (lines 2 and

7, 3 and 8, and so on). That is, variant B calculations show the BVAR model forecasts in

a relatively more favorable light then variant A calculations do.

       We present the results for both variants of the retroactively used time-series models

for comparisons relating to GNP, RGNP, and IPD (this covers both our own and outside,

multivariate and univariate models). For the other variables, only variant A is used. The

"true" outcomes are probably more often than not closer to the variant A than to the

variant B comparisons because (1) the forecasters' information about the recent and current

developments is in fact quite limited and deficient, and (2) the forecasters use preliminaiy

data and the time-series models use revised data. When all is considered, it can be argued

that variant B handicaps the forecasters more than variant A handicaps the models.

       The RMSE ratios in table 13, columns 4-8, indicate that at least 75% of the

individual forecasts of GNP, 50% of those of IPD, and 25% of RGNP were more accurate

than the variant A BVAR forecasts. Thus, the 03 ratios are less than 1.0 for nominal

growth and close to 1.0 for inflation. For real growth, the MD ratios approach unity at

spans of 2-3 quarters and exceed it at longer spans. The ratios based on the BVAR
                                             34

 forecasts variant B still show most of the survey forecasts to be superior for GNP, but not

 for IPD or RON?. Here the ratios rise above 1.00 for all horizons at 03 for ONP, at MD

for IPD, and even at 01 for RGNP.

       The BVAR mean errors are all positive, unlike the MEs for the NBER-ASA survey

forecasts which are mostly negative for ON? and IPD, and mostly positive but somewhat

mixed for RGNP. (For this and the rest of the paragraph, see table 13, columns 1-3, and

table 9, columns 1-6.) Comparisons of the MAEs and RMSEs of BVAR with the

corresponding measures for the average individual survey forecast produce a mixed picture,

depending on the series and criteria used. However, the comparisons with the group means

are generally adverse for BVAR of either variant.

       Such variables as the leading index and the short-term interest rate act as strong

codeterminants of growth in total output, as suggested by regression estimates and out-of-

sample predictions with VAR models (Zarnowitz and Braun 1990; Zarnowitz 1991, chapter

11). Our findings here are consistent with these results. The BVAR forecasts of RGNP

perform relatively well, which holds a potentially useful lesson for the forecasters to take

proper account of these relationships. But the BVAR forecasts of GNP and IPD are

apparently much weaker.




4.7 Comparing Forecasts for the First and Second Halves of 1968-90

      The period 1968:4-1979:3 was one of upward drifts and large instability in
                                             35

both inflation and unemployment; of business contractions in 1969-70 and 1973-75; of the

Vietnam war and price control disturbances in the early years, and severe supply (mainly

oil-price) shocks in the middle and late years. The period 1979:4-1990:1 was one of more

successful attempts to slow inflation by restrictive monetary policy; of sharp rises in prices

and interest rates followed by downward trends in the wake of two back-to-back recessions

in 1980 and 1981-82; of a long expansion that followed, interrupted by slowdowns in 1984-

86 and 1989; of new trade and financial problems. It is of interest to ask how the

macroforecasts fared in these two so different periods of approximately equal length.

        The errors of the individual forecasts from the NBER-ASA surveys were on average

larger in 1979-90 than in 1968-79 for GNP but smaller for IPD, judging from the

comparisons of the RMSEs in table 14, columns I and 5. For RGNP, the differences

between the two subperiods are small and mixed, depending on the horizon of the

forecasts.

        The average individual to group-mean RMSE ratios differ little between 1968-79

(1.04    j/g   1.34) and   1979-90 (1.15 hg        1.31).   They decreased somewhat in the

latter period for short ON? and RON? forecasts, increased more for longer IPD forecasts,

but remained approximately unchanged in most cases (cf. columns 2 and 6).

        The individual-to-BVAR RMSE ratios for ON? rose from .6 or less in 1968-79 to

around .8 in 1979-90; those for RON? rose as well, from an approximate range of .6-1.0

to .9-1.2; and those for IPD declined from .9-1.0 to .6-.9 (columns 3 and 7). These i/by
                                             36

ratios, then, show that on average the NBER-ASA survey forecasts outperformed our

BVAR forecasts, except for RGNP in 1979-90. The group mean predictions from the

surveys were throughout more accurate than BVAR, i.e., the ratios g/bv < 1 in all cases

(columns 4 and 8). M might be expected, the changes in i/by and g/bv between the two

subperiods paralleled each other directionally.

       There is no evidence here that the forecasts on the whole either improved or

deteriorated in the 1980s as compared with the 1970s. The BVAR benchmark proved a

little more effective in 1979-90 than in 1968-79 for nominal and real GNP growth and

somewhat less effective for inflation.




                              5. Other Forecasts for 1968-90

5.1 Percent Change Forecasts: Industrial Production and Corporate Profits

       Table 15 shows that the average errors of the forecasts of IP and CP tended to be

positive but widely dispersed and strongly increasing with the span (columns 1-3). The

RMSES increased similarly (columns 4-6). Comparisons with the average size and

variability of the actual changes (columns 9-11) indicate a moderate level of accuracy for

the 11' forecasts but poor overall performance for the CP forecasts (where the mean and

median RMSES exceed the actual SD and RMSV values). The large positive values of SK

and KU for the IP predictions up to three quarters ahead suggest skewness to the right and

fat tails; the latter may also characterize the longer CP predictions (columns 7-8).
                                            37

       Combining the individual forecasts by simple averaging reduces the errors

substantially for IP (except for the longest span) but not for CP, where the gains from using

the group mean or consensus forecast are small (cf. table 15, columns 4 and 6, with table

16, column 1). Accordingly, the RMSE ratios j/g are smaller for CP than for IP; but it is

still true for both variables that only about the best 25% of the sample are more accurate

than the group mean forecasts (see table 16, columns 2-4).

       The BVAR model forecasts (variant A only) outperform the group mean forecasts

for profits. The comparisons for the production index yield closer and mixed results, which

favor the survey group's predictions for the shorter and the BVAR predictions for the

longer horizons. (Cf. the corresponding entries in columns 1-4 and 5-8 of table 16.)

       Both IF and CF forecasts had larger RMSEs in 1979-90 than in 1968-79 in almost

all cases (table 17, columns I and 5). Compared with BVAR, variant A, the survey

forecasts look better in the earlier than in the later subperiod, particularly for IP (cf.

columns 3 and 4 with columns 7 and 8, respectively).




5.2 Level Forecasts: Unemployment Rate and Housing Starts

       For UR (table 18, lines 1-5), the mean errors are predominantly negative, suggesting

some underprediction, but they also show considerable dispersion. Level errors, unlike

average change errors, do not cumulate, but the RMSES still increase substantially with the

distance to the target quarter. The summary error measures are quite small relative to the
                                             38

 statistics for the actual values of UR. For short forecasts, the distributions of the RMSES

 are skewed to the right and have fat tails, judging from the large SK and KU values.

        For HS (lines 6-10), the mean errors are close to zero and have mixed signs. They

 do not depend on the distance to the target (unlike the mean errors for UR, which increase

with the distance). The RMSE and SD values, as usual, increase for the longer forecasts,

but they remain fairly small compared with the measures for the actual values of HS. The

SK and KU figures are small.

       Combining the individual forecasts results in substantial gains in accuracy for both

variables but particularly UR (cf. table 19, column 1, and table 18, columns 4 and 6). The

RMSE ratios i/g are generally higher for UR than for HS, but once again the Q1 ratios

are close to one throughout, i.e., about 75% of the individual forecasts are less accurate

than the group means in either case (table 19, columns 2-4). The BVAR forecasts, variant

A, are about as accurate as the group mean forecasts for target quarters 3-5 of both UR

and HS; for closer targets, the comparisons favor the surveys for UR and the BVAR for

HS (ci. the corresponding entries in columns 1-4 and 5-8).

       Table 20 shows that the NBER-ASA forecasters on the whole predicted UR

somewhat better, and HS somewhat worse, in 1968-79 than in 1979-90 (cf. columns I and

5). The relative performance of the group mean vs. individual forecasts was very similar

in the two periods (columns 2 and 6); that of the BVAR variant A model improved in most

cases for UR but showed no systematic change for HS (columns 3-7 and 4-8).
                                             39

      6. Comparisons with Selected Econometric and Time-Series Model Forecasts

6.1 The Michigan University Research Seminar in Quantitative Economics

       The Michigan RSQE has the longest record of the several well-known service

bureaus working with macroeconometric forecasting models. RSQE kindly provided us with

the record of their forecasts, and we were able to compare them with the NBER-ASA

survey forecasts for ten variables.   It is important to note that the quarterly Michigan

forecasts begin in 1970:4 and were not made in the first quarter in years 1975 and 1976,

and in the second quarter in years 1971-75 and 1977-79." We matched the Michigan and

the NBER-ASA forecasts period by period. Further, the Michigan predictions were made

typically in March, June (occasionally May), August (rarely September), and November (in

1974-75,   December). The NBER-ASA survey questionnaire was usually mailed in the first

half of each quarter but it was only in the last month of the quarter that all responses were

collected. Thus, at least some of the survey forecasts had the advantage of later timing

(which means more potentially useful up-to-date information) vis-a' -vis the Michigan

forecasts.

       Comparing the ME, MAE, and RMSE statistics for the Michigan and the NBER-

ASA group mean forecasts shows the latter to have been more accurate for GNP, RGNP,

and IPD (cf. columns 1-3 and 4-6 in table 21). Consistent evidence comes from the RMSE

ratios that have ranges of approximately 0.7-0.9, 0.9-1.1, and 1.0-1.3 for 01, MD, and 03,

respectively (columns 7-9). Thus, generally about half or more of the individual forecasts

from the surveys were at least somewhat more accurate than the Michigan forecasts.
                                             40

       The results for the other variables are mixed. As shown in table 22, the Michigan

predictions of real consumption show on the whole larger errors than the NBER-ASA

"consensus," but not by much and not for the longest horizon (lines 1-5). They are better

than 50% of the individual survey forecasts for the two shortest spans, and better than 75%

for the three longest spans. The comparisons for real nonresidential investment favor the

group averages by modest margins, except again for the longest span covered. For real

residential investment, the Michigan forecasts are definitely better than all but the shortest

group mean forecasts. National defense expenditures are predicted better by the surveys

through span 0-3 and better by Michigan for the two longer spans. More than half of the

RMSE ratios j/M for NFL, RFI, and DEF are less than one (lines 6-20).

       The pattern that the NBER-ASA group mean forecasts have an edge for the two

shortest spans and the Michigan forecasts for the two longest spans holds for the

unemployment rate and the Treasury bill rate in table 23 (lines 1-5 and 6-10). The middle

span shows about equal RMSEs for the two sets. The corporate bond yield predictions

from Michigan outperform those from the surveys for all but the shortest span (lines 11.15).



6.2 Sims' Probabilistic Forecasts

      In addition to outside econometric model forecasts, we wished to compare the results

of the NBER-ASA surveys to outside time-series forecasts. We are indebted to Chris Sims

for data on predictions from both a sophisticated BVAR and univariate ARIMA models.
                                             41

       Recall that our own BVAR model used earher in this paper includes RGNP, IPD,

TBR, M2, and LI, plus the variable predicted (if not one of the above). The Sims model

includes the first three variables in our set, plus six others: Ml, UR, NFl, S&P 500 stock

price index, a commodity price index, and the trade-weighted value of the dollar.12 It is a

nine-variable, five-lag model, whereas ours is a five-or-six variable, six-lag model.

       Sims model is an extension of the model constructed in 1980 and used in quarterly

forecasting during 1980-86 by Litterman (1986). It is three variables larger than the original

Litterman model and it allows time-variation in coefficients, predictable time variation in

forecast error variance, and non-normality in disturbances (Sims 1989). The modifications

give rise to non-normal, nonlinear models and hence to considerable complications in

estimation and analysis (Sims and Todd 1991). The Sims model (like our own BVAR)

forecasts are simulations of real-time forecasts in that they use only data from time periods

before the periods to be predicted. But for several reasons, including the use of current

versions of the data, they are far from being true ex ante forecasts (again, the same applies

to our BVAR as well).

       In evaluating the BVAR forecasts (both Sims' and our own), we used the current

data, which is consistent with their construction and believed to be fair. Use of preliminary

figures would have resulted in finding larger errors.

       Again, like for our own BVAR     (see table 13 and text above), the comparisons of

Sims model forecast with the NBER-ASA survey forecasts for GNP,         RGNP, and IPD are
                                             42

 presented in two variants A and B (table 24). For reasons already explained, variant A

 favors the real-time predictions that incorporate contemporary news evaluations, while

variant B favors the predictions based on the ex post constructed time-series models.

       Using variant A, Sims' forecasts (S) are found to have on the whole larger errors

than the group mean forecasts from the NBER-ASA surveys for both ON? and RGNP

(table 24, lines 1-5 and 11-15, cf. columns 1-3 and 4-6). The corresponding ratios

RMSEJRMSES are relatively low, approaching 1.00 only for 03 (columns 7-9), which means

that most individual forecasts from the surveys are more accurate than the S forecasts. In

contrast, the S forecasts are considerably more accurate than the group mean forecasts for

IPD inflation, and here the RMSE ratios i/S mostly exceed 1.00, even for Q (lines 21-25).

       Using variant B as a criterion (lines 6-10, 16-20, and 26-30), we still see the group

mean forecasts as retaining on balance an advantage over the S forecasts for ON?, but it

is a much reduced advantage and one essentially limited to the longer spans. For RGNP,

the NBER-ASA consensus predictions are somewhat more accurate than the S model

predictions for the spans 0-4 and 0-5, whereas the opposite is true for the shorter spans.

For IPD, the S forecasts have smaller errors throughout. (Cf. columns 1-3 for variant B

with the corresponding entries in columns 4-6.) Looking at the RMSE ratios, i/S (columns

7-9), we find them to exceed 1.00, that is, to favor the S model, for GNP at 03 only, for

RGNP at MD and Q3 and for IPD at 01, MD, and 03.
                                            43

       Interestingly, the original Litterman BVAR performed relatively well for real GNP

and unemployment hut worse for IPD, which motivated both Litterman and Sims to make

changes designed to improve their inflation forecasts. But simulations disclosed "a tendency

for improvements in the retrospective forecast performance of the BVAR model for

inflation to be accompanied by deterioration in its performance for real variables' (Sims

1989, p. 1). A similar tradeoff was observed in the work with our own BVAR.

       According to the measures in table 25 (based on the variant A only), most of the

NBER-ASA survey forecasts for the unemployment rate (1968-90), the Treasury bill rate

(1981-90), and the rate of growth in real nonresidential fixed investment (1981-90) exceeded

the corresponding Sims model forecasts considerably in overall accuracy. This can be

concluded from both the comparisons with group mean predictions from the surveys (cf.

columns 1-3 and 4-6) and the low i/S ratios (columns 7-9).

      The Sims model and our own BVAR forecasts have errors of generally similar order

of magnitude. The Sims predictions are more accurate for GNP and IPD, less accurate for

RGNP and UR. The results for NFl and TBR are mixed (favoring Sims at the two longest

horizons only).13



6.3 linivariate Time-Series Models

       Predictions from ARIMA models make popular benchmarks for evaluating

forecasters' performance. We use ARIMAS as specified in Sims and Todd 1991, where
                                             44

they are reported to have worked well relative to the Simsian BVAR for financial variables

and business fixed investment in 1980-90 (pp. 9-10). However, our measures show that the

BVAR forecasts by Sims had throughout smaller overall errors than the corresponding

ARIMA forecasts, whether the comparisons cover the variants A or the variants B (cf.

Table 24 and 25, columns 1-3, with Tables 26 and 27, columns 2-4).

       The results of comparing the NBER-ASA survey forecasts with their counterparts

of the Sims-Todd ARIMA type are less clear-cut. Most of the forecasters did better than

the time-series models according to the variant A calculations, as is evident from the

individual-to-ARIMA (i/A) ratios in columns 5-7 of Tables 26 and 27. But when variant

B is used, the forecasters are no longer clearly ahead for RGNP and fall somewhat behind

for IPD (Table 26, lines 16-20 and 26-30).

       Beginning in 1976:2, Charles Nelson has produced ARIMA forecasts of rates of

change in nominal and real GNP and the implicit price deflator synchronously with other

real-time forecasts, updating them each quarter upon the announcement of the first

preliminary numbers for the preceding quarter. Comparisons with five econometric models

for the period 1976:2-1982:4 have shown these ex ante "benchmark" forecasts to be of

competitive accuracy (Nelson 1984). Since 1988, Frederick Joutz has been preparing the

ARIMA forecasts on a current basis (the same way as Nelson had before), and he kindly

let us have the results for the purposes of a comparative analysis.
                                              45

       Table 28 shows that the NBER-ASA group mean forecasts (g) were on average

consistently more accurate than the Joutz ARIMA (J) forecasts (cf. columns 2-5 and 3-6).

The RMSE ratios g./J rose with the span from .73 to .88 for GNP and from .76 to .83 for

RGNP; they varied irregularly between .78 and .81 for IPD. The RMSE ratios i/J (columns

7-9) average .8-.9 for 01, 1.0-1.1 for MD, and 1.3-1.5 for 03. Our analysis confirms the

findings that these ARIMA forecasts are indeed competitive, and that their relative

accuracy tends to improve with their horizon for GNP and RGNP (but not for IPD, where

they are weakest).



                         7. A General Evaluation and Conclusions

       In presenting and discussing more than 30 tables on multiperiod quarterly forecasts

for a score of variables by a total of more than 100 individuals, we had to make some hard

choices about which problems to confront and which measures to use. Forecasts for two-

thirds of the time series covered were treated less comprehensively and relegated to an

appendix, to make the paper easier to read. Even so, the inevitable abundance of detail

risks obscuring the overall picture. Therefore, lest we miss the forest for the trees, a

statement of general findings, conclusions, and qualifications is very necessary at this point.

       1. The distributions of the error statistics show that there is much dispersion across

the forecasts, which typically increases with the length of the predictive horizon.

Forecasters differ in many respects and so do their products. The idea that a close
                                               46

 "consensus" persists, i.e., that current matched forecasts are generally all alike, is a popular

 fiction. The differentiation of the forecasts usually involves much more than the existence

of just a few outliers. However, it is also true that forecasters depend on common

information, interact, and influence each other. This naturally induces some common

trends. The more independent information the individuals possess, the more their

predictions can differ. Thus, a clustering of forecasts could be due either to genuine

agreement or common ignorance, while dissent may reflect uncertainty.'4

        2. Errors of the average change forecasts cumulate over the spans O-1,...,O-5 with

great regularity for a variety of time series. To a large extent, this occurs because of the

progression to larger changes in the corresponding actual values. But the errors of

marginal change and level forecasts, too, often increase with the distance to the target

quarter, although by much smaller margins and with much less regularity. As might be

expected, the further out in the future the target, the less can be inferred about it from the

past and the worse it is usually forecast. The less random and more predictable the series,

the better this rule holds, in the sense that the forecasts will be more forward-looking and

more appropriately differentiated with the distance to the target period.'5

       3. Macroeconomic variables differ greatly in forecastability. The more persistent

(autocorrelated) series are, of course, more accurately predicted than series with high

random variability. Thus, real GNP and consumption are far easier to forecast than

residential investment and, especially, change in business inventories.          Inflation was
                                            47

underestimated and poorly predicted by most forecasters most of the time. Negative

correlations between RGNP and IPD forecast errors have long been observed (see

Zarnowitz 1979, table 4 and text), and offsetting performance for inflation and real

variables appears to be frequently encountered in studies of forecasting methods and

results.

         4. A comparison of the summary measures of error for 1968:4-1979:3 and 1979:4-

1990:1 reveals no large and systematic differences that would indicate either deterioration

or improvement in the overall performance of the respondents to the NBER-ASA surveys.

The accuracy of GNP forecasts may have decreased somewhat but that of inflation forecasts

increased. The 1970s and the 1980s differed significantly in a number of economically

important dimensions, but it is difficult to say that either subperiod presented the forecasts

with definitely greater problems than the other. Each experienced two business recessions,

which is noted because previous research has shown that turning-point errors played a

major role in downgrading the forecasting records (for a recent summary, see Zarnowitz

1991).

           5. Group mean forecasts are generally much more accurate than the majority of

individual forecasts. These consensus predictions are computed by simple averaging across

the corresponding responses to each successive survey; we made no effort to use other than

equal weighting. This paper, then, provides many examples of the rule that combining

forecasts often results in substantial improvements. The method is very accessible and
                                              48

inexpensive. The gains are enhanced by the diversification of the forecasts that are

combined, e.g., our group mean forecasts should be better, the more different and

complementary the information embodied in their components. For some variables and

periods the combinations work much better than for others. In principle, one would prefer

to combine the information in a single model rather than combine the forecasts. In

practice, the latter will typically be much easier.

       6. Consider first comparisons with time-series models constructed on the assumption

that the last-known values of the variables concerned refer to the prior quarter t-1 (variant

A). The assumption is certainly valid for the quarterly variables in the real-time forecasts,

but it results in some bias against the time-series forecasts. Table 29 sums up the evidence

in form of the RMSEs averaged across spans. For the subset consisting of the median

individual and the consensus forecasts from the NBER-ASA surveys, the Michigan

econometric model, our BVAR (A) model, the Sims (A) probabilistic model, and the Sims-

Todd ARIMA (A) model (lines 1-4, 6, and 8), the consensus (group mean) survey forecasts

rank first for GNP and RGNP, and second for IPD (following the Sims (A) model).

       7. The alternative assumption, that the last-known values of the variables refer to

the current quarter t (variant B) is rather strongly biased in favor of the ex post forecasts

with time-series models. The ARMSES are all much lower for the variant B predictions

than for their variant A counterparts (cf. lines 4, 6, and 8 wiht lines 5,7, and 9). When all

nine sets of forecasts listed in table 28 are considered, Sims (B) model ranks 2,2, and 1 for
                                             49

GNP, RGNP, and IPD, respectively. The corresponding ranks of BVAR (B) are also high:

3, 1, and 3. The NBER-ASA consensus forecasts are now almost tied for the first rank

with Sims (B) and rank only 3 for RGNP and 5 for IPD (cf. lines 2, 5, and 7).

       8. Table 30 sums up the evidence on the comparative accuracy of the several sets

of forecasts included in this study, using the longest series of predictions available for each

variable. Here again, root mean square errors averaged across the spans serve as the basis

for ranking the forecasts, but only the variant (A) time-series predictions are used. By this

criterion, the group forecasts from the NBER-ASA surveys earned 10 first and 10 second

ranks for the 21 variables covered. The median individual forecasts ranked first or second

6 times, third 11 times, and lower four times. Our BVAR model had equal numbers of the

first, second, and third ranks (5 each), plus six lower ranks. The Michigan (RSQE)
forecasts, available for 10 variables, ranked first and second four times and once, third and

fourth three times and twice, respectively. Sims probabilistic model forecasts, available for

 six variables, were mostly less accurate, and the AREMA model forecasts were throughout

 least accurate.

        9. Finally, Table 31, using sums of the ranks across variables, shows that the group

 (consensus) forecasts from the survey performed best overall in each of the periods

 covered; the Michigan forecasts were second best; the median individual forecasts, BVAR

 model forecasts, and the Sims forecasts share mostly the ranks 3 or 4 (there are ties); and

 the ARIMAs rank last. Note that major deviations from this ordering appear for some
                                            50

variables, notably Michigan is best for UR, Sims for IF. Also, these results conceal the

differences between the forecast horizons, which are sometimes important (e.g., the

Michigan forecasts would rate higher for the longer, lower for the short, spans).

       10. It is important to emphasize that these comparisons concentrate on only one

aspect of the forecasts and need not imply an overall superiority of any of them. For

example, the econometric and time-series models are clearly much better defined, more

explainable, replicable, and internally consistent than the survey forecasts. But the survey

data collectively embody a great deal of apparently useful knowledge and information

available to professional forecasters. An interesting project, which must be left for future

research, would be to identify the best of the individual forecasts from the surveys, and to

combine them with each other and with very different model forecasts. Regressions of

actual values on predictions from different sources and models would serve as one method

for implementing this objective. Given rich data from active forecasters and interesting

models, studies of this type should yield useful lessons.
                                           51

                                       Footnotes



1.   Interestingly, the Morgenstern and Grunberg-Modigliani papers are in a sense

     precursors of the contemporary rational expectations models in which behavior
     follows forecasts that are consistent with the assumptions of the models and free

     of any systematic errors.

2. The same applies to the literature on microeconomic prediction, which is

     additionally restricted by the fact that much of the material on microforecasts

     is confidential.

3.   Forecasts of a Yale service developed by Irving Fisher were not better in 1929

     than those of the Harvard service developed by Warren Persons (see

     Dominguez et al. 1988).

4.   Later studies of the Livingston forecasts generally used them as amended by

     Carlson, but many earlier studies suffer from measurement errors in the

     published group averages.

5.   The B&E Section had long been engaged in producing annual surveys of

     forecasts by its members.

6. The committee was established with the support of the B&E section of the

     ASA and its 1980 and 1981 chairmen, Arnold Zellner and George Tiao. The

     members included Rosanne Cole, Ray C. Fair, Edgar R. Fiedler, Albert A.
                                            52

      Hirsch, F. Thomas Juster, Geoffrey H. Moore, George L Periy, W. Allen

      Spivey, and Victor Zarnowitz. For more detail Ofl these initiatives, see

      Zarnowitz 1982, pp. 11-13.

7.    Missing observations (gaps in response) limit our ability to use these data to

      study such problems as the dependencies over time in the forecast errors (but

      see Zarnowitz 1985, section 3).

8. We are indebted to David L Williams, Secretary-Treasurer of the NABE, for

      help in collecting the data used in the text paragraph above.

9.    Most of these differences actually disappear when rounded off to one decimal

      point. Providing detail by span of forecast and for some other variables would

      not alter the picture significantly (see Zarnowitz 1983, pp. 84-85). However, it

      is probably worth noting that the group ranking first the outside econometric

      models had the smallest average RMSES for most variables (column 3). This

      group included large companies using well-known econometric service bureaus

      as well as their own staffs of professional economists.

10.   See Zarnowitz 1984, which uses the data for 1968-79. An early demonstration

      that simple averaging can reduce forecast errors is in Zarnowitz 1967, pp. 123-

      126. For a survey of the literature, see Clemen 1989.

11. RSQE predicts normally eight times in each year.
                                            53

12. The data are generally expressed in log level form, except for TBR which was

      not logged.

13. For the RMSEs of the BVAR forecasts, see Table 13, column 3 (GNP, RGNP,

      IPD), and Tables 19, A.6, and A.8, column 5 (UR, NFl, and TBR, respectively).

14. Cf. Zarnowitz and Lambros 1987, a study which compares the point and

      probabilistic forecasts from the NBER-ASA surveys. Time and space

      restrictions   prevented us from including         in   this   paper the survey
      responses to questions on the probabilities of alternative GNP and IPD

      outcomes and turning points. See also Braun and Yaniv 1991.

15.   it should be noted that annual forecasts are generally more accurate than all

      but the veiy short quarterly forecasts, owing to cancellation of errors for the

      quarters within the year (Zarnowitz 1979). In this paper, annual forecasts are

      not considered.

16. A few deviations from the rule appear in the longest forecasts, apparently due

      to outliers and small-sample problems.
                                                            P(RCINI CIW4CI                           PIRC[NI OWIGE                        PIRCiN1 CKMC
                                                   I   £                                                                         4.   P   Là   0   Là   P   •   0
                                                   —   .'   I                       Là   L.a
                                                                               10        —            £4    Là   A   0   *
                                                                            -0 -
                                                   —   a    to   C là               0          0 5
                                                            £           £           £            £    -4--.-.'
                                                                 a-..
                          • 00                -
I   LLJH
r   ZZZ x
                +                                                                                                                                                            'P.
                          *        0-                                                                                                                                        0
    UI          UI                                                                                                                                                           P.
    C           C                                                                                                                                                            A
                                                                                                                                                                             C.
                          a——..                -                                                                                                                             A
                                                                                                                                                                             Ia
                                                                                                                                                                             C,
                          • -. .4 .4                                                                                                                                    p.
                                                                                                                                                                        Ba
                                                                                                                                                                         p.
         p.
         p.                                                                                                                                                             An
                                                                                                                                                                        An
                                                                                                                                                                        p. p.0'
                                                                                                                                                                        C..c
         Z                a'       10.4
                                                                                                                                                                        Zr,
                                                                                                                                                                        .0p
         B                S            A',                                                                                                                              —I.
         S                                                                                                                                                              p.
         A                                                                                                                                                              P.S
         p                P.-          %a'a
                                                                                                                                                                        SB
                                                                                                                                                                        AD.        Cl
         UI               S.....                                                                                                                                    o   on
         a                                                                                                                   0                                          P.fl
                                                                                                                                                                    —   p.c
                     0)
                     —4   5            45-.                                                                                                                             145
         In          N                                                                                                                                                  0i-        I
         C,                                                                                                                                                             p
                           • 0G-                                                                                                                                        Ac
         A                                                                                                                                                              -A
         p                                                                                                                                                                 pa
         0.                                                                                                                                                             —c
         A                 •           —0                                                                                                                               '0 A
         P.                                                                                                                                                             a'..
         0.
         0.                a'. .40
                                                                                                                                                                        iS    Ph
         S
          'C               • . LaO -
          p.                                                                                                                                                            '0    A
          S                                                                                                                                                             '0    P.
          C,                                                                                                                                                            on
          p..              • S.                                                                                                                                         .45
          0                                                                                                                                                             —B
          p                                                                                                                                                              F,
                           0" GO
                                                                                                                                                                              Cl
          r                                                                                                                                                                   p.
                           a.. *0                                                                                                                                             A
                                                                                                                                                                              B
          -a               •            '.4.       -                                                                                                                          A
          0                                                                                                                                                                   A
          C
                              p- aA

                              5'
                                                           P(RCINI CHNCL             PIRCEN1 CHANC[
                          P(RC[N1 CHNC[
                                                              —    UI       CI   C    a    P..   C    U        ii
                                                      I,
                      0   0 in a I, 0     'p                            —                                 —.   L

             aa

                                                                                                                               fll
     S       0-I                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                               '1
                                                                                                                               I.
                                                                                                                               I,
                                                                                                                               a
                                                                                                                               ft
     C       Ca



                                                                                                                               ft
                                                                                                                               I-I
                                                                                                                        P-I P.-
                                                                                                                        -o  OP

                                                                                                                               ft
                                                                                                                        II 0
             4'-                                                                                                        I-'     a

             -. '-I                                                                                                             a-
                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                        •1
                                                                                                                    0   — o
0                                                                                                                               ft    flI-,
                                               I-I'                                                                      0
-i   C       .5
ri                                                                                                                       C,]    —     F-a

               04'
                                                                                                                         '0
     a            a                                                                                                      a' Cft
                                                                                                                                (U
               .J a
                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                -'I
                                                                                                                         '0
                                                                                                                         '0     Pa
                                                                                                                                (0
                                                                                                                                •1
         S     SO                                                                                                               C,
                                                                                                                                ft
                                                                                                                                 rt

         C'. 0.0                                                                                                                 0C


         S     -.0                                                                                                               ID
                                                                                                                                 Co


               aa

         S..   thUI
                                 PERC[NF CHANCE                    PERCENI ChANCE            PRC(N1 CIIA)

                                                                      p4    O•      0         LI   U   •    a
                                                    .J   •3
                        0   1?   0   •fl   0        0
                                               -t        I
                -
    • a.
                -
    ....o•
                                                                                                                           11
    • 0_-                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                           '1
                                                                                                                           a
    a..—'..                                                                                                                UI
                                                                                                                           It
                                                                                                                     — C,
    a.,....
    a. U'.
                                                                                                                     zOCti.-
                                                                                                                     ,-. '1
    a.. •...                                                                                                         UI    0
                                                                                                                     —
                                                                                                                           C,
    •.. t•'•
    a. S..                                                                                                           •PU It
    a.. •4'.
                                                                                                                     M Q.
                                                                                                                     I,            n
    a.. UI..
                                                                                                                                   UI
                                                                                                                o    a>0
0
)                                                                                                                                  II
                                                                                                                I—                 C,
    a     •..                                                 UI                        La                           O
                                                                                                                     1UI
                                                                                                                     — —           La
    a..   0                                                                                                          N

    s-—a-                                                                                                            -UI   1'
                                                                                                                           a
                                                                                                                     I—    (A
    a...—.          -                                                                                                '0
                                                                                                                      0'   0I..'
    •..L.
    a. a.                                                                                                            —      II
                                                                                                                     '0
                                                                                                                     o (a
    a..   UPS                                                                                                              C,

    a....                                                                                                                  UI

    •     ,dS                                                                                                              00
                                                                                                                           a
                                                                                                                           UI
    a.. SO

    a.. •G              -
                                                    Table I
                              List of Variables Covered in the N8ER—ASA Quarterly
                           Economic Outlook Surveys, 1968:6—1981:2 and 1981:3—1990:1


                                                  Unit                  Series      Period Covered
                   Variable (Symbol)             (R or N)     Sourceb     no.    68:6—81:2 81:3—901 £211?
                            (1)                     (2)         (3)      (4)       (5)        (6)       (7)

                                                                         200
 1 Cross national product (CNP)
2 CNP implicit price deflator (IPD)
                                               $bil.(N)
                                               b.y.—100(N)
                                                             1.

                                                             1
                                               const.$bil(R) 1
                                                                         310
                                                                          50
                                                                                     1
                                                                                     1
                                                                                     1
                                                                                                1
                                                                                                1
                                                                                                1
                                                                                                        z
                                                                                                        ZA

                                                                                                        ZA
3 CNP in constant dollars (RCNP)
4 Industrial production (IF)                   b.y.100(R)    4            47         1          1       ZA
                                                                          43         1          1       Iscel
                                                                                                        x
S unemployment rate (UR)                       percent(R)     3

6 Corporate profits after taxes (C?) $bil.(N)                 1           16         1          1
                                                              2           61         1                  IA
7 Plant and equipment expenditures(PE)$bil.(N)
8 Private nonfarm housing starts (HS) ar. ,mil.(R)            2           28         1          /       )eai.
9 Change in business inventories (CBI)5bil.(N)                1          245         1                  In].
10 Consumer          expenditures for durable
         goods (CD)                              $bil.(N)        1       232         /
11  National defense purchases (DEl)             $bil.(N)        1       564         1
12  Personal consumption expenditures
     (PCE)                                       const.$bil.(R) 1        231                    1       ta
13 Nonresidential fixed investment
     (NFl)                                const.$bil.(R) 1                86                    1       IA
14   Residential fixed investment (REX)   conat.$bil.(R) 1                89                    /       Ia
                                                                                                        ZA

                                                                                                        t
                                                                         263                     1
IS   Federal government purchases (FOP) const.$bil.(R) 1
16   State and local govt. purchases
                                          conat.$bLl.(R) 1               267                     1
       (SLP)
17   Change in business inventories
                                          const.$bil.(R) 1                30                     1      lecel
       (RCBX)
18    Net exports of goods and services
                                          const.$bil.(R) 1               255                     /      Iaw.1
       (MX)
19    Consumer price index (CU)       percent change(N) 3                320                     1      teal
20   Treasury bill rate. 3—month
                                                         4               114                     1
       (TRZ)                              percent(N)
21       New high—grade corp. bond yield
                                                                 5       116                        (   lam].
          (05%')                                 percent(N)

Abbreviations: b.y. — base year; a.r. —           annual rate; conat. $ — in     constant dollars.

     —   Real.      N —   nominal.
bSource 1—U.S. Department of Commerce. Bureau of Economic Analysis (SEA). Source 2—U.S. Dept.
of Commerce. Bureau of the Census.      Source 3 — U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor
Statistics (BLS). Source 6 — Board of Covernors of the Federal Reserve Syatem (FRB). Source
5 — Citibanic and U.S. Department of Treasury.

 As listed in the Business Conditions Disest (ECD) and the Survey of Current Business (SBC).

4As used in the computation of forecast errors. 16 — percentage change.
                                               Table 2

                 NatA—ASA Quarterly Economic Outlook       Surveys. All Forecasts end
             Sampled Forecasts. Selected Disttthutional         Statistics.     1968—90 and
                                           Two Subperiods


Line            Statistic            1968:4—1981:2              1981:3—1990:1             1968:4—1990:1
                                     All       Sampi..         All     Sample            All    sample
                                     (1)          (2)          (3)        (4)            (S)      (6)

                                         Number of Surveys

  1 Total number                    51           51            35        35              86      86
  2 Surveys per respondent:Mean     14.8         26.2          10.3      20.8            21.0    28.5
  3    Standard deviation           13.0         10.4           9.9       7.5            16.1    13.5
  4    Median                       11           22             6        20              19      25
  5    Incerquartil.e range         21           18            14.8       9.5            26      21
  6    Maximum                      46           66            35        35              70      70
  7    Minimum                       1           10                 1.   10               1      10


                                      Number     of   Resoondents

  $ Total number                   156           86             74       29             159     1.11

  9 Respondents per survey:Mean     45.8         40.8           21.7     17.2            39.0    36.8
 10    Standard deviation           14.5         11.3            5.9      3.3            15.9    14.1
 11    Median                       44           42             21       18              31      34.5
 12    lnterquartil.e range         24           16             10        6              26.2    22.5
 13    Maximum                      86           61             33       22              78      67
 14    Minimum                      22           20             10        9              12      12




Note: The counts refer to the forecasts      and two quarters ahead for the following variables:
                                           en.
1968:4—1981:2 (51 surveys): Consumer expenditures for durable goods (CD); 1981:3—1990:1 (35
surveys): Nonresidential, fixed investment (NFl); 1968:4—1990:1 (86 surveys): Un.aployaent rat.
(UR).  The sample includes th. forecasters who participated in at least 10 surveys in t.ras of
these observations (see line 7).
                                                  Table 3
                   Percentage Distributions of Respondents by Primary      Affiliation.
                           Four NEER—ASA Economic Outlook Surveys, 1968—80


                                                             Ouarterlv Surveys
L.ine   Primary   Affiliation        December 1968   December 1970      November 1975     November 1980
                                           (1)                <2)            (3)               (4)
 1.     Manufactuting                     39.3               45.6            21.3             40.0
 2      Financial institutions                               2.L1            ZLA              2Q2
                                          11.9                6.5            12.8             13.3
 3
 4
 S
            Commercial banking
            Other
        Consulting and   research
                                          ..I
                                          11.9               10.9
                                                                             1Q._
                                                                             23.6             20.0
 6      Academic                           7.1.               4.4            10.6              6.7
 7      Coverrssent                        8.3                8.7                8.5           6.7
 8
 9
        Others                           _LLI
                                         100.0(84)
                                                            ..Li
                                                            100.0(46)
                                                                             12
                                                                            100.0(67)
                                                                                               Li
                                                                                             100.0(30)
        Total present'



Az reported by the participants in the given survey (those who did not respond to the question
on primary affiliation are excluded).

          a very few responses from labor union and trade association economists, but mainly Thor
elsewhere classified.      i.e.. not
                                  included in the categories listed above.

1otal number of     respondents is listed     in parentheses. The component percentages may not add
up exactly to 100.0 because     of   rounding.
                                                     Table 4

                            Average Ranks and Accuracy of Forecasting Methods
                                      Used in the M8ER—ASA Surveys. 1968—al.


                            Informal.       Econometric Models       Leading    Anticipations   Ocher
Line     Statistic          GNP Model        Own     Outside       Indicators      Surveys      1.thod
                               (1)            (2)       (3)            4)            (5)              (6)

        Percent Using          75             24        48              62            57         16
 2      I Ranking First'       55             11         9              11             2          8
 3      1. Ranking Second      13              7        15              29            21          4
 4      1 Ranking Lowerd        6              7        25              22            35          6

                                         Averse. Root Mean Square Error'

 5      GNP. 1. changet        .96          1.09       .89           1.00            .99        1.15
 6      RGNP, I change        1.16          1.25      1.05            1.24          1.22        1.27
 7      IPD. I change          .71.           .76      .72             .79           .85          .83
 8      UP., level             .53            .66      .52             .62           .71.         .59




'Write—in but often not specified.

b8ased on seven surveys 1968:4—1970:2 (496 repLies). six surveys 1974:1—1975:2 (308 replies).
and six surveys 1980:1—1981:2 (187 replies), The August 1969 survey via held in connection with
the ASA annual meeting and attracted a v.ry large number of respondents (128. including 46
regular panelists).   Participation in the other surveys covered varied from 24 to 83.      The
averages are weighted according to the numbers of th. replies.
'Most   important.

dRinks 3 to 6 (least      important).
 Accerding to first—tanked method (ties for ths first rank are nor included). Refers to 79
individuals who participated in at least 1.2 of the 46 quarterly surveys in the period from 1968:4
through 1980:1. See Zarnowits 1983 for more            detail.
Symbols as defined in table 1.
                                               Table 5

                Mean Absolute Errors and Root Mean Square Errors of Forecasts of
                  Nominal and Real GNP Growth and Inflation, Comparisons with
                           Different Vintages of Target Data, 1968—90


       Vintage of    Mean Absolute Error! by Sean (05)b Root Mean Square Errors. by SDSn(OS'
Line   Actual Data     0—1   0—2    0—3    0—4   0—5        0—1   0—2   0—3    0—4    o—s
                        (1)   (2)   (3)    (4)    (5)        (6)  (7)    (8>    (9)    (10)

                                     Gross National   Product   (Qt4P)


                       .59   1.08      1.55    1.92    2.36          .77       1.41   2.03   2.54   3.13
 1     15—day
                             1.12              1.99    2.48          .86       1.45   2.07   2.58   3.20
 2     45—day          .62
                       .65   1.15      1.65    2.02    2,54          .85       1.68   2.10   2.60   3.26
 3     Early July
                                                                               1.50   2.10   2.60   3.23
 4     Late July

                       Gross National Product in Constant Dollars (RGNP1

                       .61   1.06      1.51    1.96    2.44          .81       1.40   2.04   2.70   3.35
 S     15—day
 6                     .64   1.09      1.56    2.00    2.47          .85       1.44   2.08   2.74   3.38
       45—day                                                                                       3.33
                       .67                     1.99                  .88       1.44   2.07   2.69
 7     Early July            1.09      1.57
                                                                               1.44   2.05   2.66   3.30
 6     Lace July

                                     Itsnljcit Price Deflator (TPD)

                              .71      1.07    1.49    1.98              .50    .92   1.37   1.92   2.56
 9     15—day          .40
                       .42     .77      1.16   1.63    2.14              .54    .99   1.50   2.10   2.79
10     45—day
                       .42     .77      1.18   1.66    2.17              .53    .99   1.52   2.14   2.83
11     Early July
                                        1.21   1.70    2.21              .53    .99   1.53   2.16   2.84
12     Late July       .41     .79



                                                                              of the forecast.
 15—d.ay: preliminary data released in the month following the target quarter
45—day: revised data released a month later, Early July: generally first July revision: where
this is not available, the preceding revision. Late      July:    generally second July revision: where
this is not available, the preceding revision.
                                                                                        —
bMean of the MA!s of the individual, forecasts, where MAE — 1/N ZIEI; E — P A; ? — predicted
value: A — actual value of th, given vintage. The average
                                                             errors refer to percent changes from
                                                                                          where t
quarter c—I. (0) to
                    quarters t, t+1, t+2, t+3. and t+4 (1.2.3. end 4), respectively,
refers to the quarterly date of the survey. Thu.s 0—I denotes the change from quarterrefer to
                                                                                       t—1 to

qarter   t;0—2 denotes the change from quarter c—i to quarter t+1: etc.
                                                                            measures  All
percent change errors end ace in percent.

 Mean of the RNSEs of the individual forecasts, where RMSE — Il/n I (P — A5).
                                                     Table 6

                         Distribution of Mean Errors in Individual Forecasta
                         of Noaina1and Real. CM? Crovth and Inflation, 1968—90


                                Aversee Errors by Soan (Os)            Marelnal Errors, by Soan(Os)
Line      Statistic       0—1      0—2       0—3     0—4     0—5        1—2    2—3    3—6    4—5
                          (1)       (2)      (3)     (4)       (5)      (6)    (7)     (8)     (9)
                                          Cross Macionpi Product (CUP)
 1 Mean (M)               —.09     —.11.     —.11    —.14    —.30       —.01    .01     .04       .08
 2     Standard devia-
         tion (SD)          .26       .56     .91    1.19      1.61      .31    .38     .36       .37
 3 Median     (1(D)       —05       —.06      .04     .15       .00      .01    .06     .09       .13
 4 Interquarcile
        range (IQR)         .24       .48     .72     .91.     1.30      .27   .29   .31    .31
 S     Skewness (SM)     —1.94 —1.57 —1.60 —2.65 —2.78                  —.55 —1.41 —1.64 —1.92
 6 Kurtoais (KU)         12.1.4 12.42 11.90 12.81 13.80                10.89   8.49    8.50    8.66

                           Gross Macional Product in Constant Dollars (RCNP)

 7     Mean (H)           —.01.       .09     .25     .45       .48      .10    .16     .22       .28
 8 Standard devia-
         tion (SD)          .24       .48     .77    1.06      1.39      .29    .35     .34       .43
 9     Median (MD)        —.00        .13     .34     .62       .64      .10    .20     .27       .29
10  tnterquartile
     rang. (IQR)            .27       ...6    .69     .98      1.20      .28    .36     .38       .51
11 Skewness (SM)         —1.30 —1.58 —1.84 —2.04 —2.06                 —1.17 —1.75 —1.34       —.89
12     Kurtoais   (KU)    4.64      6.76     7.29    7.57      8.13     4.78   6.63    4.24    1.97

                                          Teolicit Price Deflator (!PD)

13 Mean (H)               —.07      —.19     —.36    —.57      —.65     —.12   —.15    —.19    —.21
1.4    Standard devia-
         tion (SD)          .16      .34      .57     .83      1.24      .20    .25     .27       .35
15    Median (MD)         —.07      —.17     —.34    —.54 —.74          —.11   —.14    —.16    —.21
16    Interquartile
        rang. (IQR)         .15       .39     .75    1.09      1.79      .27    .35     .36       .52
17    Skewness (SM)         .06       .32      .09    .14      —.06      .28   ...10    .26       .04
18    Kurtosis (KU)        1.35       .76      .50    .92      —.11.     .42    .36    1.91.   —.24



MOTE: Colwuns 1—5 refer to the errors in forecasts of average changes; coluana 6—9 refer to the
errors in forecast of earginal changes (for 0—1. the average and earginzl. changes are the ea.).
ME. SD. MD, and IQR (lines 1—4, 7—1.0. and 13—16) ar. in percentage points; .ntries for SM and
KU (lines 5—6, 11—12. and 17—18) are djecnsjonjesa ratios. IQR.— Q — Q is the difference.
third quartile ainus first quartile of the distribution (where MD — 03). SM —                /o
                                                                                     is the ratio
of the third eoent around the nean to the third power of the standard deviation SD — o. KU —
       is the ratio of th. fourth monent around the esan to the fourth power of SD.
                                                           Tabl. 7
                          Distribution   of Mean Absolute Errore in Individual. Forecasts
                               of Nosinal. and Real. GM!' Growth and Inflation, 1968—90


                                 Averpee Errors by Span (Ouarters)           Mareinal Errors, by 5ppn(Qs)
Line      Statistic             0—1.   0—2     0—3     0—4     0—5             1—2    2—3    3—4    4—5
                                (1.)     (2)       (3)      (4)       (5)      (6)     (7)    (8)     (9)
                                               Cross National Product (GWP3
 1     Mean (N)                  .62     1.12      1..60    1.99     2.48       .76     .84   .85     .88
 2 Standard devia-
         tion (SD)                .23     .43       .64       .81    1.12       .22     .23   .23      .26
 3 Median (MD)                   .56     1.02      1,49     1.84     2.31       .73     .81   .82     .86
 4     Incerquartile
      range (IQR)                .28      .39       .41      .61       .98      .20     .22    .26     .28
 S Ske.meaa (SK)                1.69     2.38      3.11     3.51      3.85     1.61    1.69   1.16    1.11
 6 Kurtosis (KU)                4.18     8.21     13.31    18.79     22.53     4.15    5.44   2.46    2.21
                                 Gross National Product in Constant Dollars (RCNP')
 7 Mean (N)                       .64    1.09      1.56     2.00      2.47      .78     .85    .93     .96
 8 Standard devia-
      tion (SD)                   .23     .37       .51      .63       .84      .20     .20    .24     .26
 9 Median (MD)                    .59    1.00      1.41     1.82      2.26      .76     .82    .92     .94
10 Interquartila
         range    (IQR)           .22     .33       .46      .63       .89      .29     .29    .34     .33
11 Slre,,n.sa (SK)              1.59     1.77      1.82     1.76      1.92     1.09     .70    .30     .33
12 Kurcosis (KU)                2.89     4.12      4.1.2    4.13      6.12     2.20     .87   —.1.8    .36
                                               tanlicit Price Deflator (IPD)
13 Mean (K)                       .42     .77      1.16     1.63      2.14      .50     .56    .61     .65
14 Standard devia-
     tion (SD)                    .13     .23       .35       .45      .59      .1.2    .13    .16     .18
15 Median (MD)                    .38     .72      1.08     1.55      2.07      .49     .54    .57     .62
16 Xncerquartile
         range    (IQR)           .14     .23       .47       .51.     .69      .15     .18    .16     .19
17 Sks'nesa (SK)                 1.84    1.29      1.11       .71.     .64      .85    1.17   1.11     .98
18 Kurtesia (NIl)               4.53     2.51.     2.21       .85      .84     1.36    1.25   2.20    1.76


NOTE:     See table       6.
                                                        Eab1e 8

                     Distribution of Root Mean         Square Errors      in Individual. Forecasts
                          of Noina1 and Real CM? Crowth and               Inflation,   1968—90


                                   Averase Errors by Span (Os)              Mereinal   Errors,    by Sppn(Os)
Line     Statistic         0—1        0—2    0—3    0—4     0—5                1—2     2—3       3—4    4—5
                            (1)       (2)      (3)      (4)        (5)         (6)     (7)       (8)     (9)

                                            Cross National Product (CM?)

 I Mean CM)                  .81      1.45     2.07     2.58       3.20        1.02    1.12      1.1.3   1.19
 2 Standard devia-
         tion                .30       .55      .76       .92      1.25         .31      .30      .30     .38
 3     Median (MD)           .76      1,33     1.93     2.45       3.06         .97    1.1.0     1.11.   1.14
 4     Incerquarcil.o
         range    (IQR)      .38       .47      .61       .69      1.14         .25      .29      .39     .40
 S Skewness (SM)            1.20      2.17     2.36     2.34       2.43        1.63    1.34       .55    1.51
 6 Murtosis (KU)            1.52      6.48     7.32     9.47      10.59        3.97    3.65       .06    4.61

                            Cross National Product in Constant Dollars (1CM?)

 7 Mean Of)                  .85      1.44     2.08     2.74       3.38        1.05    1.1.6     1.27    1.32
 8 Standard devia-
      tion                   .35       .49      .67       .82      1.04         .31      .28      .33     .38
 9 Median (MD)               .77      1.32     1.90     2.57       3.12         .98    1.1.5     1.26    1.31
10     lnterquarcile
         range (IQR)         .36       .54      .80       .83      1.18         .38      .39      .50     .51
11     Skewness (SM)        1.78      1.54     1.54      1.30      1.22        1.37      .47      .18     .46
12 Kurtosi (KU)             4.02      3.42     3.29     2.04       1.90        3.08      .20     —.11     .86

                                            Implicit Price Deflator (IPD)

13     Mean (M)              .54       .99     1.50      2.10      2.79         .65      .72      .79     .85
1.4    Standard devia-
         tion                .19       .32      .43       .57       .75         .20      .18      .24     .25
15 Median (MD)               .47       .91     1.43      2.06      2.79         .61.     .70      .74     .81
16 Incerqu.arttle
      range (IQR)            .18        .30      .55      .79      1.08         .22      .24      .22     .33
17 Skewness (SM)            1.82      1.44       .89      .54       .18        1.44      .94     1.51.   1.21
18 Kurtosis (KU)            3,35      2.78     1.15      1.06      —.04        3.00     1.58     4.19    3.64




NOTE:     See Table 6.
                                                    table 9

                   Individual, and Group Mean Forecasts and Actual Values of
                Nominal and Real GM? Growth and Inflation. Selected Statistics
                             on Accuracy and variability. 1968—90


                  Individual Forecasts'           Crouo Mean Forecastsb      Actual Values (XA)c
Line Span(Qa)         N        MAE        RI4SE     N     MA!    RNSE         K      SD    RMSV
                      (1)      (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)    (6)     (7)     (8)    (9)

                                          Cross National Product (GNP)

1       0—1        —.09             .62    .81      —.08       .49    .64    1.98   .96     2.20
2       0—2       — .11        1.12       1.45      —.10       .84   1.11   4.00    1.00    4.31
3       0—3       — .11        1.60       2.07      —.07      1.22   1.61    6.07   2.14    6.44
4       0—4        —.14        1.99       2.58      —.02      1.56   2.06    8.20   2.63    8.61
5       0—5        —.30        2.48       3.20      —.09      1.91   2.51   10.38   3.12   10.84

                            Gross National Product in Constant Dollars (RCNP)

 6      0—1        —.01             .64     .85     —.02       .50    .64     .61   1.03    1.20
 7      0—2            .09     1.09       1.44       .02       .83   1.11    1.23   1.77    2.16
 8      0—3            .25         1.56   2.08       .16      1.17   1.61    1.86   2.40    3.04
 9      0—4            .45         2.00   2.74        .33     1.42   2.05    2.50   2.95    3.87
10      0—5            .48         2.47   3.38        .40     1.70   2.47    3.15   3.45    467
                                          Imolicit Price Deflator (IPO)

11      0—1           —.07          .42     .54     —.04       .28    .35    1.36    .65    1.51
12      0—2           —.19          .77     .99     —.12       .55    .70    2.74   1.25    3.01
13      0—3           —.36         1.16   1.50      —.22       .84   1.13    4.16   1.84    4.55
14      0—4           —.57         1.63   2.10      —.34      1.21   1.64    5.60   2.43    6.10
        0—5           —.65         2.14   2.79      —.37      1.63   2.23    7.08   3.03    7.70
15




'Means of the corresponding statistics for individual forecasts (as shown in table 6—8, lines
1, 7. and 13, column, 1—5).

bSurvey_by_survey consenaus" forecasts based on the sampled data, as explained in the text.
 45—day estimates, as       used    in tables 6—8. RNSV — root mean square value computed as
        +


NOTE:   On the symbols used, see previous tables and text.
                                                           Table 10

                       Individual to Group Mean Ratios of Root Mean Square Errors.
                     Selected Distributional Statistids for Forecasts of Nominal and
                                  Real CUP Growth and Inflation, 1968—90


                                         Aversee Errors by Span (Os)         Marsinal Errors. by    Span(Os)
Line       Statistics          0—1          0—2    0—3    0—4    0—5          1—2    2—3    3—4       4—5
                               (1)          (2)    (3)       (4)      (5)     (6)    (7)    (8)       (9)

                                             Gross National Product (CUP)

 1     Lowest—error fore-
         cast (MIll)            .84          .72    .88       .79      .78     .85    .85    .82       .68
 2     First quartile (Q1)     1.10         1.07   1.07      1.08     1.03    1.05   1.07   1.06      1.07
 3     Median (MD)             1.22         1.23   1.1.9     1.20     1.18    1.15   1.11   1.13      1.14
4      Third quartile (Q3) 1.62             1.46   1.38      1.36     1.43    1.33   1.25   1.28      1.32
 S     Highest—error
         forecast (MAX)        7.34         5,35   5.90      5.78     5.57    3.12   2.88   2.56      4,26
                            Gross National Product in Constant Dollars (RCNP)

6 Lowest—error fore-
         cast (MIN)             .82          .63    .77       .82      .82     .76    .87    .86       .83
 7     First quartile (Q1)     1.   11      1.09   1.04      1.06     1.06    1.06   1.06   1.04      1.03
 8     Median (MD)         1.30             1.20   1.17      1.14     1.14    1.17   1.14   1.13      1.11
 9     Third quartile (Q3) 1.58             1.40   1.36      1.38     1.33    1.31   1.30   1.28      1,31
10     Highest—error
         forecast (MAX)    4.84             3.87   6.45      5.76     6,69    3.29   3.77   4,40      3.84
                                             Irst.licit Price Deflator (IPD)

11. Lowest—error fore—
         cast (MIll)                .83      .88    .82       .55      .53    .67     .88    .81.      .71
12 First quartile (Q1)         1.13         1.03   1.02       .99     1.00   1.03    1.02   1.02      1.02
13 Median (MD)                 1.24         1.21   1.15      1.12     1.12   1.17    1.12   1.11      1.11
14 Third quartile (03) 1.56                 1.39   1.34      1.27     1.23   1.39    1.32   1.23      1.29
IS Highest—error
         forecast (MAX)        3.55         6.30   3.55      3.74     3.37   3.27    2.68   2.86      3.71


NOTE: All entries show ratios RMSE/RN3E5. where the subscripts i and g refer to the individual
and group mean forecasts, respectively. HIM and MAX denote the lowest and highest ratios in each
distribution, Q and        Q
                         denote the lower and upper quartile ratios, and MD denote the median
ratios.
                                                    table 11.
               Ranking Fer.cascers According to Their Accuracy in Predicting Nominal
                   end Real CNP and Inflation Rates. Selected Measures, 1968—1990


                      Distribution Over Tim. of Individual         Distribution Across Individuals of Mean
        Span          Normalized Ranks (R1.)— Means of                    Normalized Ranks (Ri)
Line   (Quarters)         K         SD      IQP.    Range           SD     KIN Q         MD     Q5     MAX
                         (1)        (2)    (3)       (4)           (5)     (6)    (7)    (8)   (9)    (10)
                                          Gross National Product (CNP)

 I       0—1             53        27       46       87             10     38     68     53     59      95
 2       0—2             53        27       46       87             11     32     45     51     59      98
 3       0—3             53        27       46       88             11     36     46     51     58     100
 4       0—4             53        27       46       86             11     33     47     52     58      99
 5       0—5             53        26       45       85             12     30     66     51     58     100

                              Cross National Product in Constant Dollars (RCNP)

 6       0—1             52        28       50       90              9     29     47     52     56      77
 7       0—2             52        28       47       89             10     30     47     51     57      94
 8       0—3             52        28       47       88              9     35     46     51     57      89
 9       0—4             52        28       48       88              9     34     45     51     58      87
10       0—5             52        28       48       86             10     31     65     51     57      99

                                          Inolicit Price Deflator (IPD)

11       0-1              59        28      68       89             10     40     52     57     65      93
12       0—2             56        28       48       89             10     39     49     56     62      95
13       0—3             55         28      47       88             10     33     48     54     60      98
14       0—4              54        28      46       88             10     29     48     54     60      93
15       0—5              54        27      46       86             11     29     45     54     59      96




NOTE: The basic unit of measurement is the normalized rank RL — lOO(rJn), .,h.re r — rank
of the i—rh forecaster in time t           set
                                       of predictions for a given variable and span, and ns —
number of forecasters in the same set. The ranks are, assigned according to the squared errors
(P — A)2, fro. the smallest to largest.   The entries in columns 1—4 represent the means of the
summary measures for the distributions of the individu.e1s ranks over time (e.g.. K in column 1

refers to R —   1/n             where Ri —    I/n          similarly for the standard deviations in columns
2,etc.) The entries in columns 5—10 characterize the distributions across the individuals of
R1. All statistics are rounded off, with no deci.*ls shown. For symbols, se, the preceding
tables and text.
                                          TabI. 12

          Respondents to NBER—ASA Surveys Ranked According to the
         Accuracy of Their Forecasts of o.ina1 and Real GHP Growth
           and IPD Inflation Rates:         Correlations Among the Ranks,
                          Across Variables and Horizons,
                                         1968—1990


Line   Variables                    Correlated for Forecast Horizons (in O,.srrpts)
                                                        --
                            (1.)            (2)          (3)           (4)            (5)

 I     GN, RCNP             .73             .74          .68           .64            .64
 2     CNP, IPO             .56             .64          .68           .59            .59
 3     RGNP, IPD            .47             .52           .54          .51            .42

       Horizena                    Correlated for Variables
                          _.Qli...          RCNP          IPD

 4     0—1, 0—2             .82             .77          .79
 5     0—1, 0—3             .73             .68          .65
 6     0—1, 0—4             .68             .67           .51
 7     0—1. 0—5             .73             .62           .47
 8     0—2, 0—3             .87             .87           .83
 9     0—2. 0—4             .75             .74           .75
10     0—2, 0—5             .79             .72           .67
11     0—3, 0—4             .92             .86           .92
12     0—3. 0—5             .87             .80           .86
13     0—4, 0—5             .92             .86           .92


NOTE: The correlations ar, based on the notaliz.d ranks described in th. text
and Table 11.   On   the syba1s uzed, see previous tables and text.
                                                   Table 13

  BVAR   Forecasts   (Two Variants) vs. Individual Forecasts frog NBER—ASA Surveys.
         Suzsary   Measures  of Error and RMSE Ratios for GNP. P.CNP. and IPD.
                                                   1.968—90

                             8VAR Forecasts •          EMSE   Ratios.    Individual to BVAR   Forecasts
Line Span(Qs)               M   MAE     RMSE                  KIN       Q       MD      Q3    MAX
                            (1)    (2)       (3)              (4)       (5)    (6)     (7)    (8)
                                   Cross National Product (OW?)
                                                 Variant A

 1        0—1               .07        .84   1.11             .32    .54       .66     .91    1.89
 2        0—2               .18    1.47      1.92             .34       .57    .68      .83   2.00
 3        0—3               .26    2.08      2.73             .38       .58    .70      .83   2.44
 4        0—4               .33    2.59      3.45             .26       .59    .68      .85   2.61.
 5        0—5               .38    3.23      4.23             .25       .54    .67      .82   2.41

                                                   Variant B

 6        0—I.          0          0         0                na.    n.a.      n.a.    na.     n.a.
 7        0—2               .07        .87   1.14             .43       .75     .85    1.03   2.89
 8        0—3               .1.7   1.49      1.96             .53       .78     .91    1.03   1.90
 9        0—4               .26    2.1.2     2.80             .49       .81.    .91    LOS    1.82
1.0       0—5               .33    2.63      3.53             .63       .86     .96    1.13   2.29

                     Cross National Product in Constant Dollars (RCWP)
                                                   Variant A
1.1       0—1               .08     .78      1.00             .29       .59     .75     .99   3.65
12        0—2               .20    1.09      1.51             .36       .73     .89    1.07   2.25
13        0—3               .28    1.53      2.03             .43       .79     .93    1.13   2.36
14        0—4               .35    1.76      2.34             .52       .96    1.08    1.29   2.76
15        0—5               .39    2.05      2.64             .41    1.00      1.13    1.40   2.90

                                                   Variant 8

16        0—1           0          0         0            na.        n.e.      n. a.   n.a.   n.a.
17        0—2               .09        .78   1.01             .48     .83       .96    1.16   3.87
18        0—3               .20    1.11.     1.53             .46    1.00      1.15    1.33   2.85
19        0—4               .29    1.S6      2.06             .63    1.06      1.19    1.37   3.68
20        0—S               .36    1.79      2.38              .71   1.18      1.40    1.61    3.1.4


                                   Imlicit Price Deflator (IPO)

                                                   Variant A

21        0—1               .05        .37       .68           .55      .81.    .97    1.16    3.68
22         0—2              .11        .76    .97              .49      .76     .87    1.02    3.62
23        0—3               .17    1.18      1.53              .40      .72     .86    1.02    2.95
26         0-4               .23   1.65      2.18              .38      .72     .87    1.04    2.74
                                             2.94                       .72      .86   1.06    3.94
25         0—5               .28   2.19                        .37
                                BVAR Forecasts •               Rstio Individuil to BVA         Forecascsb
Line Span(Qs)              fl       MAE       R1SE
                                                        R1SE
                                                               MIN   Q      H Q (6)     (7)
                                                                                               MAX
                                                                                               (8)
                           (1)      (2)       (3)              (4)     (5)
                                                    Variant    B

26       0—1           0            0         0                na.    na.       n.e.   n.a.     na.
27       0—2               .04          .37    .47             .70   1..07   1.23      1.51.   3.69
28       0—3               .10       .76       .97             .71    .95    1.09      1..30   2.83
29       0—4               .16      1.17      1.53             .57    .98    1.10      1.24    2.56
30       0—5               .21      1.64      2.18             .61    .95    1.08      1.24    4.23


 Bas.d en a od.l with five variables (RON?. IPD, M2, LI. and TBR) and six
quarrarly lags, esti.ated sequentially .,ith presently available data. Variant A
assuaa  that the last known values of th. variables to be predicted refer to the
quarter t—l (denoted 0);          variant
                                  B assumes                   that they refer
                                                           to the current qu.artar
c (denoted 1).

                   wher, the      subscripts L refers to th. individual forecasts frea the
NBER/ASA surveys and the subscript by retire to th, corresponding Bayesian vector
autoregressive (BVAR) forecasts (variant A in lines 1—5. 11—15, and 21—25; variant
B in   Lines 6—1.0, 16—20. and 26—30). MIN and MAX denote the lowest and highest
ratios   in each    distribution, Q and 04            denote the lower and upper quartile         ratios,
and MD denote      the sedian ratios.
                                         Table 14

      Individual. Croup Mean, and BVAP. Forecasts of Percent Changes in
      CNP, RCNP. and IPD, Selected Comparisons by Span and Subperiods
                             1968—79 and 1979—90


                   Forecasts For 1968:4—1979:3            Forecasts for 1979:4—1990:1
                   Median            PMSE Ratios         Median      RuSE Ratios
Line Span(Qs)      RflSE'     i/g      i/by    g/bv      RMSE    i/g    i/by   g/bv
                    (1)       (2)       (3)    <4)        (5)    (6)       (7)     (8)

                            Cross National Product (CNP)

 1     0—1           .60      1.34       .53   .48         .86   1 1.5      .79    .71
 2     0—2          1.13      1.20       .58   .50        1.56   1 . 17     .78    .69
 3     0—3          1.68      1.18       .60    .51       2.23   1 .18      .81    .70
4      0—4          2.04      1.21       .60    .49       3.08   1.15       .81.   .71
 5     0—5          2.24      1.19       .51    .67       3.80   1. 16      .82    .70

                Cross National Product in Constant Dollars (RCNP)

 6     0—1.          .69      1.29       .62       57      .80   1.20       .88    • 76
 7     0—2          1.25      1.18       .78       69     1,36   1.15      1.01    .82
 8     0—3          1.87      1.17       .85    .76       1.80   1.15      1.03     86
 9     0—4          2.59      1,14       .99    .84       2.30   1.16      1.16     94
10     0—5          3.13      1.13      1.04    .92       2.84   1.15      1.24    .99
                            Imolicit Price Deflator (IFD)

11     0—1            .50     1.29       .90       .73     .37   1.22       .87    .74
12     0—2          1.00      1.14       .90       .80     .64   1.   31    .70    .56
13     0—3          1.57      1.08       .89       .84     .93   1.28       .60    .51.
14      0—4         2.25      1.04       .92       .89    1.37   1.26       .64    .50
15      0—S         3.06      1.05       .99       .95    1.94   1.25       .63    .49




'Median of the root mean aquare errors of the individual forecasts from the
quaxterly N8—ASk surveys.

hLaUo of   the median R1(SE        individual forecasts (t) to the RMSE of the
                              of the
correaponding group mean           (g) in coLumns 2 and 6. Ratio of the median
                            forecast
R(SE of the individual forecacts (i) to the RMSE of the corresponding BVAR model
forecast (by) in columns 3 and 7. Ratio of the P.MSE of the group mean forecast
(g> to the R1iSE of the corrresponding ZVAR model (by) in columns 4 and 6.
                                                          Table 15

                Selected Measures of Forecast Accuracy and Actual Values, Percent Changes
                    in Industrial Production and Corporate Profits, by Span, 1968—90


                          Mean Error                      Root Mean Square Error                   Actual Vplue
Line Span(Qs) M                SD      MD           ft     SD        MD     SK      KU      ft         SD     RMSV
                    (1)       (2)      (3)         (4)      (5)      (6)    (7)     (8)     (9)       (10)    (11)

                                        Index of    Industrial    Production (IP)

 1        0—1        .04      .58       .02        1.66    1.08      1.54   7.89    73.16    .76      2.17    2.29
 2        0—2        .83     1.07       .30        3.13    1.80      2.93   7.66   69.68    1.52      3.79    4.08
 3        0—3        .67     1.58       .63      4.52      2.10 4.26        6.28    52.71   2.28      5.04    5.53
 4        0—4       1.04     1.90      1.09        5.45    1.35      5.34    .80     1.58   3.06      6.08    6.81
 5        0—5       1.06     2.27      1.35        6.19    1.37      6.02    .36     1.05   3.83      6.95    7.94

                                        Cororate Profits After Taxes (CP)e

 6        0—1        .26     2.49      —.02        9.50    2.03      9.39    .04     1.08   1.33      7.36    7.48
 7        0—2       1.00     4.58       .76     14.42      2.86   14.71     —.39     1.95   2.78     11.13   11.47
 B        0—3      2.58      6.54      2.64     18.58      3.32   18.75     —.14     4.23   4.17     13.54   14.17
 9        0—4      4,11      8.20      4,39     22.38      4.29   22.58      .05     7.34   5.55     15.56   16.52
10        0—5      6.29      9.66      6.61     26.30      4.94   26.47      .93     9.07   7.01     17.82   19.15


Refsrs    to    the period   l970:l—19894.
bBased   on the second revision of the monthly data.
         en   the first July revision         of the quarterly data.
                                       Table 16

        Individual, Group Mean, and EVAR Forecasts of Percent Changes in
       Industrial Production and Corporate Profits, Selected Comparisons.
                                    by Span. 1968—90


                  Group Mean R1(SE   Ratios   i/s      BVAR    RMSE Ratios i/by
Line   Span(Qa)      WiSE     Q        MO       Q3      WiSE    Q1     MI)    Q3
                     (1)      (2)     (3)      (4)      (5)     (6)    (7)    (8)

                       Index of Industrial Production (jp)b

 1       0—1         1.17    1.13     1.26     1.54     1.56    .85   1.00   1.32
 2       0—2         2.44    1.06     1.16     1.30    2.83     .90   1.04   1.45
 3       0—3         3.50    1.07     1.16     1.28    3.66     .99   1.20   1.58
 4       0—4         4.55    1.06     1.13     1.24    4.25    1.04   1.25   1.74
 5       0—5         6.16    1.05     1.13     1.26    4.78    1.04   1.21   1.66

                       Coroorste Profits After Taxes (CP'

 6       0—1         9.24    1.00     [.08     1.14     7.22   1.25   1.41   1.58
 7       0—2        13.68    1.01     1.08     1.16    11.22   1.15   1.32   1.49
 8      0—3         17.36    1.00     1.06     1.14    14.35   1.14   1.29   1.44
 9       0—4        20.98    1.00     1.06     1.14    16.62   1.18   1.31   1.48
10       0—5        24.41     .98     1.05     1.12    19.16   1.14   1.33   1.51



 For I?: Based on a model with six variables (RGNP, IPD. Ff2, LI, TSR, and IP)
and six quarterly lags. estimated sequentially with presently available data.
For CP: Based on a model with six variables (RCNP. IPD. M2, LI, TSR. and CP) and
six quarterly lags, estimated sequentially with presently available data. BVAR
variant A is used throughout.

       on the second revision of the monthly data.

Bssed on the first July revision of the quarterly data.
                                          Table 17

        Individual. Group Mean, and 5VA Forecasts of Percent changes in
       Industrial Production and Corporate Profits, Selected Comparisons,
                   by Span and Subperiod, 1968—79 and 1979—90



                   Median            R!(SE Ratios          Median             RuSE Ratjps
Line   Span(Qs)     RHSE      i/g       i/by     g/bv       RMSE        j/g       i/by g/bv
                    (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)   (8)


                       Index of Industrial Production (I?)
 1      0—1         1.65      1.23      1.00      .91       1.49       1.30     1.22    .83
 2      0—2         2.95      1.16      1.01      .92       3.13       1.09     1.42   1.07
 3      0—3         4.17      1.17      1.09      .95       4.54       1.11.    1.65   1.21
 6      0—4         4.96      1.14      1.16     1.00       5.84       1.10     1.70   1.29
 5      0—5         5.37      1.18      1.03     1.28       6.98       1.08     1.64   1.35
                          Coroorace Profits After Taxes (CP)

 6      0—1         9.13      1.06      1.68     1.40      10.08       1.06     1.37   1.20
 7      0—2        14.12      1.08      1.32      1.25     15.06       1.05     1.44   1.25
 8      0—3        17.62      1.05      1.17     1.13      19.06       1.08     1.47   1.29
 9      0—4        20.93      1.06      1.17     1.09      22.66       1.07     1.52   1.32
10      0—5        23.52      1.06      1.12     1.06      25.93       1.06     1.67



NOTE: Subscripts    i. g, and by refer to            the individual,    group mean,    and IVAR
forecasts, variant A, respectively.            RflSE is   the   median of the RuSEa of the
sampled for.casts (columns 1. and 5).          The i,'g ratio is RMSE/RMSE1 for strictly
matching observations, and th. i/by            ratio is R1(SE1/RI4SE, with medians of the
individual forecasts used      ineach          case (colu,anz 2 and 6, and 3 and 7,
respectively).    The g/bv     ratio     is    RnSE1/RnSE (columns 4 and 8). Se. also
notes to tables 1,3 and 14.
                                                          Table 18

               S.lecred Measures of Forecast Accuracy and Actual Values. Levels of the
                  Unemploys.ent Race and Housing            Starts, by
                                                           Target Quarter. 1968—90


     Target                 Mean Error                     Root Mean Square Error                 Actual Value
Line Quarter        H           SD       MD         H         SD     MD     5K       KU      H        SD     LMSV
                   (1)         (2)        (3)      (4)       (5)      (6)    (7)      (8)   (9)      (10)    (11)

                                                 Uneenlov.ent Rate(UR

 1.        1          .02       .08       .03      .26       .21      .21   4.93    27.12   6.30     1.61   6.70
 2         2      —   .01       .13       .01      .52       .20      .49   3.83    19.92
 3         3      —.08          .20      —.07      • 77      .23      .73   2.31    11.73
 4         4      —.20          .28      —.19       98       .26      .97   1.22     5.93
 5         5      —.22          .34      —.29     1.15       .25     1.13    .53      .65

                                                  Housins   Starts (HS)b

 6         1     —.04           .06      —.03      .23       .04      .23   —.01      .08   1.65      .38   1.69
 7         2     —.03           .09      —.02      .29       .05      .29    .18      .67
 8         3     —.00           .12       .01.      34       .07      .34    .61     2.23
 9         4          .03       .15       .03       38       .09      .38    .72     3.32
10         5          .06       .18       .08      .42        10      .41    .69     2.45

6aeed on   presently        available data (no teportant revisions).

5ssd en the second revision of the               aenthly    data.
                                      Table 19
      Individual, Group Mean, and BVAR Forecasts of Levels of the Unemployment
         Rate and Housing Starts, Selected Comparisons, by Target Quarter,
                                       196 8—90


        Target   Group Mean    RMSE Ratios i/s                __________________
Line Quarter        RMSE       Q1     MD      Q3     RMS      Q      MD
                     (1)      (2)     (3>    (4)     (5)       (6)    (7)    (8)
                              Unemployment Rate (UR)b
                                                        .28    .72    .84    .96
 2         2        .41       1.05    1.17   1.32       .50    .89   1.02   1.23
 3         3        .65       1.01    1.10   1.23    .66       .96   1.16   1.38
 4         4        .86        .98    1.09   1.20       .78   1.07   1.25   1.50
 S         5       1.00        .99    1.10   1,20
                               Housins Start! (HS'
 6         1.        .21       .99    1.06   1.16    .13      1.52   1.78   1.99
 7         2         .25      1.00    1.07   1.18    .20      1.30   1.41   1.60
 8         3        .29       1.02    1,08   1.19    .27      1.15   1.25   1.38
 9         4        .33        .98    1.10   1.16    .32       .99   1.13   1.22
10         5        .36        .99    1.07   1.18    .37       .93   1.04   1.16

 For IP: Based on a model, with aix variables (RaN?, IPD, K2, LI, TBR, and UP.)
and six quarterly lags, eaciat.d sequentially with presently available data.
For HS: Based on a model with six variablei (RCNP. XPD. M2, LI, TBR. and HS) and
six quarterly lags, estimated s.qu.ntially with presently available data. See
text and appendix. BVAP. variant A is used throughout.
bBaSed on presently available data.

Baged en ascend revision of the monthly data.
                                         Table 20
         Individual. Group Mean. and BVAR For.casts of the Uneeploytsent Rate
     and Housing Starts, Selected Coapariions, by Target Quarter and Subperiod
                                 1968—79 and 1979—90


                     Forecasts   for  196S:4—19793   Forecasts for l9794—I99O:j
        Target      Median          RNSE Ratios      Median           RuSE Ratios
Line Quarter        R2tSE    i/g       i/by   S/by      RMSE1 hg        i/by    g/bv
                      (1)    (2)       (3)     (4)       (5)  (6)        (7)    (8)

                                 Uneeolovment Rate(UR
 1          1.        .21    1.34       .84    .58       .21   1.39       .82       .57
 2         2          .45    1.15       .95    .80       .52   1.19      1.16       .84
 3          3         .66    1.06       .98    .95       .83   1.10      1.39   1.03
 4         4          .84    1.06      1.09   1.04      1.09   1.10      1.51   1.20
 5          5         .96    1.08      1.11   1.02      1.28   1.09      1.71   1.37
                                   Housins Starts (HS
 6         1          .23    1.07      1.58   1.39       .23   1.03      1.93   1.80
 7         2          .30    LOS       1.39   1.24       .28   1.05      1.43   1.26
 8         3          .37    1.10      1.27   1.14       .30   1.07      1.23   1.01
 9         4          .42    1.08      1.11   1.07       .31   1.05      1.14       .98
10          5         .45    LOS       1.01   1.01       .34   1.04      1.08       .98



NOTE:    S.. table 17.
                                      Table 21

          Michigan (RSQE) Economattic Forecasts and MBER—ASA Survey
       Forecasts of Nominal. and Peal GM? Growth and IPD Inflation Rates
                                   by Span. 1970—90

                    Michisan For.ciats     GrouD Mean Forecasts          RMSE Ratios.    i/H
Line Span(Qs)        H       MAE   RHSE     K     MAE   RI4SE            Q MD           Q3
                    (1)      (2)    (3)    (4)     (5)       (6)         (7)    (8)     (9)

                            Gross Netional Product (ON?)
 1     0—1         —.09      .80   1.08    —.09       .51     .66        .36     .73     .95
 2     0—2           .13    1.24   1.60    —.07       .91.   1.1.8       .73     .89    1.05
 3     0—3           .34    1.45   1.91.    .02    1.33      1.73        .95    1.11    1.27
 4     0—4           .51.   1.81   2.38     .04    1.64      2.15       na.     1.00    1.26
 3     0—5           .97    2.15   2.93    —.02    1.99      2.61.       .76    1.00    1.19
                Gross National Product in Constant Dollars           (RGNP1

 6     0—1           .01.    .77   1.02    —.05       .51.    .66        .56     .73     .99
 7     0—2           .23    1.09   1.49     .01     .88      1.16        .75     .91    1.13
 8     0—3           .46    1.34   1.77     .1.4   1.19      1.64        .91.   1.09    1.28
 9     0—4           .77    1.58   2.3,5    .1.9   1.32      1.89        .81     .97    1.30
10     0—S         1.20     1.96   2.88     .29    1.61.     2.32        .75     .94    1.18
                            I,olieit Price Deflator (IPD)
11     0—1         —.10      .39    .31    —.03       .27     .34        .71     .88    1.17
12     0—2         —.14      .72    .87    —.08     .52       .65        .81.    .97    1.17
13     0—4         —.15     1.00   1.32    —.12     .76      1.05        .78     .90    1.05
14     0—4         —.27     1.40   1.95    —.14    1.12      1.56        .78     .89    1.02
15     0—5         —.28     1.78   2.42    —.18    1.57      2.20        .87     .98    1.12


NOTE: The Michigan forecasts cov.r th. period 1970:4—1990:1, except for the
following quarters: 71:2, 72:2, 73:2, 74:2, 75:1., 75:2, 76:1, 77:2. 78:2. and
79:2. W. match the N3EP.—A5A forecasts to the Michigan forecasts period by
period. Tb. ratios in columns 7—9 are R2ISE/RHSF,I, where the subscript t refers
to individual forecasts from the N8E&—ASA surveys and the subscript H r.f.r. to
the Michigan forecasts.
                                             Table 22

            Michigan (&SQE) Econometric Fotscasta and HBEP.—ASA Survey
      Foracasca  of Percent Chang.a in Consumption. Investment, and Defense
                      Expenditursa. by Span. 1981—90 and 1968—81


                      Michisan Forecasta         Crouo Mean Forecasts RIISE       Ratios.   ifM
Line Span(Qs)              K    MAE    81(SE       K      MAE        RMSE    Q     Hi)      Q,
                          (1)   (2)    (3)         (4)    (5)        (6)    (7)     (8) (9)
                          rarspnal Conaumocjpn Exoenditurea (PCE

 I      0—1           —.12       .56    .76       —.14    .   47      .59   .82     .89 1.56
 2      0—2           —.19       .73    .89       —.24        .64     .77   .78     .97 1.25
 3      0—3           —.26       .93   1.15       —.39        .84     .99   .98 1.15 1.41.
 4      0—4           —.35      1.10   1.34       —.51    1.04       1.25   .94 1.21 1.52
 5      0—5           —.41      1.21   1.51       —.66    1.28       1.56   .92 1.30 1.51.

                          Nonreatdential Fixed Investment (NFl)

 6      0—1           —.63      2.04   2.65        —.69   1.68      2.10    .71  .93      1.18
 7      0—2          —1.04      3.25   4.26       —.93    2.74      3.52    .81 1.00      1.29
 8      0—3          —1.09 4.91        5.94      —1.38    4.03       5.23   .70  .87      1.09
 9      0—4           —.95 6.47        7.48      —1.71    5.57       7.09   .76  .93      1.16
10      0—5           —.84 7.71.       8.68      —2.16    7.57      9.11    .82 1.10      1.33
                            Residential Fixed Investment (RFI)

11      0—1           —.34 2.53        3.54       —.87    2.15      3.29    .79 1.36 1.57
12      0—2           —.30      3.89   3.93      —1.99    4.34      7.55    .92 1.20 1.79
13      0—4               .31   5.26   7.57      —3.72    6.51      11.43   .92 1.11 1.37
14      0—4           1.36 6.59   9.02           —5.43    8.43 16.32        .96 1.16 1.29
15      0—3           2.32 8.19 10.56            —7.51 10.55 17.46          .93    1.1.4 1.26

                           National Defense E,mendituree (OFF)

16      0—1           —.09      2.18   2.54       —.07    1.44      2.00    .85  .98 1.20
1.7     0—2           —.28      2.89   3.65         .56. 2.28       3.08    .84 1.04 1.19
18      0—3           —.49      3.75   4.52      —1.49    3.13      4.09    .74  .92 1.15
19      0—4           —.65 4.03        4.76      —2.14    4.34      5.23    .79 1.01 1.25
20      0—5           —.95 5.84        6.83      —3.64    5.45      7.07    .67     .80     .99


NOTE: S..     Table 21.
                                          Table 23
        Michigan (RSQE) Econometric Forecasts and NBER—ASA Forscascs of
      the Unemployment Rat., treasury 8111 Rate, and Corporate Bond Yield,
                        by Target Quarter. 1.968—90 and 1.981—go


      Target      Mich!ean Forecista         Crouo Mean Forecasts      RJSE Ratios. i/H
Line Quarter       H       MAE    P.MSE       M         MAE    RZISE    Q    MD        Q
                  (1)      (2)    (3)        (4)        (5)    (6)     (7)   (8)      (9)
                           TJnem1ovment Rate. 1968—90 (UR

 1       1.      .05       .14    .17         .02      .1.3    .17     1.07   1.32   1.72
 2       2       .08       .33    .44         .05      .33     .43     1.03   1.15   1.35
 3       3       .05       .49    .67         .03      .51.    .68     1.01   1.16   1.32
 4       4      —.01.      .58    .78         .00      .61     .55     1.08   1.21   1.38
 5       5      —.11       .69    .93        —.02      .71     .96     1.01   1.18   1.33
                          Treasury Bill Rat..       1981—90 (TBR)

 6       3.     —.04       .24    .31.        .01      .15     .20      .96   1.17   1.58
 7       2      —.05       .79   1.07         .15      .69     .91      .85    .96   1.19
 8       3      —.01      1.13   1.39         .38     1.11.   1.40      .97   1.11   1.32
 9       4       .07      1.37   1.64         .62     1.45    1,80     1.05   1.25   1.39
10       5       .21      1.67   1.90         .87     1.72    2.16     1.06   1.25   1.52

                         CorDorat. lond Yield. 1981—90 (CBY
1.1      1.     —.44       .48    .63        —.19      .3].    .38      .73    .97   1.26
12       2      —.31.      .64    .81        —.07      .66     .83     1.17   1.28   1.55
13       3      —.20       .84   1.08         .16     1.05    1.23     1.23   1.36   1.50
1.4      4      —.12      1.17   1.43         .31     1.32    1.33     1.08   1.23   1.39
15       5      —.03      1.39   1.68         .57     1.48    1.74     1.02   1.12   1.32



MOTE: S.. Tab].. 21.
                                                     table 26
              Sims Model Forecasts (Iwo Variants) and NBER—ASA Survey Forecasts
                     of Nominal, and geal CNP Growth, and IPD Inflation,
                                          by Span. 1968—90 and 1981—90

                   Sims Model Forecasts(S)             Crouc Mean      Forecasts    RuSE Rst1o. i/S
Line Span(Qs)         M    MAE    RuSE                 H     MAE        RMSE         Q      MD    q5
                        (1)    (2)         (3)        (4)    (5)         (6)        (7)     (8)   (9)
                               Gross Natjpp1 Product. 1968—90 (CNP)
                                                     Variant A

  1    0—1              .01        .86     1.09       —.08       .49      .64       .51     .66    .89
 2     0—2              .01    1.31        1.68       —.10       .84    1.1.1       .62     .79    .94
  3    0—3          —.05       1.87        2.36       —.07   1.22       1.61        .62     .79    .93
 4     0—4          —.11       2.32        2.93       —.02   1.56       2.06        .65     .79     98
 5     0—5          —.20       2.74        3.48       —.09   1.91       2.51        .65     .80   1.08

                                                     Variant B

 6     0—1          0          0           0                                        n.a. n.e. na.
 7     0—2              .00     .85        1.08                                     .70     .84    .98
 8     0—3              .02    1.29        1.66                                     .81     .93   1.10
 9     0—4              .08    1.85        2.33                                     .74     .88   1.09
10     0—5              .15    2.29        2.90                                     .78     .88   1.10

                 Cross National Product in Constant Dollars. 1968—90 (RCNP)

                                                     Variant A

11     0—1.             .03        • 78     .99       —.02    .50         .64       .63     .7?    .98
12     0—2              .05    1.18        1.50        .02    .83       LII         .73     .86   1.06
13     0—3              .06    1.68        2.12         16   1.17       1.61        .15     .89   1.05
14     0—4              .02    2.10        2.66        .33   1.42       2.05        .79     .93   1.08
1,5    0—5          —.03       2.54        3.15        .40   1.70       2.47        .80     .96   1.12

                                                     Variant B

16     0—1          0          0           0                                        n.e. n.e. n.e.
17     0—2          —.02           .19     1.00                                     .81     .96   1.11
18     0—3          —.03       1.19        1.51                                     .99    1.12   1.27
19     0—4          —.03       1.70        2.14                                     .97    1.12   1.30
20     0—5              .00    2.11.       2.68                                    1.01 1.1.3     1.36

                               Imol.icit Price Deflator. 1968—90 (IPD)

                                                     Variant A
21     0—1.             .01.       .30         .38    —.04       .27      .34       .71.    .88   1.17
22     0—2              .04        .54         .68    —.12    .55        .70       1.8L'    .97 - 1.17
23     0—4              .08        .75      .95       —.22    .84       1.13       1.24    1.46   1.73
24     0—4              .12    1.01        1.25       —.34   1.21       1.64       1.35 1.58      1.85
25     0—5              .16    1.29        1.59       —.31   1.63       2.23       1.40 1.68      1.99
                 SI Model Fotecast(Sj CrOUD       Meen   Forecp RMSE Rtioi. i/S
L.in. Spsn(Q3)       M   MAE       RMSE     M     MAE     RNSE    Q1    W
                  (1)    (2)       (3)     (4)    (5)     (6)     (7)   (6)   (9)
                                          Variant 8
26     0—1       0       0         0                              n.e n.e. n.e.
27     0—2       —.02        .31    .39                          1.31 1.52 1.81.
28     0—3       —.05        .55    .69                          1.43 1.63 1.91
29     0—4       —.09     .76       .96                          1.51 1.68 1.90
30     0—5       —.16    1.02      1.26                          1.47 1.71 1.98
                                           Table 25
         Sims Model Forecasts (Variant A) and NBER—ASA Survey Forecasts
        of the Unemployment Rate, the Treasury Bill Rate, and Growth in
               Real Nonresidential Investment, by Target Quarter,
                          or Span. 1968—90 and 1981—90


       Target       Sims Model Forecasts        Crouo Mean Forecasts RuSE        Ratios, I/S
Line Quarter           N      MAE    RMSE         M       MAE     RuSE     Q1       MI)
       or   Span(Q5) (1)      (2)     (3)       (4)        (5)     (6)    (7)       (8)    (9)
                            Unemolovisent Rate 1968—90 (IJR)
 1          1         .09      .39     .55       .03       .13      .16   .35     .45      .55
 2          2         .14      .56     .79       .04       .32      .41   .54     .65      .81
 3          3         .18      .76    1.03      — .00      .49      .65   .59     .71      .93
 4          4         .21      .95    1.23      — .08      .63      .86   .66     .78      .94
 5          5        .23      1.10    1.40      —.10       .73    1.00    .66     .79      .98

                            Treasury Bill Rate. 1981—90 (TBR)
 6          1       —.34      1.27    1.57       .01        .15     .20   .20     .24      .29
 7          2       —.54      1.47    1.84       .13        .68     .90   .52     .62      .70
 8          3       —.60      1.69    2.13       .35      1.09    1.38    .62     .71      .82
 9          4       —.71      1.96    2.48       .61      1.41    1.77    .67     .76      .86
                                                                          .75     .86      .97


                  Nonresidential Fixed Inveensent. 1981—90 (NFl)

11       0—i         —.16     2.31    2.93      —.45      1.61    2.01     .72    .85     1.01
12       0—2         —.31     3.61    4.16      —.88      2.67    3.43     .63    .72     1.01
13       0—3         —.74     5.23    6.05     —1.19      3.93    4.99     .60    .67      .85
14       0—4         —.90     4.50    6.69     —1.74      5.51    6.89     .60    .65      .93
15       0—5        —1.63     4.95    7.31     —2.31       7.29   8.69     .54    .65      .75



NOTE to tables 24 and 25:      Sims' is a nine—variable, five—lag quarterly
probabilistic model (see text for more detail). The Sims forecasts contain no
gaps and refer to the same periods as those covered by the NOER—ASA aurvey
forecasts (individual and group means). The entries in columns 7—9 represent
ratios R1(SE/RflSEs. where the subscript i refers to individual forecasts from the
surveys and the subscript S refers to the Sims model forecasts. Qt and Q3 denote
the   lower and upper quartile ratios, and MD           denote the median ratios.

      Variant A assumes that         the   last known values of the variables to be
predicted refer to the quarter t—l (denoted 0); variant B sssumes that they refer
to the currenter quarter t (denoted 1).
                                                Table 26

       ARIMA Modal Forecasts (Two Variants) and N8ER—ASA Survey Forecasts
                  of Nominal.   and Real     CM? Growth, and IPD Inflation,
                                       by Span. 1968—90

                         ARI.KA          ARTHA Forecasts                RuSE Ratios i/A
Line     Span(Qs)        Modst(A)           N      MAE           RuSE   Q    MD       Q,
                          (1)               (2)    (3)           (6)    (5)   (6)      (7)
                                  Cross Mationsl Product (CM?)
                                                Variant      A

 1         0—1.          n.a.           —.11        .95          1.18    .48     .61.    .82
 2         0—2                          —.29       1.64          2.05    .53     .64     .74
 3         0—3                          —.55       2.51          3.04    .51     .61     .73
 4         0—6                          —.85       3.32          4.00    .51.    .58     .69
 5         0—5                         —1.19       4.11          4.96    .49     .61.    .74

                                                Variant      B

 6         0—1           na.            0          0             0      n.e.    n.a.    n.a.
 7         0—2                              .12     .94          1.18    .64     .17     .86
 8         0—3                              .32    1.62          2.02    .71     .81     .95
 9         0—4                              .59    2.68          3.01    .61     .11.    .87
10         0—5                              .91    3.28          3.96    .59     .74     .94

                   Cross Mationpi Product          in Constant Dollars (RCNP)
                                                Variant A
11         0—1           1,1,0          —.06           .80       1.03    .60     .74     .94
12         0—2                          —.14       1.33          1.68    .67     .79     .94
13         0—3                          —.27        1.91         2.33    .11     .82    1.00
14         0—4            .             —.40       2.31          2.88    .11     .86    1.05
15         0—5                          —.54       2.82          3.39    .76     .93    1.11

                                                Variant 5

16         0—1           1.1,0          0          0             0      na.     n.a.    n.a.
1.7        0—2                              .06      .81         1.04    .78     .93    1.08
18         0—3                              .16     1.33         1.68    .91    1.04    1.21
19         0—4                              .28     1.93         2.35    .93    1.07    1.29
20         0—5                              .43     2.39         2.91    .99    1.11    1.34

                                  Imolicic Price       Deflator (TPD1

                                                Variant A

21         0—1           1.1.2              .05        .38        .50    .72     .93    1.11
22         0—2                              .15      .80         1.00    .71.    .81    1.10
23         0—4                              .29     1.27         1.60    .68     .90    1.11
24         0—4                              .49     1.84         2.29    .65     .93    1.16
25          0—5                             .74     2.47         3.07    .63    1.02    1.28
                       ARIMA       ARIMA Forecasts               .RIISE Ratios i/A
Line      Span(Qa)     Model(A)       N      MAE       RMSE
                        (1)           (2)    (3)       (4)        (5)    (6)     (7)

                                          Variant B

26         0—1         1.1,2      0          0         0         n.m.   n.m.   n.m.
27         0—2                    —.05           .39       .51    .94   1.10   1.39
28         0—3                    —.1.6          .80   1.01       .97   1.17   1.37
29         0—4                    —.32       1.27      1.62       .88   1.11   1.33
30         0—5                    —.53       1.86      2.32       .79   1.14   1.60


n.m.   Not available   (forecasta obtained from those for RCNP and IPD).
                                           Table 27

            ARIMA Model Forecasts (Variant A) and NBER—ASA Survey
         Forecasts of the Unemp1oya.nc Rat., the Treasury Bill Rat.,
       and Crowth in Real. Nonresidential Invasteenc, by Target Quarter,
                             or   Span. 1968—90 and 1981—90

        Target
       Quarter or      ARINA          ARIMA Forecasts            RuSE Ratios   i/A
Line    Span(Qs)      Hodal(A)       H       MAE       R1SE        Qt    MD
                       (1)           (2)      (3)       (4)       (5)   (6)     (7)

                                  Ures,lov.ent Rate (UR)
 1         1.         1,1.0         —.25       .45       .65      .30   .36     .44
 2         2                        —.44       .67       .96      .44   .52     .60
 3         3                        —.63       .87      1.26      .50   .58     .68
 1.        4                        —.80      1.07      1.50      .36   .63     .74
 5         5                        —.94      1.21      1.67      .58   .66     .76
                               Treasury Bill        Rate (T8R)
 6         2.         0,1,1         —.39      1.37      1.96      .15   .19     .26
 7         2                        —.66      1.60      2.14      .42   .49     .61
 8         3                        —.80      1.88      2.59      .53   .60     .72
 9         4                         —.96     2.26      3.19      .57   .65     .72
10         5                        —1.19     2.31      3.49      .59   .69     .78

                       Nonresidential Fixed Investment (NFl)

12.       0—1         1.1,0          —.07     1.63      2.37      .58   .64 1.21
12        0—2                        —.16     3.32      4.27      .65   .78     .98
13        0—3                        —.22     5.10      6.26      .58   .64     .81
15        0—4                        —.22     6.76      8.11      .50   .59     .65
16        0—5                        —.16     8.1.9     9.69      .40   .48     .56

NOTE to Tables 26 and 27: The specifications of the ARIMA models ar, as in Sims
and Todd 1991, Table 1.    For mor, detail, see          pp. 3-4. The entries in
col.umns 5—6    rspr.s.nr ratios RMSi/RflSE*. where the subscript i reZ.rs to
individual, forecasts from the NRER—ASA surveys and th. subscript A refers to the
ARIMA model forecasts.
                                                  Table 28

                    Jeutz Model Forecasts and NBER—ASA S..rvey Forecasts
                     of Notnal and Real GNP ro,.rch and IPD InflatIon,
                                             by Span, 1976—1990

                  Jouc: Nodal Foracaats(J)           Croun Mean     Forecasrs(g)   RuSE Rattps. i/i
Line   Span(Qs)      N        MAE     RMSE                N     MAE     RNSE        Q    MD    Q3
                    (1)       (2)      (3)                (4)     (5)    (6)        (7)    (8)   (9)
                                     Cross National Product (C1P)

 1      0—1         .04       .72      .96            —.05        .55    .70        .73    .89   1.25
 2      0—2         .09      1.21.   1.52             —.02        .89   1.16        .85   1.08   1.26
 3      0—3         .16      1.65    2.08                .08    1.30    1.69       1.00   1.18   1.64
 4      0—4         .28      2.05    2.58                .18    1.63    2.15        .94   1.14   1.39

                         Cross National Product     in   Constant Dollars (RCtP)

 5      0—1.        .02       .64      .85            —.08        .53    .65        .86   1.07   1.40
 6      0—2         .08      1.05     1.31            —.10        .81   1.03        .84   1.03   1.45
 7       0—3        .18      1.38     1.68            —.05      1.03    1.35        .95   1.21   1.55
 8       0—4        .30      1.53     1.90            —.04      1.12    1.37        .89   1.12   1.51

                                     Ie1icit Price Deflator (IPD

 9       0—1        .01.      .29      .37               .04      .24    .30        .86   1.07   1.40
10       0—2        .00       .53      .65               .09      .63    .52        .78    .96   1.30
11       0—3       —.03       .73      .96               .15      .61    .75        .80    .98   1.21
12       0—4       —.04      1.05     1.33               .21      .89   1.06        .79    .97   1.28
                                      Table 29

         Nine Sets of Forecasts Ranked According to Their Average RJISEs,
                          Three Veriables, 1968:4—1990:1

                             Cross National      CUP in Constant   implicit Price
                             Product (CUP)       Dollsrs (RCNP)    Deflator ()PD
Line       Forecast           ARMSE   Rank        ARNSE    Rank    ARtISt   Rank
                              (1)     (2)          (3)     (4)       (5)     (6)

 I      NBER—ASA median       190      4          1.94     7         1.53     7
 2      UBER—ASA consensus    1.586    1          1.58     3         1.21     5
 3      Michigan (RSQE)       1.98     S          1.87     5         1.42     6
 6      BVAR(A)               2.69     8          1.90     6         1.62     8
 5      BVAR(B)               1.89     3          1.40     1         1.03     3
 6      Sims(A)               2.30     7          2.08     8          .97     2
 7      Sims(B)               1.594    2          1.47     2          .66     1
 8      Sims—Todd ARIMA(A)    3.05     9          2.26     9         1.69     9
 9      Sims—Todd ARIMA(B)    2.03     6          1.60     4         1.09     4


NOTE:  ARNSE (average root mean square error) is computed by taking the mean of
the RuSts across the five spans 0—1        0—S. The smallest ARtISt is ranked 1,
the largest ARtISt is ranked 9, for each of the three variables.


SOURCE: Line L is based on entries in table 10, line 3, columns 1—5; line 2. on
table 9, column 6; line 3, on table 21. column 3; lines 4 and 5, on table 13.
column 3; lines 6 and 7, on table 26, column 3; and lines 8 and 7, on table 26.
column 6.
                                                 table 30

          Six Sets of Forecasts Ranked According to their RXSEs Averaged Across Spans.
                  21 Variables. 1968:4—1990:1, 1968:4—1981:2 and 1981:3—1990:1


                          Averafe Root Mean Sousre Error (AFJISE') and the Correspond ins Rprdctl
                                                                                   Sims
                   NIER—ASA Surveys     Croup             BVAR        Michigan Probabilistic ARIMA
                   Median Individual (Consensus)         Model         (RSQE)      Model      Model
Line    Verieble       Forecast        Forecast         Forecast      Forecast   Forecast    Foretast
                            (1)                (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)             (6)

                                               1968:4—1990:1

 1        GNP              1.90(2)          1.59(1)      2.69(5)       1.98(3)    2.30(4)      3.05(6)
 2        RCNP             1.94(4)          1.58(1)      1.90(3)       1.87(2)    2.08(5)      2.26(6)
 3        tPD              1.53(6)          1.21(2)      1.62(5)       1.42(3)      .97(1)     1.69(6)
 4        IP               4.02(3)          3.56(2)      3.42(1)        n.e.       n.a.         na.
 S        CP              18.38(3)         17.13(2)     13.71(1)        n.a.       n.e.         n.e.
 6        UR                 .71(4)          .62(3)        .61(2)       .60(1)    1.00(5)      1.21(6)
 7        MS                 .33(3)           .29(2)         .26(1)     n.e.       na.          n.a.

                                               1968:4—1981:2

 8        CD               5.65(2)           5.05(l)        5.93(3)     n.e.       n.e.         n.e.
 9        FE              11.49(3)          11.08(2)     4.35(1)        n.e.       n.a.         n.e.
10        DEE              3.92(2)           3.34(1)     8.19(4)       4.46(3)     n.e.         n.a.
11        CII             11.38(1)          12.38(2)    13.94(3)        n.e.       n.e.         n.e.

                                               1981:3—1990:1

12        RC8I            19.69(2)          18.96(1)    26.69(3)        n.e.       n.e.          n.a.
13        NX              47.29(3)          44.19(2)    21.02(1)        n.e.       n.e.          n.a.
14        FCE              1.30(3)           1.24(2)     5.69(4)       1.13(1)     n.e.          n.a.
15        NFl              6.06(5)           1.11(1)     5.25(2)       5.80(4)    5.43(3)       6.14(6)
16        REt                                1.22(1)     8.70(2)      10.81(4)     n.e.          n.e.
                           9.59(3)
17        FCP              4.96(2)           1.38(1)     8.54(3)        n.e.       n.e.          n.e.
18        SLCP             1.47(3)             .94(l)    1.27(2)        n.e.        n.e.         n.e.
19        CU               1.19(3)             .52(1)        .76(2)     n.e.        n.e.         n.e.
20        TIR              1.71(3)           1.35(2)        2.03(4)    1.26(1)     2.14(5)      2.67(6)
21        CII              1.64(3)           1.28(2)        1.72(4)    1.13(1)      n.e.         n.a.




n.e.   — not available.
 0n the symbols used, see previous tables end text.

bARnSE — average of the RNSEs etross the five horizons (0—1, ...0—5 or 1,.. .5).              Entries in
perentheses represent renics eccording to AB}jSE ( smallest to largest).
                                                   table 31

        Six Sets of Forecasts Ranked According to Their Overall Accuracy Across Variables
                   by Period, 1968:4—1990:1, 1968:4-1981:2. and 1981:2—1990:1


                             Rankina Accordine to the Sum of Ranks Across Vsriablesb
                                                                                   S has
            Number        Individual      Group         BVAR       Michigan     Probabilistic    ARIMA
              of            Median     (Consensus)      Model      (RSQE)          Model         Model
Line    Variables'         Forecast      Forecast      Forecast    Forecast       Forecast      Forecast
                             (1)          (2)             (3)        (4)            (5)             (6)

                                                1968:4—1990:1

 1      7(1—7)            Third(23)     Firsc(i3)     Second(18)     n.a.            na.          n.a.
 2      6(1—36)           Thirdfl6)     Firsc)        Fourth(1S)   Second(9)      Fourth(15)    Sixth(36)

                                                1968:4—1981:2

 3      4(8—11)            Second(S)    First(6)      Third(ll)      na.             n.a.         n.a.

                                                1981:2—1990:1

 4          10(12—21)      Third(30)    Firsc(14)     Second(27)     n.e.            na.          na.
 5          5(14—16,20,21) Third(17)    Firsc(8)      Fourth(lb)   Second(ll)        n.a.         na.
 6          2(15.20)       Fourth(8)    Firsc(3)      Third(6)     Second(S)      Fourth(S)      Sixth(12)




na. — not available.

'Identified by lines in table 30 in parentheses.

bsum   of   the ranks froa table 30 is given in parentheses.
                                        References


Braun, P.A. and I. Yaniv, 1991. "A Case Study of Expert Judgment: Economists
      Probabilistic Forecasts," mimeo, University of Chicago.

Burns. A.F. and W.C. Mitchell. 1946. Measurine Business Cycles. New York:
      NBER.

Butler.    W.F. and R.A. Kavesh. 1974. "Judgmental Forecasting of the Gross
      National Products' in W.F. Butler, R.A. Kavesh, and R.B. Platt, eds.
      Methods and Technjoues of Business ForecastiTiz. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
      Prentice—Hall,    Inc. .   pp. 207—221.
Carlson.    J.A. 1977. "Study of Price Forecasts." Annals of Econo,nic and Social
      Measurement,    vol. 6, no. 1 (Winter). pp. 27—56.

Clemen, R.T. 1989. "Combining Forecasts: A Review and Annotated Bibliography,"
      International Journal of Forecastine, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 559—583.

Cole, R. 1969. Errors in Provisional Estimates of Cross National Product. New
      York: NBER.

Cox. G.V.   1929. An Aooraisal of American Business Forecasts. Chicago:
      University of Chicago Press.

Dominguez. K.14., R.C. Fair. and M.D. Shapiro. 1988. Forecasting the Depression:
      Harvard versus Yale," American Economic Review, vol. 78, no.6 (September),
      pp. 595—612.

Evans. M.K.. Y. Haitovsky. and C.I. Treyz. assisted by V. Su. 1972. "An Analysis
      of the Forecasting Properties of U.S. Econometric Models." In C. Hickman.
      ed.. Econometric Models of Cyclical Behavior. New York: Columbia
      University Press for NBER,       vol.   2. pp. 949—1158.

Fels, R. and C.E. Hinshaw. 1968. Forecastine and RecoEnizinr Business Cycle
      Turnins Points. New York: NEER.

Grunberg, E. and F. Modigliani. 1954. "The Predictability of Social Events,"
      Journal of Political Economy, vol. 62, no. 6 (December). pp. 465—478.

Haitovsky, Y., G.I. Treyz, and V. Su. 1974. Forecasts with quarterly Macro—
      econometric Models. New York: NBER.

Hicks, J.R. 1979. Causality in Economics. New York: Basic Books.

Keynes. J.M. 1936. The General Theory of Emolovment. Interest and Money.
      London:     Macmillan.

Knight.    F.M 1921. Risk. Uncertainty, and Profit. Boston: Houghton—Mifflin.
Litterman, RB. 1986. "Forecasting with Bayesian Vector Autoregressions — Five
      Years of Experience," Journal of Business & Economics Statistics, vol. 4•
      no. 1 (January). pp. 25—38.

McCloskey, D.N. 1988. "The Limits of Expertise: If You're So Smart, thy   Am' t
      You Rich?." The American Scholar, Summer, pp. 393—406.

McNees, S.K. 1979. 'The Forecasting Record of the 1970s," New Enaland Economic
      Review, September/October: 1—21.

Mincer, J. 1969. Economic Forecasts apd Expectations: Analyses of Fprecastjn
      Behavior and Performance. New York: Columbia University Press for NBER.

Moore, G.H. 1969. "Forecasting Short—Term Economic Change," Journal of the
      American Statistical Association. 64(March): 1—22.

Morgenstern, 0. 1928. 4irtschaftsoronose: Eine Untersuchun2 ihrer
      Voraussetzunen and lló2lichkeiten. Ijien: Springer.

Niemira, H. and P.A. klein. 1991. "Forecasting the Great Depression Using
      Cyclical Indicators: Another Look." mimeo. New York: Mitsubishi Bank.

Okun. A.M. 1959. "A Review of Some Economic Forecasts for 1955—57," Journal of
      Business, vol.. 32 (July): 199—211.

Sims, CA. 1989. "A Nine—Variable Probabilistic Macroeconomic Forecasting
      Model." Discussion Paper 14, Institute for Empirical Macroeconomics.
      Federal Reserve Bank of Minnesota. (May) mimeo.

Sims. C.A. and R.M. Todd. 1991. "Evaluating Bayesian Vector Autoregressive
      Forecasting Procedures for Macroeconomic Data: Part 2,' presented at NSF—
      NBER Seminar on Bayesian Inference in Econometrics and Statistics. St.
      Paul, Minnesota (April).

Solow, R.M. 1985. "Economic History and Economics," American Economic Review,
      vol. 75, no. 2, (May). pp. 328—331.

Stekier, H.O. 1968. 'Forecasting with Econometric Models: An Evaluation,"
      Econometrica, vol. 36, pp. 437—463.

Su, V. and J. Su. 1975. "An Evaluation of the ASA/NBER Business Outlook Survey
      Forecasts," Explorations in Economic Research, vol. 2, pp. 588—618.

Suits, D. B. 1962. "Forecasting and Analysis with an Econometric Model,"
      American Economic Review, vol. 52, pp. 104—132.

Thorp. W.L. 1926. Business Annals. New York: NBER.

Theil,    H.  1961. Economic Forecasts and Policy. 2nd rev. ed., Amsterdam:
         North—Holland.
Theil. II.  1966. Aoolied Economic ForecastiTw. Amsterdam: North—Holland.
       Chicago: Rand McNally.

Theil, H. 1967. Economics and Information Theory. Amsterdam: North Holland.
      Chicago: Rand McNally.

Zarnowitz, V. 1967. An Appraisal of Short—Term Economic Forecast. New York:
       NBER.

Zarnowitz,  V. 1968. "The New ASA—NBER Survey of Forecasts by Economic Scads—
       ticians" A Supplement to National Bureau Report 4 (December). Also in Ih
       American Statistician, vol. 23, no. 1. pp. 12—16.
Zarnowitz, V. 1971. "New Plans and Results of Research in Economic
      Forecasting," Fifty—first Annual Report. New York: NBER.

Zarnowitz, V. 1972.    Forecasting Economic Conditions: The Record and the
      Prospect," in V. Zarnowitz, ed., The Business Cycle Today, Columbia
      University Press for NBER. pp. 183—239.

Zarnouitz, V. 1979. "An Analysis of Annual and Multiperiod Quarterly Forecasts
      of Aggregate Income, Output, and the Price Level." Journal of Business,
      vol. 52, no. 1. pp. 1—33.

Zarnowitz, V. 1982. "Improvements and New Studies of the Economic Outlook
      Survey." NBER Reporter, Summer 1982, pp. 11—13.

Zarnovitz, V. 1983. "Some Lessons from Research in Macroeconomic Forecasting,"
      Economic Outlook USA, vol. 10. no. 4 (Autumn), pp. 83—86.

Zarnowitz, V. 1984. "The Accuracy of Individual and Group Forecasts from
      Business Outlook Surveys." Journal of Forecastina, vol.3, no. 1 (January—
      March), pp.11—26.

Zarnowitz, V. 1985. "Rational Expectations and Macroeconomic Forecasts,"
      Journal of Business & Economic Statistics. vol. 3, no. 4 (October). pp.
       293—311.
 Zarnowitz, V. 1991a. Business Cycles: Theories. History. Indicators, and
       Forecasttha. University of Chicago Press for NBER. In print.

 Z,arnowitz. V. 1991.b. "Has Macro—Forecasting Failed?." Money. Macroeconomics,
        and Forecastinz, Cato Institute's Ninth Annual Monetary Conference
        (February).

 Zarnowitz,  V. and P. Braun, 1990. "Major Macroeconomic Variables and Leading
        Indexes: Some Estimates of Their Interre1ations,' In P.A. Klein, ed.,
        Analvzins Modern Business Cycles: Essays Hpnorins Geoffrey II. Moore.
        Armonk, N.Y.: M.E. Sharpe, Inc., pp. 177—205.

 Zarnowitz, V. and L.A. Lambros. 1987. "Consensus and Uncertainty in Economic
        Prediction." Journal of Political Economy. vol. 95. no. 3 (June), pp. 591—
        621.
                                    Appendix


  Appendix: Forecasts of Diverse Macroeconomic Series. 1968—81 and 1981—90

A.l Selected Nominal Aureates. 1968—81

      Current—dollar expenditures on durable consumer goods, business plant and

equipment, and national defense (CD, P8, and DEF. respectively> all contribute

strongly to the cyclicall.ty and volatility of quarterly changes in CNP. DEF is

generally treated as an important exogenous variable.

      The statistics for mean errors suggest that underestimates prevailed in the

forecasts of CD and FE, overestimates in those of DEF. but there is much

dispersion across the individual respondents here, which increases strongly with

the forecast horizon (Table A.l, columns 1—3). The R1(SE measures show much the

same kind of progression (columns 6—6). The forecast errors generally are at

least smaller than the actual percent changes in CD. P8, and DEF. but often not

by much, as can be seen by comparing the corresponding entries in columns 4—6 and

9—11. Most of the SK and KU values are small, and only a few fot CD and DEF may

be significant (columns 7 and 8).

      The gains from averaging across the individual forecasts are modest for CD

and DEF and, perhaps surprisingly, hardly existent for P8 (Table A.2, columns 1—

4).    The RMSE ratios for FE are closely clustered, indicating lack of

differentiation among the forecasts for this variable. One possible reason may

be the availability and influence of the quarterly anticipation series for plant

and equipment outlays.

      The RNSEs of our BVAR forecasts are larger than those of the group mean

 forecasts for CD, and much larger for DEF. In contrast, BVAR is found to be much

 more accurate than the survey averages for P8. Indeed, the RMSE ratios i/by are

 relatively very low for CD and DEF, very high for FE throughout. (Compare the
corresponding measures in columns 1—4 and 5—8).

      Finally, the NSER—ASA survey questionnaire used through 1981,2 asked for

forecasts of the levels of inventory investment in current dollars (CBI), another

important but highly volatile and hard—to—predict variable.       Table A.3 shows

that the mean errors and root mean square errors for CBI increased markedly with

the span, while the corresponding standard deviation did not (lines 1—5). The

M and MD Statistics for mean errors are all positive here, the RNSE for target

quarter 5 (i.e. .   t+4)   is about equal to the actual RMSV.

      Apparently. CBI is another of those rare cases in which combining the

individual survey forecasts is of little help.           The group mean's RMSE is

relatively large, and even the lower quartile i/g ratios are close to one (see

Table A.4, lines 1—5). However, our BVAR model performs somewhat worse still

here (cf. columns 1—4 and 5—8).



A.2 ComDonents of Real CUP. 1981—90

      After mid—1981, the survey collected forecasts of the main GUI' expenditure

categories in constant dollars. We start with real inventory investment (RCSI).

to follow up on the preceding. It turns out that the RCBI forecasts for 1981—90,

like the CBI forecasts for 1981—90, have RflSEs that are large relative to the

average actual levels and their variability, especially for the more distant

target quarters (Table A.3, lines 6—10). The average MEs are negative but very

small, the SDs are large and stable. Again, little is gained by averaging the

 individual forecasts, but the group mean forecasts do have a distinct advantage

 over the gV.R forecasts (Table A.4, lines 6—10).

       Similarly, real net exports (NX) were on the whole poorly predicted in the

 l980s, as seen from the large relative size of the summary error measures in
Table A.3, lines 11—15. For NX, too, the group mean forecasts do not help much.

but in this case the BVAR forecasts are found to be much more accurate (Table

A.4. Lines 11—15).

      One would expect total consumption (PCE). the largest and smoothest

component of real GNF, to be the easiest to predict and in fact best predicted.

A relatively small but smooth and presumably also well predictable series should

be that of state and local government purchases (SLOP).       Federal government

purchases (FOP) are more autonomous and volatile, hence more difficult to

forecast. Residential fixed investment (RFI) is another hard problem for the

forecasters, though for different reasons: it is highly cyclical and an early

leading series (construction lags behind housing permits and starts are short).

nonresidential fixed investment (NFl) has more persistence, more of an upward

trend, and lags at cyclical turning points, which should make it more predictable

than Rn. Also, NFl is anticipated with long leads by new capital appropriations

and contracts and orders for plant and equipment— but these monthly series on

business investment commitments are themselves very volatile.

      The evidence on the forecasts of percent changes in PCE, NFl, RFI. FOP, and

SLOP is generally consistent with these priors. Thus, forecasts of growth in PCE

four quarters ahead have errors averaging about half the actual percent change

 (Table A.S, lines 1—5). This is not great but fair, and in sharp contrast to the

apparent failure of forecasts of inventory investment (the least predictable of

 the components of aggregate demand). The RHSEs of the NFl forecasts are much

 smaller than their counterparts for PSI (but the actual percent changes are also

 smaller for NFl; cf. the corresponding entries in lines 6—10 an 11—15). The SLOP

 forecasts are definitely much more accurate than the FOP forecasts (cf. lines 16—

 20 and 21—25).
        The forecasts share some characteristics across all the variables. All the

H and MD statistics for mean errors are negative, suggesting a          prevalence   of

underprediction errors (columns I and 3).            The absolute values of these

statistics increase with the span in each case. Indeed, all the summary error

measures, except SK and KU. show such increases, as do the statistics for actual

values,16 The means of the R1'tSEs are generally larger than the medians, and

SK > 0.    The KU statistics are large in some cases, particularly for NFl (short

forecasts) and SLCP.

        Combining the individual forecasts into group means reduces the RHSEs for

each variable and span, as can be seen by comparing column 1 in Table A.6 with

column 6 (and a fortiori with column 4) in Table A.5. AC the lower quartile Q1,

the RMSE ratios i/g are close to one throughout; the range of the median ratios

is about l.1'-L3, that    of   the Q3 ratios is 1.2—1.7. The group mean forecasts

perform best (the ratios are highest) for ECE and SLOP. (See Table A.6, columns

2-4).

        Our BVAR forecasts have larger RMSEs than the NEER—ASA group mean forecasts

80 percent of the time, according to the     paired   entries in columns 1 and 5 of

Table A.6. They are very poor for PCE and definitely inferior for FOP, whereas

elsewhere the differences are much smaller (cf. columns 1—6       and   5—8).




A.3 Consumer Price Inflation and Interest Rates. 1981—90

        Forecasters underpredicted the CPI inflation just as they did the IPD

inflation (see the negative signs of the mean errors in Table A.7, lines 1—5,

columns 1 and 3). The RHSEs of these forecasts are discouragingly large compared

 to the descriptive statistics for the actual values (cf. columns 4 and 6 with 11,

 in particular). Note that the NBER—ASA     survey   questionnaire asked directly for
forecasts of the level of Cl'I inflation at annual rate in the current quarter and

the following four quarters (not for forecasts of the CPI itself).

        In contrast, the forecasts of the 3—month Treasury bill rate (TBR) had

relatively small errors according to these comparisons (lines 6—10). The

forecasts of the (new high—grade) corporate bond yield (CBY) were even more

accurate (lines 11—15).

        Despite the already noted weakness of most of the individual CPI forecasts.

the corresponding group mean forecasts perform relatively well. Their RNSEs are

considerably smaller than those of the &VAR model, and less than half those of

the average individual forecasts (cf. Table A.8, lines 1—5, and Table .7, lines

1—5. columns 4 and 6). The i/g ratios cluster close to one between Q1        and Q,

which   indicates that the forecasts concerned are remarkably alike.

        For the interest rates TR and CBY, combining the individual forecasts

greatly reduces errors, but with notable exceptions at the most distant target

quarter (5). Here the RMSEs are much larger for the &VAR than the group mean

forecasts, and correspondingly the   i/by ratios   are much lower than the i/g ratios

(cf. Table A.8, lines 6—15, columns 1—4 and 5—8).
                                                      Table A.l

           Selected Measures of Forecast Accuracy and Actual Values. Percent Changes
         in Expenditures for Consumer Durable Goods. Plant and Equipment, and National
                                   Defense, by Span. 1968—81


      Span             Mean Error                      Root Mean Square Error                  Acta1 Value
Line (Qa)      H          SD        MD          H        SD        MD     5K     KU       96       SD    RMSV
               (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)      (5)        (6)    (7)     (8)    (9)      (10)    (11.)


                                Consmer Expenditures for Durable Coods (CD

      0—1      —.79       .73      —.87        3.60     1.06      3.42     .88     .72   1.93    4.52    6.91
 1
2     0—2     —1.10      1.26     —1.18        5.35     1.80      4.95    3.97   24.35   3.96    6.00     7.19
 3    0—3     —1.30      1.59     —1.26        6.30     1.52      5.96    1.45    2.69   5.69    7.12     9.26
4     0—4      —.97      2.07      —.87        6.94     1.83      6.45    1.73   4.01.   7.86     7.57   10.91
      0—5     —1.23      2.61      —.74        8.39     3.50      7.46    4.01   23.83   9.96     8.68   13.21
 5

                                    Plant and Euionent Expenditures (FE)

 6    0—1     —.71       1.02       —.51.      5.49     1.15       5.69    .06    —.89   2.36     6.10    6.53
 7     0—2    —1.24      1.89     —1.24        8.49     2.52       9.00    .40    —.19   '.66     9.36   10.46
 8    0—3     —1.69      2.55     —1.95       11.51     2.84      11.82 —.07      —.70    6.89 11.99     13.63
 9     0—4    —1.83      3.12     —1.95       13,78     3.26      14.17   —.32    —.46    8.86 14.19     16.73
10     0—5    —2.77 4.18          —2.46       16.46     3.68      16.79 —.60       .01   10.83 15.97     19.30

                                     Natiopal Defense Expenditures (DEF)

                           .55       .24       2.33       .56      2.25    .54     .71    1.43    2.51    2.89
11     0—1.     .1.6
                                                                                  2.28    2.97    4.27    5.20
12     0—2      .21        .97       .35       3.48       .97      3.41    .72
                                                                   4.05   1.02    2.88   4.75     5.98    7.64
1.3    0—3      .17       1.52       .40       4.19     1.21
                                                                   4.51   1.80    6.39    6.60    7.58   10.05
16     0—4      .04       2.06        .34      4.80     1.57
15     0—5     —.23       2.62      p.s.       5.79     1.94       5.38   2.21    8.93    8.60 9.55      12.85



NOTE: On the sybe1s used. ace             previous tables and text.
                                         Table A.2

          Individual, Group Mean, and BVAP. Forecasts of Percent Changes in
     Expenditures for Consumer Durable Goods, Plant and Equipment, and National
                   Defense, Selected Comparisons, by Span, 1968—81


                   Group Mean RNSE Ratios [/2          SVAR     RMSE   Ratios   i fbv
Line Span(Qs)         RuSE     Q         MD     Q3     RMSE     Q1      MD       Q3
                      (1)      (2)       (3)    (4)     (5)     (6)     (7)      (8)

                    Consumer Exoenditures for Durable Goods (CD)

 1         0—1        3.23      .95      1.12   1.34    3.98     .72     .93     1.05
 2         0—2        4.70    1.01       1.11   1.23    5.23     .88    1.02     1.15
 3         0—3        5.38    1.02       1.13   1.31    6.27     .88     .98     1.19
 4         0—4        5.50    1.06       1.16   1.36    6.74     .84     .96     1.13
 5         0—5        6.42    I .   04   1.17   1.43    7.45     .83     .99     1.18

                        Plant and Epuinment Exoenditures (FE)

 6         0—1        5.82    1.01       1.05   1.09    2.19    1.87    2.72     3.04
 7         0—2        8.96    1.01       1.07   1.10    3.16    2.19    2.83     3.33
 8         0—3       11.54    1.00       1.06   1.10    4.47    2.36    2.79     3.20
 9         0—4       13.76    1.00       1.05   1.12    5.51    2.39    2.70     3.30
10         0—5       15.69      .98      1.05   1.13    6.41    2.50    2.89     3.55

                         National Defense ExDendituret (DEF)

11         0—1        1.78    1.07       1.19   1.38    2.85     .66     .75       .87
12         0—2        2.73    1.05       1.16   1.34    5.78     .47     .54       .63
13         0—4        3.31    1.02       1.17   1.38    8.53     .38     .45       .54
14         0—4        3.91    1.03       1.20   1.44   10.55     .35     .43       .50




NOTE: On the symbols used, se. previous tables and text.
                                                     Table A.3

                 Selected K.asurea of Foracact Accuracy and Actual Va1ue. Nominal
                   and P.al lnvsntory Inv.atenc and Real Net Exports, by Span.
                                        1968—81 and 1981—90



       Target            Mean Error                     Root Mean Sware Error                    Actual Vphe
tine   Quarter     M           SD      MD      K          SD     MD     SR          KU     K        SD    P..MSV

                  (1.)         (2)     (3)     (4)       (5)      (6)       (7)     (8)    (9)     (10)    (11)

                                Ci.nfe in 8usin.es Inventoriec. 1968—81 (CBI)

 1.       1.       .43      2.07       .45    9.33       3.65     9.76        .13   —.26    7.30    11.27 13.43
 2        2        .92      2.42      1.10    9.96       3.62    10.24       —.19   —.49
 3        3      1.59       2.28      1.73    10.92      3.95    11.59       —.46   —.84
 4        4      2.57       2.53      2.78    11.63      3.77    11.84       —.34   —.43
 5        5      3.54       2.78      3.34    13.01      3.90    13.45       —.53   —.21

                 Chance   In   Susinass Inventories in Constant Dollars. 1981—90 (RCBI)

 6        1      —.20       2.94      —.18    18.27      4.64    18.58        .58   1.35   14.58 20.37 25.05
 7        2      —.47       3.57        .27   18.90      3.72    19.26       —.02   —.07
 8        3      —1.09      3.26      —.83    19.70      3.78    19.35        .47    .35
 9        4       —.08      3.73      —.64    20.46      4.10    20.25        .41   —.22
10        5       —.69      4.41      —.58    21.06      4.47    21.03        .70    .75


                 Net Exports     of Cood and Services in Constant         Dollars. 1981—90 (NX)

11         1      9.33      6.02       7.48   28.83      9.87     31.32      —.90    .35 —53.19 66.09 84.84
12         2     14.52      8.81      12.99   37.89      12.21   40.35      —1.15    .94
13         3     21.36     10.72      18.35   47.60      12.79   48.36      —1.02   1.21
                                              54.15      12.06    55.81     —1.09   1.68
14         4     27.04     12.72      27.36
15         5     31.53     15.13      28.56   60.21      12.31    60.63     —1.3€   2.89


NOTE: On the sysbo1s       used, see    previous   tibias   and text.
                                   Table A.4

       Individual. Group Mean, and BVAR Forecasts of Nominal and Real
      Inventory Investment and Real Net Exports Selected Comparisons.
                        by Span, 1968—81 and 1981—90


     Target    Group Mean   RI1SE Ratios   i/s      BVAR.    RMSE Ratios i/by
Line Quarter      RMSE       Q1      MD        Q3   RMSE     Q      MD     Q3
                  (1)        (2)    (3)      (4)     (5)     (6)    (7)    (8)

                Change in Business Inventories. 1968—81 (CM)

 1      1        10.57       .98   1.07     1.15    10.70    .83   1.03    1.15
 2      2        10.75       .97   1.07     1.18    13.32    .72    .89    1.02
 3      3        12.69       .99   1.07     1.16    14.17    .76    .95    1.07
4       4        13.41      1.00   1.06     1.12    16.24    .78    .91    1.09
 5      5        14.50      1.00   1.05     1.12    15.28    .81     99    1.12

     Chanee in Business Inventories in Constant Dollars. 1981—90 (RCBI)

6       1        17.87       .96   1.03     1.14    19.78    .76    .91    1.08
7       2        18.35       .99   1.06     1.12    25.95    .52    .72     .82
8       3        19.19      1.00   1.05     1.13    28.45    .50    .66     .80
9       4        19.40       .97   1.06     1.20    29.38    .52    .68     • 95
10      S        20.01       .98   1.02     1.11.   29.89    .55    .68     .84

     Net Exports of Goods and Services in Constant Dollars. 1981—90 (NX)

11      1        28.04      1.00   1.03     1.07    13.28   2.06   2.30    2.60
12      2        36.45      1.00   1.04     1.14    17.71   2.00   2.21    2.65
13      3        44.91       .98   1.03     1.11    19.66   2.17   2.45    2.78
14      4        52.11       .98   1.03     1.10    23.08   2.16   2.36    2.51
15      5        59.44       .97   1.02     1.08    31.39   1.79   1.94    2.13



NOTE: On the symbols used, see previous tables and text.
                                                               Table A.5

               Selected Measures of Forecast ACCUraCy and Actual. Values, Percent Chan8es
                   in Conaweption, 1nv.atsnt. and GàvernenC Cosponents of Real. CU',
                                            by Span. 1981—90


       Span                Mean    Error                        Root Mean Souare Error                          Actual Value
Line   (Qs)          M            SD      MD            K         SD        MD      SK           KU      K         SD     RMSV
                    (1.)          (2)      (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)    (7)          (8)    (9)       (1.0)   (11)

                                         Personal Conauation Exoenditures (PCE)

 1     0—1         —.14           .20    —.14           .83        .30       .68    1.61        2.17     .78       .69    1.04
 2     0—2         —.26           .29    —.29          l..10       .42       .94    1.81        2.67    1.58        .99   1.86
 3     0—3         —.47           .66     —.44         1.45        .51.     1.27    1.96        3.76    2.44      1.22    2.73
 4     0—6         —.63           .65     —.59         1.80        .64      1.60    1.96        4.33    3.33      1.41    3.62
 5     0—5         —.85           .85     —.74         2.23        .86      2.00    2.03        4.02    4.22      1.69    6.55

                                          Nonresidential Fixed Investment (NFl)

 6      0—1.       —.59           .91     —.71         2.85      2.10       2.43    5.07    26.62       1.05      2.00    2.80
 7      0—2       —1.22      1.42 —1.26                4.53      1.91       4.07    3.99        18.39   2.21.     4.40    4.92
 8      0—3       —1.47      1.88 —1.51                6.76      2.51       5.86    2.32         5.35   3.46      6.18     7.08
 9      0—4       —2.31      2.38 —2.36                8.47      2.14       7.97    1.43         1.69   4.87      7.85     9.24
10      0—5       —2.76      3.14 —2.97               10.33      2.55       9.99    1.35         1.81   6.46      9.26    11.29

                                            R..cidential Fixed Investment (RFI)

11      0—1        —.85       1.08        —.67         4.16       1.52      3.83    1.89         4.70   1.18      4.84    4.98
12      0—2       —1.87       2.27      —1.42          7.56       2.48      7.18     .67         —.26   2.95      9.01     4.27
13      0—3       —2.93       3.19      —2.32         10.23      3.28 10.14          .36         —.21   5.06 12.59        13.57
14      0—6       —4.12       3.93      —3.56         12.68      4.26 12.42          .28         —.67   7.39 15.78        17.62
1)      0—5       —5.58       5.23      —4.94         14.95      5.07 14.40          .21         —.95   9.90 18.71        21.17

                                               Federal Govern,sent        Purchases (FOP)
                                                                            3.77     .60         —.37   1.16      4.15     4.31.
16      0—1        —.60       1.33         —.5].       3.99        .81
                   —.79       1.50         —.90        5.25       1.32       5.03   1.49         3.63   2.22       5.24    5.69
17      0—2
        0—3        —.94       1.75 —1.21               5.35       1.43       5.01   1.78         4.67   3.09       5.28    6.12
18
19      0—4        —.74       2.36 —1.35               5.91       3.06       5.27   3.75        17.22   4.00 4.85          6.29
                                                                  1.71       5.74   1.14         1.48   5.27       6.05    8.02
20      0—5       —1.55       2.70 —1.81               6.16

                                        State and Local Government Purchase! (SLOP)

                                                                   .33        .85   1.87         4.40     .52       .70      .87
21      0—i        —.13           .28      —.17          .90
                                                       1.24        .56       1.15   2.77         9.44   1.12       1.07    1.55
22      0—2        —.24           .52      —.26
                                                       1.57        .77       1.52   2.61         9.42   1.72       1.32    2.17
 23      0—3       —.38           .72      —.40
 24     0—4        —.62           .88      —.58        1.89        .92       1.79   2.98    .   12.01   2.34       1.56    2.80
                                                       2.35       1.11       2.03   2.82        11.02    2.99      1.85    3.52
 25      0—5       —.92       1,09 —1.13

 NOTE: On the ybo1a used,                 cc.    previous tables and text.
                                          Table A.6

         Individual, Group Mean, and BVAR Forecasts of Percent Changes in
     Consumption. Investment, and Covernment Components of Real CNP, Selected
                           Comparisons, by Span, 1981—90


                 Group Mean RNSE Ratios .tL.z.__            8VAR          RMSE Ratios I/by
Line Span(Qs)        RMSE       Q1        MD     Q3         RMSE           Q      MI)     Q3
                     (1)        (2)       (3)    (4)         (5)          (6)     (7)     (8)

                     personal Consuintion ExDenditures (PCE)

 1        0—1          .58     1.08       1.23   1.73        1.97          .31    .36     .48
 2        0—2          .79     1.12       1.22   1.41        3.78          .22    .24     .28
 3        0—3          .98     1.11       1.25   1.51        5.65          .20    .22     .27
 4        0—4        1.16      1.15       1.24   1.71        7.66          .18    .20     .25
 5        0—5        1.47      1.10       1.27   1.66        9.37          .18    .21     .24

                       Nonresidential Fixed Investment (NFl)

 6        0—1        2.01      1 . 10     1.19   1.34        2.23          .90   1.02    1.19
 7        0—2        3.43      1.03       1.11   1.26        3.64          .95   l .04   1.   17
 8        0—3        4.99       1.04      1.12   1.26        5.31          .96   1.04    1.19
 9        0—4        6.89       1.00      1.06   1.22        6.83          .99   1.09    1.23
10        0—5        8.69           .99   1.05   1.18        8.25         1.02   1.09    1.26

                           Residential Fixed Investment       (RFI)
11        0—1        3.01       1.05      1.26   1.45        3.97          .79    .97    1.21
12        0—2        5.83           .96   1.25   1.43        5.24         1.10   1.30    1.80
13        0—4        8.42           .94   1.21   1.41        8.33          .90   1.15    1.51
14        0—4       10.63           .93   1.24   1.42       11.30          .80   1.02    1.35
IS        0—S       12.62           .96   1.15   1.45       14.64          .71    .98    1.23

                           Federal Government Purchases (FCP)
16        0—1        3.31       1.00      1.14   1.27        4.61          .72    .80     .95
17        0—2        4.22       1.02      1.10   1.29        7.26          .59    .65     .82
18        0—3        4.11       1.04      1.18   1.37        9.02          .50    .54     .66
19        0—4        3.79       1.13      1.31   1.48       10.39          .39     .52        .63
20        0—5        4.55       1.07      1.30   1.48       11.44          .44     .53        .65

                    State and Local       Government    Purchases (SLGP)

21        0—1          .61      1.14      1.23   1.51         .49         1.40   1.64    2.07
22        0—2         .75       1.02      1.19   1.39         .82         1.09   1.44    1.62
23        0—3         .91       1.00      1.17   1.27        1.20         1.11   1.41    1.60
24        0—4        1.07       1.13      1.19   1.40        1.68     .   1.13   1.29    1.54
25        0—5        1.35       1.01      1.13   1.30        2.18         1.04   1.28    1.53

NOTE: On the sumbols used, see previous tables and text.
                                                  Table A.?

                  Selected Measures of Forecast Accuracy and Actual Values,
               Consumer Price Inflation, treasury Bill Rate, and Corporate Bond
                                        Yield, 1981—90


     Target           Mean Error                    Root    Keen Square Error                 Actual Value
Line Quarter     K      SD       MD         K        SD        MD      5K       KU      K          SD    LMSV
                (1)     (2)     (3)         (4)      (5)      (6)     (7)       (8)     (9)       (10)   (11)

                              Consumer Price Index. Percent Chance (C?!)

 1      1      —.61     .47     —.50       1.20      .39      1.08     .34   —1.37     1.02        .54   1.16
 2      2      —.58     .48     —.46       1.18      .43      1.15     .11   —1.41
 3      3      —.57     .50     —.46       1.20      .42      1.20     .19   —1.36
 4      4      —.53     .50     —.51       1.21      .38      1.26     .10   —1.50
 5      5      —.51     .53     —.50       1.23      .39      1.24     .00   —1.41

                              Treasury Bill Rate. 3—Month. Percent (TBR)

 6      1       .03     .24     —.03         .49     .36       .40    2.50      8.01   8.38       2.48    8.74
 7      2       .19     .49        .24      1.51     .51      1.52     .06      2.75
 8      3       .39     .68        .61      1.85     .50      1.80     .11       .85
 9      4       .65     .59        .83      2.03     .56      2,23   —1.55      2.14
10      5      1.05     .68      1.03       2.48     .71      2.62    —.42      1.09

                                   Coroorate Bond Yield. Percent (CBY)

11      1      —.26     .30     —.24         .72     .35       .63    2.01      5.65   11.66      2.34   11.87
12      2      —.00     .48        .12      1.59     .59      1.37     .66      —.26
13      3       .21     .61        .31      1.86      .49     1.81     .78       .51
14      4       .39     .72        .58      2.05      .43     2.02     .39      —.28




NOTE: On the symbols used,      see previous    tables and text.
                                         Table A8

         Individual, Group Mean, and BVAR Forecasts of Consumer Price
      Inflation, Treasury Bill Rate, and Corporate Bond Yield, Selected
                         Comparisons, by Span, 1981—90


     Target    Group Mean      RJ4SE Ratios i/2           BVAR,   RuSE Ratios i/by
Line Quarter      RNSE         Q1        MD      Qa       RMSE    Q1        MD      Q3
                  (1)         (2)        (3)      (4)      (5)    (6)       (7)     (8)
                  Consumer Price Index. Percent Chanee (CPI)

 1      1          .53        1.01       1.03    1.12       .54   1.63      2.63   3.22
2       2          .46        1.01       1.03    1.12 -     .74   1.02      1.63   2.29
 3      3          .68        1.01       1.03    1.18       .78   1.05      1.80   2.06
4       4          .56        1.01       1.02    1.09       .80   1.07      1.63   1.79
5       5          .58        1.01       1.02    1.08       .95       .92   1.36   1.59

                  Treasury Bill        Rate. 3—month. Percent (TBR)

 6      1          .20        1.45        1.83   2.46       .96       .29    .38    .56
 7      2          .90        1 . 09      1.26   2.11      1.62       .59    .81   1.17
 8      3         1.38        1.02        1.31    1.54     2.03       .65    .80   1.08
 9      4         1.77        1.00        1.14    1.29     2.51       .68    .77    .94
10      5         2.69        l.01        1.08    1.18     3.03       .67    .78    .95

                        Coroorate Bond Yield. Percent (CBY)

11      1          .38        1.17       1.57    1.81      .77        .56    .77     .98
12      2          .83        1.15       1.48    2.52     1.26        .72    .95    1.75
13      3         1.24        1.09       1.25    1.74     1.74        .77    .92    1.25
14      4         1.51        1.03       1.19    1.46     2.19        .69    .88    1.03




NOTE: On the symbols used, see previous tables and text,
