                            NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




                    MENUS OF LINEAR INCOME TAX SCHEDULES




                                       Alberto Alesina

                                        Philippe Weil




                                  Working Paper No. 3968




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 1992

We are grateful to Patrick Bolton, Daniel Cohen, and Eytan Sheshinski for helpful
discussions. We thank Phillip Swagel for excellent research assistance. The original version
of this paper was written while Alesina was an Olin Fellow at the NBER. Alesina gratefully
acknowledges financial support from the Olin and Sloan Foundations, and Well from the
National Science Foundation (SES-8823040). This paper is part of NBER's research program
in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                             NBER Working Paper #3968
                                                             January 1992




                      MENuS OF LINEAR INCOME TAX SCHEDULES




                                           ABSTRACT


         Relative to traditional piecewise linear income taxation schemes, it is possible to

increase government revenues by offering to consumers a menu of linear income tax

schedules. In the resulting Pareto-superior equilibrium, consumers sort themselves out

according to their (unobservable) productivity level, with high productivity agents choosing

the tax schedules with low marginal tax rate and high intercept. This scheme extracts from

the economy an unexploited source of revenue which, in contrast with standard supply-side

proposals, does not depend on the economy being on the downward-sloping side of the Laffer

curve.




Alberto Alesina                                              Philippe Weil
Department of Economics                                      Department of Economics
Harvard University                                           Harvard University
Cansbridge, MA 02138                                         Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                                     and NBER
I                                                                           Alesina & Weil


Lump sum income taxes, while non distortionary, are considered undesirable be-
cause of their regressivity. Thus, in designing income tax schedules, benevolent
governments face a trade-off between the efficiency cost of distortinglabor sup-
ply decisions and the distributional benefit of progressivity (or proportionality) of
the tax burden.1
In most developed countries, including the United States, income tax sched-
ules are progressive and take, undoubtedly for simplicity, the form of continuous
piecewise linear functions.2 In this paper, we demonstrate that any fiscal system
with a continuous linear (or piecewise linear) tax schedule can be Pareto im-
proved by the introductionof a second tax schedule, and by letting the taxpayers
select their preferred tax function on the menu of linear schedule presented to
them. The additional tax schedule should have a lower marginal rate than the
first one and a higher intercept.In more colorful terms, by introducingthe second
tax schedule, the governmentoffers to "sell" a reduction of the marginal tax rate
for the price of a lower lump sum transfer (the higher intercept of the new tax
schedule). The tax payers who select to "buy" the reductionin the marginal rate,
i.e., who choose the new tax schedule, will be the most productive workers: under
the new tax schedule they will work and consume more, and some (or all) ofthem
will pay more taxes. In fact, we derive simple conditions which insure that the
Pareto improving introductionof the second tax schedule does not reduce total
tax revenues. More generally, additional revenue-neutral or revenue-increasing
Pareto improvements can be achieved by offering to the tax payers a menu of ]V
linear tax schedules (with N greater than two). The only limit to the number of
schedules is the complexity of the tax system. It should be stressed that, in con-
trast with standard supply-side arguments, this Pareto improving increase in tax
revenues can be achievedeven if the economy is on the upward sloping side of
the Laffer curve and the additional fiscal revenue is wasted. These results hold
under assumptions on utility functions which are quite general and standard in
the optimal taxation literature.
Our results can be viewed as a practical proposal to implement the "no distor-
tions at the top" principle.3 We show that a version of this principlemay often be
applied "globally"so as to offer lower marginal income tax rates to a substantial

1. On the theory of income taxation, see Mirrlees [1977], Sadka [1977], Seade [19771 and
Atkinson and Stiglitz [1980].
2. See Sheshinski [1972] and Sheshinski[1989] on the theory of optimal linear tax schedules.
3. Sadka [1977], Seade [19771.
Linear Mcome tax schedules                                                       2


fraction of the population—without affecting government revenues or relying
on supply-side effects. We provide simple conditions under which this ensuing
Pareto-improvement can be implemented for linear tax schedules.
Our results on the welfare benefits of a menu of linear income taxes are reminis-
cent of some recent theoretical developments in the principal-agent literature,
which analyzes a situationwhere a principal employs agents without being able
to observe their effort. Laffont and Tirole [1986] show that under certain con-
ditions and with specific functional forms, the optimal contract is one in which
the principal offers a menu of wage functions which are linear in output and the
agentsare free to choose any of these functions as their contract. The analogy be-
tween our results and those of Laffont and Tirole is that, in both cases, the menu
of opportunities is such that high productivity workers choose to work more. In
the principal-agent situation this occurs because by doing so high productivity
workers take advantage of a more profitable wage function; in the case of income
taxes they take advantage of lower marginal tax rates, even though they may pay
more taxes in the end.
It shouldbe pointed out that results similar to ours have been obtained indepen-
dently by Slemrod et al. [1991].
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 1 we introduce the model and review
the standard case with a single linear income tax schedule, Section 2 shows how
a menu of linear income tax schedules may improve welfare without reducing tax
revenues. In Section 3 we develop a numerical example and discuss the empirical
relevance of our proposal. Section 4 discusses several extensions. The last section
concludes.



1       Unique linear income tax schedule
In this section we analyze, to fix the notation and for future reference, the equi-
librium in the presence of a unique linear income tax schedule. We describe first
the behavior of consumers and of the government, and then characterize the
equilibrium.
3                                                                               Alesina & Weil


1.1     Consumers
The economy consists of one-period lived consumers-workers who differ only in
their labor productivity, w.4 Let F(w) denote the cumulative distributionfunc-
tion of productivities. Clearly, F(0) = 0, F(c) = 1 and j'00° wdF(w) = 1.
We assume that all agents are productive (w > 0). Productivity is truly exogenous
(a consumer cannot choose to be less productive), and cannot be unobserved by
fiscal authorities.

All consumers have an equal unit endowment of leisure time, and rank bundles
of consumption (c) and labor (I) according to the same utility function u(c, I),
with u1 > 0 and u2 < 0. In addition to strict quasi-concavity, differentiability,
monotonicity and local non-satiationof u(.,.) in c and 1 — I, we impose:

Assumption 1
                             1imui(c,t)=+c VIE (0,1)
                              lirnu2(c,t)=+c' Vc>0


Assumption 2
                                umU2
                                i—o u1(c,t)
                                                   0   Vc>O.
                                                         —




Assumption 3
                             — U2U12    <0    and u2u11 — U1U12       > 0.


Assumption 4
                                u + (uiuj2     —
                                                   u2uii)t > 0.

4. We could as well study consumers who only differ in their tastes. What matters is that we
restrict ourselves, for simplicity, to one-dimensional heterogeneity. Our notation closely follows
Sheshinski [19891.
Linear income tax schedules                                                               4


The first assumption rules out corner solutions at zero for consumptionor leisure.
The second assumption guarantees that, at a consumption optimum, all con-
sumers work a strictly positive number of hours.5 The third assumption ensures
that consumption and leisure are normal goods, and the fourthimplies that opti-
mum labor supply increases with the wage rate and decreases with the marginal
tax rate on labor income.
One can think of consumers agents as yeoman farmers with different production
functions; the production function of a consumer-worker of productivity w is
q = wL Alternatively, one can imagine that the consumption good is produced
by competitive firms which employ different types of labor, with one unit of type
w labor input yielding w units of output; in that interpretation, assuming that
firms can perfectly monitor their workers' marginal product, w is the unit wage
of consumer w. There is no capital.

1.2     Government
The government is modelled as an entity (possibly a social planner) which must
raise enough tax revenue to finance an exogenously determinedsupply of a public
good which is not an argument of the consumers' utility function. As we shall be
exclusively concernedwith revenue-increasing and Pareto-improving changes in
the tax structure, we avoid the arbitrariness of explicitly specifring, in this econ-
omywith heterogeneous agents and without voting, the social planner's objective
function. We however limit ourselves (and therefore limit the fisc) to the class
linear income tax schemes.
Suppose that there is a unique linear income tax schedule 'r

                                  t=—a+(1—/3)y.                                        (1.1)

Taxes paid by a consumer with income y have accordingly two components: a
lump-sum transfer a > 0 (a lump-sum tax if a < 0), and a distortionary la-
bor income tax at the marginal rate 1 — E [0, 1]. Note that the tax system is
progressive when a > 0.

5. If one feels uncomfortable with this restriction on the utility function, one can alterna-
tively stipulate, instead of assumption 1, that productivity levels are bounded from below by
lim_o[fluz(c, £)]/[ui(c, £)]. Either assumption will rule out non-active workers.
5                                                                          Alesina & Weil


The social planner sets the tax structure taking into account the reaction of the
consumers. Taxes cannot be changed after labor supply and consumption deci-
sions have been taken.
Tax revenues are constrainedto finance the exogenous governmentexpenditure
G> 0:6

where   yt =
                                R=
                                      j   t(y*) dF(w)      G,
               y(, /3w) denotes the equilibrium labor income of a consumer of
                                                                                     (1.2)


productivity   w who faces tax schedule r.

1.3     Equilibrium and comparativestatics
A consumer of type w maximizes u(c,£) subject to the constraint that consump-
tion cannot exceed after-tax labor income:

                                       cc+/9wi,                                      (1.3)
and   that
                                     c0     ,   £E[0,1].                             (1.4)


Because ofassumption       2,   and assuming that the followingsecond-order condition
holds
                         (/3w)2uii + 2/3wu12 + u22 0,                        (1.5)
the solution to this problem is unique and interior for every w, and satisfies the
first-order condition:
                                 /3wui + U2 = 0.                             (1.6)
Let c* = c(c, /3w) and £* = £(, /3w) denote that solution. Because of assump-
tion 3, optimal consumptionand leisure increase when the lump-sum transfer c
increases:
                              c > 0 and £ <0,                                (1.7)

where, for instance,   cdenotes Oc/Oa.
Because of assumption 4, optimal labor supply increases as the marginal tax rate
1 — /3 decreases or as productivity w rises:

                                          £ > 0.                                     (1.8)

6. As we choose to abstract ourselves from intertemporal considerations, we assume that all
expendituresare tax-financed.
Linearincome tax schedules                                                                    6



This obviously implies that pre-tax labor income rises with productivity.
The maximum utility attainedby a consumer of type w is therefore u                 = u(c*, £).
Using the envelope theorem,
                             8u*
                             —=u1
                             Oct
                                          and   _=wl*uj.
                                                0/3
                                                                                         (1.9)


Taxes paid, at the optimum, by a consumer of type w are

                                   tt = —a + (1 — /3)e*.                                (1.10)

As a consequence,

                                   = —1+(1—/3)wt<O                                      (1.11)

                                   = w[(1—$)wt—t].                                      (1.12)



2       A menu of linear income tax schedules
Now suppose that the flsc introduces a secondlinear income tax schedule, and of-
fers to taxpayers a choice between two schedules. The first schedule,T = (a, /3),
is the one described in the previous section. The second schedule,                r'
                                                                           = (a', p3'),
proposes to consumers   a lower marginal tax rate     >    in
                                                  (/3' /3) exchange       for a lower
lump-sum transfer (a' < a). In others terms,    tax  authorities sell at a "price" of
   =
p a a'> 0 the right to a lower marginal tax rate.
        —

The introductionof this second tax schedule cannot but be Pareto-improving.7
The welfare of consumers who do not wish to take advantage of the opportunity
to buy a reduction in their marginal tax rate is unaffected, while the utility level
reached by taxpayers who choose to use the new tax schedule                  r'
                                                                     is necessarily
higher (they would not otherwise choose the new schedule).
A decrease in the marginal tax rate from 1 — /3 to 1 — /3' does not provide the
same utility benefit to all consumers: highly productive consumers (those with a

7. Strictly speaking, introducing this second schedule cannot lead to a Pareto-inferior equilib-
                                                               r'
rium. As we shall see below, one can however always construct in suchaway that it makes at
least one consumer strictly better off.
7                                                                                Alesina & Well


high w) value it more than low productivity workers. Because the cost for this
reductionin the marginal rate is the same (p) for all consumers,8 only consumers
with a high enough productivity, for whom benefit exceeds cost, will choose the
new tax schedule.
The central point of this paper is that, for any initial tax schedule, for any income
distributionand for any desired reduction in the marginal tax rate, one can always
find a reductionpin the lump-sum transfer componentof the tax which will result
in increased tax revenues—provided taxpayers are presented with both the r and
r' schedule.
The formal proof, which we nowpresent, follows the logic of the preceding verbal
argument.

2.1      Welfare
Let > 0 be the income level at which both tax schedules produce the same
revenue [i.e., T and i-' intersect at       (,i)
                                      in (y,t) space]:

                          —a+(1—8)=—c'+(1—/3')=.                                           (2.1)

For a given initial tax schedule r and a given               , the   second tax schedule    r' is
therefore fully characterized by the choice of fi'.
Let D   denote the productivity of a consumer who would have pre-tax labor in-
come under the high marginal rate tax schedule r, and tD' denote the productiv-
ity of a consumer who would have pre-tax labor income under the low marginal
rate tax schedule i-':9
                                       t((cs, i3ü) =                                       (2.2)

                                     üi't(a', 3'i') =    .                                 (2.3)

The following lemma establishes that a lower productivity level is required under
the T' schedule to achieve the pre-tax income level g:

Lemma 1      'iL'   > iD' >0.
8. A productivity.specific priceis not feasible, as producrivities are assumed to be unobservable.
An income-specific price, equivalentto introducing non-linearincome taxation,might be Pareto-
superior to our scheme but would be more dicult to design.
           i'
9. u and are uniquely defined since £2 > 0.
linear income tax schedules                                                                          8


Proofi The second inequality follows from the assumption that £2            > 0 and the fact that 7> 0.
From eqs. (2.2) and (2.3), we have

                                  tDt(a,/3rD)        =   tD't(a', /3'tD')
                                                     >   tD't(a, /3'ta')
                                                     >   tD't(a,/3t3'),
since a > a', /3 < 3', Li < 0 and £2 > 0. Now the functionwt(x, yw) is strictly increasing in w
for all positive z and y. Therefore, tD > ti".

We can now demonstrate

Proposition 1 Low productivity consumers (w      tD') choose tax schedule r.
High productivityconsumers (w zD)   choose tax schedule  T'.

Proofi Let   (c,t)   and (c',V') denote the preferred bundles at the income levels and rela-
tive prices implied, respectively, by tax schedules and  r       r'
                                                         (they are computed along the lines
suggested in section 1).
Consider first a low productivity consumer (w < tD'). Since pre-tax labor income rises with
                                                                                   .
productivity, and given the definition of iD' in eq. (23), we have wL' < But then, from eq.
(2.1),
                            —a+(l—/3)wL         SI   <—a!         I •1
                                                             +(1—fl)wt
which implies that
                                 a+/3wt'             cs'+/D'wL'=c'.                               (2.4)
Hence the bundle (ce', £') is affordable at the income and relative price level implied by sched-
ule r. But (c, £) is the preferred bundle for that schedule. Since preferences are strictly quasi-
concave, we must have u(c,t) > u(c',t), so that a low productivity consumer always
chooses the r schedule.
The proof for high productivity consumers (w > tD) is symmetrical:it obtains by circular permu-
tation of primed and non-primed a, j3 and L variables.

Productivity therefore provides the criterion according to which consumers sort
themsel.'es between the two tax schedules: workers with very low (high) produc-
tivity never (always) find it worthwhile to "buy" a reduction in their marginal tax
rate.
In the absence of tighter restrictions on the utility function, we cannot say pre-
cisely which tax schedule will be chosen by which consumer with intermediate

10. Notice that the proofrelies heavily on our assumption that the wage elasticity of labor supply
                                  we would have iJi' = iii.
is positive; were £2 equal to zero,
9                                                                              Alesina & Weil


productivity (those for whom tD' < w < tD). This is because, under the new tax
schedule, these consumers both work and consume more. Depending on the de-
gree of substitutability between consumption and leisure, the latter effect may or
may not dominatethe former.For consumers at either end of the income distribu-
tion, this ambiguity can be lifted, as established above. What we however know,
by continuity, is that there is an odd number of consumers who are indifferent
between the two tax schedules."
The possibility, which cannot be ruled out,12 that there are many consumers in-
different between the two schedules, in general prohibits implementing our menu
scheme as a standard simple piecewise linear income tax function. As we shall
see below, this multiplicity is however no impediment to the determinationof the
revenueeffects of the introductionof a second linear tax schedule.

2.2     Government revenues
To study the effect of the introductionof the second tax schedule on govern-   r'
ment revenues, it is useful—assuggested by the foregoinganalysis—to separately
consider low, intermediateand high productivity workers.

Low productiviry workers We have shown above that low productivity consumers
                          r
(w < tD') choose the schedule. Tax collection from these workers is thus not
affected by the introductionof the second tax schedule.

Intermediateproductivityworkers While we do not precisely know who, among
intermediateproductivity workers (tii <w <zD'), will opt for the new tax sched-
                                                            r'
ule, we can guarantee that anybody who chooses ends up paying more taxes
than what he had paid under r:

Proposition 2 Any consumer with intermediate productivity ('s'                      w
pays more taxes under tax schedule r' than under tax schedule r.

Proofi Under tax schedule T, intermediate consumershave labor income wt < y, and thus
pay, from eq. (2.1), taxes no greater than 1, with consumer 0) paying 1. Under tax schedule TI,

11. Consumer0)' prefers schedule T , consumer 0)> 0)' prefers schedule r', and indirect utility
functions are continuous under our assumptions.
12. See the appendix for an example of a sutcient condition guaranteeing the existence of a
unique indifferentconsumer.
Linear income tax schedules                                                                       10


intermediateconsumers have labor income wi."
consumeriii' paying t.
                                                     ,   and   thus pay taxes no smaller than 1, with


Therefore,   the existence ofintermediateproductivity consumers who choose the
r' tax schedule increases the government's tax revenues.
Highproductivityworkers We have shown above that all consumers with produc-
tivity higher than tD opt for tax schedule r'. The impact on tax revenues of the
adoption of this tax schedule by high productivity consumers is best understood
by decomposing it into two parts. First, at their old labor supply £, high produc-
tivity consumers would pay less taxes under T' than under T since wt < —
an effect which raises, ceteris paribus, their tax bill and which is the stronger
the more productive the worker. Second, labor supply and thus labor income in-
                 r'
crease under because this new schedule offers a lower marginal tax rate—an
effect which increases the tax bill and which is the stronger the more elastic labor
supply is relative to the wage rate.13
There will therefore be two types of high productivity consumers: those for whom
the secondeffect dominates the first (and who will consequently pay more taxes),
and those for whom the first effect dominates the second (and who will pay less
taxes) 14
Designing, for any given 'r, a menu of linear income tax schedules which is not
revenue-decreasing therefore requires that tax authorities make sure that the
possible decrease in taxes levied from the some of the high productivity agents
does nor offset the revenuegains from intermediate workers and from those high
productivity workers who end up paying more taxes.
The followingargument, based on the possibleexistence of an upper-limit to the
productivity distribution, shows that this goal can always be attainedby designing
the tax system appropriately:

13. The second effect is clearly absent if, contrary to our assumptions, labor supply were inelastic
(t2 = 0). In that case, as follows from footnote 10, tax collections from consumers with income
below would be unchangedunder our scheme, while those from income above would go
down—an outcome incompatible with budget balance. The feasibility of our scheme thus cru-
cially hinges on a positivewage elasticity oflabor supply.
14. If we were willing to restrict preferences further to ensure that income effects are well-
behaved, we would be able to identify the first group of consumers with "upper-middle class'
workers who have a producrivity larger than, but close to tS, and the second group with "upper
class" consumers with incomes at the high end of the income distribution.
11                                                                                 Alesiria & \Veil


Proposition 3   Ifthere is a highest productivity level Wm, then itis alwayspossi-
ble to design schedule T' in such a way that its introductionresults in an increase
in governmentrevenues: for any desired decrease in the marginaltax rate, it suf-
                                                             r
fices to pick equal to the pre-tax income under ofthe largest taxpayer

Proof Pick an arbitrary tax schedule rand a /3'   > /3 (i.e., select a lower marginal   tax rate). If

                                     =
we have, using (2.2),
                                         W   = Wm.
This constructionguarantees,using the rults ofpropositions 1 and 2, that governmentrevenues
                        =
will increase: because üi Wmax, the only consumers who choose r' are "intermediate" workers
(with productivitybetween   i' and wm) who pay more taxes.
The condition of the proposition is of course overly strong, for it is a sufficient
but not necessary condition for our scheme to be successful. An alternative suf-
ficient condition—which we view as uninteresting—would of course be that the
economy be on the decreasing side of the Laffer curve, on which tax revenues
increase when the marginal rate goes down. It must however be emphasized that
the revenue-increasing features of our plan do not hinge, as the condition of
proposition 3 makes clear, on such circumstances. Instead, the feasibility of our
scheme proceeds from the desirability for high productivity tax payers of a tax
package offering reduced marginal tax rates in exchange of a larger lump-sum
component of the tax bill.
One must note at this juncture, that our scheme provides a global implementa-
tion of the well-known (Sadka [1977]) but local result that optimal tax sched-
ules must feature "no distortion at the top" by setting the marginal tax rate of
the most able taxpayer, if she exists, equal to zero. By offering a menu of lin-
ear income tax schedules, our plan provides the opportunity to many workers to
"purchase" a low marginal tax rate—a Pareto-improving approximation, relative
to the single T scheme, of the (perhaps too complex or unknown, and in general
non-linear) optimal income tax function which must be flat at its endpoint. As
the computations presented below will show, a large fraction of the population
may in practice choose to take advantage of the low marginal rate tax schedule.
Our menu scheme, because it is implementable even in the presence of multi-
ple indifferent consumers, has thus much wider applicability that Seade's [1977]
Linear income tax schedules                                                      12



previous attempt to explore the non-local implications of the "no distortionat
the top." His implementation, in contrastwith ours, is of little practical guidance
because, although not strictly confined to the top taxpayer, it only affects a mi-
nuscule fraction of the populationand is thus extremely sensitive to changes in
the top of the income distribution.
As our goal—establishing that the introductionof a menu of linear income tax
schedules enables the governmentto raise more revenue—is attainedby the fore-
going analysis, and as additional results cannot be derived without tighter specifi-
cation of the utility function, we do not pursue further the analysis of the general
case. We instead construct an example which, although it does not satisfy all the
assumptions of our theoretical analysis, illustrates in a simple manner the issues
at hand, how our scheme may in practice be implemented, and its effects on the
tax bill of various sections of the population.


3      An example
Assume that the utility function of our consumers is:


                        u(c,) = ac—S _____t1+8
                                     1+0       a,0>           0,
so that optimal consumption, labor supply and indirect utility of an agent of type
w facing only schedule i- are

                          c*   = a + a11'(f3w)(1+B)/'8,
                               = (a18w)'°,
                               = aa + ___(a/3w)(1+9)/'8.
                                      1+0
Thus, the wage elasticity of labor supply is equal to 1/0.
Similarly, optimal consumption, labor supply and indirect utility of an agent of
type w facing schedule T' only are
                         c1 = a' + ah/O(/3w)(1lG)$,
                               = (a/3'w)"°,
                               =   acr'   + ____(a/3Fw)(1+0)h/9.
                                            1+0
13                                                                                   Alesina & Weil


It is straightforward to show that when offered a choice between the two tax
schedules r and T, any agent with productivity above (below) a critical level ti
will choose schedule r' (r)'5, where, using eq. (2.1),

                      -—
                       —
                         1+0                    aa      —
                                                                                              31
                               0    ah/9(fiu(1+O)/9         /3(1+9)19)


3.1    Necessaryand sufficient condition
We now derive a necessary and sufficient condition for the introductionof a sec-
ond tax schedule to be revenue-increasing. For any given a, /3 and 3' > /3, let
      )
z(w, denote the change in the tax bill of consumer w if he opts for r' instead of
i- when the income level at which the two schedules intersect is V—i.e, when all
consumers with productivity larger than ti' choose schedule r'. Using equations
(2.1) and (3.1), it is easy to show that

           z(w,   i) = a9                         —
                                                      /3(1+O)IOj,(i+G)IO

                                       —                —        —
                                            fi)flFi/9       (1       fi)/31/9Jw(1+9)/9]       (3.2)


Assume, to make the analysis interesting, that /9 and /3' are greater than (1 + 0)_i
(otherwise, the economy is on the downward-sloping side of the Laffer curve) 16
The change in tax revenuesstemming from the introductionof T' is thus

                            R(si') =     f      z(w, t1) dF(w),

since only consumers with productivity larger than tZ' choose tax schedule r'.
Since /3' — /3 > 0 by assumption, we immediately find that R(tZ) > 0 if and
only if
              (a/3)/91iY(°)/° 1+0 (1 — /3)/31/9 (1 /31)/3Ii/9
                                                 —     —

                                        0          j3i(1+9)/9 — /9(1+0)10
where
                                    fx0(a/3)hIOw(+e)IOdF(w)
                                              f°°dF(w)

15. ConsumeriZ) is indifferentbetween the two schedules since, for him, U = U'.
16. For any given cs, a and w, the tax revenue function —a      (1
                                                                    —+/3)w(aJ3w)'/9 reaches a
maximum—the top of the Laffer curve, at     =(1 + O)_l.
Linear income tax schedules                                                                    14


denotes the average pre-tax income, prior to the introductionof the r' schedule,
of consumers with productivity larger than x.
According to equation (3.3), government revenues will thus increase if and only
if, measured prior to the introductionof the menu of tax schedules, the pre-tax
income of the consumer of type tZi relative to the average income of consumers
with productivity bigher than tZ' exceeds the value on the right-handside of the
inequality.
One can always construct the schedule i-' to satisfy this inequality. Since 3' >
/3 > 1, the right-handside of (3.3) is strictly smaller than          1,
                                                             while the left-hand
side converges to 1 as tD tends to co. Therefore, for any given a, /3 and /3' such
that /3' > /3 > 1, one can always find a tZ' (or, equivalently by (3.1), an a') which
satisfies (3.3).
In particular, following the suggestion of proposition 3, it is easy to show that
selecting equal to the income of the largest taxpayer—when such an individual
exists—satisfies inequality (3.3) whichever the shape F(.).

3.2     Numerical simulations
We consider two stylized cases. First, a "U.S" economy with an original marginal
tax rate of 33%, and then a "Swedish"economy (or a U.S. economy ofyesteryear)
with a 60% marginal tax rate.
We assume that productivities follow a r(a, b) distribution, and choose its pa-
rametersto fit as closely as possible the empirical distribution of income in each
country for plausible wage elasticities of labor supply 1/O. The resultingmodel
parametersarereported in Table 1.
Our numerical exercises illustrate three basic properties of the model:
•     The larger the original marginal tax rate, the larger the fraction of the
      population which will select the new tax schedule with lower marginal
      rate but higher intercept which we introduce.

 17. Let g(x) x(°)'8/(1 + 0)—              It is straightforward to show that 1' > /3> 1 and 0 > 0
imply  that g(/3') <g(/3)—which   is a necessary and sufficient condition for the righthand side of
eq. (3.3) to be smaller than 1 when /3' > /3.
                                                                      r
 18. See Salem and Mount [1976] for a justi1cationof the use of the distribution to model the
income distribution, and McDonald and Rensom [19791 for details on the estimation technique.
15                                                                                Alesina & Weil


•      The larger the reduction in the marginal rate offered by the second sched-
       ule relative to the first, the larger the increase in the intercept required
       to maintain revenue neutrality, and the fewer the number of taxpayers
       who will choose the new schedule. In other terms, the lump-sum "price"
       which must be paid to take advantage of the new schedule rises when the
       reduction in the marginal rate becomes larger;
•      The smallest the wage elasticity of labor supply, the smaller the fraction
       of the populationchoosing the new tax schedule.
The last observation suggests that our scheme has significant implications only
for economies with relatively high labor elasticities. One should however note
that when the labor income elasticity is small, the distortiorsary costs of taxation
are small—so that one should not be overly worried about tax distortions in the
first place!
In the "U.S." case, Table 2 shows that it is possible to offer a moderate (5%)
Pareto-improving and revenue-neutral decrease in the marginal tax rate, and still
have, if the wage elasticity of labor supply is 0.8, 11% of the population choosing
to take advantage of the new, lower tax rate. If a more drastic cut (18%) in the
marginal tax rate is desired, however, the revenue neutrality constraint imposes
that the "price" to be paidby consumers to take advantage of this new low rate be
so high that only the top 2% of the taxpayers will participate in the scheme—as
illustrated in Thble 3. The more elastic labor supply is, the larger the fraction of
consumers who will choose to take advantage of the lower marginal rate schedule.
The results are ofcourse more spectacular in the "Swedish"case when the original
marginal tax rate is close to (but still to the left of) the top of the LafTer curve.
A revenue neutral decrease in the marginal rate from 60% to 50% would affect
more than half of the populationif the wage elasticity of labor supply is 0.6, and
close to a quarter when it is 0.4 (Table 4). A schedule offering a decrease in the
marginal tax rate from 60% to 30% (while increasing the average tax rate enough
to maintain revenueneutrality) would still be selected by 20% of the population
if the elasticity of labor is 0.6 (Table 5) 19
For both the U.S. and Swedish cases, it is straightforward to show that the effect

10. These values slightly overstate our case, as we are implicitly assuming that there is initially
only one 60% tax bracket from which all the consumers choosing the new scheduleoriginate. In
practice, however, it is often tiue (in particularin the "Swedish" case) that all consumers but the
very poorest ones are subject to the highestmarginal tax rate.
Linear income tax schedules                                                        16



of our scheme is to shift the pre-tax income distribution to the right.

Although these numbers are only illustrative, they emphasize i) that our proposal
is most relevant for countries with high marginal tax rates, as it is in those coun-
tries that the welfare gains of offering to sell the income tax are greatest; and ii)
that large reductions in marginal rates for a large fraction of the populationare
achievable without decreasing government revenueeven if the economy is on the
upward-sloping side of the Laffer curve if the fisc "sells" its right of distortionary
taxation to the public.



4       Discussion
4.1     Implementation as a piecewise linear tax schedule
An interestingquestion is whether the Pareto improvement achievedby a menu
of two tax schedules can be obtainedby modifyingthe original tax schedule, with-
Out offering to taxpayers the choice between two schedules. As we showed above,
workers with "intermediate" productivity levels do not sort themselves monoton-
ically; that is, there exists workers who choose the new tax schedules who are less
productive than some of the workers who choose the original schedule. Thus, un-
less one is willing to design extremely complex (and fragile) tax rules, our scheme
is best implemented—and the proposed Pareto improvement achieved—not by
designing a piecewise linear income tax schedule but instead by using a menu of
schedules and letting consumers sort themselves out, often in a non-monotonic
fashion, according to their best self-interest.

4.2     A menu of N tax schedules
A menu of more than two schedules can provide further welfare improvements.
One could introduce a third tax schedule, with a lower marginal rate and a higher
intercept (i.e., a lower lump sum transfer) than the second schedule. An appro-
priate choice of parameters, along the lines described in the previous section,
improves upon the scheme with two schedules. This argument can be repeated
for N schedules. Note, in particular, that nothingrules out a zero marginal rate for
the Nth (last) schedule chosen by the most productive workers. Needless to say,
the magnitude of N is constrainedby the administrative costs of an excessively
complicated tax system.
17                                                                               Alesina   & Weil


4.3     Piecewise linear functions
An immediate generalization of our results implies that any piecewise linear tax
schedule, such as those studied by Sheshinski [1989], can be Pareto dominated,
without reducing tax revenues, by introducing one or more new tax schedules.
The second tax schedule has a marginal rate lower than the highest one of the
original piecewise linear schedule and the new schedule intersect the old one
             °
only once. In this case the existence of a kink in the original tax schedule does
not affect in any way the proofs of the results shown in Sections 2 and 321
These results lead to a comment on the optimality of discontinuous piecewise lin-
ear schedules. Our preceding analysis suggests that the optimal piecewise linear
tax schedule is discontinuous for any non-degenerate social welfare functions—
in contradictionwith Sheshinski's [1989] results on the shape of the optimal
piecewise linear income tax schedule.22The discontinuity of the tax schedule of-
fers the planner the Pareto-improving opportunity of decreasing the marginal tax
rate of high productivity consumers. A social planner will thus in general find it
optimal to design, within the class of piecewise linear schedules, a discontinuous
income tax function—or, equivalently, a menu of linear income tax schedules.



5       Conclusion
Menus of multiple income tax schedules can Pareto-improve upon traditional
linear or piecewise linear income tax schedules without reducing tax revenues.
By offering a choice between different tax schedules the government "sells" the
right of a lower marginal rate in exchange for a higher lump sum contribution.
The more productive taxpayers find it in their interest to buy this reduction of
marginal tax rates. Multiple tax schedules thus introduce discontinuities into the
pre-tax distribution of income.

20. If the two tax schedules intersect twice, the second schedule can be defined in such a way
that is available only for tax payers with an income higher than the lower intercept.
21. If this is not the case, the proofs have to be slightly generalized with no qualitative changes
in the results. Also, note that, in principle, it is not impossible that the conditions for revenue
neutrality could be satisfied even if <   y.    However, the range of parametervalues for which
this is possible is likely to be small.
22. This observation has been confirmed recently in independentwork by Slemrod et al. [1991],
who point out the mistake in Sheshinski's proof.
Linear income tax schedules                                                     18


This result is related to the "no distortions at the top" principle of the optimal
taxation literature, which implies that the derivative of the optimal tax sched-
ule should be zero for the most productive taxpayer. Our results generalize this
principle: it applies more globally, and does not rely upon the existence of a well
defined and identified "most productive tax payer." In addition, our scheme is
relatively easy to implement—particularly if the number of schedules is not too
high—andunlikely to produce perverse results in the presence ofgradual changes
in the income distribution.
Numerical simulations suggest that for economies with relatively high marginal
rates at the top (but still in the upward sloping part of the Laffer curve) the
marginal rates of a relatively large fraction of the population could be cut with-
out reducing tax revenues. In economies with relatively low marginal rates at the
top, such as the United States, our scheme would affect the marginal rates of a
small but not trivial fraction of the population. Our scheme is more likely to be
successful and affect a larger fraction of the population the more elastic is the
labor supply to the after tax wage. If the trend of increasing women participation
in the labor force continues, this elasticity is likely to be increasing.
Finally, it should be noted that our scheme makes the income distributionmore
unequal, which might be an undesirable feature politically. However, our pro-
posed scheme is a Pareto-improvement: the rich are getting richer—butnot at
the expense of the poor.
19                                                                      Alesina & Weil


References
Atkinson,A. and Stiglitz, J., 1980, Lectures in public economics.
Laffont, J.-J. and Tirole, J., 1986, Using cost observationto regulate firms, Journal of
   Political Economy 94, 614—641.

McDonald, J. B. and Rensom, M. R., 1979, Functional forms, estimation techniques and
  the distributionof income, Econoinetrica 47(6), 1513—1525.
Mirrlees, J., 1977, An explorationin the theory of optimal income taxation, Review of
   Economic Studies 38, 175—208.

Sadka, E., 1977, A theory of uniform taxation, Journal ofPublic Economics 7, 397—399.

Salem, A. B. Z. and Mount, T D., 1976, A convenient descriptive model of income
   distribution:The Gamma density, Econoinetrica 42, 1115—i 127.

Seade, J. K., 1977, On the shape of the optimal tax schedule, Journal ofPublic Economics
     7, 203—235.

Sheshinski, B., 1972, The optimal linear income tax, Review ofEconomic Studies 39,
     297—302.

Sheshinski, E., 1989, A note on the shape of the optimum income tax schedule, mimeo,
   HarvardUniversity Cambridge, MA.

Slemrod,J., Yitzhaki, S., and Mayshar,J., 1991, The OptimalTwo-BrackerLinear Income
   Tax, Working Paper 3847, NBER.
Linear income tax schedules                                                                         20


Appendix
Under additional assumptions on the strength of income effects, one can lift any ambi-
guity as to the behavior of intermediateproductivity workers. A sufficient conditionis
givenby

Proposition A      Ifu — u2u11 > 0, there exists a unique tZ', si" < ti <             D, such   that I)
consumer D is indifferent between schedules T             and r'; ii) consumers with productivity
lower (higher) than     i' strictlypreferscheduler (r').
Proofi Let v[a, /3w] = u[a + /3w(a, /3w), £(c, j3w)] denote the indirect utility of a consumer       of
type w facing schedule z-. Let
                                  L(w)= v[a',/l'wJ—v[a,,Ow]
denote the utility gain (or loss, if negative) of choosing schedule    r' over schedule r. Applying
the envelope theorem, we have

                                    as      = /3't'u' — /3tt4
                                            as   f(cr',/3',w)—f(a,13,w).
               *
Dropping the superscripts for ease of notation, it is straightforward to show that

                    =   /3u11   +   -{u + (ulaul      —
                                                          usuii)t} <0

              fp        —{(u — u2uiit)t + /3wt2[u + (uu1 — u2u11)e]} > 0.
The property that f,    < 0 follows from assumptions 3 and 4, and while the result that fs >          0
requires, in addition, the condition of the proposition.
Thus, since  a' < a and /3' > /3 by construction, i!(w) > 0 for all w. Since           '(.)
                                                                                      does not

which shows that
all w > iD follows from  '
change sign, the ff, which solves
                   (w)
                                       = o is unique. Existence is guaranteed by proposition I,
                                     (w)
                         < 0 for w < zT/ and
                            > 0.
Notice that, from assumption 4,
                                                 (w)
                                                   > 0 for w > üi. The property         (w)
                                                                                        > 0 for




                                   t1 — 5L2Uii > UjU12,
so that the conditionof the propositionis satisfied as soonas income effects are "weak."
This occurs, in particular, for all utility function for which        u
                                                                 < 0.23 Similarly, utility

23. Sheshinski 119891 assumes, to prove that the optimal continuous piecewise tax schedule
is convex, that income effects are non-increasing with productivity, and that (in our notation)
tii'4 (a', /3'Ji') < ti'f1 (a, fltD). Regularity conditionssimilar to these would lead to an alternative
sufficient condition for the existenceof a unique ü.
21                                                                 Alesina   & Well


functionswith curvaturein consumption C —cujj/ui < 1 satisfy proposition A, since
the conditionof the propositionis equivalent,using eq. (1.6), to
                                      a
                                 c<1+—.
                                     3wt
                   Table   1:   Model Parameters


Labor Elasticity (1/8)          0.2     0.4     0.6     0.8     1.0



TopofLafferCurve           0.833      0.714   0.625   0.556   0.500


                     United States (1988)
                   Mean Income      $24,054
                         1.65    2.15 2.66             3.21    3.82
                         0.70    0.80 0.90             1.05    1.10
mean w                   2.35    2.69 2.95             3.06    3.47
median w                 1.90    2.29 2.59             2.74    3.17
variance of w            3.35 3.36 3.28                2.91    3.15


                       Sweden (1985)
                  Mean Income = 77,900 Kr
                        0.99    1.18  1.39             1.61    1.85
                        0.30   0.30 0.35               0.40    0.40
mean to                     3.29       3.95   3.98     4.04    4.62
median to                   2.27       2.91   3.08     3.24    3.82
variance of to             10.96      13.15   11.37   10.09   11.55
                          Table 2: "U.s.,' Tax Cut from 33% to 28%
  Labor Elasticity (1/0)                        0.2           0.4         0.6         0.8          1.0
  % of agents affected                         O.Ot          0.4          3.6        10.8        21.4
  "price"                                   14,735        7,443        4,766       3,261        2,290
  equiv. consumptiongain                       0.0         O.O            0.3         1.0          1.9
  critical income                         292,556       146,706      93,260       63,336      44,151
  revenue-neutralincome                   300,287       150,993      97,375       67,090      47,446
                                               O.Ot          O.Ot       O.U          O.Ot         O.Ot
  %whopaymoretax
  % who pay less tax                           O.Ot           0.5         3.6        10.8        21.4
  % affected who pay more tax                  11.6          O.Ot        0.O         0.O          O.O
  % affected who pay less tax                  88.4         99.9         99.9        99.9        99.9


NOThS:
 indicates a number rounded down toO.
Labor elasticity is the wage elasticity of labor suppIc
"Price' is the lump suns tax the agent would have to 'pay' to be allowed to take advantage of the lower
marginal tax rate.
E.quivalerconsumption gain is the fraction of additional consumption (in$) which would make
                                                                                            the average
agent indifferent to the existence of the new tax schedule.
Criticalincome is the income level above which agents opt for the new tax schedule.
Revenue.neucra] income is the income below whichagentswhohave opted for the newschedule pay more
tax, while those above pay less.
% who pay esore/less tax shows the breakdown of agents affected by rise new schedule as a fraction of tise
entire population.
% ecred who pay moreiless tax shows the breakdown onlyof agents whoopt for the new schedule.
                         Table   3:   'U.S.' Tax Cut from 33% to 15%

 Labor Elasticity (1/8)                       0.2         0.4           0.6          0.8           1.0
 % of agents affected                       0.01         0.01          0.5           2.3           5.9
 "price"                                  79,748      44,024       30,769        23,001       17,741
 equiv. consumptiongain                     O.Ot         O.Ot          0.2           0.9           2.4
 critical income                        432,180 232,683           158,576       115,572       86,891
 revenue-neurralincome                  454,825      255,995      182,913       139,806      110,235
 % who pay more rax                         OUt          O.O          0.Ot         O.O           0.Ot
 % who pay less tax                         0.01         O.Ot          0.5           2.3           5.9
 % affected who pay more tax                 5.0          0.2          O.Ot         o.o          O.0
 % affected who pay less tax                95.0         99.8          99.9         99.9         99.9


NOTES
t indicatesa number rounded down toO.
Labor elasticity is the wage elasticity of labor supply.
"Price" is the lump sum tax the agent would have to 'pay' to be allowed to rake advantage of the lower
marginal tax rate.
Eeuivalencconsumptiongain is the fraction ofadditionalconsumption (in$) whichwould make the average
agent indifferent to the existenceof the new tax schedule.
Critical income is the income level above which agents opt for the new tax schedule.
Revenue.neutral income is the income belowwhich agentswho have opted for the new schedule pay more
tax, while those above pay less.
% who pay more/lesstax shows the breakdown of agents affected by the new schedule as a fraction of the
entire population.
 % affected who pay more/lesstax shows the breakdownonly of agents who opt for the new schedule.
                        Table 4: "Swedish" Tax Cut from 60% to 50%

              Labor Elasticity (1/0)                      0.2          0.4           0.6
              %ofagentsaffected                           2.1        21.2           52.2
              "price"                                 40,654       14,834         5,104
              equiv. consumptiongain                      0.8          8.1          18.0
              critical income                        397,202      141,585        47,578
              revenue-neutralincome                  425601       154,805        54,394
              %whopaymoretax                               0.2            O.0       O.Ot
              % who pay less tax                           1.9            21.2      52.2
              % affected who pay mote tax                  7.6            O.O       O.Ot
              % affected who pay less tax                92.4             99.9      99.9


NOTES:
 indicates a number rounded down toO.
Labor elasticity is the wage elasticity of labor supply.
"Price" is the lump sum tax the agent would have to 'pay' to be allowed   to take advantage of the lower
marginal tax nate.
Equivalent consumption gain is the fraction of additional consumption (in Kr.) which would make the
average agent indifferent to the existenceof the new tax schedule.
Ceitical income is the income level above which agents opt for the new tax schedule,
Revenue.neutral income is the income belowwhich agentswho have opted for the new schedule pay more
tax, while those above pay less.
% who pay more/lesstax shows the breakdownof agentsaffected by the new schedule as a fraction of the
entire population.
% affecred who pay more/lesstax shows the breakdownon'y of agents who opt lot the new schedule.
                          Table 5: "Swedish" Tax Cut from 60% to 30%

              Labor Elasticity (1/6)                          0.2        0.4        0.6
              % of agentsaffected                              0.2       5.9       19.3
              "price"                                     215,856    104,796    59,213
              equiv. consumptiongain                           03        8.4      28.0
              criticalincome                              676,490    308,472   163,541
              income of tax burdenswitch                  761,025    385,901   228,796
               %whopaymoretax                                0.Q        O.Ot      O.Ot
               % who pay less tax                             0.2        5.9      19.3
               % affected who pay more tax                    2.9       O.O       O.Ot
               % affected who pay less tax                   97.1       99.9      99.9


NOTES:
 indicates a number rounded down toO.
Labor elasticityis the wage elasticity of labor supply.
Pric&' is the lump suni tax the agent would have to pay' to be allowed to take advantage of the lower
marginal tax rate.
Equivalent consumption gain is the fraction of additional consumption (in Kr.) which would make the
average agent indifferent to the existenceof the new tax schedule.
Critical income is the income level above which agentaopt for the new tax schedule.
Revenue-neutral income is the income belowwhichagenta who have opted for the new schedule pay more
tax, while those above pay less.
% who pay more/lesstax shows the breakdown of agenta affected by the new schedule as a fraction of the
entire population.
% ecred who pay more/lesstax shows the breakdownonly of agents who opt for the new schedule.
