                            NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




     THE IMPACT OF COLLECTIVE BARGAINING LEGISLATION ON DISPUTES
     IN THE U.S. PUBLIC SECTOR; NO POLICY MAY BE THE WORST POLICY




                                         Janet Currie

                                     Sheena McConnell




                                  Working Paper No. 3978




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  January 1992

We would like to thank Scott Newlon, Duncan Thomas. Joseph Tracy, Larry Katz. and workshop
participants at Northwestern University, Queens University, the University of Michigan, and the
1991 NBER Summer Labor Workshop for helpful comments. Carlos Diaz, Tom Johnston, and
Lina Takia provided excellent research assistance. This research was supported by a grant from
the Fund for Research on Dispute Resolution. This paper is part of NBER's research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the Fund or
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                NBER Working Paper #3978
                                                                January 1992




     THE IMPACT OF COLLECTIVE BARGAINING LEGISLATION ON DISPUTES
      IN THE U.S. PUBLIC SECTOR: NO POLICY MAY BE THE WORST POLICY




                                             ABSTRACT


    This paperestimates the impact of collective bargaining legislation on disputes during labor

negotiations in the U.S. public sector. We use a large national sample of U.S. state and local

government contracts to compare the incidence and intensity of disputes by similar workers under

different forms of collective bargaining legislation. The breadth of our data allows us to examine

the impact   of five   different forms   of legislation.   Our principal finding is that strike Costs,

measured by strike duration and the number of working days lost, are highest in jurisdictions that

provide no explicit framework for bargaining or dispute resolution.




Janet Currie                                                    Sheena McConnell
Department of Economics                                         Mathematica Policy Research
M.I.T.                                                          600 Maryland Avenue, SW
77 Massachusetts Avenue                                         Suite 550
Cambridge, MA 02139                                             Washington, DC 20024
and NBER
                                         I, Introduction


       Disputes during labor negotiations can be extremely costly. This     is   especially true in the

public sector where the government may be the sole supplier of an essential service. Yet, despite

concerns about the costs of disputes, legislators have not reached a consensus on the best form

of policy to minimisedisputes.   As a result, public sector negotiations are governed by a diverse

set of lax that vary by state and occupation of the employees. This paper contributes to the
debate over the best form of collective bargaining legislation in the public sector by estimating

the impact of the legal structure on the form, frequency, and intensity of disputes.

       We consider two main aspects of the legislation: the laws regarding the employees'

bargaining rights and the provision of procedures to resolve disputes. In the U.S. private sector,

most employees have the right to strike and all employers are required to bargain in 'good faith"

with a legally-constitutedunion. In contrast, in the U.S. public sector, employers are not required

to bargain with a union in manyjurisdictions and in the majority ofjurisdictions, strikes arc Ilegal.

Many of the jurisdictions that prohibit strikes provide no institutional procedures to resolve

disputes. Some jurisdictions that prohibit strikes, however, require that public sector disputes he

resolved by a neutral third-party -- an arbitrator. Some jurisdictions in the public sector grant

workers the right to strike.

       Ideally,we would like to examine the impactof collective bargaining legislation on the cost

of disputes. However, in the absence of data on dispute costs we examine the impact on the

incidence of strikes, the length of strikes, and the number of working days lost due to strikes.

We also examine the impact of collective bargaining legislation on the incidence of negotiations

ended by an arbitrator imposing an award.

       Previousstudies of the impact of collectivebargaininglegislation on disputes have suffered

from a lack of a large data set of disputes in the U.S. public sector. This limits both the forms
of legal structure that they were ahic te examine and the ability to generalize the reaulta from

these atudiea to etherjuriadieriona. For example, ichniowaki'a (1932) study of police disputes and

Wheeler's (1975) atudy of fircfighteraexamined the impact of legislation on diaputea by workera

in only one occupation. And while Olson (1986) examined the impact of legislation on workers

in foor different occupations, his data only covered strikes in six states. Currie and McConnell

(1991) examined the impactoflegislation on disputes using a large data set of Canadian contracts.

However, because of the major differences in both the industrial relations environment and the

existing forms of collective bargaining legialatien between Canada and the United Stases, the
results of Currie and McConnell (1991) should not be generalized to the U.S. public sector.

      in this   study, we use   a large data act of U.S. state and local government contracts

negotiated between 1971 and 1986. This data act baa four advantages over data sets used in

previous atudlea of the impact of collective bargaining legislation on disputes in the U.S. public

sector. First, she data set coverscontracts from a wide variety of different types of workers under

different forms of legislation. These contracts were negotiated by workers in 8 different

occupations and 40 states. The breadth of the data set allows us to eatimatc the impact of five

mutually-exclusivecategories of collective bargaining legislation.

      Second, because the data span 16 years we are able to observe changes in legislation over

time. We exploit this variation by controlling in our models for the state in which the

negotiations took place and the occupation of the workem.

      Third, unlike all previous studlea of disputes in the U.S. public sector, the unit        of
observation is a contract negotiation. Contract data allow us to calculate the proportion       of
contract negotiations that end in a strike or an arbitration: the probability of a dispute. This

measure of dispute incidence controla for changes in the opportunities for a dispute afforded by

changes in she number of contract negotiations. No diapute rates for a nationally-based sample

of public sector contracts v,'cre previooaly availsble. Contract data also allow us to control for


                                                2
contractspecific detcrminantsof disputes, such as
                                                  the number of workers in the bargaining unit.

       Fourth, we examine two alternative forms of disputes, strikes and arbitrations, within the

same framework. And, unlike previous studies, we model three measures of strike activity: the

incidence of strikes, the length        of strikes,   and the total number of working days lost due to

strikes.   It is important to examine a range of measures of strikeactivity because strike incidence

alone may not fully capture the cost of disputes.

       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses the forms of collective

bargaining legislation that exist in the U.S. public sector. Section        III describes the   data used in

this study. In Section     IV, we present estimates of the impact of bargaining         legislation on the

incidence of strikes and arbitration. In Section V. we present estimates of the impact of

                                                    the number of workingdays lost due to strikes.
bargaining legislation on the length of strikes and

A discussion of our results follows in Section VI,

                                  II.   Collective Bargaining Legislation


       Collective bargaining legislation in the U.S. publicsector varies considerably by state and

by the occupation       of the   workers.     Similar types   of workers   are often covered by different

                                                                              are often covered by
legislation in different states and different types of workers within a State

different legislation. Legislation varies in terms of both the requirements for employers to

bargain eollectively and the provision         of procedures to    resolve disputes. Some public.sector

                                                                      to strikeor provided with
employeesare prohibitedfrom striking,while others are given the right

some form of arbitration.

           As collective bargaining law is developed at the State rather than the federal level, and has

 historically developed    in a piece.mcal     fashion, legislation is rarely exactly the same in any two

                                                    structure exist as there are groups of workers
jurisdictions. Hence, almost as many forms of legal

 deEmed by occupation and state, For the purposes               of this study, however, we lump together


                                                         3
similar forms of legislationinto live categories.For shorthand,we call thesecategories:(1) no

duty to bargain, (2) doty to bargain, (3) volonsary arbitration, (4) compulsory arbitration, and (5)

right to strike. All   of the   contracts in our data set fall into one, and only one,   of these   live

categories.
       We identilied the collective bargaininglegislation in effect during the negotiation of each

of the contracts in our data act using the National Bureau        of Economic Research       (NBER)
Collective Bargaining Law Data Set. We updated the data set to 1986 using the annual

descriptions of changes in labor lassa published by the U.S. Department        of Labor, Bureau of
Labor Statistics (BLS) in the Monthly Labor Review. This is the best available source                of
informationon collective bargaininglegislationin the U.S. public sector and ia described in detail

in Valletta and Freeman (1988). Table I showsthe relationshipsbetween our live categories of

legislation and the categories of legislation as defined in the NBER data set.
      A clear   relationship exists between the provision of collective bargaining rights and the

provision of dispute-resolution procedures. Forexample, it is rare for a jurisdiction that does not

require employers to bargain with their employees to provide the right to strike or to provide
institutions to facilitate the arbitration of disputes. Hence, we do not study the impact of the

provision of collective bargaining rights and dispute resolution procedures as two unrelated

aspects of the legislation. Instead, each of our live categories of legislation is defined in terms
of both she prevision of collective bargaining rights and the provision of dispute-resolution

procedures.

      The first category    of legislation--no duty to bargain--covers legal   structures in which

employers are not required so bargain, employees do not have she right to strike, and no

provision is provided for arbitration. It includes jurisdictions in which there is no law that
discusses collective bargaining ("no provision" in    the NBER data set). jurisdictions in which
collective bargaining is explicitly prohibited, and jurisdictions in which she employer is authorized
to bargain or the union has the right to present proposals or meet and confer" hut the employer

is not required to bargain.

      Contracts are still negotiated even in jurisdictions in which employers arc not required to

bargain. In our sample of 1,005 contracts, 175 contracts (17 percent)
                                                                      were negotiated in no-duty-

to-bargainjurisdictions (see Table 1). Eight contractswere even negotiated in jurisdictions which

explicitly prohibited collective bargaining.

      Employees in the public sector do not hsve the right to strike unless legislation explicitly

gives them the right to do so. In our sample, slightly more than half of the contracts in the no-

duty-to.hargain category were negotiated in jurisdictions in which strikes were explicitly

prohibited. We do not obsee any jurisdictions in which strikes were permitted hot employers

were not required to bargain with a union.

      The second category of legislation .- duty to bargain .- covers legislation that explicitly or

implicitly requires employers   to bargain with employees in   "good faith" but does not provide

employees the right to strike or any binding dispute-resolution procedures. The legislation may,

however, require that the bargaining parties take a dispute to mediation or fact-finding. In

mediation and fact.[inding, a neutral third-party recommends a settlement but the parties are not

bound to act on this recommendation. In our sample, 344 contracts (34 percent) fall into the

duty-to-bargain category.

       In some jurisdictions legislation explicitly requires the employer to bargain in ood faith

In others, the legislation jggjjes that employersmust bargain in good faith but does   not explicitly
                                                                                                a
require them to do so. For example, the legislation may specify ratification procedures or list

failure to negotiate under unfair practicea. Both typesof legislation are included in the duty-to-
                                                                                          as
bargain category. We have alto included 31 contracts in this category that were not coded
either implied"   or "explicit" duty to bargain   in the NBER database. These contracts were

                                                                                   a
negotiated under legislation that required mediation or fact-findingin the event of dispute.
                                                                                             We


                                                  5
took the view that this typc of legislation implicitly requircd the employers to bargain in good

faith. Placing these contracts into the no-duty-to-bargaincategory instead of the duty-to-bargain

category did not change any of the conclusionsof this study.

      The third category of legislation -- voluntary arbitration -- includes all legislation that

requires (either explicitly or implicitly) the employer to bargain with the union, does not give

employees the right to strike, and provides for binding voluntary arbitration. Under voluntary

arbitration both parties must agree to take their dispute to an arbitrator and the bargaining pair

is   0by     his or her decision. Because under arbitration the parties are bound by the decision

of the third party,   it differs from mediation and fact-finding under which the parties are free to

reject the suggested settlement. The legislationmay specifysome form of mediation in addition

to voluntary arbitration. In our sample, 208 contracts        (21 percent) fall into   the voluntary

arbitration category.

       The fourth form oflegislation-- compulsoryarbitration-- includes all legislation that does

not provide employees the right to strike and provides for some form of binding compulsory

arbitration. Under compulsory arbitration, any unresolved dispute must go so arbitration. In

contrast to voluntary arbitration, either party can take the dispute to arbitration even against the

wishes of the other party. As under voluntary arbitration, both parties are bound by the

arbitrator's decision. In our sample, all jurisdictions that provide compulsory arbitration explicitly

prohibit strikes.
       Our compulsory-arbitrationcategory includes legislationthat both mandates arbitration by

law and legislation that falls under   the category discretionary in the NBER data set. Under

discretionary arbitration, arbitration may be initiated by an administrative agency cither

unilaterallyor upon request of a party (Valletta and Freeman, 1988, page 403). We classify this

as compulsory arbitration because either party may take the negotiations      to an arbitrator.t



                                                  6
                                                                                  conventional
        Compulsoryarbitration procedures can be dividedinto two main categories--

and final-offer arbitration. Under conventional arbitration the arbitrator      can choose any    award

he or she wishes. Under final-offer arbitration, the parties prepare "final offers' and              the

arbitrator must choose one of the final offers on the negotiating table,2 In our sample, 105

contracts (10 percent) are negotiated under some form of compulsoryarbitration. Of these 105
                                                                                  under final-
contracts, 38 are negotiated under conventional arbitration and 67 are negotiated

offer arbitration.3
                                                 --        strike -- includes legislation that explicitly
       Finally, the fifth category of legislation right to

permits strikes.   In our sample, all jurisdictions that provide the right to strike also require

employers (either explicitly   or implicitly)to bargain in good faith with their     employees. In our

data, 173 contracts (17 percent) fall into this category.

       Seventeen contracts in our sample were negotiated in jurisdictions that provided the right

to strike and also legislated compulsory arbitration (in either the NBER 'discretionary' or
                                                                            arbitration as an
'required by statute' categories). We interpret the provision of compulsory
                                                                          or a means -- arbitration
attempt to limit the employees' right to strike. The legislation provides

-- to end a strike viewed as too lengthy or disruptive. We       have included these contracts     in the
                                                                                            limited
right-to-strikecategory because a public sector employee's right to strike is nearly always
                                                                                                       of
by the potential for ad hoe legislative intervention and so we interpret the provision

compulsory arbitration as a formalization    of this type of intervention.   Includingthe 17 contracts

 in the compulsory-arbitration category rather than the right-to-strike category does not alter our

 results.

        It is importantto note that many jurisdictions    that grant employees the right to strike also


 provide institutions to encourage voluntary arbitration.
                                                          Over 80 percent         of the   contracts (140

                                                                             that provided             for
 contracts) in the right-to-strike category were negotiated in jurisdictions

 voluntary arbitration. In these cases, employees have the choice
                                                                              of settling a   dispute by


                                                    7
arbitration   or   a strike.     In oor voluntary-arbitration category. bargaining parties have no

alternative bot to take any impasse to arbitration.

      The importance           of each of our   legislation categories changed over time.    The trend

towards more pro-bargaining legislation noted by Freeman and Valletta (1988) is reflected in our

sample: 23 percent of all contracts were signed in no-duty-to-bargainjurisdictions between 1971

and 1978 compared with 15 percent between 1979 and 1986. In contrast the right-to-strike

category hat become more important over time. While 13 percent of all contracts in our sample

were negotiated under the right to strike between 1971 and 1978, 19 percent of all contracts were

negotiated under the right to strike between 1979 and t986.


                                      III. A Description of the Data


      Thu basisof our data set is a list of 1,005 contract negotiations that occurred between 1971

and 1986. We constructed the list ofcontract negotiationsfrom the Current Waco Developments

(CWD), a monthly publication of the BLS that lists major contracts recently negotiated in the

private and public sector that involved 1,000 or more workers.

      The CWD includes information on the date the contract was effective, the date the

contract was negotiated, the length of the contract, the names           of the   employer and union

involved in thu negotiariona, the state in which the contract was negotiated, and the number of

workers covered by the contract. The CWD also states whether a strike or arbitration occurred

at the negotiation and whether the settlement was imposed by legislation.           Unfortunately, the

CWD does not include information on the wage level negotiated in the new contract.

       Thu DES does nut publish information on all large public sector contracta.4 Hence we

were unable to construct a full panel of contracts for each bargainingpair over the sample period.

The data include ccntrscts negotiated by 584 different employer-unionbargaining paira; we have

more than two contracts for only 9$ of these bargainingpairs. The                 lists more contracta in


                                                      8
the later years of our sample: 64 percent of the contracts in the sample were negotiated in the

last 5 years   of the 16-year sample period.

      A striking feature of collective bargaining legislation is its variation across   workers   ijhin
an occupation group.      From the name of the employer and the name of the union we could

identify eight occupation groups of workers covered by the contracts in the sample: teachers,

police, fire-fighters, hospital workers, city white-collar workers, other city workers, university

faculty, and other state employees.     The distribution of contracts by law category for each

occupation group of workers is shown in Appendix Table      I   No one occupation group negotiates

under a single type of legislation. Teachers, university faculty, and hospital workers are the

groups moSt likely to negotiate in ,jurisdictions with neither arbitration nor the right to strike.

Essential workers -- police and fire-fighters-- rarely have the right to strike and are the groups

most likely to be providedwith some form of arbitration.

       The Industrial Relations Facts (IRF), a weekly BLS internal publication, records

information on all strikes that involved 1,000 or more workers.          From this publication, we

constructed a list of all strikes that occurred between 1971 and 1986 in the public sector. The

IRF includes informationon the name of the employer, the name of the union, the state in which

the strike occurred, the beginning and ending date of the strike, and the number of workers

involved in the strike.    For each strike we checked to see whether it occurred at a contract

negotiation in our sample.    If it did, we supplemented information   on the strike from the

with information from the IRF.

       It   is important to note that we only include in our sample disputes over contract

negotiations.     Unlike previous studies using more aggregated data, (for example, Ichniowski,

1982), we can distinguish between strikes that occur at the negotiation       of a new contract      and

strikes that occur at other times over other issues, such as grievance resolution            or    union


recognition.     As the determinants of strikes probably vary by the cause of the strike, it is


                                                  9
important to limit the scope of the study in this way.5 Disputes over the terms of a new contract
are the most frequent cause of the strikes involving 1,000or more workers reported in the        j:
nearly 72 percent of all strikes reported in the lRFwere matched to a contract negotiation in our

sample.

        In our sample, over 17 percent of all negotiations end in a dispute.      Strikes occurred at

about 7 percent    of contract   negotiations. Compared to the private sector the probability of a
strike in the public sector is low -- between 12 and 15 percent of contract negotiations in the

U.S. private sector end in a strike (McConnell, 1990). Five percent of the contract negotiations

in   our sample were settled by arbitration and 5.5 percent     of the settlements   were imposed by

legislation. The incidence of all disputes--resolvedby either a strike, an arbitration, or a legislated

settlement--fluctuated from year to year. However, there was a general decline throughout the

1980s in the incidence of all three types of dispute. Although no aggregate public sector strike

or arbitration rates arc available, this decline mirrors the decline in the aggregate number        of
strikes in the United States during the j9gQ•6


                          IV. The Incidence of Strikes and Arbiti-ationa


        The goal of most collective bargaining laws    is   to reduce the frequency of disputes. A

dispute can be resolved in three ways: by a strike, by an award made by an arbitrator, or by a
settlement imposed by legislation. Table 2 shows the number of contract negotiations in our

sample that were settled without a dispute, by a strike, by an arbitration, and by a legislated
settlement. It also shows the average strike length and the average number of working days lost

due to strikes under each type of law.

        Strikes occurred under each of our five categories of legislation even though strikes are

illegal under all of our legislation categories except the right-to-strike category. Strike incidnce

is highest when the parties have neither    a duty to bargain nor dispute resolution procedures --

                                                  10
over 13 percent of all contracts negotiated in jurisdictionswith no-duty-to-bargainlegislationend

in a strikeY In our sample, a strike occurred in just under 10 percent of all contract

negotiations in jurisdictions where strikes are legal.

      Arbitrations also occurred under everycategory of legislation including legislation that did

not require the state to set up any institution to facilitatearbitration. Even under right-to-strike

legislation, an arbitrator settled about 2 percent of contract negotiations. But, not surprisingly,
most arbitrations took place under compulsoryarbitration legislation -- an arbitrator settled just

under 30 percent    of contracts   negotiated under compulsory arbitration. The frequency of

arbitration did not vary greatly between different typesof compulsoryarbitration -- the incidence

of arbitration is just under 4 percentage points higher under [mat-offer compulsory arbitration

than under conventional compulsory arbitration.

      A legislated settlement was imposed most frequentlyin jurisdictions without arbitration or

the right to strike -- our no-duty-to-bargain and duty-to-bargain categories. More than one in
nine contracts negotiated in jurisdictions with no-duty-to-bargainlaw were settled by a legislator

imposing an award. Legislated settlements were rare under compulsory arbitration --          in   our

sample only one legislated settlement occurred under compulsory arbitration.

      Disputes -- strikes, arbitrations, and legislated settlements -- were most frequent under

compulsory arbitration legislation. Only 66 percent      of contracts   were negotiated without a

dispute under final-offer compulsoryarbitration. Disputeswere least frequent injurisdictions with

duty-to-bargain legislation but without arbitration or the right to strike. Over 88 percent        of
contracts were negotiated without a dispute under duty-to-bargain legislation compared to art

average of 83 percent for the whole sample.

       If factors other than the form of collective bargaining legislation are important
determinants   of dispute   rates, the pattern of 'raw' strike and arbitration rates by collective

bargaining law shown in Table 2 may be misleading. To control for the effects of other

                                                  11
determinants of the incidence of strikes and arbitrations, we estimate models of whether the

negotiation was settled by a strike and whether the negotiation was settled by an arbitration. The

strike models are presented in columns        I   through   3   of Table 3; the arbitration models are

presented in columns 4 through 6.8 We do not estimate models of legislated settlements as the

parties to the negotiations may not have direct control over whether a legislator imposes an

award.

         Each   of our   models contains a dummy variable for each         of our   main categories of

legislation (except no-duty-to-bargain legislation).     We only present the results of models that

include one dummy variable to capture the effect of both conventional and final-offer arbitration

because there was never a significant difference between the impact              of the   two forms of

compulsoryarbitration in any model we estimated.

         To control for variation across states in the economy, the industrial relations environment,

and the political climate, we include state dummies in columns 1. 2, 4, and 5             of Table 39
Columns 3 and 6 of Table 3 present estimates of models that do not include state dummies. In

each model, we also include the state unemployment rate, the average hourly earnings in

manufacturing in the state, and the size of the state's labor force,10 We estimate the models

presented in Table 3 using ordinary least squares.1t

         To control for variation in strike and arbitration incidence across different types of

workers, we include dummy variables for the occupation of the workers in each model. As the

size of the collective bargaining unit may affect both the benefit from and the cost of a dispute,

we also include the number of workers in the bargaining unit in each model.12 To capture

changes over time that occurred nationwide,we include year dummies in each model. These year

dummies should pick up any general macroeconomic impacts on                the incidence of disputes in
addition to the impact on publicsector contract negotiations of events such as the 1981 strike by

she Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization.


                                                    12
      The introduction of collective bargaining legislation is unlikely to he completely random.

In particular, it may be affected by the recent incidence of disputes. For example, a change in

legislation maybe triggered by a particularlylarge strike in the public sector. If the introduction

of collective bargaining law is correlated with the incidence of strikes        or arbitrations,   our

estimates may be biased. This    is   a problem with all existing models of the impact of collective

bargaining law on disputes and cannot he solved until an adequate model of the determinants of

the introduction of collective bargaining legislation has been developed (Ehrcnherg and Schwarz,

1986). As yet, such   a model does not     exist (see Farber, 1988, for an example of an attempt at

this type of model). However, most changes in collective bargaining legislation occurred before

1979 (Farber, t988). To reduce        the likelihood of an endogericity bias, we estimate our models

in columns 2 and 5    of Table   3 on the sample of contracts that were negotiated in 1979 or

laier13

      The results presented in Table 3 suggest that introducing duty-to-bargain legislation,

without granting workers the right to strike or providing for arbitration, would decrease the

incidence ofstrikes by between 7 and      11   percentage points. When the model is estimated on the

whole sample (its columns 1 and 3), the hypothesis that the form of legislation has no impact on

strike incidence is rejected by art F-teat at a 10 percent level ofsignificance. This confirms results

of earlier studies which looked only at specific occupation groups. For example, Sternand Olson

(1982) found strikes highest in jurisdictions with no-duty-to-bargain legislation in a study        of

disputes by police, teachers, and fire-fighters. Also, Ichniowski (1982) in a study of police strikes

found that a switch from no-duty-to-bargain legislation to duty-to-bargain legislation reduced

strikes. However, Currie and McConnell (1991) found no significant difference in the strike

incidence in jurisdictions with and without duty-to-bargain legislation in the Canadian public

sector. But, in Canada nearly all jurisdictions require employers to bargain in good faith with a

union.


                                                     13
      Our estimates suggest that, given that employers are required to bargain in good faith,

strikes are more frequent if they are legal. In column I         of Table   3, the coefficients on all

legislationvariables        the right-to-strike dummy are significantly negative. Ao F-test rejects

the hypothesis thst all forms of duty-to-bargainlegislation have the same impart at a 10 percent

level of significance when the model is estimated on the full sample. However, there is no

statistically significant difference between she incidence of strikes under the right to strike and

the incidence of strikes under no-duty-to-bargain legislation.

      The incidence of strikes in our sample is lowest under compulsoryarbitration. The results

in Table 3 show that the incidence of strikes is between 5 and 13 percentage points lower under

eompulaory arbitration than under the right to strike. This result ia alao similar to findings

reported previouslyfor specific occupation groups. In the U.S. public sector, Ichniowaki(1982)
found that arbitration reduced strikes by police and Wbeeler (1975) found that arbitration

reduced atrikea by fire-fighters. Currie and McConnell(1991) found that in the Canadian public

sector strikes are about 5 percentage pointa more frequent under the right to strike than under

compulsoryarbitration.

      A atriking. although not surprising, result in Table 3 is that arbitrations are used most

frequently under compulsoryarbitration. Conventionalcompulsoryarbitration is often criticized

for discouraging or "chilling" negotiations (Stevens, 1966). For example, some argue that

arbitrators under conventional arbitration "split the difference" between the final-offers of the

negotiating partiet.   If negotiating parties anticipate   thia behavior, they may take extreme

positions that discourage negotiations and increase the probability of a dispute. Our eatimatea

suggestthat the introduction of compulsoryarbitration into a jurisdiction with no-duty-to-bargain

legislation increases the incidence of arbitration by between 22 and 39 percentage points.
      Our estimates also suggest that replacingvoluntary arbitration with compoltory arbitration

increases the probability of an arbitration by between 15 and 23 percentage pointa. F-teats


                                                14
ovcrwhclmingly reject the hypothesis that the introduction of the duty to bargain, with or without

dispute resolution procedures. into a jurisdictionwith no-duty-to-bargain legislation has no impact

on the incidence of arbitration.

        The estimates in Table 3 suggest that making strikes legal significantly reduces the

probability   of an arbitrated   settlement. We predict that switching from voluntary arbitration to

the   right to strike decreasesthe incidence of arbitration by between 26 and 28 percentage points

(if we include state dummies in the model). As most jurisdictions with the nght to strike also

provide   for voluntary arbitration,the finding    that a switch from voluntary arbitration to the right

to strike increases strike incidence and decreases arbitration incidence suggests that bargaining

pairs prefer   to settlea dispute with a strike rather than an arbitration when they have the choice

between the two,

        The results presented in columns 3 and 6           of Table   3 underline the importance     of

controlling for the State 0 which the negotiations take place. When state dummies are excluded
from the strike model (in column 3), the coefficients on all the legislation variables show a

positive bias. This suggests that,     for some reason not    captured by the variables in the model,

states with frequent strikes are more likely to have legislation that requires employers to bargain.

When state dummies are excluded from the arbitration model (in column 6), the coefficienton

the right to strike dummy exhibits        a   large positive bias, while the coefficients on the other

legislation variables show a negative bias. This suggests that Stateswith frequent arbitrations are

more likely to have either no-duty-to-bargain legislation or duty-to-bargain legislation and the

right to strike.

         Restricting the sample to include only those contracts negotiated after most        of the law

changes have taken place (1979 through 1986) does not have a significant impact on the estimates

in Table 3. However, estimates of the impact of legislation on strike incidence in the period      1979


to 1986 are slightly lower (in absolute terms) than those made using the whole sample (compare


                                                     15
columns I and   2 oF Table 3).    Rcatricting the sample to those contracts negotiated during the

period 1979 to 1986 has little impact on the estimates of the impact of legislation on the

incidence of arbitration (compare columns 4 and 5 of Table 3).

       Turning to she impact of the other explanatoryvariablet on the incidence of strikes and

arbitrations, we find that an increase in the state unemployment rate has no impact on the

probability of a strike but increases the probability of an arbitration by between I and            2
percentage points. The negative correlation between strike incidence and unemployment in the

private sector is well documented (Vrornan, 1989). So it is surprising that the inverse relationship
between strike incidence and unemployment does not hold in the public sector.t4              This may

be because the ability of the state government to pay for wage increases falls in a recession. And,

while in the private sector the cost   of a strike to the employees rises in a recession as it becomes
easier for them to be replaced, in the public sector the cost of a strike to the employee probably

does not rise much in a recessionbecause publicsector strikers are unlikely to lose their jobs and

be replaced by other workers. None of the other explanatory variables have a consistent and

significantimpact on the incidence of strikes or arbitrations.


                  V.   Strike Duration and Working Days Lost Due to Strikes


       Perhaps more important than the impact of collective bargaining legislation on the

incidence of strikes is its impact on the cost of disputes. Disputes are not all equally costly. For

example, although strikes are more frequent in jurisdictionswith no-duty-to-bargain legislation,
it may be   that the strikes that do occur are so short that the total cost of strikes in these

jurisdictions is negligible.   It is   beyond the scope   of this   paper to evaluate the impact   of

legislation on the cost of disputes. Instead, we examine the impact of legislation on two variables
that are highly correlated with the     Cost of a strike: the length of the strike and   the number of

working days lost because of the strike. We do not cstimstc the cost of arbitration hearings. But

                                                   16
as an arbitration hearing is typically   so muchless costly than a strike, in most jurisdictions the cost

of arbitrations constitutes only a small fraction of the total cost of disputes.15

      The average strike length and the average number of working days lost due to strikes

under each     of
             type            are shown in Table 2. The number of working days lost due to a
                     legislation

strike is the product of the strike length and the number of workers involved in the strike.t6

Strikes are, on average, longer and involve more working days lost when they are legal.             li-i   our

sample, the average strike under the right to strike lasted 18 days and involved the loss of 184,000

workingdays compared to an average strike length of 14 days and a loss of 107.000working days
in the sample as a whole. In contrast, under all forms of arbitration, strikes tend to he short and

involve the loss of fewer working days.t7 When employers are            not required to bargain -- our

                 legislation-- strikes are about 4 days longer and involve the loss of about the
no-duty-to-bargain

same number of working days as the average strike in our sample.

       On the basis of sample averages of strike duration and the number of working days lost

doe to strikes, Currie and McConnell (1991) conclude that in the Canadian public sector strikes

are longer and involve the loss of more working days when they are legal. But strikes may be

longer when they are legal because workers who rarely strike for long, such as police and fire-
                                                                               In this study, we
fighters, are more likely to be covered by legislation that prohibits strikes.
estimate models of strike duration and days lost due to strikes and control for other determinants

of the intensity of the strike.

        We present the results of the estimation of models of strike duration and the number                of

days lost due to strikes irs Table 4. Itt each column, the dependent variables         is   'unconditional"

 on a strike occurring .- if no strike occurred at a contract negotiation the dependent variable is

 Set equal   to zero..8 Thus, we interpret the estimates of the coefficients in Table 4                      as


 measuring the impact of the explanatory variables on the product of the probability of a strike

 occurring and the intensity of a strike if one occurs -- the expected strike length or the expected

                                                      17
number   of working days lost.      In our sample, the average unconditional strike duration is I

dayt9 and the average unconditional number        of days   lost due to strikes is 7,769 days. The

models   of strike   duration and working days lost presented in Table        4   include the same

explanatory variables as the models of strike and arbitration incidence presented in Table 3.

       The results presented in Table 4 suggest that strikes are most costly in jurisdictions in

which employers are not required to bargain in good faith with the union. Both unconditional

strike duration and the unconditional number of days lost due to strikes are higher in jurisdictions

with no-duty-to-bargain law. (Except in column 2 of Table 4, F-tests reject the hypothesis that

the coefficients on the four main legislation variables are equal to zero at the 90 percent level

of confidence.)   The point estimates suggest that switching from no-duty-to-bargain legislation to

duty-to-bargain legislation would reduce the unconditionalstrike duration by about 1.7 days and

reduce the unconditional number of working days lost due to strikes by between 10 and 22 days.

       The average strike in our sample is as long when strikes are legal as when there is no-duty-

to-bargain legislation (see Table 2). However, once we control for the state in which the strike

took place (see columns     1   and 2 of Table 4), we find that switching from no-duty-to-bargain

legislation to the right to strike decreases the expected length of strikes by nearly 2 days. Our

point estimates also suggest that switching from the right to strike to compulsory arbitration

would decrease the expected length of a strike by about I day and decrease the expected number

of working days lost by between      15 and 20 days, although these differences   are not statistically

significant.

       As in our models of strike incidence, we find that omitting state dummies from the model

of strike duration   and working days lost due to strikes biases upwards the coefficients on the

legislation variables. Thus states with many, long, and costlystrikes are more likely to introduce

some form of collective bargaining lcgilation.




                                                  18
                                          VI. l)iscusslon


      The most striking conclusion from this study     is   that those jurisdictions that have neither

legislation requiring employers to bargain in good faith nor legislation that provides some form

of procedure for dispute resolution experience the most costly strikes measured in terms of the

expected length of the strike and the number of working days lost due to strikes. While most of

these jurisdictions do not explicitly prohibit bargaining,they do not have legislation that provides

employees with the right to engage in collective bargaining. Granting workers both the right to

bargain and the right to strike does not seem to increase the incidence of strikes but may
decrease the expected length of a strike and working days lost because of sirikes. Requiring

employers to bargain and providingsome form of arbitration reduces all three measures of strike
                                                                framework for bargaining or dispute
activity. Hence, our results suggest that providing no explicit

resolution is the worst industrial relations policy.

       Our results are less conclusiveabout the best form of industrial relations policy. While our

point estimates suggest that the expected duration and number of working days lost due to strikes

is lowest under compulsory arbitration, these differences are        not ststistically significant. The

incidence of strikes is lowest under compulsory arbitration, but the incidence of arbitrations is

highest under compulsory arbitration. However, an srbitration is so much less costly than a

typicalstrike that the incidence of arbitrations is much less important than the incidence of strikes

from a policy perspective

       While our results provide useful information for assessing the effectiveness of different

types of collective bargaining legislation, these results alone are not sufficient to make policy

recommendations. Future research should aim to measure more directly the cost of disputes.

This would involve collecting data about the cost of arbitration hearings and estimating the value

of output or services lost during a strike    As emphasized by our study, these data should cover



                                                  19
a wide variety of typea of workera and atatea.   We look at only one aapect of      the outcome of

contract negotiations: disputes. Future research should alao examine the impact of legialation

ctn other important ootcomea, aueh aa the wage level, the level      of employment,      the benefit

package, the degree   of indexation specified in the contract, and she length   of the contract.




                                                 20
                                            Endnotes


I. Five contracts in our sample were negotiated in jurisdictions in which the legislation
authorizes, but does not require, the employer to bargain but also requires any dispute to go to
compulsoi-y arbitration. We interpreted the compulsory arbitration clause as implicitly requiring
the employer to bargain in good faith.
2. When the ditpute is over multiple issues, some jurisdictions require arbitrators to decide on
each negotiating issue separately, while other jurisdictions require arbitrators to choose between
the employer's and union's packages of offers. We do not make a distinction between these
forms of final-offer arbitration.

3. Iowa operates a tn-offer arbitration system. In this system a fact.finder first recommends an
award and the arbitrator must then choose between the two final offers of the negotiating parties
and the fact-finder's recommended award, Only seven contracts in our sample were negotiated
under this tn-offer system so we place them in the category of final-offer arbitration. Two
contracts in the sample -- both covering police in Boston -- were negotiated in jurisdictions that
give the bargaining parties the choice of settling their disputes with either conventional or final-
offer arbitration. These two contracts were classified into the final.offer arbitration category.

4. The contracts included in the CWD arc those viewed as "significant"by the BLS. The BLS
are more likely to include in the listingscontracts that cover many workers. We do not rule out
the possibilityof some sample selection bias.

5. See Ichniowski (1986) for a study of the impactof legislation en recognition strikes.

6.The BLS publishes a series of the aggregate number of strikes in the United States in the
Monthly Labor Review.

7. Olson (1988) argues that strikes are under-reported in jurisdictions with no collective
bargaining law. If this is the case, 13 percent may be an underestimate of the strike frequency
itt jurisdictions with no-duty-to-bargain legislation.

8. Two contracts involved both a strike and an arbitration and four contracts involved both a
strike and a legislated settlement. In our strike models, we count the disputes at all six contracts
as a strike and in our arbitration models, we count the disputes at the two contracts with both
a strike and an arbitration as an arbitration.
9. We include a dummy variable for all but two states that are represented in our sample. Only
one contract in our sample was negotiated in each of these two states,

10.   We describe the sources of the explanatoryvariables in an Appendix,

11. Nonlinear models corresponding to the models shown in columns I and 4 of Tables 3 and
4 are shown in Appendix Table 2. These models yield conclusions that are qualitatively similar
to those discussed in the text. However,compared to the estimates made from she linear models,
the estimates from the nonlinear models are much less precise and are sensitive to the
specificationof the model. Hence, we regard the point estimates from the linear models as more
reliable.

                                                21
l2.We do not control for other contract-specific variables,such as the lengthof the contract or
the degree of indexation, because of the potential for endogeneity bias. Including such variables
in the models did not alter our conclusions from the study.

13. In our wholesample, only 43 contracts were negotiated in the same year as a law change that
affected workers in the same occupation and state, and only 15 of these occurred after 1979.

14. Although Nelson, Stone, and Swint (1981) argue that strikes arc   not pro-cyclical in the public
sector.

15. See   Currie and McConnell (1991) for a comparison of the Coat       of strikes and   arbitration
hearings in the Canadian public sector.

16.  The number of workers involved in a strike is missing for 17 strikes. In these cases, we use




                                                          j
the number of workers covered by the contract as an ettimateof the number of workers involved
in a strike.

17. We also   found these differences in strike duration and working days lost in a larger sample
of all 346 public sector strikes that were reported in the over the sample period.

18. We do not have a sufficient number of strikes to estimate models of conditional             strike
duration.

19. This is much shorter than the average unconditional     strike duration of just under 6      days
found in the U.S. private sector (McConnell, 1990).




                                                22
                                           References


Currie, Janet, and Sheena McConnell. 'Collective Bargaining in the Public Sector: The Effect

      of Legal   Structure on Dispute Costs and Wages.' American Economic Review. vol. 81,

      no. 4, September 1991, PP 693.718.

Ehrenberg, Ronald G., and Joshua L. Schwarc, 'Public Sector Labor Marketa," In Handbook
      of Labor Economics, vol. II, edited by Orley Ashenfeltcr and Richard Layard.   Amsterdam:

      North Holland, 1986.

Farber, Henry S.. 'The Evolution of Public Sector BargainingLaws, In When Public Employees

      Unionize, edited by Richard B. Freeman and Casey Ichniowski. Chicago and London.

      The Universityof Chicago Press, 1988.

Freeman, Richard B., and Robert G. Vallctta, 'The EfEcct of Public Sector Labor Laws on

      Collective Bargaining, Wages, and Employment." In When Public Employees Unionize,

      edited by Richard B. Freeman and Casey lchniowski.            Chicago and London.      The

      Universityof Chicago Press, 1988.

Ichniowski, Casey.     'Acbitration and Police Bargaining:     Prescriptions for the Blue flu.'

      Industrial Relations, vol. 21, no. 2, Spring 1982, Pp 149.166.

lchniowski, Casey. "Public Sector Recognition Strikes: Illegal and Ill.Fated." NBER Working

      Paper No. 1808, January 1986.

McConnell Sheena        Cycltcal Fluctuations in Slrtke Activity   lndustrtal and Labor Relations

                 vol. 44, no. 1, October 1990, pp 130-143.

Nelson, WilliamB., Gerald W. Stone, Jr., and MichaelJ. Swint. 'An Economic Analysis of Public

      Sector Collective Bargaining and Strike Activity.' Journal of Labor Research, vol. 2, no.

      1, 1981, pp 77-98.




                                                23
Olson, Craig A.. Strikes, Strike Penallics, and Arbitration in Six States. Industrial and Labor

      Relations Review, vol.   39,   no. 4, July 1986, pp 539.552.

Olaon, Craig A..   'Dispute Resolution in the Public Sector," In Puljc Sector Bargaining, edited

      by Benjamin Aaron, Joyce M. Najita, and James L. Stern. Washington, D.C.: The Bureau

      of National Affairs,   1988.

Stern, James, L., and Craig      A    Olson. "The Propensity to Strike        of Local   Government

      Employees." Journal of Collective Neotiatigns vol.        11, no.   3, 1982, pp 201-214.

Stevens, Carl M..     "Is Compulsory Arbitration Compatible With Bargaining?"               Industrial

      Relations, vol. 5, no. 1, February 1966, pp 38-52.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. Statistical Abstract of the United States.

      Waslsington,D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, various issues.

U.S. Department      of   Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.         Current Wage Developments.

      Washington. D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, various issues.

U.S. Department    of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. Employment and Earnings.        Washington,

      D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, various issues.

U.S. Department    of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.    Industrial Relations Facts. Washington,

      D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, various issues.

U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. Monthly Labor Review. Washington,

      D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, various issues.

Valletta, Robert G., mid Richard B. Freeman. 'The NBER Public Sector Collective Bargaining

      Law Data Set? In When Public Employees Unionize, edited by Richard B. Freeman and

      Casey Ichniowski. Chicago and London. The Universityof Chicago Press, 1988.

Vroman, Susan B.,     A Longitudinal Analysis of Strike Activity in U.S. Manufacturing:          1957-

       1984? American Economic Review, vol. 79, no. 4, September 1989, pp 816-826.




                                                   24
Wheeler Hoyt N..   An Analysis   of Fircflghtcrs Strikes."   Labor Law Journal. vol. 26, no. 1,

     January 1975. pp 17-20.




                                              25
                                Appendix: Data Sources



Variable                                    Source


Average hourly earnings in manufacturing    U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor
by state                                    Statistics,Emptoyment and   Earnin
Size of labor force, by state               U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau        of
                                            the Census, Slatistical Abstract of the
                                            United States


Unemployment rate, by state                 U.S. Department of Commerce. Bureau of
                                            the Census, Statistics! Ahstrct   of the
                                            United States




                                           26
                                                Table I

                              Number of Contracts by Legislation Category



                                               Categoriesof Legislation Use8 in This Study
                                   No Duty       Duty to      Voluntary     Compulsory       Right to
                                  to Bargain     Bargain     Arbitration    Arbitration       Strike

Legislation as Delined
by the NBER Collective
Itargaining Law Data Set

Co!Iecnve Bargaining Rights

No Provision                          83            4

Bargaining Prohibited                 8
Employer Authorized but not           64             2                            5
Required to Bargain
Union has the Right to                5
Present Proposals
Union has the Right to Meet           15            25
and Confer
                                                   235           208             75             102
Duty to Bargain (Implied)
Duty to Bargain                                     78                           25             71

(Explicit)

Strike Lows
None                                  79            38             5

Strikes Prohibited                    96            306          203             105

Strikes Permitted                                                                               173


Arbitration Laws
No Provision                          175           343                                         16

Arbitration Prohibited                               I
Arbitration Voluntary                                             208                           140

ArbitrationDiscretionary                                                          76             14

Arbitration Required by                                                           29             3
Statute

Total                                 175           344           208            105            173
                                                                     Tul,lo 2

                  Froqnossoy of Dlspolon, Avorugo SInks length, nod Average l)trys I.osl l)oo In Strikes by Leglslotlots Cutegory



                                               Number 01 ConItOrts Settled by:

law Category                     llargsrning         Striks?    Arbitration       Legtslation         Average           Average         Total
                                   Without a                                                    Strike Length         Number of
                                    Dispute                                                            (Days)'         Days Lost
                                                                                                                        Due to a
                                                                                                                           Strike
                                                                                                                        (1,000sf

140 Dory to Bargain                     130              23               I               21                10                107            175
                                  (74,3%)5          (13.1%)         (0.6%)          (12.0%)

Duly to Bargain                         303               16              S               24                14                 93            344
                                   (88.1%)           (4.7%)         (1.5%)            (7.0%)

Voluntary Arbitration                   182               14            10                 4                 7                 64            208
                                   (87.5%)           (6.7%)         (4.8%)            (1.9%)
Cnovsrttliorrat                         26                 I             10                I                 I                  3             38
Compulsory Arbitration             (68.4%)           (2.6%)        (26.3%)            (2.6%)

l9nal-OIler Compulsory                  44                 3            20                 0                 6                  3             67
Arbilrvmtion                       (65.7%)           (4.5%)        (29.9%)
Right to Strike                         147              17              4                 5                18                184            173
                                   (05.0%)           (9.8%)         (2.3%)            (2.9%)


Total I Average                         832              74              50               55                14                107           1.005
                                   (02.0%)           (7.4%)         (5.0%)            (5.5%)


No ten:

a. 'Pun eunlearlu involved boris a strike and an arbitr.ttioo. tour ennlr.rcts intvolved both a strike and a legislated settlement.

km. Percentages of nil contracts in each law ottegoty ate given in parentheses.

c. Strike length is missing for one strike. The strike length is averaged only ever those contract negotiations st which a strike occurred.

d. The number of workers involved in a strike is mivsirtg for 17 strikes. In Stone cases, we use he number of workers covered try     the
cr,nteact anon estimate of the number of workers involved in a strike.
                                                       Table 3

                             The Impact of Collectise Bargaining Law ott the
                                  incidence of Strikes and Arbitrations


                                       Incidenceof Strikes                     Incidence of Arbitrations

                              (1)              (2)               (3)      (4)             (5)              (6)
                             State         Year=1979       No State      State        Year= 1979     No State
                            Dummtes         or Later       Dummies     Dummies         or Later      Dummies
                            included         State                     Included         State
                                            Dummies                                    Dummies
                                            included                                   Included

Collective Barfaining Law
(Omitted categoty is no
duty to bargain)
1.   Duty to Bargain        -0.112'          -0.078'         -0.067'     0.059'          0.061'        0.034'
                            (0.041)°         (0.039)         (0.027)     (0.029)        (0.031)        (0.020)
2.   Voluntary               -0.140'          -0.064         -0.078'     0.154'          0.176'        0.066'
     Arbitration             (0.052)         (0.051)         (0.029)     (0.038)         (0.040)       (0.022)
3.   Compulsory              -0.206'         -0.115'          -0.048     0.383'          0.386'        1)216'
     Arbitration             (0.060)         (0.056)         (0.035)     (0.043)         (0.044)       (0.027)

4.   Right to Strike         -0.1)73          -0.047          0.0(12     -0,105'         -0.1060'      0.049'
                             (0.050)         (0.046)         (0.030)     (0.036)         (0.036)       (0.023)
State Variables
     Unemployment Rate       -0.0t4           -0.000          0.004      0.023'          0.007         0.014'
                             (0.010)         (0.012)         (0.007)     (0.007)         (0.009)       (0.005)
                              0.015          -0.074           0.007       0.006           0.038        -0.000
     Average Hourly
     Earnings itt            (0.033)         (0.044)         (0.016)     (0.024)         (0.035)       (0.008)
     Manufacturing
     LaborForce              -0.002          0.125'           0.005       0.017           0.039        -0.004'
     (millions)              (0.017)         (0.040)         (0.003)     (0.012)         (0.032)       (0.002)

Contract Variables
     Number of Workers       -0.211          -0.162          -0.491      -0.243           0.267        .0.336
     in Bargaining Unit      (0.449)         (0.593)         (0.441)     (0.322)         (0.466)       (0.337)
     (millions)

Fixed Effects
     Year (15)                 yes           yes (7)             yes       yes           yes (7)           yes
     State (37)                yes             yes               no        yes             yes             no

     Occupation                yes             yes               yes       yes             yes             yes
     Dummies (7)

(Table 3 to be continued)
(Table 3 continued)

                                 0.107          0.545         0.03!                -0.288          -0.536      -0.122
Intercept
                                (0.331)        (0.450)       (0.096)               (0.237)        (0.354)      (0.074)


                                 0,173         0.179          0.110                 0.389          0.406        0.251
R-squarcd
Number of contract                 74            33            74                       50           28          50
Negotiations at which a
Strike Occurs
Number of Contract                914            697           914                      938         702          938
Negotiations at which a
Strike Does Not Occurb
F.Tesssc

Duty to Bargain,                 1.754          0.552         0.364                40.346          39.951       26.359
Voluntary Arbitration,          (0.186)        (0.576)       (0.695)               (0.001)        (0.0001)     (0.0001)
and Compulsory
Arbitration have the same
impact (coefficients in
rows 1-3 are equal)

 Dutyto Bargain,                  2.111         0.718         2.856                54,714          52.729       18.118

 Voluntary Arbitration,          (0.096)       (0.545)       (0.036)               (0.001)        (0.()00l)    (0.0001)
 Compulsory Arbitration,
 and the Right to Strike
 have the same impact
 (coefficients in rows 1-4
 are equal)
 No collective bargaining         3.430          1.445         3.258                41.253         39.710       19.918
 laws have an impact             (0.1)09)      (0.217)        (0.012)              (0.0001)       (0.0001)     (0.0001)
 (coefficients in rows 1-4
 are zero)

Notes:

a.   Standard errors are given in parentheses. An asterisk indicates significance at the 95 percent level of confidence.

b.   The number of workers in the bargaining unit is missing for        17 contracts.    We omit these contracts from our
     sample.

C.   Probability values are given in parentheses.
                                                          Table 4

                                    The Impact of Collective Bargaining Law on
                         Strike Length and the Number of Working Days Lost Due to Strikes


                                            Strike Length°                 Number of Working Days Lost Due
                                                                                       to Strikes

                                   (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)             (5)        (6)
                                  State      Year=l979        No State      State      Year= 1979     No State
                                Dummies       or Later        Dummies     Dummies       or Utter      Dummtcs
                                Included       State                      Included        State
                                              Dummies                                  Dummies
                                              Included                                 Included

Collective Bargaining Law
(omitted category is no
duty to bargain)
                                 -1.687'        -1.695'        -1.694'     -17.231'     -22.107'      -10,246'
1.   Duty to Bargain
                                 (0.882f        (0869)         (0.567)      (7.907)      (8.097)       (5.114)

2.                               -3.027'         -1.928        -2.344'     -30.350'     -27.914'      -l6.32L'
     Voluntary
     Arbitration                 (1.137)        (1.150)        (0.627)     (10.197)     (10.727)       (5.655)
                                 -3.084'        -2.691'         -1.125     -33.089'     -33.263'        -6.9S5
3,   Compulsory
     Arbitration                 (1.302)        (1254)         (0.747)     (11.681)     (11.704)       (6.733)

4.           to Strike           -1.896'        -1.969          -0.123      -13.437     -18.247'        6.581
     Right
                                  (0.094)       (1.026)         (0.640)     (9.S08)      (9563)        (5.783)

State Variables
                                                                 0.038      -0.984          -0.112      0.652
     Unemployment Rate            .0.248        -0.314
                                  (0.207)       (0.260)         (0.147)     (1.859)         (2.242)    (1.325)

                                   0.341        -0643            0.185      -0.399          -3,069      0.302
     Average Hourly
     Earnings in                  (0.720)       (0.9S7)         (0.215)     (6.454)         (9.205)    (1.939)
     Manufacturing
     Labor Force                   0.175        2.313'          0129'        2.599          14,112      1.024'
     (millions)                   (0.376)       (0.906)         (0.059)     (3.375)         (8.447)    (0.535)

Contract Variables
    Number of Workers             -13.967       -14.145         -0.016'      61.344      92.211         63.675
    in Bargaining Unit            (9.756)       (13.246)        (0.009)     (87.452)    (123.519)      (84.865)
     (millions)
Fixed Effects
     Year (15)                      yes         yes (7)             yes       yes           yes (7)      yes

     State(37)                      yes           yes               no        yes             yes         no

     Occupation                     yes           yes               yet       yes             yes         yes
     Dummies (7)

 (Table 4 to be continued)
 (Table 4 continued)


 intercept                        0.151         4,476            -1097               25.858       14.912       -5442
                                 (7.193)       (10.065)          (2.054)            (64.480)     (93.840)     (18.516)


 R-sqaared                        0.132         0.149            0.099                0.126        0.128        0.081
 Number of Contract                73                32            73                  73           32           73
 Negotiations at which a
 StrikeOccurs
 Number of Contract                914           697               914                914           697          914
 Negotiations at which a
 StrikeDoes Not Occurd
 FTcstsu
 Duty to Bargain,                 1.476          0.459            1.484               1.975        0.732        1.259
 Voluntary Arbitration,          (0.229)        (0.632)          (0.227)             (0.139)      (0.48t)      (0.284)
 and Compulsory
 Arbitration have the same
 impact (coefficients in
 rows 1-3 are equal)

 Duty to Bargain,                 1.058          0.306            4.225               1.890        0.795        5.537
 Volutttarv Arbitration,         (0.366)        (0.823)          (0.006)             (0.128)      (0.500)      (1)001)
 Compulsory Arbitration,
 and the Right to Strike
 have the same impact
 (coefficients in rows 1-4
 are equal)
 No collective bargaining         2.004          1.446            5.024               2.738        2.536        4.761
 laws have an impact             (0.092)        (0.217)          (0.005)             (0.028)      (0.039)      (0.001)
  (coefficients in rows 1-4
 are eero)

Notes:

a.   The independentvariable it the unconditional strike length (i.e., the length of a strike if one occurred and rero
     otherwise). The mean unconditional strike length is 1.058.

b.   The independentvariable is the unconditional number of working days lost due to a strike (i.e., the number of
     working days lost due to a strike if one occurred and zero otherwise). The mean unconditional number of
     working days lost due to strikes is 7,769.

c.   Standard errors are given in parentheses. An asterisk indicates significance at the 95 percent les'el of confidence.

d.   The number of workers in the bargaining unit         is missing   for 17 contracts. We omit these contracts from our
     sample.

e.   Probability values are given in parentltesea.
                                                                                                           p.aenlheses in gisen are totals column   ol l'ercenragcs a
                                                                                                                                                                Notes:
1(815   228            02            11,6          5,1                21,             50               95              277                                        lbt:iI
(17)    (33)           (10)          (22)          (II)               (IS)            (0)              (3)             (13)
                                                                      5               0                3               37                             Strike   In Right
73      75             10            38            5
(7)     (7)            (2)           (1)           (0)                (0)             (24)             (28)            (2)                           Arbitration
67      7               2            2             0                  0               2                28               6                 Compulsory Final-OIler
(4)     (4)            (0)           (1)           (2)                (1))            (18)             (12)            (2)                            Asbitratk,n
38      10             0             1              I                 0               9                II              6                 Compulsory Concuntional
(20)    (13)           (7)           (33)          (21)               (19)            (14)             (17)            (23)
208     30             7             1,1           13                 5               7                16              69                    Athiltalion Voluntaty
(34)    (35)           (81)          (8)           (49)               (27)            (26)             (19)            (35)
344     81             83            14            30                 7               13               18              98                            Ilargain 0   l)oly
(19)    (7)            (0)           (32)          (2)                (35)            (18)             (20)             (22)
                                                                      9                                9               61                      Ibegain    to 1)ulyNo
75      15             0             50            2                                  9
                                                                                                                                                       ('aIcory law
                                                   Workers
        Workers        Faculty       Workers       Collar             workers
lotal   Stile Oilier   Untveu-sity   City Other    While City         lospital I      ISre-ighiers     Police          Teachers
                                                             Occul,alion
                                            Oreupalionnod Cisingory Ems by Conirouts of DLsInlboIton
                                                                 1   labln Appundlo
                                          Appendix Table 2

The Impact of Collective Bargaining Law on the Incidence of Strikes and Arhitrations, Strike Length,
                       and the Number of Working Days Lost Due to Strikes

                                         (Probits and Tobits)


                                        (1)              (2)            (3)                (4)
                                      Strike        Arbitration    Strike Length       Number of
                                     Incidence       Incidence                        Working Days
                                                                                         Lost

                                      Probit           Probit           Tobit             Tohit

Collective Barainins Law
(omitted category is no duty to
bargain)
1.   Duty to Bargain                   -0.655             2.773         -13.650           -118.957
                                       (Q357)a           (3.129)         (8.729)           (73.100)
2.   Voluntary Arbitration             -0.254             3.620          -6.568            -56.780
                                       (0541)            (3.157)        (13.034)          (110.964)
3.   Compulsory Arbitration            -1.504W            4.111         -33.106           -295.497
                                       (0.657)           (3.162)        (16.552)          (138.607)
4.   Right to Strike                   -0.064             2.389          -2.663            -23.466
                                       (0.450)           (3.149)        (10.920)           (92.590)
State Variables
     Unemployment Rate                 -0.032             0.165          -0.179              2.537
                                       (0.087)           (0.108)         (2.156)           (17.982)
     Average Hourly Earnings             0.394            0.063           9.311             5 1.683
     in Manufacturing                   (0.319)          (0.390)         (7.741)           (63.840)
     Labor Force (millions)             -0.129           -0.894          -2.522            -28.597
                                        (0.205)          (0.612)         (5.008)           (43.754)
Contract Variables
     Number of Workers in               -2.387           -0.508        -118.613           -157.314
     Bargaining Unit                    (4.343)          (6.324)       (115.817)          (814.246)
     (millions)

Fixed Effects
      Year (15)                         yea              yes             yea                yes
      State (37)                        yes              yes             yea                yes

      Occupation Dummies (7)            yes              yes             yes                yes
(Appendix Table 2 to be continued)
 (Appendix Tabie 2 continued)


 Intercept                                -5.108            -5.775         -129.830            -824.038
                                          (3.311)           (4.856)         (80.991)           (663.943)
 -2 log likelihood                       175.939          227.856           885.396           2.198.384

 Number of Contract                       74               50                73                  73
 Negotiationsat which a Strike
 Occurs

 Numberof Contract                       914              938               914
 Negotiationsat which a Strike
 Not Occurb

 Chi-Squared Tests

         Duty to Bargain.                  3.600             5.628            2.634               3.042
         Compulsory Arbitration.          (5.991)           (5.991)          (5.991)             (5.991)
         and Voluntary Arbitration
         have the same impact
         (coefficients in rows 1-3
         are the same)

         Duty to Bargain,                  8.033             9.734            5.450               6.308
         Compulsory Arbitration,          (7.815)           (7.815)          (7.815)             (7.815)
         Voluntary Arbitration.
         and the Right to Strike
         have the same impact
         (coefficients in rows 1-4
         are the same)
         No collective bargaining          9.841            12.608            6.996               8,020
         laws have an impact              (9.488)           (9.488)          (9.488)             (9.488)
         (coefficients in rows 1-4
         are zero)

Notes:

a.   Standard errors are given in parentheses. Art asterisk indicates signtficartceat the 95 percent level of
     confidence.

b.   The number of workers in the bargaining unit is missing for 17 contracts. We omit these contracts from
     our sample.

c.   Probability valuesat the 95 percent level of confidence are given in parentheses.
