                            NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




         SECTORAL SHIFTS AND UNEMPLOYMENT IN INTERWAR BRITAIN




                                      S. LaeI Brainard




                                  Working Paper No. 3980




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  January 1992




I am grateful so Barry Eichengreen, Doug Elmendorf, Larry Katz, Larry Summers, and Aiwyn
Young for helpful discussions, to Kishwar Ahmed for research assistance, and to the National
Science Foundation for research support. This paper is part of NBER's research program in
Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Reseaih.
                                                             NBER Working Paper #3980
                                                             January 1992




         SECTORAL SHIFTS AND UNEMPLOYMENT IN INTERWAR BRITAIN




                                          ABSTRACT



       This paper measures the importance of sectoral shifts, as against aggregate shocks and

changes in search intensity, in explaining the persistent high unemployment that prevailed in

interwar Britain.   It develops a new measure of sectoral shifts that captures the arrival of

information about reallocation shocks by using the cross-section variation in sectoral stock market

excess retums over time. The cross-section variation series accounts for roughly one-quarter of

the average level of aggregate unemployment during the interwar period, even after controlling

for a variety of shocks to aggregate demand, and for roughly one-half of the variation in

unemployment, suggesting an important role for sectoral shifts.




                                                             S. Lad Brainard
                                                             Sloan School of Management
                                                             M.I.T.
                                                             Cambridge, MA 02139
                                                             and NBER
I.     Introduction

       Following the First World War, British unemployment rose to unprecedented

levels that persisted throughout the interwar period. Unemployment averaged

10.6 percent between 1921 and 1938, more than double the average during the

five decades preceding the First World War, and five times that in the two decades

following the Second World War. The prolonged episode of high unemployment in

the interwar period was unusual in several respects: it was accompanied by

extensive shifts of output between sectors and regions and by moderate growth in

both industrial production and GNP, and it diverged markedly from

contemporaneous patterns of unemployment in other industrial economies.

      Not surprisingly, this episode of high unemployment has provided fertile

ground for competing theories of unemployment. The primary contenders in this

debate, as in the debates over recent unemployment, are adverse aggregate

fluctuations, increased search activity, and sectoral reallocation shocks. Those

who emphasize aggregate fluctuations argue that firms across a broad cross-

section of sectors laid off workers in response to economy-wide adverse demand

shocks associated with monetary contraction. The proponents of the search

hypothesis contend that an increase in unemployment benefits enabled workers to

be more selective in their job searches, leading to a sharp increase in search

activity on aggregate. Seccoral shifts proponents argue that a massive, permanent

shift in the sectoral pattern of demand led to higher unemployment through time-

consuming reallocation of capital and labor between sectors.
      In this paper, I formalize and test the role of sectoral shifts in explaining

British interwar unemployment, relative to greater search intensity and adverse

aggregate shocks. To this end, I develop a series to measure the incidence of

sectoral reallocation shocks, based on the cross-section variation (CSV) in industry

stock market excess returns over time.' This series has two advantages over

reallocation measures based on dispersion in ex post employment flows, such as

that proposed by Lilien (1982). First, it measures the arrival of the shocks directly,

since stock prices move immediately and only once in response to the arrival of

information about future profitability. Second, the series relies on a capital asset

pricing model (CAPMI formulation of excess returns to isolate movements in stock

prices that are attributable to reallocation news from those attributable to shocks

to the aggregate economy.

      The CSV series is included in unemployment equations as a proxy for

reallocation shocks, along with variables that control for aggregate shocks and

changes in search costs, with interesting results. The effect of an increase in CSV

is to raise unemployment with a lag of 1 to 2 years. The CSV series accounts for

roughly one-third of unemployment on average in the interwar period, after

controlling for the effects of aggregate shocks. It accounts for over 40 percent in

the first half of the 1930's, rising to 50 percent in 1932. CSV also accounts for a

substantial portion of the variation in unemployment.

      The paper proceeds as follows. Section II describes the principal competing

explanations of unemployment, as they are applied to the British interwar debate.


                                            2
Section III formulates a sectoral reallocation explanation of unemployment that

hinges on imperfect mobility of labour and capital, and presents anecdotal evidence

on the British interwar economy in its support. Section IV discusses alternative

empirical measures of sectoral shifts, and argues for a measure that relies on stock

market excess returns; it then describes the construction of the CSV series and

other data. Section V presents the empirical findings. Section VI concludes.



II.   Search. Aggregate Fluctuations, and Sectoral Shifts

      Explanations of the high interwar unemployment rate can be grouped broadly

into three categories, reflecting the general macroeconomic debate over the nature

of unemployment. The search hypothesis attributes the increase in unemployment

levels to an increase in the opportunity cost of labor that induced workers moving

between jobs to spend longer in search activities. It has been advanced as an

explanation for British interwar unemployment by Benjamin and Kochin (1979).

According to their account, an increase in the benefits-to-wage ratio provided

under unemployment insurance, from 16 percent in 1920 to over 38 percent by

1925. raised the opportunity cost of labour and ratcheted up the natural rate of

unemployment. Benjamin and Kochin's empirical results suggest that over 30

percent of unemployment was chosen voluntarily in response to this increase in

benefits. These findings have been challenged by a number of authors, in

particular by those who see the change in the benefits-wage ratio as itself a

response to adverse aggregate shocks.2


                                         3
    The aggregate fluctuations hypothesis attributes high levels of unemployment

to adverse aggregate shocks that caused firms across a wide range of sectors to

lay off workers temporarily. There are several variants of this hypothesis, which

commonly hinge on nominal stickiness either in wages or prices. In the British

interwar context, Hancock (1962) attributes the persistent high unemployment to

deflationary monetary policies pursued by a government committed to restoring the

sterling prewar parity in order to maintain U.K. dominance in world financial

markets. Crafts et. al. (1984) conclude that an adverse demand shock to the

global economy caused a large decline in demand for British staple exports, which

depressed aggregate income and led to a contraction in labour demand throughout

the economy.

      Both the search and aggregate fluctuations hypotheses attribute prime

causality to aggregate forces that affected a broad cross-section of sectors

similarly. In contrast, a third set of explanations emphasizes sector-specific shocks

as the locus of the unemployment problem. Sectoral reallocation leads to an

increase in aggregate unemployment if the process of matching workers from

adversely affected sectors to jobs in favorably affected sectors is time-consuming,

or if job creation takes longer than job destruction due to adjustment costs in

investment.




                                         4
Ill.   Sectoral Shifts and Imperfect Mobility

       The sectoral reallocation hypothesis fits well with the peculiar economic

conditions that accompanied the persistently high unemployment in interwar

Britain. The first was growth in the economy overall: between 1920 and 1938,

real GNP grew at an annual rate of roughly 2 percent on average, while industrial

output grew at 3 percent annually. The second notable fact was significant

disparity between regions and between sectors in growth and employment rates.

Landes (1969) attributes this disparity to a set of profound shifts in the industrial

base that were concentrated in this period. By his account, these shifts were

sufficiently profound and disruptive to warrant the label, "the second industrial

revolution".

       Aldcroft (1969) was the first to advance a sectoral shifts explanation of

British interwar unemployment. According to his account, Britain emerged from

the First World War overcommitted to its traditional export industries, at a time

when world demand for these goods was falling, and firms in other industrial

countries were investing heavily in "second revolution" industries. The decline in

demand for Britain's traditional exports, coupled with rising internal demand for

new products, induced a massive shift of resources away from the "first

revolution" industries to the fledgling "second revolution" industries. Aldcroft

argues that the shift in the sectoral composition of output led to an increase in

aggregate unemployment because the expanding sectors were more capital

intensive than the contracting sectors.


                                           5
      There have been several challenges to Aldcroft's claim that sectoral shifts

resulted in an aggregate net change in factor intensity. Broadberry (19831 shows

that overall total factor productivity growth in the interwar period was

unexceptional, controlling for changes in the quality of the labour force. He further

finds scant evidence linking rationalization to a decline in labour intensity. Von

Tunzelman (1982) shows that the new industries were more rather than less

labour-intensive than the old by roughly one-third, so that equal rates of output

growth in the new industries and contraction in the old would have resulted in

more rather than less labour absorption. Dowie shows that productivity growth

rates were not consistently different in new and old industries; some of the staple

industries experienced productivity growth of the same magnitude as the new

industries (Broadberry, 1983).

      It is important to note that these arguments do not challenge the claim that

there were extensive shifts among sectors in labour demand, and indeed there is

abundant informal empirical support of extensive sectoral reallocation. An

alternative account of sectoral shifts that is consistent with both sets of facts

posits imperfect intersectoral factor mobility as the transmission mechanism

whereby reallocation shocks generate aggregate unemployment.3         It starts from

the premise that the economy is subject to permanent shocks that change the

sectora) pattern of demand, inducing shifts in the equilibrium distribution of

resources between sectors. In the presence of imperfect intersectoral mobility,

adjustment to an exogenous shock that changes the equilibrium distribution of


                                          6
capital raises unemployment, even when the new equilibrium attains a higher level

of aggregate Income. Put simply, if steel mills cannot cheaply and quickly be

converted into chemical plants, or experienced steel workers cannot costlessly and

immediately switch to chemical production, steel workers will experience

unemployment when there is a long-term contraction in the steel industry, even if

it is more than offset by expansion in the chemical industry.

      Imperfect intersectoral mobility may be caused by adjustment costs in

investment; industry-specific physical capital; and industry, location, or occupation-

specific human capital. Only some subset of these factors is necessary, but there

is evidence that all three were important in the British interwar economy.

      In the interwar period, a number of large shocks have been identified as

inducing an extensive and sustained reallocation of resources among sectors.

Firms in Britain's traditional export industries faced stiff new competition from

second-tier countries that had been large import customers prior to the war, and

had since expanded their productive capacities under the enforced autarchy of the

war years. This shift in demand was aggravated by a terms-of-trade shock caused

by the return to the prewar sterling parity to gold in 1925. The price shock was

extremely damaging to the international competitiveness of Britain's established

export industries.

      The decline in export demand in the staple industries was particularly severe

during the Depression years. Crafts et. al. (1984) note that exports was the

component of aggregate demand that sustained by far the largest decline both


                                           7
relatively and absolutely during the Depression in Britain. This was in sharp

contrast to the U.S., where consumption and investment dominated. Between

1929 and 1932, British exports fell by 32 percent, while investment fell by 19

percent, and consumption actually rose by 2 percent. In absolute terms, the

decline in exports (L 317 million in 1938 prices) was more than triple that in

investment. Since sectors varied widely in their shares of production for export,

the effect of the severe contraction in export competitiveness was distributed very

unevenly among sectors. Using inputloutput tables to calculate the differential

effect of export demand on employment among industries, Crafts et. a). find there

were tremendous differences. For instance, in one mature industry that

experienced an overall employment decline of 18 percent, the decline in export

demand accounted for employment contraction of twice the net amount. In

contrast, only 1/3 of the 7 percent reductions in employment in the emerging

motor vehicles and aircraft industries was attributable to decreased foreign

demand.

   At the same time, domestic demand for durable goods such as housing and

automobiles surged, reflecting pent-up demand carried over from the war years and

the emergence of new products attributable to technological advances. The period

1924-37 stands out between the years of 1856 and 1973 as having extremely

high growth in domestic absorption relative to total output. The strength of the

impetus provided by domestic absorption as against export demand for the

manufacturing sector also stands out in this period. Domestic absorption


                                          8
contributed twice as much stimulus as in other periods, while the contraction In

export demand outweighed that in any other period by a factor of two, with the

exception of 1963-72, which was comparable (Matthews et all.

   These shifts in demand were mirrored on the production side by concentrated

disinvestment in first revolution industries, and increased investment In second

revolution industries. Firms in the U.S., Germany, and other industrial countries

had made substantial investments in emerging industries such as chemicals, cars,

and aircraft in the early 1900's, and they moved quickly to exploit the

technological advances that had been made under the stimulus of war-time

production. British investment in the new industries during the prewar period had

been more tentative, owing in part to British dominance in the maturing first

revolution industries, so that British firms had to make up for lost time in the

postwar years.
       The period 1924-37 in Britain stands out as having by far the highest

growth rate of manufactures among the periods between 1856 and 1973, against

a background of moderate overall growth. The growth of manufacturing share in

output was nearly double that of any other period. The growth rate of total factor

productivity in manufacturing was also extremely high in the interwar period:

double that during the first industrial revolution (1856 to 1873), and triple that of

the four decades leading up to the First World War (Matthews et. al.). This rapid

 growth suggests substantial shifts of factors into high growth industries.

       Although it is difficult to find direct evidence of sectoral specificity in human


                                           9
capital, there is substantial evidence that labour markets were geographically

segmented in the interwar period.5 Disparities in industry growth rates in this

period were accompanied by large disparities among geographic regions in

employment growth. The mature export industries were clustered around ports

and coal mines in the north and the west, while the new industries tended to be

located near growing concentrations of domestic demand in the south and the

east. As Matthews et. al. point out, the regional ranking of labour force

participation and unemployment rates reversed itself between the prewar and

interwar periods. In 1881 and 1921, labour force participation rates were low in

the South East (including London), and high in the East Midlands, Yorkshire, the

North West, and Wales. By 1929, the reverse was true, and the new pattern

proved persistent. Table 1 establishes that regional unemployment rates

underwent a similarly sharp reversal.

   The reallocation hypothesis is also substantiated by observations made at the

time that severe unemployment in some industries coexisted with labour shortages

in others. Thus, for instance, the 1927 Blanesburgh Committee on Unemployment

Insurance concluded:

      Some of us have been impressed by the difficulty which certain growing
      industries experience in meeting their labour requirements, even though
      there are unemployed men in other industries where their services are not
      likely again to be required, at any rate for a considerable time (cited in
      Hancock (1962)).




                                        10
IV. Q
      i.     Measuring Sectoral Shifts

      These observations are suggestive but far from conclusive. A rigorous test

of the importance of sectoral reallocation in response to permanent shocks to the

equilibrium distribution of capital must distinguish empirically between the

idiosyncratic effects of aggregate and sectoral shocks. Note that in the account I

have developed, it is not necessary that aggregate fluctuations play no role in the

unemployment story. It is critical, however, that the effects of sectoral and

aggregate shocks be distinguishable, and independently significant; the key is to

find a clean measure of sectoral reallocation shocks.

      Lilien (1982a and b) proposed a measure of the sectoral dispersion in

employment growth as a proxy for the degree of sectoral shifts in the U.S.

postwar economy. If the movement of workers between sectors takes time, then

stochastic shocks to the sectoral pattern of demand will induce an increase in the

dispersion of sectoral net employment growth rates, and in aggregate

unemployment. Even with constant aggregate demand, the unemployment rate

will fluctuate as long as the variance of the process generating fluctuations in

individual market demands changes over time.

    Following this logic, Crafts et. al. developed an employment dispersion index

for the interwar period in Britain in order to test the sectoral shifts hypothesis

against the aggregate fluctuations hypothesis. They are led to conclude that

sectoral shifts had little independent significance in explaining the high


                                           11
unemployment of the interwar years, when measured against aggregate demand

shocks.

      However, their conclusions depend on the employment dispersion series

being a good proxy for sectoral shifts; this claim has been convincingly challenged

in the U.S. postwar context by Abraham and Katz (1986). Abraham and Katz

argue that sectoral employment dispersion may rise in response to aggregate

fluctuations as well as sectoral shifts, as long as sectoral sensitivities to aggregate

fluctuations differ.6

      A related difficulty with an employment dispersion measure is that it

measures the employment response to a shock rather than the arrival of the shock

itself. Thus, even if sectors are identical in terms of the magnitude of their cyclical

responsiveness, employment dispersion will be a diluted indicator of reallocation

shocks if sectors differ in their rate of response.

      To overcome these ambiguities, I propose an alternative measure of sectoral

reallocation shocks that is constructed from the dispersion of industry stock market

excess returns over time. This measure has several virtues over a measure based

on employment flows. First, it measures the arrival of the shocks themselves

rather than the employment response. Given sector-specific capital, a reallocation

shock should register first in an increase in the sectoral dispersion of returns to

capital, reflecting the shift in the long-run equilibrium distribution of capital. Given

efficient markets, the arrival of new information about the expected present

discounted value of the stream of profits from incremental investment in an


                                           12
industry should be reflected in a one-time change in an industry's stock market

return. In contrast to industry employment growth, which changes gradually over

time, industry returns should respond immediately and completely to the arrival of

new information, yielding a much clearer temporal pattern.

      Second, the CAPM provides theoretical underpinnings that permit the

decomposition of an industry's return into an idiosyncratic shock component (the

excess return) and an aggregate shock component (the correlation with the market

portfolio). Thus, the variance of sectoral excess returns should closely reflect the

degree of dispersion in expected future profitability across sectors at each point in

time, and foreshadow the degree of future intersectoral capital movements.

      As long as the correlation between the demands for labour and capital is of

the same sign in a majority of industries, and is fairly stable within industries over

time, high dispersion in excess returns will anticipate an increase in intersectoral

labour reallocation. Given a positive cross-elasticity of demand for capital and

labour in an industry, an increase in the return on capital signals the desirability of

augmenting labour as well as capital! The unemployment response to an increase

in sectoral returns dispersion will be greater the greater is the rate of job

destruction relative to job creation, the more sector specific is human and physical

capital, the greater is the geographical dispersion of growing and declining sectors,

and the greater is the cross-elasticity of factor demands.




                                           13
      ii.    Construction of the CSV Series

      The cross-section variation (CSV) series is constructed from the stock prices

of 103 companies in 11 industries from 1920 to 1938 at annual frequencies.

Industry price indices were constructed from company stock prices, using a report

by the London and Cambridge Economic Service (1931) on the construction of

their stock market index to identify the most representative companies in each

industry. Using the company values from this report as weights, and company

stock market prices reported in the London Times (on the same day each year).

price indices were constructed for 11 industry stock portfolios. The indices are

adjusted for discontinuities (reporting changes, mergers, entrances and exits from

the stock exchange), incomparability of stock prices between companies, and

missing data.

      The return for industry i at time t, R., is computed from company stock

prices, m, and company values v',:



(1)                             R=E _!_ln(_!_)
                                  c—i ,        Pd_i
                                        Evd
                                       c—i




where n is the number of companies in industry i.

      The excess return for industry i at time t, e, is computed as the residual

from a CAPM regression of individual industry returns against the market return;

(2)




                                         14
where R,.d is the return on the market portfolio in year t. The cross-section

variation series, CSV, is formed as the variance of industry excess returns,

weighted by employment shares, e. computed from employment data in Feinstein

(1972):
                                          N

(3)                              CSVg = Eeu (_)2



The employment weights adlust for the magnitude of the impact of a change in an

industry's excess return on aggregate employment.

      The CSV series is reported in the Appendix and is shown in Figure is. The

statistics for the CSV series are given in Table 2. There is some positive serial

correlation in the series, but it is small and declines quickly.

      There are a number of caveats in using CSV as a proxy for reallocation

shocks, chief among them that the relationship between the demands for labour

and capital could go in different directions for different subsets of industries in

response to certain sectoral shocks. Von Tunzelman's finding that capital-labour

ratios were fairly similar across the new and old industries provides evidence

against this possibility. In addition, an OLS regression of excess net employment

growth against excess returns by industry over time (not reported) confirms that

the relationship is positive, although the explanatory power of the excess return is

low, It also provides some evidence against the possibility that the

informativeness of the CSV series is compromised by extreme differences between

                                              15
industries in investment or hiring rates, which would be reflected in an ambiguous

lag structure.

      Potential flaws are a'so inherited through the reliance on the CAPM model;

there is an extensive literature on the theoretical and empirical merits and flaws of

the CAPM, which I will not review here.8 I address the criticism that the return on

the market does not adequately capture the full range of aggregate shocks by

forming an alternative excess return dispersion series using a multifactor model of

stock returns. This series was formed by adding the log change in the real money

supply, the change in real government spending, and a dummy to capture the

1931 currency revaluation to the independent variables in equation (2). For most

industries, almost all of the explanatory power is in the market return. The series

formed from the residuals of this equation is very similar to the CSV series, with a

cross-correlation of 0.93, and performs similarly in the aggregate equations, so I do

not report the results below.

      The series would also be distorted if there were systematic differences in

debt/equity ratios between industries or over time. Since a large share of

investment capital was in the form of bank debt and the equity market was

growing rapidly during this period, it is possible that the average debt-equity ratio

was declining. In the absence of data on industry debt/equity ratios, I include the

return on the market portfolio as a (rough) control for the aggregate debt/equity

ratio in several of the equations.




                                          16
      iii.   Other Series

       The dependent variable, UNN, is formed as the ratio of the aggregate

unemployment rate to the aggregate employment rate (Source: Feinstein (1972)).

The statistics for the unemployment series are given in Table 2; notice that there is

strong positive first-order serial correlation. Figure la shows the CSV series and

Figure lb shows the aggregate unemployment rate over the period 1921-1938.

There is a steep increase in CSV in the years 1929 to 1930. followed one year

later by a sharp spike in the unemployment rate. Between the years 1923 and

1931. the unemployment series follows a one-year lag of CSV quite closely, but

after the peak in the CSV series in 1931, CSV reverses direction sooner than does

unemployment.

      The empirical tests use various controls for aggregate shocks. The reported

equations include a control for aggregate monetary shocks, DRM. which Is

computed as the annual log change in the real money supply (Source: Friedman

and Schwartz (1982)). I also used alternative measures of monetary shocks,

including a 3-month Treasury interest rate series, and an unanticipated money

series, similar to that favored by Lilien. and by Crafts et. al., and originally

proposed by Barro (1978). The alternative measures yield similar results, so I do

not report them.

      I control for the aggregate effects of the return to the prewar sterling parity

in 1925 and the subsequent abandonment of the gold standard in 1931 with a

dummy variable, called GOLD.


                                           17
      Following Crafts et. al. • I also control for terms-of-trade shocks by Including

the log change in the real value of exports, called DEX (Source: Feinstein (1972)).

      I control for shocks to the aggregate stock market by including the one-year

real return on the market portfolio, called MRET (Source: London Times, and

London and Cambridge Economic Service).

      I tried various controls for the effects of fiscal policy, including log changes

in the real value of the government debt, and changes in the real value of total

government expenditures. Again, the choice of fiscal variable made no difference

to the significance of the CSV series, so I report only the equations with changes

in real government expenditure, called DGOV.

      I test against the search hypothesis by including the benefits-to-wage ratio.

called BW, following Benjamin and Kochin (Source: Burns (1941) for benefits;

Chapman (1953) for wages).

      In addition, I construct an employment dispersion series along the lines

proposed by Lilien in order to compare it with the CSV series directly. The

equation for the employment series, called EMP, is:


                        EMP1
                               =    -f--              -ln( eu)]2 (4)
                                                eui        e_1




The employment data includes 13 manufacturing industries and 13

nonmanufacturing sectors, including government (Source: Feinstein (1972)).


                                           18
       Series
     Nwn Description
       UNN Ratio of Aggregate Unemployment Rate to Employment Rate
       CSV Employment-weighted Variance in Industry Excess Returns
       DRM Log Change in Real Money Supply
       DEX Log Change in Real Export Revenues
       DGOV        Change in Real Government Expenditures
       MRET        Return on the Market Portfolio
       BW Ratio of Unemployment Benefit to Average Wage
       EMP Employment-weighted Variance in Sectoral Employment Growth
       GOLD        Dummy Variable for Return to Prewar Parity




V.       Measurina Sectoral Shifts Unemployment

                Time Specification

         I start by considering the appropriate time specification of the unemployment

equation. Since the true temporal structure of aggregate unemployment is an

extensively researched and as yet unresolved issue, Table 3 reports a variety of

time specifications of the basic unemployment equation. Column 1 reports the

base equation in levels with CSV and DRM as the independent variables:

                                      2            1
 (5)                   UNN, =        + E icsv1 + E DRM1J +
                                      1-0          1-0




The Durbin-Watson statistic suggests the possibility of serial correlation, consistent

with the high autocorrelation of the UNN series.

         Accordingly, Column 2 uses the first lagged value of the dependent variable


                                            19
to control for serial correlation:

                                    2           1
 (6)            UNN, =        +             +                 + pUNN,1 +
                                                i.0



The inclusion of lagged unemployment improves the fit of the equation, and

increases the explanatory power of the contemporaneous and first lagged values of

CSV, while it decreases both the size and precision of the coefficient on the

second lag of CSV. The contemporaneous and first lagged values of CSV enter

positively and significantly at the 5 percent level. DRM enters with the expected

sign, but is insignificant.

        Column 3 reports the AR(1) specification:

                              2                         1


       UNN,-pUNN1 =                 11(CSV4-pCSP,1)+         P(DR?vfg—pDRMi)+   FL:
                              1-0                      I-c



The first-order serial correlation coefficient is large and significant. However, the

explanatory power of the CSV series changes very little: the contemporaneous

value of CSV is somewhat less significant, while the size and significance of the

second lagged value rises. DRM remains insignificant.

        I also include a difference specification of the unemployment equation since

the possibility of a unit root has not been decisively rejected in related research:




                                             20
                               2             I
 (8)         AUNN,         +             + 3JDRM + p MJNN,1             +
                               4.0          4-0




where UNN denotes the first difference of unemployment. The results are

reported in Column 4. The difference specification worsens the fit of the equation

substantially, and the first lagged value of the difference in unemployment is

insignificant. The contemporaneous and first lagged values of CSV continue to

enter positively, at a lower level of significance, while the second lagged value of

CSV becomes insignificant. In contrast, the first lagged value of DRM gains in

significance, and both lags have the expected sign.

       The explanatory power of the CSV series appears fairly robust to variations

in the time specification: changes are reflected primarily in the relative importance

of different lags, and both the first lag of CSV and the sum of the

contemporaneous and two lagged values of CSV (not reported) are almost

uniformly positive and significant. I confine attention to the first lag specification

for the remaining empirical results; this specification seems most appropriate

because it controls for autocorrelation without being overly restrictive, it achieves

the best fit, and it is most comparable to related work in the area.



       ii.   Unemployment Equations

       Table 4 reports regressions that add different combinations of independent

variables to Equation (6) to control for aggregate shocks. Column 1 reports


                                           21
unemployment regressed against contemporaneous and two lagged values of CSV

and its own first lag. The equation suggests there is a strong and significant

positive relationship between unemployment and CSV.

       Figure 2 shows the impulse response of unemployment to a CSV shock,

associated with the univariate equation in Column 1. The impulse is a one

standard deviation shock to the error term of a second order autoregression of

CSV. Unemployment rises by 0.7 percentage points contemporaneous with the

CSV shock, an additional 1.1 percentage points in the second year, and the

increase peaks at 2.0 percentage points 3 years out. The response of

unemployment falls gradually after the peak, approaching zero after 6 years.

Figure 2 also shows standard error bands for the response function; the response

is statistically significant throughout the first 6 years.

       Column 2 adds the contemporaneous and first lagged value of real money

growth to the regression as an aggregate control. There is only a marginal

improvement in the fit of the equation. The coefficients on both values of DRM

are negative, as expected, but neither is statistically significant. The inclusion of

ORM lowers the size and significance of the coefficients on all three values of CSV

slightly, but all three remain positive and statistically significant. The poor

performance of the money series may be attributable to the endogeneity of

monetary policy.

       The contemporaneous and first lagged value of the return on the market

portfolio are included in Column 3. The addition of MRET improves the fit of the


                                            22
equation markedly; the coefficients on both the contemporaneous and lagged

values have the expected sign, although only the latter is significant. The

coefficients on all three values of CSV fall in response to the inclusion of MRET,

but the contemporaneous and first lagged value continue to be highly significant,
and an F test on the exclusion of CSV achieves significance of 3 percent. Thus, it

appears that CSV exerts an influence on unemployment independent of its

correlation with the aggregate market.

      Column 4 adds a dummy variable to control for the effects of aggregate

shocks associated with the return to the prewar parity in 1925 and its subsequent

abandonment in 1931. The inclusion of GOLD improves the fit of the equation

significantly; the intercept shifts up substantially, and the magnitude and

significance of the coefficients on most of the independent variables rise. The

coefficients on CSV increase in both size and significance, and their exclusion can

be rejected at less than 1 percent.

       Column 5 replaces the market and gold standard variables with the

contemporaneous and first lagged value of the log change in real exports. I include

this series to permit comparison with the findings of Crafts et. al.; they use real

exports to capture the effects of terms-of-trade shocks, along with an employment

dispersion series as a proxy for sectoral shifts. Crafts et. al. find that the export

series is highly significant and the employment dispersion series is not, and from

this conclude that aggregate rather than sectoral shocks were the key determinant

of interwar unemployment. Here, in contrast, the CSV series retains substantial


                                           23
explanatory power with the inclusion of DEX, and the inclusion of DEX improves

the fit of the equation only marginally. The coefficients on all three values of CSV

fall, but the first and second lagged values remain significant at the 5 and 10

percent levels respectively, and an F test on the exclusion of CSV fails at 11

percent significance. The coefficient on the contemporaneous value of DEX is

negative and statistically significant, while that on the lagged value is insignificant.

The exclusion of DEX can be rejected only at 24 percent significance.

      It is difficult to interpret the results on the export series as rejecting either

the aggregate or sectoral shifts hypothesis. To the extent that changes in

aggregate exports reflected aggregate shocks, such as terms-of-trade shocks

associated with the return to the prewar parity, or the decline in world income

associated with the Depression, it can be interpreted as an aggregate control. But

to the extent that the export variable reflects shifts in relative sectoral demands

due to increased foreign competition in selected industries, it can be interpreted as

a sectoral reallocation variable. The sign of the coefficient on the

contemporaneous value of DEX is consistent with an aggregate interpretation,

while the high correlation of the DEX series with both aggregate and sectoral

variables suggests elements of both.

       Column 6 includes the market return and the gold standard variable, along

with the export series. The results are very similar to those excluding the export

series, with the sole exception that the coefficient on the contemporaneous value

of the market return gains in significance, while that on exports shifts from the


                                           24
contemporaneous to the lagged value, consistent with the high correlation between

the export and market return series. The coefficients on cross-section variation

gain in magnitude, and remain highly significant.

      Figure 3 shows the impulse response functions associated with the

multivariate equation reported in Column 6. The impulses are one standard

deviation shocks to the error term of the second order autoregression of each of

the independent variables: DAM, MRET, DEX, and CSV. The inclusion of the

aggregate controls reduces the magnitude of the responsiveness to CSV, but the

response remains significant throughout the first four years. Unemployment rises

1.4 percentage points in the first year following a CSV shock, and peaks at 1.5

percentage points two years out (Figure 3a). The response falls rapidly following

the peak.

      The response to the aggregate shocks is much more modest (Figures

3b,3c,3d). Unemployment falls by 0.5 percentage points over two years in

response to a one standard deviation increase in exports. It essentially returns to 0

the following year. A positive monetary shock is associated with a transitory

increase in unemployment of 1.3 percentage points, followed by a steep decline of

2.5 percentage points over the following year. Unemployment then rises gradually,

reaching 0 at 4 years out. A shock to the market induces an immediate drop in

unemployment of 0.3 percentage points that lasts for an additional year.

Unemployment then rises, peaking at 0.3 percentage points 4 years out, and then

fluctuates shallowly about 0.


                                         25
      Returning to Table 4, Column 7 includes the log change in real government

expenditures as an aggregate control. The inclusion of DGOV worsens the fit of

the equation, and the coefficient on neither the contemporaneous nor lagged value

differs significantly from 0. The coefficients on all three values of CSV rise, and all

three are significant. The low explanatory power of DGOV is not surprising, since

there was little variation in fiscal policy through most of the interwar period. The

inclusion of alternative measures of fiscal stimulus, such as the net change in

public debt yields similar results, so I do not report them.

      Column 8 includes the contemporaneous and first lag of the benefits-to-

wage ratio to capture changes in the opportunity cost of labour. The

contemporaneous value of the BW series has the expected sign, but neither of the

BW terms is significant, and the fit of the overall equation deteriorates slightly.

The inclusion of BW slightly lowers the coefficients on all three values of CSV, but

the contemporaneous and first lagged value remain significant, and the exclusion

of CSV is rejected at 2 percent significance.

       I estimate similar equations replacing the cross-section variation series with

the employment dispersion series; the results are largely consistent with Crafts et.

al., so I do not report them here. In an equation with money and lagged

unemployment, the contemporaneous and first lagged values of EMP are positive

and statistically significant. When the export variable is added to the equation,

however, the employment dispersion series is rendered insignificant, and the fit of

the overall equation improves markedly. The contemporaneous value of DEX is


                                           26
negative and significant, consistent with an aggregate shock Interpretation. EMP

also loses its explanatory power when the return on the market Is included in place

of the export series.

      Column 9 reports an equation that includes both employment dispersion and

cross-section variation simultaneously. The inclusion of EMP improves the fit of

the equation only marginally relative to Column 2. The coefficient on the

contemporaneous value of CSV rises and remains statistically significant, while the

first lag becomes insignificant. In contrast, the addition of CSV improves the fit of

the EMP equation substantially. The coefficient on the contemporaneous value of

EMP becomes insignificantly negative, while the coefficient on the first lag rises

and remains significant. The exclusion of CSV is rejected at 3 percent

significance, compared with 16 percent for the exclusion of EMP.

      Overall, Table 4 establishes that aggregate unemployment rises in response

to a cross-section variation shock; this is robust to the inclusion of a variety of

controls for aggregate shocks and for changes in the opportunity cost of work.

The evidence suggests that reallocation shocks were important in raising

unemployment in the interwar period, independent of aggregate shocks and labour

supply shocks. In contrast, the positive influence of employment dispersion on

unemployment appears strongly correlated with that of aggregate variables, such

as exports and the market return.




                                           27
      jj     Unemployment Decomposition

      Figure 4 shows a decomposition of total unemployment into the share

attributable to CSV shocks, and that explained by a constant in combination with

aggregate variables (money growth, the market return, exports, and the return to

the prewar parity). Figure 4a shows the share of total unemployment explained by

shocks to cross-section variation. Reallocation unemployment associated with

shocks to CSV accounts for roughly one-quarter of total unemployment on average

over the entire time period, and for over one-half of the variance in unemployment.

Between 1929 and 1935, the share of unemployment associated with cross-

section variation averages over one-third, peaking at 55 percent in 1930. These

results suggest that sectoral shifts accounted for much of the variation in

unemployment, and for a moderate share of the level of unemployment on average

over the entire period, with a much larger role in the first half of the 1930's.

These results are particularly striking, since the decomposition uses the equation

that is most conservative in assigning explanatory power to the cross-section

variation series.

       In contrast, unemployment associated with aggregate shocks peaks in 1932

and 1933; this is shown in Figure 4b. The aggregate controls account for much

less of the variation in unemployment - close to 30 percent over the entire period -

and this is attributable primarily to the market return and gold standard variables.




                                          28
VI.   Conclusion

      Taken together, the point estimates, the impulse response functions, and the

decomposition suggest an important role for sectoral shifts in explaining the

persistent high unemployment in interwar Britain. The estimates suggest that a

standard deviation shock to cross-section variation predicts an increase in

unemployment between 1.5 and 1.8 percentage points in 2 years, even after

controlling for aggregate shocks. On average, CSV accounts for one-quarter of

total unemployment over the interwar period, and over half of unemployment in

1930. It also accounts for over half of the variance in unemployment. In contrast,

the measured contribution of aggregate shocks is greatest in 1932-3, and is

attributable mainly to the market return and terms-of-trade shocks. The measured

contribution of monetary shocks is more moderate, while that of fiscal stimulus

and of the benefit-wage ratio is negligible. These results suggest a significant role

for sectoral shifts, and accord well with observations that the high levels of

interwar unemployment were accompanied by moderate economic growth, high

disparities in growth rates between both regions and industries, and massive shifts

in the industrial base.

      Of course, the results are not conclusive. The chief caveat is that the CSV

series may reflect idiosyncratic sectoral responses to aggregate shocks that are not

captured in the aggregate variables. To establish definitively whether CSV is a

reallocation variable would require an additional variable, such as vacancies, which

moves in opposite directions in response to aggregate and sectoral shocks.° 10


                                          29
1. A number of papers have been written using similar series since the original 1987
draft of this paper. Brainard and Cutler (1989) developed an analogous series to test
for sectoral shifts unemployment in the postwar U.S. economy. A series measuring
the variance in total returns was developed by Loungani, Rush, and Tave (1990) for
the postwar U.S. economy, and by Loungani and Rush (1991) for the interwar British
economy. Cutler (1989) developed a firm cross-section volatility series for the
postwar U.S. to test for the importance of nondiversifiable risk in stock prices. In
addition, Topel and Weiss (1985) developed a related series as a proxy for workers'
expectations about future relative wage uncertainty.
2. See Collins (1982), Cross (1982), Metcalf et. al. (1982), and Hatton (1985).
3. See Brainard and Cutler (1989) for a theoretical treatment of this variant of the
sectoral shifts hypothesis, and a more thorough discussion.

4. Sectoral shifts explanations along these lines are closest in spirit to real business
cycle explanations such as those advanced by Black (1982) and Lucas and Prescott
(1974).
5. Both theoretical and empirical evidence suggests that average wages are a poor
reflection of returns to marginal human capital investment.

6. More precisely, they claim a positive correlation between unemployment and
employment dispersion could be attributable to aggregate fluctuations if either: (1)
industries' trend growth rates and cyclical sensitivities are negatively correlated; or (2)
industries differ in their cyclical sensitivities, and labour adlustment costs are higher
 upward than downward.

7. The series would also work if labour and capital movements were negatively
correlated across most industries.

8. The CAPM assumption of complete capital markets may be particularly problematic
for the period in question, since the national capital market was thin.

9. See Brainard and Cutler (1989) for a theoretical discussion and empirical results
using vacancies to distinguish between the two types of shocks.

10. Unfortunately, vacancy data is unavailable.




                                            30
                                            References

Abraham, Katharine and Lawrence Katz (1986), "Cyclical Unemployment: Sectoral Shifts or
Aggregate Disturbances?" Journal of Political Economv.v. 94, n. 3, June. p. 507-522

Aldcroft, 0.11. (19671, "Growth in Britain in the Interwar Years: a Reassessment, Economic
History Review. v. 20. P. 31 1-326.

Barro, R. (1978), "Unanticipated Money, Output, and the Price Level in the U.S.." Journal of
Political Economy., August

Benjamin, Daniel K. and Levis A. Kochin (1979), "Searching for an Explanation of Unemployment in
Interwar Britain," Journal of Political Economy, v. 87, n. 3, p. 441-78.

___________________________ (19821. "Unemployment and Unemployment Benefits in Twentieth
Century Britain," Journal of Political Economy. v. 90, n. 2, p. 410-36.

Black. Agatha, Earnings and Employment in Britain

Bowley, AL., G.L. Schwartz. and K.C. Smith (19311. "A New Index of Prices of Securities,"
London and Cambridge Economic Service, Special Memorandum n. 33, V. 9, January

Brainard. S. LaeI, and David M. Cutler (19901. "Sectoral Shift and Cyclical Unemployment
Reconsidered." NBER Working Paper #3491, November.

Broadberry, S.N. (19831. "Unemployment in Interwar Britain: A Disequilibrium Approach," Qfg
Economic Papers. 35, p. 463-85.

Burns. E. (1941), British Unemployment Programs: 1920-38, Social Science Research Council,
Washington.

Capie, F.H. and Michael Collins (1 9821, The Interwar British Economy: A Statistical Abstract
Manchester, Manchester University Press.

Chapman, D. (1953). Waaes and Salaries in the United Kingdom, 1920-3. Cambridge University
Press.

Collins, Michael (1982), "Unemployment in Interwar Britain: Still Searching for an Explanation,"
Journal of Political Economy. v. 90. n. 2, p. 369-79.

Crafts, N.F.R.. M. MacKinnon, and M. Thomas (19841. "International Trade and Structural
Unemployment in lnterwar Britain," mimeo. Oxford University.

Cross, Rodney (1982), "How Much Voluntary Unemployment in lnterwar Britain," in Comment.
Journal of Political Economy. v. 90, n. 2, p. 380-85.

Cutler, David M. (1989). "Stock Market Volatility, Cross Section Volatility, and Stock Returns",
MIT, mimeo.

Davis, Steve (1987),"Fluctuations in the Pace of Labor Reallocation," in K. Brunner and A. Metzler
(eds.), "Empirical Studies of Velocity, Real Exchange Rates, Unemployment and Productivity,"
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy. 27. p. 335-402.
Deane, Phyllis and BR. Mitchell, 11971), Abstract of British Historical Sources, Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press.

Dimsdale, N.H., Steven J. Nickell, and N. Horsewood (1989), "Real Wages and Unemployment In
Britain during the 1930's," Economic Journal, 99, p. 27 1-92.

Feinstein, C.H. (1972), Domestic Capital Formation in the U.K.. 1920-38, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.

_____________ (1972), National Income. Expenditure, and Outout of the U.K.. 1 855-65.
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Friedman, Milton, and Anne J. Schwartz (1982), Monetary Trends in the U.S. and the U.K.,
Chicago, University of Chicago Press.

Hancock, K.J. (1962), "The Reduction of Unemployment as a Problem of Public Policy, 1 920-29,"
Economic History Review, December.

Hatton, T.J. (1985), "The British Labour Market in the 1920's: A Test of the Search Turnover
Approach," Explorations in Economic History, v. 22, n. 3, July.

Jones, M.E.F. (1985). "Regional Policy in Interwar Britain," QIorations in Economic History. v.
22, n. 4.

Lilien, David (1982al, "Sectoral Shifts and Cyclical Unemployment," Journal of Political Economy,
v. 90, n. 4, August, p. 777-793.

Lilien, David (1982bl, "A Sectoral Model of the Business Cycle," USC-MRG Working Paper.

Loungani, Prakash, and Mark Rush (19911, "Sectoral Shifts in Interwar Britain," Working Paper,
March.

Loungani, Prakash, Mark Rush. and William Tave (19901, "Stock Market Dispersion and
Unemployment," Journal of Monetary Economics, June.

Lucas. Robert and Edward Prescott, (1974). "Equilibrium Search and Unemployment," Journal of
Economic Theory, 7. February, p. 188-209.

Metcalf, David. Steven J. Nickell, and Nicos Floros (1 982),"Still Searching for an Explanation of
Unemployment in Interwar Britain," Journal of Political Economy. v. 90, n. 2, p. 386-399.

Ormerod, PA. and G.D.N. Worswick (19821, "Searching for an Explanation of Unemployment in
Interwar Britain," Journal of Political Economy. v. 90, n. 2, p. 400-9.

Richardson, H.W. (1961). "The New Industries in Britain between the Wars," Oxford Economic
Ea.
Topel, Robert and Laurence Weiss (1985), "Sectoral Uncertainty and Unemployment," in
Employment. Unemployment, and Hours of Work.

Von Tunzelmann, G.N. (1982), "Structural Change and Leading Sectors in British Manufacturing,
1907-68." in C.P. Kindleberger and G. Di Tella (eds.), Economics in the Long View. V. Ill, London,
Macmillan.
Table 1: Reaional Unemployment Rates
Percentaoe of Aoareoate UK Unemployment Rate

                                    1913-14 j
London                              192%       50%
Southeast & East Anglia             105        52
West Midlands                       87         86
East Midlands                       71
Northwest                           87         126
Yorkshire & Humberside              71         132
North                               63
Wales                               60         187
Scotland                            55         151

• Incorporated   Yorkshire & Northwest.


Source: Matthews et. al. 119821
Table 2:


Univariate Statistics

                           Standard                      Serial Correlation
sn              M&afl      Deviation                                    JL         J4.L
UNN             0.112      0.035           0.771          0.358         -0.024     -0.263

CSV             0.057       0.073          0.203          0.132         0.022      0.012

ORM             0.032       0.040          0.368         -0.261         -0.221     -0.060

MRET            0.026       0.207          0.162         -0.290         -0.191     -0.223

DEX             -0.023      0.090         -0.069          -0.081        0.245      0.091

DGOV            0.029       0.056          0.596            0.278       0.086      -0.019

8W              0.359       0.044          0.632            0.329       0.031      -0.209

EMP             0.321       0.578          0.270          -0.013        -0.068     -0.032



Cross-Correlations




UNN
           Lu
           1
                  UNN


                  0.778
                          J1JLJJL
                          UNN        CSV           DAM        MRET       DEX       8W       EMP




CSV         1     0.703    0.354

 DAM        1    -0.124    0.240     -0.109

 MRET       1    -0.536   -0.377     -0.292        -0.013

 DEX        1    -0.514   -0.348       -0.344      -0.348      0.738

 SW         1    0.046    -0.141       0.097       -0.623      0.283      -0.021

 EMP        1     0.014    0.140       -0.054      0.550       -0.645     -0.332   -0.791

 DGOV       1     0.068   -0.056       -0.060      -0.466      -0.198     -0.330   0.650    -0.218


 Note: Definitions of the variables are Qiven in the text. Data are annual from 1921 to 1938.
Table 3:      ]]mt.
                 1            2            3            4
                J1N           UfN         JN            DUN

R2              0.786        0.890         0.185       0.520

DURBIN-          1.46
    WATSON

CONST.           0.071        0.035       0.082         0.003
                (0.008)      (0.013)      (0.015)      (0.008)

CSV(O)           0.093        0.098       0.094         0.083
                (0.060)      (0.043)      (0.061)      (0.047)
CSV(1)           0.274        0.209       0.247         0.084
                (0.060)      (0.048)      (0.065)      (0.055)
CSV(2)          0.258         0.116        0.161       -0.046
                (0.070)      (0.067)      (0.065)      (0.060)

DRM(0)          0.078        -0.085        0.208       -0.228
                (0.205)      (0.156)      (0.187)      (0.165)
DRM(1)         -0.004        -0.128       .0.078       -0.162
                (0.133)      (0.103)      (0.176)      (0.112)

UNN(1)                        0.504
                             (0.156)

p                                          0.621
                                          (0.330)

DUN(1)                                                  0.260
                                                       (0.281)



Note: Table 3 reports regressions of the unemployment rate on contemporaneous and lagged values of CSV
and DAM at annual frequencies for different time specifications. Definitions of the variables are given in the
text. Columns (1) through (4) correspond to Equations (5) through (8) in the text respectively.
Table 4:   Unemployment Equations with Cross Section Variation

                          2            3

R           0.887       0.890        0.931        0.978       0.905        0.976

CONST.      0.040       0.035         0.043       0.114        0.029        0.144
           (0.012)      (0.013)      (0.012)     (0.019)      (0.012)      (0.034)

CSV(0)      0.104        0.098        0.083       0.170        0.053        0.210
           (0.0431      (0.043)      (0.038)     (0.031)      (0.046)      (0.051)
CSV(1)      0.226        0.209        0.154       0.240        0.158        0.258
           (0.047)      (0.048)      (0.042)     (0.033)      (0.057)      (0.042)
CSV(2)      0.150        0.116        0.081       0.113        0.097        0.120
           (0.061)      (0.067)      (0.059)     (0.033)      (0.065)      (0.037)

UNN(1)       0.377       0.504       0.506        -0.022       0.545       -0.285
            (0.131)     (0.156)      (0.131)      (0.153)     (0.152)      (0.278)

DRM(0)                  -0.085       -0.097       -0.165       0.006       -0.172
                        (0.156)      (0.172)      (0.099)     (0.155)      (0.111)
DRM(1(                  -0.128       -0.018       -0.223      -0.052       -0.225
                        (0.103)      (0.093)      (0.074)     (0.140)      (0.083)

MRET(0l                              -0.019        0.068                    0.112
                                     (0.032)      (0.029)                  (0.047)
MRET(1(                              -0.053       -0.125                   -0.145
                                     (0.029)      (0.024)                  (0.034)

GOLD                                              -0.034                   -0.048
                                                  (0.009)                  (0.015)


DEX(0(                                                        -0.130       -0.013
                                                              (0.070)      (0.046)
DEX(1(                                                        -0.016       -0.074
                                                              (0.066)      (0.061)


F Stat
  CSV0       0.001        0.003       0.022        0.002       0.111        0.016


 Note: Table 4 reports OLS regressions of unemployment on contemporaneous and lagged values of CSV and
 aggregate controls at annual frequencies. The variables are defined in the text The specification corresponds
 to Equation (61, with additional independent variables.
Table 4:    ljnemojoyment Equations with Cross Section Variation
 Icont.)
            __z__                     --
R2          0.868        0.876        0.926

CONST.       0.034        0.097       0.003
            (0.014)      (0.079)      (0.016)

CSV(0)       0.105        0.085       0.217
            (0.049)      (0.047)      (0.067)
CSV(1)       0.222        0.194       0.016
            (0.058)      (0.053)      (0.086)
CSV(2)       0.129        0.077       -0.037
            (0.076)      (0.082)      (0.079)

UNN(1)       0.451       0.556        0.916
            (0.193)      (0.174)      (0.198)

DRM(0)      -0.025       -0.081       -0.473
            (0.223)      (0.168)      (0.161)
DRM(1(      -0.081       -0.229       -0.473
            (0.132)      (0.167)      (0.183)

DGOV(0)      0.052
            (0.188)
DGOV(1) 0.014
            (0.120)


BW(0)                    -0.320
                         (0.317)
BW(1)                    0.159
                         (0.198)

EMP(0)                                -0.032
                                      (0.041)
EMP(1)                                0.159
                                      (0.065)
EMP(2)                                -0.025
                                      (0.016)


F Stat
 CSV0 0.018              0.023         0.028
 EMP0                                  0.158


 Note: Table 4 reports OLS regressions of unemployment on contemporaneous and lagged vslues of CSV and
 aggregate controls at annual frequencies. The variables are defined in the text. The specification corresponds
to Equation (6), with additional independent variables.
Figure la   CROSS-SECTION VARIATION
0.35


0.30


0.25




       212223242526272829303132333435363738
                       YEAR


Figure lb    UNEMPLOYMENTK4 TE (%)
 18


 16


 14


 12


 10


  8

   6
       212223242526272829303132333435363738
                       YEAR
Fig. 2
           UNEMPLOYMENT RESPONSE TO CSVSHOCK
                  UNIVARIATE EQUATION
         2.5


 E-        2

 0
 1.5
 (b1
  0.5
       —0.5
               1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10
                               4RS

Fig. 3a
           UNEMPLOYMENT RESPONSE TO CSVSHOCK
                 MULTIVARIA TE EQUATION
         2.5


  k4       2


  1.5
           1


  0.5

               1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10
                               4RS
Fir. 3b
                         UNEMPLOYMENT RESPONSE
                            TO EXPORT SHOCK




                                 ____ —
                               TADARD
                    1     2    3       4   5       6   7   8    9 10
Fi'.   3c
                                           Y4RS
                         UNEMPLOYMENT RESPONSE
                            TO MONEYSHOCK


            c:i


            -. —2
                    1     2    3       4   5       6   7   8    9   10
                                           Y&IRS
Fi'. 3d
                         UNEMPLOYMENTRESPONSE
                            TO MARKET SHOCK




               -2
                     1
                        /RESPO.



                           2       3
                                       STANDARD ERROR




                                       4     675            8   9   10
                                           4RS
Fig. 4a
              UNEMPLOYMENT DECOMPOSiTION
                       CSV SHARE
       20



       15



       10
 0
        5




        0
            23242526272829303132333435363738
                          YEAR



Fir.   4b

              UNEMPLOYMENT DECOMPOSiTION
                  AGGREGATE SHOCKS
       20

                            TOTAL
       15




       10



        5



        0
            2324252627282930313233343536 3738
                          YEAR
Appendix: Cross-Section Variation Series


      Year

         21   0.0 17
         22   0.042
         23   0.003
         24   0.010
         25   0.046
         26   0.021
         27   0.032
         28   0.016
         29   0.096
         30   0.3 10
         31   0.05 1
         32   0.106
         33   0.086
         34   0.098
         35   0.007
         36   0.023
         37   0.012
         38   0.022



Appendix: Data Sources

Series
                                                          Source

UNN  Aggregate Unemployment Rate/Employment Rate          Feinstein, 1972
CSV  Employment-weighted Variance in Industry             Described in text
      Excess Returns
DRM Log Change in Real Money Supply                       Friedman and Schwartz 1 982
DEX Change in Export Revenues in 1938 Prices              Feinstein, 1972
DGOV Change in Real Government Expenditures               Feinsteiri, 1972
MRET Return on the Market Portfolio                       London Times and
                                                           London Cambridge Economic Service
8W       Average Ratio of Unemployment Benefits to Wage   Benefits:        Burns. 1941
                                                          Wages:           Chapman, 1953
EMP Employment-weighted Variance in Sectorat              Employment data from Feinstein, 1972
       Employment Growth
PINDX GNP Deflator Index                                  Feinstein, 1972
PBOR Change in Central Government Debt                    Feinstein. 1972
