                          NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




           GEOGRAPHIC LOCALIZATION OF KNOWLEDGE SPILLOVERS
                  AS EVIDENCED BY PATENT CITATIONS




                                     Adam B. Jaffe

                                   Manuel Trajtenberg

                                   Rebecca Henderson




                                Working Paper No. 3993




                  NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 February 1992


We gratefully acknowledge support from the Ameritech Foundation, via the Ameritech
Fellows program of the Center for Regional Economic Issues at Case-Western Reserve
University, and from the National Science Foundation through grant SES91-10516. We thank
Neil Bania, Mike Fogarty, Zvi Griliches, Frank Lichtenberg, Francis Narin and seminar
participants at NBER and Case-Western University for helpful comments. This paper is part
of NBER's research program in Productivity. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Reseaih.
                                                           NBER Working Paper #3993
                                                           February 1992




            GEOGRAPHIC LOCALIZATION OF KNOWLEDGE SPILLOVERS
                   AS EVIDENCED BY PATENT CITATIONS




                                         ABSTRACT


       We compare the geographic location of patent citations to those of the cited patents, as

evidence of the extent to which knowledge spillovers are geographically localized. We find

that citations to U.S. patents are more likely to come from the U.S., and more likely to come

from the same state and SMSA as the cited patents than one would expect based only on the

preexisting concentration of related research activity. These effects are particularly significant

at the local (SMSA) level, and are particularly apparent in early citations.




Adam B. Jaffe                                               Manuel Trajtenberg
Department of Economics                                     Tel Aviv University
Harvard University                                          Ramat Aviv
Cambridge, MA 02138                                         Tel Aviv 69978
and NBER                                                    ISRAEL
                                                            and NBER

Rebecca Henderson
Sloan School of Management
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
       GEOGRAPHIC LOCALIZATION OF KNOWLEDGE SPILLOVERS

                    AS EVIDENCED BY PATENT CITATIONS

          by Adam B. Jaffe, Manuel Trajtenberg and Rebecca Henderson



      The last decade has seen the development of a significant body of empirical

research on R&D spillovers.' Generally speaking, this research has shown that the
productivity of firms or industries is dependent not only on their R&D spending, but also

on the R&D spending of other firms or other industries. In parallel, economic growth

theorists have focussed new attention on the role of knowledge capital in aggregate

economic growth, with a prominent modelling role for knowledge spillovers (e.g., Romer,

1986 and 1990; Grossman and Helpman, 1991).

       We know very little, however, about where spillovers go. Is there any advantage

to nearby firms, or even firms in the same country, or do spillovers waft into the ether,

available for anyone around the globe to grab? The presumption that U.S. international

competitiveness is affected by what goes on at Federal Labs and U.S. universities, and

the belief that universities and other research centers can stimulate regional economic

growth2 are predicated on the existence of a geographic component to the spillover

mechanism. The existing spillover literature is, however, virtually silent on this point.3


1. E.g., Jaffe (1986), and Nadiri and Bernstein (1988 and 1989). For a recent survey
and evaluation of this literature, see Griliches (1991).
2. See, e.g., Minnesota Department of Trade and Economic Development (1988);
Feller (1989); and Smilor, et a! (1989).
3. Jaffe (1989) provides evidence that corporate patenting at the state level depends on
university research spending, after controlling for corporate R&D. Mansfield (1991)
surveyed industrial R&D about university research from which they benefitted. He
                                            2
      In the growth literature, it is typically assumed that knowledge spills over to other

agents within the country, but not to other countries.4 This implicit assumption clearly

begs the fundamental question of whether and to what extent knowledge externalities

are localized. As emphasized recently by Krugman (1991), acknowledging the
importance of spillovers and increasing returns requires renewed attention by economists

to issues of economic geography. Krugman revives and explores the explanations given

by Marshall (1920) as to why industries are concentrated in cities. Marshall identified

three factors favoring geographic concentration of industries: (1) the pooling of

demands for specialized labor; (2) the development of specialized intermediate goods

industries; and (3) knowledge spillovers among the firms in an industry. Krugman
believes that economists should focus on the first two of these, partially because he

perceives that '[k}nowledge flows, by contrast, are invisible; they leave no paper trail by

which they may be measured and tracked, and there is nothing to prevent the theorist

from assuming anything about them that she likes." (Krugman, p. 53)

       Glaeser,   et a! (1991) characterize the "Marshall-Arrow-Romer" models as

focussing on knowledge spillovers within the firms in a given industry. They examine the

growth rate of industries in cities as a function of the concentration of industrial activity

across cities, within-city industrial diversity, and within-city competition. They find that


found that they most often identified major research universities, but that there was
some tendency to cite local universities even if they were not the best in their field.
4. The existence of this implicit assumption was noted by Glaeser, et al (1991): "After
all, intellectual breakthroughs must cross hallways and streets more easily than oceans
and continents." Grossman and Helpman (1991) consider international knowledge
spillovers explicitly.
                                             3
within-city diversity is positively associated with growth of industries in that city, while

concentration of an industry within a city does not foster its growth. They interpret this

contrast to mean that spillovers across industries are more important than spillovers
within industries. As is discussed below, there is evidence from the R&D spillover

literature to suggest that across-industry knowledge spillovers are, indeed, important.
In this study, we do not consider the industrial identity of either generators or receivers

of spillovers, though we do have some information on their technological similarity.

       Our approach is to seek evidence of spillover-localization in patent citation
patterns. Taking a citation from a later patent as evidence of a subsequent technological

development that builds upon the result of the cited patent, it provides some evidence

of the "paper trail" left by the "invisible" knowledge flow. Because patents contain

detailed geographic information about their inventors, we can examine where these trails

actually lead. We perform this examination for the citations of patents assigned to

universities, and also for the citations of a sample of domestic corporate patents. If

knowledge spillovers are localized within countries, then citations of patents generated

within the U.S. should come disproportionately from within the U.S. To the extent that

regional localization of spillovers is important, citations should come disproportionately

from the same state or metropolitan area as the originating patent.

        The most difficult problem confronted by the effort to test for spillover-
localization is the difficulty of separating spillovers from correlations that may be due

to a pre-existing pattern of geographic concentration of technologically related activities.

That is, if a large fraction of citations to Stanford patents come from Silicon valley, we
                                              4
would like to attribute this to localization of spillovers. A slightly different interpretation

is that a lot of Stanford patents relate to semiconductors, and a disproportionate fraction

of the people interested in semiconductors happen to be in Silicon valley, suggesting that

we would observe localization of citations even if proximity offers no advantage in

receiving spillovers. Of course, the ability to receive spillovers is probably one reason

for this pre-existing concentration of activity. If it were the Qfl1y possible reason, then,

under the null hypothesis of no spillover localization we should still see no localization

of citations. As discussed above, however, there are other sources of agglomeration

effects that could explain the geographic concentration of technologically related
activities without resort to localization of knowledge spillovers. We will show that the

frequency with which citations are localized is significantly greater than a control

frequency designed to capture the pre-existing geographic distribution of technologically

related activities. Since this "control" frequency is, itself, likely to be partly the result of

spillover-localization, we believe this to be a conservative test for the existence of

localization.

        The first section of the paper describes patents, and considers more carefully how

citations might be used to infer spillovers. The following section explains the
 construction of the samples of patents used in this study. The third section presents an

 analysis of the frequency with which citations come from the same country, the same

 state and the same metropolitan area as the originating patent, and compares these to

 "control" frequencies. The fourth section examines whether the probability of geographic

 localization of any given citation can be explained by attributes of the originating or
                                            5

citing patents, or of relationships between them. A concluding section follows.



L      Patents and Patent Citations

      A patent is a property right in the commercial use of a device.S For a patent to

be granted, the invention must be non-trivial, meaning that it would not appear obvious

to a skilled practitioner of the relevant technology, and it must be useful, meaning that

it has potential commercial value. If a patent is granted,6 a public document is created

containing extensive information about the inventor, her employer, and the technological

antecedents of the invention, all of which can be accessed in computerized form. Among

this information are "references" or "citations." What citations a patent must include is

determined by the patent examiner, The citations serve the legal function of delimiting

the scope of the property right that the patent constitutes. In theory, the granting of the

patent is a legal statement that the idea embodied in the patent represents a novel and

useful contribution over and above the previous state of knowledge, as represented by

the citations. Thus, in principle, a citation of Patent X by Patent Y means that X

represents a piece of previously existing knowledge upon which Y builds.
       The examiner has several ways of identiing potential citations. The applicant

has a legal duty to disclose any knowledge of the prior art that she may have. In
addition, the examiner is supposed to be an expert in the technological area and be able



5. Ideas are not patentable; nor are algorithms or computer programs, though a chip
with a particular program coded into it might be. The definition of a device was recently
broadened to include genetically engineered organisms.
6. There is no public record of unsuccessful patent applications.
                                              6
to identify relevant prior art that the applicant misses or conceals. The framework for

the search of the prior art is the patent classification system. Every patent is assigned
to a 9-digit patent class (of which there are about 100,000) as well as an unlimited

number of additional or "cross-referenced" classes. An examiner will typically begin the

search of prior art using her knowledge of the relevant classes. For the purpose of

identifying distinct technical areas, we utilize aggregations of subclasses to a 3-digit level;

at this level there are currently about 400 technical classes.7

       The main advantage of patent data can be stated simply: They are easily
available and they provide a tremendous amount of information about the invention, the

inventor and her employer.8 Every major research organization holds some patents, and

the associated data are publicly available in computerized form. There is no other form

of data that gives such broad coverage of the output of the research enterprise. Further,

the data available for each patent are quite extensive: In addition to the citation and

classification information discussed above, one knows the application date, the name and

exact address of each inventor, and the name of the organization to which the patent

right is assigned, if any. The combination of the citation information wit!' detailed

institutional and geographic information about each applicant provides a unique
mechanism for tracing the diffusion of technology across time, space, and types of



7. Examples of 3-digit patent classes are "Batteries, Thermoelectric and Photoelectric;"
 Distillation: Apparatus;" "Robots;" 17 distinct classes of "Organic Compounds;" and the
ever-popular "Whips and Whip Apparatus."
 8. For a general discussion of the value and problems of patent data, see Griliches
 (1990) and Trajtenberg (1990, Chapter 5).
                                             7

institutions.

       There are, however, limits to the value of patent data for our purposes. Most
fundamentally, much of the output of research cannot be patented, and this is
particularly true for basic research, which may generate the greatest spillovers. Beyond
the question of what is patentbk, there is a question of what is patent. An inventor

in possession of what she judges to be a patentable idea decides whether or not to apply

for a patent. Though the decision to apply, and favorable action by the Patent Office,

may create a presumption of potential value to the invention, a decision ni to apply
does not mean that the invention is valueless. Patenting is a strategic decision. In
addition, firms and universities face quite different incentives in this regard. Until 1980,

universities could not grant exclusive licenses to commercialize patents derived from

federally funded research. This restriction greatly limited the effective monopoly power

that a patent is intended to confer, and hence greatly reduced incentives to apply for

patents derived from federally funded research, which is about 90% of university
research. Firms, on the other hand, may elect not to patent and rely on secrecy to

protect their property rights.
        None of these limitations seem particularly troubling for the narrow purpose at

hand. We do not purport in this paper to measure the knowledge output of firms or

universities, or the fraction that "spills out." We simply take a set of patents (described

further below) as evidence of a set of potentially economically useful inventions, and

then examine where subsequent related inventions were developed. While this set is

surely a non-random sample of the universe of new knowledge creations, it still seems
                                            8
informative to examine the geographic patterns that emerge.

       Separate from the question of biases created by looking at spillovers from
patented inventions, there is the question of whether it is appropriate to use patent
citations as indicating knowledge spillovers in the way that we propose. The role of the

examiner in identifying citations means that the citing inventor may not actually have

been aware of the work of the cited inventor. Further, even if the citing inventor was

aware of the cited work, she may not, in fact, have benefitted from her knowledge ofit.9

In using citations to trace the pattern of knowledge spillovers, we risk imputing spillovers

that did not really exist. For our purposes, however, this implies a conservative bias
against finding substantive results that only underscores the importance of those results

if found. That is, if many citations do not actually correspond to true spillovers, then

citations would be an extremely noisy indicator of spillovers, suggesting that one might

not find a geographic pattern to citations even if there really is a geographic pattern to

spillovers. But if we    find that there is a geographic pattern to citations, the fact that

citations mis-measure spillovers only means that our results understate the importance

of geography.'°



9. As in any paper, the Bibliography at the end of this paper contains refereflces that
we feel have to be included for completeness, but from which we may have received
little direct intellectual benefit.
 10. This reasoning would break down if non-spillover citations were more geographically
 localized than spillovers. It is difficult for us to see how this might be the case.
 Certainly, for citations to previous patents that represent work of which the citing
 inventor is unaware, one would expect no geographic connection (other than the
 localization due to concentration of the underlying technologically activities, which we
 control for directly).
                                           9

IL    The Data

      We begin with two sets of university patents: 316 comprising the universe of
successful applications from the year 1975, and 482 comprising the universe of successful

applications from the year 1980.11 We are particularly interested in universities
because of a prior belief in their importance in generating spillovers. In order to
compare the citation patterns of university patents with those of corporate patents, we

also drew two "matching" samples of corporate patents to correspond to each of these

university sets. One sample (the 'Top Corporate" sample) was drawn from patents
granted to the 200 U.S. firms with the greatest R&D spending in 1986, according to
Compustat. The "Other Corporate" sample was drawn from the universe of all other

patents assigned to U.S. corporations. In order to make the matching samples as similar

as possible except for their institutional origin, the corporate samples were drawn as

follows:


       1. For each university patent, we identified all patents in both the Top Corporate
       and Other Corporate groups that had the same patent class and application year
       as the university patent.

       2. From each of these two sets of patents matched by class and application year,
       we then drew the patent that minimized the absolute value of the difference in
       patent numbers between the university patent and the matching sample patent.

        3. Step (2) was performed without replacement, that is, if a patent class had n
        university patents, we drew n distinct matching sample patents.




 11. These patents may have been granted anytime between their application date and
 the end of 1989. In practice, most patents are granted (or denied) within about 3 years
 of application. We have no information on unsuccessful applications.
                                           10

The result of this exercise is that for both the 1975 and 1980 university cohorts, we have

samples of Top Corporate and Other Corporate patents with the same app1iction year

and the same patent class distribution. By matching on patent classes, we control for

variations in citation practices across technological areas. Because patent numbers are

assigned sequentially, choosing matching sample patents with close patent numbers

results in matches that were granted very close in time to the originating patent. This
is desirable so that the matching samples will have had the same amount of time to be

cited. About 90% of the matching sample patents were granted within I month of the

matching university patent, and over 99% were granted within 1 year.

       These 6 distinct sets of patents (1975 and 1980 cohorts for each of university, Top

Corporate, Other Corporate) represent the potential generators of spillovers; we call
them "originating patents." The next step was to identify all of the patents citing any of

these originating patents, of which there were about 10,000 by the end of 1989. As a

prelude to the geographic analysis, Tables One and Two and Figure One present some

 descriptive data about the citations and their relationship to the originating patents.

Table One shows that about 80-90 percent of the 1975 patents and 70-80 percent of the

 1980 patents had received at least one citation by the end of 1989, with the higher

 proportion in each case applying to the university patents. Mean citations received

 (including zeros) were 4-6 for 1975 and 3-4 for 1980, again with the higher numbers

 corresponding to the university patents.'2 The average lag between the originating


 12. Our companion paper (Trajtenberg, Henderson and Jaffe, 1992) explores in detail
 the inferences that can be drawn about the nature of university and corporate research
 from differences in citation intensity and related measures.
                                                                TABLE ONE
                                                          DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS

                                 Percent                           Mean       Average     Percent       Percent
                                               Total No.         Citations    Citation     Self        Same Patent
Originating                      Receiving
 Dataset                         Citations   of Citations         Received     Lag"2      Citations2      Class2


1975

                                   88.6            1933              6.12          6.53     5.6            54.3
  University

                                    84.2           1476              4.70          7.17    18.6            55.7
  Top Corporate

  Other Corporate                   82.3           1341              4.22          7.82     9.1            57.5



1980

                                   79.9            2093              4.34          4.36     8.9            56.3
  University

                                   79.9            1701              3.54          4.41    24.6            58.3
  Top Corporate

                                   74.1            1424              2.95          4.46    12.6            57.2
  Other Corporate


       Notes:

                1.   Application year of citing patent minus application
                     year of originating patent

                2.   For those patents receiving   any citations
                                                            Table 2

                                Originating and Citing Patents by Technological Field



               Origin
               Distribution                         Field Distribution of Citations                                     Distribution
                                                       (Percent or Row)                                                 of Citations
               (Pcrccnt
                of                                                                                                      by Origin FicId
                Column)                                                                                                 (Percent or Column)
                                      1                   2                3               4              5
                                   Drugs             Chcmicats        Electronics      Mechanical         AM
                                    and              cxc. Drugs       Optics and          Arts           Other
Origin Fictd                       Medical                              Nuclear


                                                                         1975

                        2&2               83.7                 9.3               1.8             4.0              ii             32.4

           2            22.2                 9.5              73.3              9.5               7.2             0.5            16.9


           3            26.3                 2.0               5.1              883               4.2             0.4            29.3

           4            16.1                 2.6              15.0               8.2             71.4             2.9             16.1


           5             7.3                 4.1               7.1               4.0              9.0            75.9              5.2

       Total           100.0              30.0                 19.7             29.6             15.7             5.0            100.0




                                                                         1980

           1            36.9              78.7                11.8               4.8              3.5             1.2             34.6

           2            22.8                 9.9              70.8               3.2             14.6             13              223

           3             22.0                2.1                4.8             84.2              8.5             0.4             27.3

           4             13.9                3.6               10.6              7.8             75.3             2.7             11.7


           5              4.4                6.5                3.6              2.2              9.6            78.1              3.9

       Total            100.0                30.8              22.7             26.3              16.0            4.3            100.0
                                            11

application year and the application year of the citing patent is 6.5 to 8 years for the
1975 cohort, and a little over 4 years for the 1980 cohort.

       The inference that a citation indicates a possible knowledge spillover is much less

clear in the case where the citing patent is owned by the same organization as the

originating patent. For this reason, we distinguish what we call 'self-citations.' A self-

citation is defined as a citing patent assigned by its inventors to the same paty as the

originating patent, which is, by construction, either a university or a domestic
corporation. Not surprisingly, the self-citation rate differs for the different sources of

originating patents, with universities having the lowest and Top Corporations the highest

rates.13 Finally, Table One shows that 55 to 60 percent of citations have a primary

patent class that is the same as the primary patent class of the originating patent,
indicating that the originating and citing patents are technologically close to one another.

       The technological relationships between the citing and originating patents are
summarized in a different way in Table Two. This Table uses a very broad 5-way

technological classification, based on the underlying patent classes: (1) Drugs and

Medical Technology; (2) Chemicals and Chemical Processes Excluding Drugs; (3)

Electronics, Optics. and Nuclear Technologies; (4) Mechanical Arts; and (5) All Other.

Even at this broad classification level, one cannot assume that a citing patent is in the

same category as the originating patent. The Table shows a cross-classification of
frequencies across these fields for the originating and citing patents, with the university


13. The apparent increase in self-citation rates between 1975 and 1980 is probably
spurious; self-citations tend to come earlier than other citations. See Trajtenberg,
Henderson, and Jaffe (1992) for more on this issue.
                                             12

and corporate patents combined for this purpose. For example, the Table shows that

83.7 percent of those citations received by all of our 1975 Drug and Medical Patents

were themselves classified as Drug and Medical; about 9.3 percent were classified in

Chemicals. Overall, the 28.2 percent of our 1975 patents that were classified as Drugs

and Medical generated 32.4 percent of citations to our 1975 patents; of all the citations

(regardless of origin field) to our 1975 patents, 30 percent were Drug and Medical. The

diagonal elements of the matrices in each panel, which correspond to the f'action of

citations that are within broad technical fields, range from 70.8 to 88.3.

       Figure One provides additional detail on the distribution of lags between

originating and citing patents, again defined as the difference in application years. The

Figure shows that citations are few in the early years,'4 and reach a plateau after about

3 years. It is not possible to tell from these data when (if ever) that plateau tails off; the

apparent tail-off in both panels of the Figure is due at least in part to the 1989
observational cutoff. For 1975, the higher citation rate for university patents is
particularly pronounced in the early years; this pattern is not apparent in the 1980

cohort.

       The easiest way to examine the locus of the citing patents is using an assignment

code that is provided by the patent office on the public datasets. The code identifies

those patents that are unassigned, meaning that the property right resides with the



 14. Recall that patents are typically granted ito 3 years after application; thus a citation
 lag of 0 or 1 implies that the citing patent may well have been applied for before the
 origtnating patent was actually granted. Pending applications are not public, so in this
 case the citation would almost surely have been identified by the examiner.
                                                       1975 Cohort
   250




   200




   150




   100




     so




      0

                                    Citation Lag (difference between application years)




                                                       1980 Cohort
    500




    400




    300




    200




    100




      0
           0          1         2          3           4             5         6          7   8   9
                                    Citation lag (difference between application years)
... UniversitycitatiOns                                    __ Top Corporate Citations
... Other Corporate Citations
                                            13

inventor(s), and classifies the remainder according to whether the assignee was U.S. or

foreign, and whether it was an individual, a government or a corporation. Table Three

compares the assignee distributions of the citation datasets to the universe of all patents.

It shows that citations of university patents are themselves more likely to be assigned to

universities than the typical patent, and are also more likely to be cited by a patent

assigned to the U.S. government.

       The identified citations of corporate patents are also slightly more likely to be

assigned to a university than a typical patent, probably because the patent class
distribution of the corporate originating datasets was chosen to reflect the distribution

of university research activity. Hence, these citations are concentrated in areas where

universities are important. All of these patents, chosen because they cited a patent
assigned to a U.S. university or U.S. firm, are more likely to be themselves assigned to

a U.S. university or firm than a randomly drawn patent. Note that self-citations are not

excluded from Table Three.

       The meaning of a geographic assignment based on assignee is somewhat unclear,

however, in a world of multinational corporations. An invention developed at an IBM

lab in Switzerland could be categorized as U.S. corporate, while one from a Toyota lab

in Kentucky could be categorized as Foreign Corporate.15 For this reason, and also our

interest at looking at smaller geographic units, we turn to the geographic information

that relates to the inventors themselves.


15. "Could" rather than "would" in each case because the categorization would depend
on whether the inventor legally assigned the patent to the parent multinational
corporation or to a host-country subsidiary.
                                                          TABLE THREE
                                                    ASSIGNEE DISTRIBUTIONS




Oataset                                             Percent Assigned to:

                                                                         U.S.          Foreign         U.S.
                                       Unassigned      Universities   Corporations   Corporations   Government   Other'

Citations to:

  1975 University                        12.9             9.9              44.7         26.1           4.5        1.8

  1975 Top Corporate                      8.5             1.6              62.5         23.9           2.2        1.3

  1975 Other Corporate                   14.8             1.3              57.9         23.0           1.6        1.3

  1980 University                        10.5            14.4              47.2         22.4           3.3        2.2

  1980 Top Corporate                      6.3             2.2              60.4        20.8            1.8         .5


  1980 Other Corporate                    9.0             3.0              62.9         21.8           1.9        1.4

All 1982 Application Year Patents        16.1              .8              44.0         35.7           1.9        1.7

All 1905 Application Year Patents        16.7              .9              40.1        39.3            1.2        1.6



          inclildec U .S.and foreign individuals and foreign governments.
                                          14

ilL   The Extent of Geographic Localization

       The patent data contain the country of residence of each inventor, and the city

and state of residence for U.S. inventors. Use of this information is complicated by the

fact that patents can have multiple inventors who can live in different places. The

following procedure was followed:


       1. For U.S. inventors, city/state combinations were placed in counties using a
       commercially available city directory; each U.S. inventor was then assigned to an
       SMSA16 based on state and county. For this purpose an additional "phantom"
       SMA was created in each state, encompassing all counties in the state outside
       of defined SMSA's. Approximately 98% of inventors were successfully assigned
       to SMSAs.

       2. Assignments of each patent to a country, a state and an SMSA were then made
       based on pluralities of inventors. So, for example, a patent with one inventor
       living in Bethesda MD, one in Alexandria VA and one in rural Virginia would
       be assigned VA for its state and Washington DC for its SMSA. Ties were
       assigned arbitrarily, except that ties between true SMSAs and phantom SMSAs
       were resolved for the true one and ties between U.S. and foreign were resolved
       in favor of foreign.17

       Having assigned all of the patents to countries, states and SMSAs, we can then

ask the question: how often is the citing patent in the same locale (country, state,

SMSA) as the originating patent? But to ask that question meaningfully we have to

consider how often we would expect them to match under some "null" hypothesis. That



16. These assignments were made based on the 1981 SMSA definitions. In areas where
Consolidated Metropolitan Statistical Areas were defined in 1981, these w :e used;
elsewhere Metropolitan Statistical Areas were used. Hence we use the generic term
"SMSA."

17. At the country level, 98% of patents were assigned unanimously. At the state level,
90% were assigned unanimously; an additional 4% had more than half of inventors in
a single state. At the SMSA level, 86% were assigned unanimously, and an additional
6% had a clear majority.
                                              15

is,   we need to compare the probability of a patent matching the originating patent by
geographic area, conditional on its citing the originating patent, to the unconditional

probability. This unconditional probability gives us a baseline or reference value against

which to compare the actual proportions that match. We now consider how to estimate

this unconditional or "null hypothesis" probability. As indicated in the introduction, a

key issue is the extent to which we allow the null-hypothesis probability to reflect the

pre-existing concentration of technological activity.

           To be concrete, assume that both the originating and citing patents are drawn

randomly from some set F, and that the elements of P are distributed across N distinct

geographic areas such that the fraction in area i is f, i =1...N. For the moment we can

think of these different areas as countries, states or cities; in each case let 1N be the

fraction that are foreign. Suppose first that we choose a sample of originating patents

that are, by design, all from a given area i. If there is no geographic relationship
between originating and citing patents, then the probability of a match for any given

citation is simply the probability that a randomly drawn patent comes from area i, that

 is, f1. For the country-level match, that is what we did: all the originating patents are

 of U.S. origin. Hence the probability of a country-level match under the null hypothesis

 is the fraction of patents in some (properly chosen) universe P that are domestic or

 (1-fN).

           The null probability for the state and SMSA matches is slightly more complicated.

 Suppose now that we chose originating patents at random from the geographic
 distribution characterized by the f's. The expected probability of a match would be the
                                              16

probability of picking a patent from a given area (fi), times the probability that the

citation is from that area (f1), summed over all areas. Thus, if originating patents were
drawn geographically at random, the null probability would be the sum across areas of

the squared area proportions, or the Herfindahi index of concentration across geographic

areas. Of course, we did not choose the originating patents at random, because we
excluded foreign patents. This implies that the probability of a match if there were no

geographic relationship is the sum over i of [f1/(1 -    or (1 - N) times the Herfindahi

index of concentration across states or SMSAs within the U.S. We will refer below to

this statistic as an 'adjusted domestic Herfindahi."

       The question then becomes: what is the appropriate universe P from which
originating and citing patents are drawn? This depends on the null hypothesis one
wishes to test. One version is that the appropriate P is the universe of all patents. This

corresponds to the null hypothesis that there is no relationship between the geographic

location of citing and originating patents.

       One could argue, however, that this is not an appropriate test of localization of

knowledge spillovers. We know from Table One that over half of all citations are in the

same patent class as the originating patent. We suspect that the probability of a given

geographic location conditional on patent class is not the same as the unconditional. In

other words, concentration of inventive activity across geographic areas is probably

higher within technical areas than it is over all. Silicon valley has a higher proportion

of the world's semiconductor researchers than it does of the world's researchers. Of

course, part of the reason for this is probably the existence of knowledge spillovers. To
                                           17

the extent that is true, the effect of this pre-existing concentration of activity on the

probability of a match might appropriately be viewed as part of the phenomenon of
interest, and the appropriate null probability would remain at that predicted by drawing

at random from the universe of all patents. On the other hand, as discussed above,

there may be reasons for this pre-existing concentration other than knowledge spillovers.

To this extent, the null probability should reflect the localization predicted by the

likelihood that the originating and citing patents are, on average, more technologically
similar than two randomly drawn patents.

       If citations were always from the same class as originating patents, then we could

view the patent class as the appropriate universe P. We could calculate the measures

discussed above within each patent class, and then average across patent classes to yield

an expected value for the null probability. The results of such calculations are discussed

below. But this does not seem quite right either, given that almost half the time
citations are    assigned to the same primary class as the originating patent.18 For this

reason, we focus primarily on an alternative method for calculating the null probability.

This method allows for localization caused solely by geographic concentration of

technologically related activities, but does not rely on the assumption that citing and

originating patents are necessarily in the same patent class. Instead, we took every
citation that we identified, and drew a control patent for it in the way described in

section II above, this time drawing from the universe of all U.S. patents. That is, for



18. We also show below that the probability of a geographic match is not, in fact, higher
for citations in the same patent class.
                                            18

each citation, we found another patent in the same class, with the same application year,

granted as close in time as possible to the citing patent. This patent has nothing in

common with the originating patent, except that it is temporally and technologically veiy

close to the citation. We then examined the frequency with which these control patents

came from the U.S., and from the same state and SMSA as the originating patent that

was cited by the patent for which the control was drawn, and compared these frequencies

to those for the citations. If it were true that citations are close to originating patents

only because of the technological areas they represent, then the frequencies with which

citations and controls match the originating patents by geographic area should be the

same.

        Before getting to such comparisons, examination of Table Four is useful merely

to get a sense for the extent of geographic concentration. It shows the fraction of
patents coining from abroad and from a selection of major U.S. SMSAs for several of

the datasets. Not surprisingly, a measurable fraction of university patents comes from

Madison, WI; this is not true for corporate patents. Somewhat more substantively, a

measurable (though smaller) fraction of the citations of university patents comes from

Madison, and this fraction is larger than that for the controls. Indeed, the controls for

the university citations look generally "more like" corporate patents than do the citations,

suggesting that localization may be present. Other qualitative evidence of localization

is apparent in the Table, including the high percentage of NY SMSA citations that come

from the NY SMSA.

        Quantitative comparisons of the matching proportions are presented in Table
                                                          TABLE FOUR
                                             SMSA DISTRIBUTIONS FOR SOME DATASETS


                    .1975           1975        Citations to     Citations to       Controls for       All Citations to
                                                   1975            1975             Citations to      Patents Originating
                  University    Top Corporate
                                                                Top Corporate       1975 University       in NY SMSA
Location          Originating    Originating     University

Foreign                -               -           31.8            31.4                35.8                 31.2

                     15.0         3.1               7.5              4.6                5.1                  4.0
Boston

                      7.0         4.8                9.0             5.7                6.1                  3.9
Los Angeles!
  Anaheim

S. Francisco!         5.1         1.4                3.8             3.7                6.1                  3.5
  Oakland

Madison. WI           4.2          -                 1.6                                 .5                   .6


                      4.2         9.3                5.4             8.2                4.5                  9.1
Philadelphia!
  Wilmington
                                                                                                              -
Rural Iowa            3.8          -
                                                     1.6              .6                 .2


San Jose              3.5         2.8                4.0             3.4                 -
                                                                                                             1.9

New York!             3.2        13.5                9.7            11.7               13.7                 28.5
  NJ\Conrt

Salt Lake City        3.2          -
                                                     2.1              -                  .5                   .4


                      2.6         2.4                2.6             1.7                1.7                  1.2
Detroit!
  Ann Atbor

                                                                                        1.9                  2.1
Minneapolis!          1.3         5.2                2.8             2.9
  St. Paul

                      1.9         4.2                3.9             5.7                5.6                  4.2
Chicago

                       .6         3.1                1.9             2.1                1.3                   .8
Albany

  Note       All figures are percentages.   SMSA percentages for citations and controls are relative to domestic total.
                                            19

Five. For each geographic area and each originating dataset, it presents the proportion

of citations that geographically matched the originating patent. These proportions are

shown both with and without self-citations. The matching proportions for the control

samples are then shown, as well as a t-statistic testing the equality of the control

proportions and the citation proportions (excluding self-citations).19          The null-
hypothesis probabilities based on Herfindahis are not shown in the Table, but are

discussed in the text.

       We focus first on the 1975 results on the left of the Table. At the countTy level,

it turns out that the different tests proposed above make little difference. The
proportion of all patents that are domestic in the period corresponding to citations of

from 1975 is 63.6%; calculating this percentage by patent class and then taking a
weighted average across classes using the originating dataset class distribution for weights

yields 64.0%. These proportions are quite similar to the predictions based on the

fraction of controls that matched, shown in the Table (62.8, 63.1 and 66.3 percent for

university, Top Corporate and Other Corporate, respectively).
       Table Five shows that, including self-citations, citations are domestic about 6 or


19. Let p be the probability that a citation comes from the same geographic unit as the
originating patent; let p0 be the corresponding probability for a randomly drawn patent
in the same patent class (control). We test H0: p=p0 versus H1: p>p0 using the test
statistic:
                         pC_   PO


            /[p(1— P) + (1— 0)}/n
where and p0 are the sample proportion estimates of p and p0. This statistic tests for
the difference between two independently drawn binomial proportions; it is distributed
as I.
                                                             TABLE FIVE
                                                 GEOGRAPHIC MATCHING FRACTIONS




                                                      Originating Cohorts
                                                                                          1980

                                         Top          Other                              Top         Other
                        University    Corporate      Corporate            University   Corporate   Corporate

                                                                                                      1210
Number of   Citations      1759         1215           1050                  2046        1614

                                         Matching    by Country
Overall Citation
                                                                            71.4         74.6         73.0
  Matching Percentage      68.3         68.7           71.7

Citations Excluding                                                                                   70.4
  Self-cites               66.5         62.9           69.5                 69.3         68.9

                           62.8         63.1           66.3                 58.5         60.0         59.6
Controls
t-statistjc                 2.28        -0.1            1.61                7.24          5.31         5.59

                                         Matching by State
Overall Citation                                                                                      18.4
                           10.4         18.9           15.4                 16.3         27.3
  Matching Percentage
Citations Excluding
                            6.0          5.8           10.7                 10.5         13.6         11.3
  Self-cites

Controls                    2.9          6.8           6.4                   4.1          7.0          5.2

t-Statistic                 4.55           .09         3.50                  7.90         6.28         5.51

                                         Matching by SMSA

Overall Citation
                            8.6         16.9          13.3                  12.6         21.9         14.3
  Matching Percentage
Citations Excluding
                                         4.5           8.7                   6.9                       7.0
  e1f-cits                  4.3
Controls                    1.0          1.3           1.2                   1.1          3.6          2.3

                            643          4.80          8.24                  9.57         6.28         5.52
t-statjstjc

     Note      Number of citations is less than in Table One because of
               missing georaphic data for some patents. The tstatistic
               tests equality of the citation proportion excluding self-
               cites and the conrroi proportion. See text for details.
                                             20

7 percent more often than the controls. Excluding self-citations eliminates this
difference for the Top Corporate citations and cuts it roughly in half for the others. The

remaining difference between the citations excluding self-cites and the controls is only

marginally significant statistically.
       Looking at the 1975 results for states, we find that citations of university patents

come from the same state about 10 percent of the time; this rises to 15% for Other

Corporate and 19% for Top Corporate. Excluding self-citations, however, makes a big

difference. The university and Top Corporate proportions are cut to 6-7 percent, and

the Other Corporate to just over 10. For comparison, the adjusted domestic Herfindahl

across states is 4.3 percent for the universe of patents, and is 6.5% for the weighted
average of within-patent-class values. The latter of these two figures is again quite close

to the actual match frequency using the control patents. For the university and Other

 Corporate cohorts, the matching frequencies excluding self-citations are significantly

 greater than the matching control proportions.
        At the SMSA level, 9 to 17 percent of total citations are localized. This again

 drops significantly when self-citations are excluded, but 4.3 percent of university citations,

 4.5 percent of Top Corporate citations and 8.7 percent of Other Corporate citations are

 localized excluding self-cites. This compares to control matching proportions of about

 1 percent, and these differences are highly significant. The overall adjusted domestic

 Herfindahi at the SMSA level is about 1.6%; the within-patent-class Herfindahl is about

 3.4%. Note that the latter is higher than the control frequency reported in the Table,

 and is not significantly different from the citation matching frequencies except for Other
                                           21

Corporate.
      The results for citations of 1980 patents are even stronger and more significant.

For every dataset, for every geographic level, the citations are quantitatively and
statistically significantly more localized than the controls. It is well known that the

proportion of all U.S. patents taken by foreigners has been increasing; this is reflected

in a decline of 3 to 6 percent in the control percentages matching by country. The

citation matching percentages actually rise, however, particularly for Top Corporate
citations. It is impossible to tell from this comparison whether this represents a real

change, or whether it is the result of the 1980 citations having shorter average citation

lags. Since this gets to the issue of explaining which citations are localized, we postpone

discussion until the next section.

       Before moving on, the results on the extent of localization can be summarized as

follows. For citations observed by 1989 of 1980 patents, there is a clear pattern of
localization at the country, state and SMSA levels. Citations are 5 to 10 times as likely

to come from the same SMSA as control patents; 2 to 6 times as likely excluding self-

citations. They are 3 to 4 times as likely to come from the same state as the originating

patent; roughly twice as likely excluding self-cites. Whereas about 60 percent of control

patents are domestic, 70 to 75 percent of citations and 69 to 70 percent of citations
excluding self-cites are domestic. Once self-cites are excluded, universities and firms

have about the same domestic citation fraction; at the state and SMSA level there is

weak evidence that university citations are less localized. For citations of 1975 patents,

 the same pattern, but weaker, emerges for citations of university and Other Corporate
                                            22
patents. For Top Corporate, there is no evidence of localization at the state or country

levels, though the SMSA fraction is significantly localized. Thus we find significant

evidence that citations are even more localized than one would expect based on the pre-

existing concentration of technological activity, particularly in the early years after the

originating patent.



DL.    Factors Affecting the Probability of Localization

       The contrast between the 1975 and 1980 results suggests that localization of early

citations is more likely than localization of later ones. This accords with intuition, since

whatever advantages are created by geographic proximity for learning about the work

of others should fade as the work is used and disseminated. Another hypothesis that is

implicit in the previous discussion is that citations that represent research that is
technologically similar to the originating research are more likely to be localized,
because the individuals pursuing these related research lines may be localized. In
addition, attributes of the originating invention or the institution that produced it may

affect the probability that its spillovers are localized.

       To explore these issues, we pooled the citations (excluding self-cites) to university

and corporate patents for each cohort, and ran a probit estimation with geographic
match/no match between the originating and citing patents as the dependent variable.

As independent variables we included the log of the citation lag (set to zero for lags of

zero), dummy variables for Top Corporate and Other Corporate originating patents,
interactions of the lag and these dummies, and a dummy variable equal to unity if the
                                            23
citation has the same primary class as the originating patent. To prevent the
measurement of the effect of time from being contaminated by the fact that fl patents

are becoming more likely to be foreign over time, we included as a control a dummy

variable that is unity if the control patent corresponding to this citation matches

geographically with the originating patent.
       We also included two variables relating to the originating patent suggested by our

work on basicness and appropriability of inventions (Trajtenberg, Henderson, and Jaffe,

1992). The first, "generality" is one minus the Herfindahl index across patent classes of

the citations received. It attempts to capture the extent to which the technological
"children" of an originating patent are diverse in terms of their own technological
location. Thus an originating patent with generality approaching 1 has citations that are

very widely dispersed across patent classes; generality of zero corresponds to all citations

in a single class. We argue elsewhere that generality is one aspect of the 'basicness" of

an invention. One might hypothesize that basic research results are less likely to be

localized, because there spread is more likely to be through communication mechanisms

(e.g. journals) that are not localized. The other variable characterizing the originating

invention is the fraction of the originating patent's citations that were self-cites. We take

a high proportion of self-cites as evidence of relatively successful efforts by the original

inventor to appropriate the invention. We expect that the non-self-citations to such a

patent are more likely to be confined to suppliers, customers, or other firms that the

inventing firm has a relationship with, and may therefore tend to be localized.

       Finally, the extent of localization depends fundamentally on the mechanisms by
                                            24
which information flows, and these mechanisms may be different in different technical

fields. For this reason, we also included dummy variables for the broad technological

fields discussed above in the context of Table Two.

       The results are presented in Table Six. Because of the presence of the interaction

terms between the lag and the corporate dummies, the coefficient on the lag itself
corresponds to the fading of localization of citations of university patents. There is

evidence in the 1975 results of such fading. This effect is statistically significant at the

state and SMSA levels; its quantitative significance is discussed further below. For the

citations of corporate patents, the interaction terms measure the difference between their

fading rates and those of university citations. These terms are generally not statistically

significant. In only one case (Other Corporate, 1975) could we reject the hypothesis of

equality of fading rates at traditional confidence levels. There is, however, weak
 evidence that the corporate citations do not fade as rapidly as those of university patents,

 at least at the state and SMSA levels. The coefficients on the corporate dummies
 themselves capture differences in the predicted probability of localization for citations

 with lags of 0 or 1 year. These are all insignificant, and there is no clear pattern.

        The matching patent class and generality measures do not work well. The effects

 are generally insignificant, and show no consistent pattern. The effect of the self-citation

 fraction is, however, strong and puzzling. At the state and local level, there is a very

 significant effect in the predicted direction: citations of patents with a high self-citation

 fraction are more likely to be localized. This is flS2 just saying that self-citations are

 localized, since they are excluded; it is the other citations that are more localized. At
                                                                     TABLE SIX
                                                             GEOGRAPHIC PROBIT RESULTS

                                                                                   State                       SMSA
                                          Country
                                           Match                                   Match                    Match

                                   1975             1980                1975                   1980       1975            1980

                                  .139              .085                    .396            .300            •             .283
Dummy for Control
 Sample    Match              (.045)                (.041)              (.124)             (.102)                     (.172)

Log of Citation               -   .078              .094                -.264                  .198   -.123            .037
                              (.049)                (.056)              (.073)             (.079)     (.057)          (.086)
 Lag

Dummy for Top                 -
                                  .114             - .010               -   .383               .013   -   .234        -
                                                                                                                          .208
                              (.168)                (.127)              (.249)             (.177)     (.288)          (.200)
 Corporate
                                                                        -   .214           - .007                         .042
Dummy for Other                .069                 .053                                                  .325        -




                              (.209)                (.134)              (.277)             (.189)     (.291)          (.207)
 Corporate

Log-lag                        .046                - .016                   .226            .007          .102            •   156
                                                    (.086)              (.138)             (.115)     (.156)          (.131)
  Top Corp. Dummy             (.091)

Log-lag                           .008             - .026                   .307               .036       .037         .039
  Other Corp. DunTny          (.108)                (.091)              (.147)             (.124)     (.155)          (.138)

                                                                        - .013              .034      - .057          - .016
Dummy for Matching            -
                                  .085               .069
 Patent Class                 (.050)                (.045)              (.073)             (.058)     (.080)          (.068)


Generality of origin           .092                  .117                   .026           -   .140       .013            •   298
 Patent                       (.091)                (.088)              (.136)             (.111)     (.150)          (.130)

Origin Fraction               -
                                  .813               .162                   .815            .883      1.114               .828
 Self-citations               (.180)                (.124)              (.246)             (.134)     (.237)          (.154)


#   of   Observations         3581                  4217                    3573               4215       3566                3972

    of Matches                2363                  2925                     256                490        197                 298

Log Likelihood               -2269                  2559                    -894.2         -1459          -735.8          -1022

     * The number   of observations for which the control patent matched at the SMSA level was so small that this parameter
         could not be estimated.

         Standard errors in parentheses.       All equations also included S technological field dummies.
                                            25
the country level, at least in 1975, this effect is reversed and is significant. Taking all

results together it suggests that for patents with a lot of self-citations, the non-self-
citations are more likely to be foreign, but those that are domestic are more likely to be

in the same state and SMSA as the originating patent.

       The 1980 results are disappointing. The coefficient on the time lag term switches

sign, though it is generally insignificant. One possibility is that these citations span too

short a time period to capture the lag effect well. To test this possibility, we re-ran the

estimation in Table Six on the 1975 citations, excluding all that were granted after 1984.

These results show what we would have believed about citations of 1975 patents if we

had looked for them only as long as we have looked for the citations of the 1980 patents.

The results are presented in Table Seven. As expected, they look 'more like' the 1980

results than the original 1975 results did. In particular, the coefficient on the lag term

is now insignificant, and is positive at the SMSA level. Thus it may be that the
"perverse" results for the 1980 sample would go away if we had later citations to include.

       A probit coefficient does not have an economically meaningful magnitude,

because of the need to standardize the variance of the underlying error distribution. We

can, however, calculate what the coefficients imply about changes in the predicted

probabilities. This is done in Table Eight, using the 1975 lag coefficient.2° Table Eight

was constructed by calculating the predicted localization probability using the results of




20. As discussed above, this is the point estimate of the lag coefficient for citations of
university patents. The point estimates are different for the corporate originating
patents, but since these differences are generally insignificant we have not performed
separate calculations for each dataset.
                                                                    TABLE SEVEN
                                                             Geographic    Probit Results
                                                                             "Trimsrned 1975      Citation Sample
                                                 Country                                State                         SMSA
                                                   Match                                Hatch                         Match


Dummy for Contzol                               .249                                 .456
 Sample Match                                  (.061)                               (.158)

       of Citation                             -.077                                 .088                            .093
Log
                                               (.072)                               (.100)                          (.111)
                                                                                    -.461                           - .326
     for Top
Dlinry                                          .361
 Corporate                                     (.212)                               (.327)                          (.397)

Duiasy for Other                               -.104                                -
                                                                                        .403                         .2.97

                                               (.294)                               (.410)                          (.425)
 Corporate

                                                .275                                    .252                         .118
Log-lag
                                               (.144)                               (.218)                          (.261)
  Top Corp. Dussny

                                                .137                                    .346                         .026
Log-lag
 •Other Corp.                                  (.190)                               (.260)                          (.271)
                   Duxrsny



Dursny for Matching                             .136
                                                                                    -
                                                                                        .149                        -.187
 Patent Class                                  (.067)                               (.095)                          (.103)

                                           -   .018                                 -.130                           -.180
Generality of Origin
     Patent                                (.124)                                   (.115>                          (193)
                                           -139                                                                      .985
origin Fraction                                                                         .655
 Self-citations                            (.234)                                   (.310)                          C.318J

                                               2005                                      2003                         1986
t$   of Observations

                                               1354                                       166                          122
      of Matches

        Likelihood                             1244                                       560.9                       -444.7
Log

       * The numberof observations     for which the control patent matched at the SMSA level was so small that              this parameter
         could not be estimated.
         Standard errors     in parenthesis.     AU     equations   also included 5 technological field dujmries.
                                   TABLE EIG1T

                   PREDICTED LOCALIZATION PERCENTAGES OVER TIME

                           Based on 1975 Probit Results
                       for Citations of University Patents


                                  Predicted Percentage for:

                   Same Country         Same   State              Same SMSA




o or   1.   Year      67.1                 9.7                      4.8


5 'fears              65.5                 6.5                      4.0




10 Years              64.6                 5.3                      3.7




25 Years              63.5                 4.0                      3.3
                                             26
Table Six, evaluating the citation lag at different values, and evaluating the other
independent variables at the mean of the data. It shows that the estimates correspond

to a reduction in the localization fraction after, for, for example, 10 years, from 67.1%

to 64.6% at the country level, 9.7% to 5.3% at the state level, and 4.8% to 3.7% at the

SMSA level.



       Discussion and Conclusion

       Despite the invisibility of knowledge spillovers, they do leave a paper trail in the

form of citations. We find evidence that these trails, at least, are geographically
localized. The results, particularly for the 1980 cohort, suggest that these effects are

quite large and quite significant statistically. Because of our interest in true externalities,

we have focussed on citations excluding self-cites. For some purposes, however, this is

probably overly conservative. From the point of view of the Regional Development

Administrator, it may not matter whether the subsequent development that flows from

an invention is performed by the inventing firm, as long as it is performed in her state

or city. Our results are also conservative because we attribute none of the localization

present in the control samples to spillovers, despite the likelihood that spillovers are,

indeed, one of the major reasons for the pre-existing concentration of research activity.

       We also find evidence that geographic localization fades over time. The 1980

citations, which have shorter average citation lags, are systematically more localized than

the 1975 citations. By using a probit analysis, we produced estimates of the rate of

fading. These estimates seem to suggest a rate of fading that is both smaller than one
                                           27
would expect, and smaller than would be necessary to explain the difference between the

1975 and 1980 overall matching fractions. One possibility is that the difficulty of
measuring the rate of fading is due to the "contamination" of citations by the patent

examiner. As noted above (Footnote 14), it is particularly likely that citations with very

short lags were added by the examiner. If we believe that such citations are less likely

to represent spillovers and less likely to be localized, then this would tend to bias
towards zero our measure of the effect of time on localization.

       We find less evidence of the effect of technological area on the localization

process. Citations in the same class are no more likely to be localized. These non-

results are also consistent with the relative insensitivity of our estimates of the "null"

probabilities to whether or not we look within classes. Overall, there is not really any

evidence in these data that the probability of coming from a given geographic location

conditional on patent class is different from the unconditional probability. This may be

due to the arbitrary use of the "primary" patent class, to the exclusion of the "cross-

referenced" classes. There is no legal difference in significance between the primary and

cross-referenced classes, and in many cases the examiners do not place any significance

on which class is designated primary. In future work, we hope to explore whether using

the full range of information contained in the cross-referenced classes provides a better

technological characterization of the patents.

       In this context, it is worth noting that part of what is going on is probably that

knowledge spillovers are not confined to closely related regions of technology space. As

shown in Table 2, citations come to some extent from different technological areas, even
                                              28

at a very broad level of technological categorization. This is consistent with previous

research (Jaffe, 1986) that found that a significant fraction of the total "flow" of spillovers

affecting firms' own research productivity comes from firms outside of the receiving

firm's immediate technological neighborhood.
       We find surprisingly little evidence of differences in localization between the

citations of university and corporate patents. The largest difference is that corporate
patents are more often self-cited, and self-cites are more often localized. The probit

results do not allow rejection of the hypothesis that the initial localization rates for non-

self-citations are indistinguishable for the different groups. They do provide some weak

evidence that this initial localization is more likely to fade for the university patents, at

least at the state and local levels.

        In order to provide a true foundation for public policy and economic theorizing,

we would ultimately like to be able to say more about the mechanisms of knowledge

transfer, and about something resembling social rates of return at different levels of
geographic aggregation. The limitations of patent and citation data make it difficult to

 go much further with such questions within this research approach. & post, the vast

 majority of patents are seen to generate negligible private (and probably social) returns.

 In future work, we plan to identi' a small number of patents that are extremely highly

 cited. It is likely that such patents are both technologically and economically important

 (Trajtenberg, 1990). Case studies of such patents and their citations could prove highly

 informative about both the mechanisms of knowledge transfer, and the extent to which

 citations do indeed correspond to externalities in an economic sense.
                                          29
                                  BIBLIOGRAPHY

Bania, N.: 'Technological Spillovers and Innovation in Research and Development
Laboratories,' REI Working Paper Series, Center for Regional Economic Issues, Case-
Western Reserve University, 1989

Bania, N., R. Eberts and M. Fogarty: 'The Role of Technical Capital in Regional
Growth," presented at the Western Economic Association Meetings, July 1987.

Bernstein, J.I. and M.I. Nadiri: "Interindustry R&D Spillovers, Rates of Return, and
Production in High-Tech Industries," American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings, 1988

Bernstein, J.I. and Md. Nadiri:      "Research and Development and Intra-industry
Spillovers: An Empirical Application of Dynamic Duality," Review of Economic Studies,
1989

Carpenter, M. et. a!.: "Citation Rates to Technologically Important Patents," World
Patent Information, Vol. 3. No. 4., 1980.

Carpenter, M. and F. Narin.: "Validation Study: Patent Citations as Indicators of Science
and Foreign Dependence," World Patent Information, Vol.5, No. 3, pp. 180-185, 1983.

Dorfman, N: "Route 128: The Development of a Regional High-Technology Economy"
in D. Lampe (ed.), The Massachusetts Miracle: High Technology and Economic
Revitalization, MIT Press, 1988

Feller, Irwin, "R&D Theories and State Advanced Technology Programs," Paper
prepared for the American Association for the Advancement of Science Annual Meeting,
JanuaTy 1989

Glaeser, Edward, H.D. Kallal, J.A. Scheinkman and A. Shleifer: "Growth in Cities,"
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 3787, July 1991

Griliches, Z.: "Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: a Survey," Journal of Economic
Literature, , page   1661, 1990

Griliches, Z.: 'The Search for R&D Spillovers," National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 3768, July 1991

Grossman, G. and E. Helprnan, Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy,
Cambridge: M.I.T. Press, 1991

Jacobs, Jane: The Economy of Cities, New York, Vintage Books, 1969
                                         30
Jaffe, A.: 'Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R&D: Evidence from Firms'
Patents, Profits and Market Value," American Economic Review, 1986

Jaffe, A.: "Real Effects of Academic Research," American Economic Review, 1989.

Krugman, P.: Geography and Trade, Cambridge: M.I.T. Press, 1991
Mansfield, E.: "Sources and Characteristics of Academic Research Underlying Industrial
Innovations," mimeo, University of Pennsylvania, 1991

Marshall, A.: Principles of Economics, London: MacMillan., 1920

Minnesota Department of Trade and Economic Development, Office of Science and
Technology, State Technology Programs in the United States, 1988

Romer, P.: 'Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth," Journal of Political Economy,
October 1986

Romer, P.: "Endogenous Technological Change," Journal of Political Economy, 1990
Shimshoni, D.: "Regional Development and Science-Based Industry," in J. Kain and J.
Meyer (eds.), Essays in Regional Economics, Harvard University Press, 1971

Smilor, R., G. Kozmetsky and D. Gibson: Creating the Technopolis:        Linking
Technology. Commercialization and Economic Development, Ballinger Publishing Co.,
1988

Teplitz, P.: Spin-off Enterprises form a Large Government Sponsored Laboratory,
unpublished M.S. thesis, M.I.T., 1965

Trajtenberg, M.: "A Penny for Your Quotes: Patent Citations and the Value of
Innovations," Rand Journal of Economics, 1990a, Vol. 21, No. 1, pp 172-187

Trajtenberg, M.: Economic Analysis of Product Innovation: The Case of CT Scanners,
Harvard University Press, 1990

Trajtenberg, M., R. Henderson and A. Jaffe: "Quantifying Basicness and Appropriability
of Innovations with the Aid of Patent Data -- A Comparison of University and corporate
Research," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. xxxx, 1992

Wainer, H.: The Spin-off of Technology from Government Sponsored Research
 Laboratories: Lincoln Laboratory, unpublished M.S. thesis, M.I.T., 1965
</ref_section>
