                            NEER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




         HUMAN CAPITAL ACCUMULATION AND INCOME DISTRiBUTION




                                    Raquel Fernandez

                                    Richard Rogerson                        -




                                 Working Paper No. 3994




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  February 1992



This research was conducted in part while R. Fernandez was a visiting fellow at the Hoover
Institution. We thank seminar participants at Brown Harvard, and the NBER Summer Institute
for comments. An earlier version of this paper circulated under the dde "On the Political
Economy of Educational Subsidies." Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                             NEER Working Paper #3994
                                                             February 1992




          HUMAN CAPITAL ACCUMULATION AND INCOME DISTRIBUTION




                                          ABSTRACT


       This paper analyzes the extent to which education will be subsidized when the subsidy

Tate 15 determined by majority voting. The analysis takes place in a framework where

education is a discrete decision and all individuals would like to obtain an education because

of its effect on future earnings. Individuals differ in their initial income levels. The

non•existence of credit markets implies that initial income is a determinant of who actually

obtains an education. We consider the outcome of a process in which income is taxed to

provide subsidies for education, and taxes are chosen by majority voting. We characterize the

outcome as a function of both the level and the distribution of income in the economy. In

particular we derive conditions under which middle income individuals ally themselves with

upper income individuals at the expense of lower income individuals, and vice vers& The

analysis determines the relationship between human capital accumulation and disthbution of

income.




Raquel Fernandez                                            Richard Rogerson
Department of Economics                                     Department of Economics
Boston University                                           University of Minnesota
Boston, MA 02215                                            Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER                                                    and NBER
1.   Introduct ion

     Societies intervene in the area of education in a variety of ways. That

they should choose to do so is perhaps not surprising plausible economic

justifications for intervention are plentiful and range from the existence of

market imperfections of various sorts (especially imperfect capital aarkets},

to externalities from education both static and dynamic, to public goods

arguments.    The factorm that determine the extent and the forms that these

interventions take seem far less obvious, however.         Heterogeneity among

individuals, whether in terms of incose, ability or locality, tends to

generate conflicting preferences as to the kind of policies that are most

desirable.    Thus, there is reason to suspect that there say be substantial

disagreement in the choice of,        for example, the optimal degree of
subsidization of education, the quality of education, the rules that should

determine an individual's eligibility for particular subsidies             (e.g.

guaranteed student loans, scholarships, or financial aid), or the desirability

of barriers to entry such as entrance examinat ions or enrollment restrictions.

In the absence of a social planner that chooses policies to maximize a

well-defined welfare function, an analysis is required to understand how

heterogeneity and the political system interact to generate different features

of the educational system.

     The focus of this paper is relatively narrow.     We seek to examine how

income heterogeneity in particular cay affect the political feasibility of




1There is a growing literature that examines political forces as a deterninant
of economic outcomes. Early examples are Schuspeter (1947), Downs (1957), and
Buchanan and Tullock (1962). More recent studies include Meltzer and Richard
(1981), Alesina (1997), Persson and Tabellini (1990), and Fernandez and Rodrik
(1991).
educational subsidies. To do so we deliberately simplify our framework, both

economic and political, so as to highlight some of the fundamental tensions at

work as a consequence of income heterogenelty and a system of majority rule.

     At the economic levei, individuals are assumed to be cx ante identical in

every respect except for their initial income.        Education is a discrete

investment good and capital markets are imperfect.      An individual's cost of

acquiring an education is uniformly subsidized through a proportional inccme

tax levied on the general public. The subsidy, however, is available only to

those individuals who choose to acquire an education.      Since we assume that

all Individuals would benefit from obtaining an education, an       individual's

income and the subsidized cost of education are the sole determinants          of


whether they will do so.

     At the political level, we have chosen the equilibrium concept of

najority rule, thus allocating each individual equal weight in determining the

outcome. The tax rate, and hence the extent to which education is subsidized,

 is voted on directly and is therefore endogenously determined.

     We derive the majority voting equilibrium of the economy. In equilibrium

 the degree of subsidization of education depends both on the wealth of the

 economy and on its distribution.    Specifically, it depends on the economy's

 average income relative to the cost of education and on each income group's

 ability to extract revenue from another. The latter, we show, is determined

 by the relative income levels, by the allocation of the population among the

 different income groups, and by whether particular groups can afford to obtain

 an education at a zero subsidy.

      Interpreting the results requires understanding how alliances are

 generated among income groups for different costs of education and different




                                        2
income distributions.2    As will be shown, the middle class is often the

pivotal group.   There are ceses, however,   in which the poor and rich ally

against the middle clase, but these are relatively few for reasons that will

be made deer in the paper. Loosely speaking, we find that the equilibrium

tax rate tends to increase as an economy becomes wealthier as long as

subsidization still plays a meaningful role (i.e. as long as some individuals

still need a non—zero subsidy to afford an education).          Interestingly.

however, not all individuals necessarily prosper as society's wealth increases

relative to the cost of education.        The welfare of a poor individual

conditional on a constant income, for example, is not a monotonically

increasing function of society's average wealth. Whiie in a poor society the

equilibrium tax is zero, in a mediumly well-off one (in a sense that will be

made precise in the paper) the tax rate is set at a level that ensures the

maximum degree of exploitation of the poor1       i.e. a tax rate which just

prevents them from obtaining en education.        in a richer economy with an

equilibrium tax rate of one, they are best off.          This contrasts in an

interesting way with the results of Stiglita (1974) who argued, for several

variants of his model, that majority voting favors the prefences of the poor

if the median income is less then the mean. This need not be the case in our

framework.

     Our paper is not, of course, the first to examine the determinants of an

economy's degree of subsidization of education.     Creedy and Francois (1990)

examine an economy in which the growth rate is an increasing function of the




2several authors have coemented on and documented the tendency for the system
of higher education financing to imply a transfer from the rich and the peer
to the middle class (see e.g. Hansen and Weisbrcd (1969), Hansen (1971), and
Peltzman (1974)).
number of people educated.   The authors assume that individuals are able to

share in the benefits from growth regardless of whether they receive an

education. Given income heterogeneity and complete capital markets they show

that, for a psrticular income distribution majority rule results in the

subsidization of education despite the fact that the median voter is

uneducated.   G.E. Johnson (1984) provides a different motivation for why

individuals who do not directly benefit from education may nonetheless wish to

subsidize education. In this economy heterogeneity is in the level of skills

possessed by a worker (high, eedium, or low), rather than in initial income.

Sufficient complesentarity in the production function can provide low—skilled

workers with an incentive to subsidize education for medium—skilled workers

(which transforms the latter into highskilied workers) although low—skilled

workers themselves will not obtain an education.3 Ferotti's (1990) framework

is perhaps the most similar to ours: capital markets are imperfect, education

is the sole discrete choice variable, and majority vote determines the value

of the tax rate. Taxation works differently than in our model, however. Tax

revenue is redistributed independently of an individual's schooling decision,

and there is also redistribution of second—period earnings.      Second—period

redistribution may induce the poor to subsidize education, even if only the

rich individuals get educated.

     The main feature that distinguishes our work from those discussed above

is our assumption that individuals are unable to share in others' gains from




31n a rather different vein, K.E. Losmerud (1983) discusses the role of
relative moose concerns as an additional justification for the provision of
educational subsidies and JR. Lott (1990) suggests that the public provis.on
of schooling is undertaken by the state since it lowers the opposition to
wealth transfers by indoctrinating students with the 'correct" set of beliefs.


                                       4
education.   It is not that we consider such factors as the overall benefits

from growth (Creedy and Francois) complementarities in production (Johnson),

and increased tax revenues for redistribution (Perotti), to be unimportant

motivators for society's willingness to subsidize education. Bather, we wish

to understand, in the absence of such considerations, which groups would form

an alliance favoring subsidization of education and to what degree.        Whc

benefits and at whose expense (if anyone's)?         How dces the degree of

subsidization relate to the distribution of incoee among different groups?

How is it affected by the size of these groups? How does it relate to the

cost of education? In what way does the overall wealth of an econosy play a

role? These are some of the questions that we are able to examine in our

model without the additional impetus favoring the subsidization of education

that would be introduced by any of the other factors previously mentioned.

The fundamental tensionm that we identify in this basic model are likely to be

present in models that incorporate additional factors in their analyses.



2. The Model

     In order to study in as stark and simple a framework am possible some of

the interactions between income distribution, the political system and

education, we choose to abstract away from considerations that may be

generated    by other    factors   such    as   income   smoothing   concerns,

intergenerational bequest motivations, heterogeneity in preferences and

abilities among individuals. etc.         We place emphasis instead on the

affordability of education in an economy in which each individual would




                                      5
benefit by acquiring sn education.4

     The economy consists of a continuum of two-period lived agents with total

sass equal to one. There is a single coneumption good arid individuals have a

linear utility function defined over first arid second—period consumption.

There is no discounting.             The agents belong to one of three groups,

differentiated by their initial income (equivalently, endowment of the

consumption good) which is assumed to take on the values y1, y2, or y3.5 We

assume that y1 >        >         and will often refer to the three groups of agents
                   y2       y3,
as rich, middle class, and poor respectively. The fraction of agents in group

I is written as X.

     In the first period of her life, each agent decides whether to cbtain an

education.   The choice is zero—one and the cost of obtaining an education

(with zero subsidy) is E.8 The benefit fros education for an individual from

group i is that second-period income equals f(y1). By contrast, an individual

who does not obtain an education in the first period receives a second—period

income equal to             We assuae that f(y1)—E>y1 for all i.   This ensures that

all individuals would like to obtain an education.

      The market structure that we consider, however, does not necessarily

permit all individuals to obtain an education. individuals are assumed not to




4Affordabllity is not generally an issue at the primary and secondary level of
education.    Thus this model ie perhaps best viewed as concerning the
subsidization of higher education.
 5We have chosen to assume only three types of agents since it allows for
 closed form solutions and highlights the nature of the tensions anong Income
 groups.
 6We have deliberately chosen to model the acquisition of education as a
 discrete choice.   In terms of our results, what matters is that some
 individuals should find themselves at a corner with respect to their choice to
 invest En education.

                                              S
     have access to credit markets and hence cannot borrow against future earnings
     to   finance expenditures on education when young.7 It follows that period-one

     income will be a determinant of whether an individual obtains an education.8

I:
           A second factor that determines whether a given individual will receive

     an education is the extent to which education is subsidized,        In our model

     education is (endogenously) a partially publicly provided private good that is

     subsidized solely via a proportional tax 8 on period—one income.9            The

     proceeds from taxation are distributed equally among all individuals that

     receive an education.

           We study equilibria for the above economy in which the choice of the tax

     rate 8   is   endogenously determined by sajority rule.   Thus, by voting upon a

     tax rate individuals are simultaneously deciding two things: 1) the height of

     the "entry barrier" to education, i.e. the identity of the individuals who can

     afford to get educated, and 2) the degree to which educated individuals can

     extract revenue from those individuals who are not educated (and hence who do

     not receive a benefit from taxation). Of course, these two are simultaneously

     determined and thus cannot be chosen independently of one another.           The

     barrier to entry aspect is central to our analysis and, in particular,




     7Recent espirical work by Behrman, Pollak and Taubsan (1989) finds evidence
     for the existence of credit constraints in the context of education.     We do
     not model here the particular microfoundations underlying this market failure.
     This would merely complicate the model and its exact features are not
     critical. The essential feature is not that individuals cannot borrow at all,
     but rather that access to credit markets is such that initial income remains a
     determinant in an individual's decision to acquire education.
     8Our specification implies that individuals may spend all their income on
     education. This could be generalized to include expenditures on other goods.
     What mattere ie that for some individuals income is a binding constraint on
     their purchase of education.
     9Thus we are lsplicitly constraining our system from resorting to lump-sue
     taxation and other schemes.


                                              7
distinguishes it frost the bulk of voting models on education in which tax

revenue is redistributed independently of an individual's education decision

(e.g. Stiglttz (1974) and Perotti (i990D.

       Before proceeding to the equilibrium analysts it is useful to analyze the

relationship between values of the tax rate, indtvidual actions and utilttiee.

Consider first the relationship between the tax rate1 the government subsidy

to education and the fraction of the population that receives an education.

With a tax rate equal to 0, tax revenues T(9) mrs given by:

(1)         T(9) 0Dk
where ji is average income (which also equals total income since the mass of

agents is one).        If lUG) represents the mass of agents who receive an

education, then the per person subsidy sIB) is given by

(2)         s(G) = 9juN10).

The difficulty with these expressions is that N and 5 are jointly deterained

by 9. A simple procedure. however, allows us to determine the values of s and

N that are mutually consistent,

       Let p19) be the fraction of individuals of typo 1 that receive an

educntion as a function of 0.         For a given value of sb), an individual of

type i can obtain an education if (l-e) — E + s(G) 5          0.   Clearly, if an

individual from group I can afford to be educated then so can all individuals

from group j for all j C U Consider the following expression for any fixed

value of 9:

 (3)         (l—9)y — £ + Ogil((ZA1)+vX
                   j
                               IC.)
First, set j=l and v=l.        If expression (3) is nonnegative, then p1(G)=l.

 Otherwise, at the tax rate of 5 it is not possible for all of group one to be

 educated and p1(O) is that value of v that sets (3) equal to zero.       In this




                                           8
                                                              If p1(8)1, this procedure is
case          and
                    p3{9) are equal to zero.
repeated for ,j=2.     If p2(a)=l, then it is repeated for j3. This determines

the values of p1(O) for any value of S.                 Whenever O<Pi(9)<l we assume that a

fraction            of agents from group i is rmndomly selected to obtain an

education end that the resaining fraction l—p1(G) does not-

       Having determined the values of the ps's, it is possible to express the

expected utilities of each of the three groups as a function of the tax rate

0:


(4)
           EUJO)     (i—e)      +
                                    p1(S)(s(O)
                                                   —   E +
                                                             fl)]   +

       Since agents in this economy vote on the value of the tax rate to be
instituted, it is essential to understand how their respective utilites are

affected by different values of 6.                 A few preliminary results are helpful.

First note that each of the functions (8) •is non—decreasing in 0,                     Second,

and following directly from the algorithm outlined above, if 0p1(O)cl the

following relationship holds:

CS)                  E — sCe)       =
                                        (l—S)y1.
       Some additional notation facilitates the characterization of the EU1's.

Let      be the maxisum value of 0 In [0,1) for which p2(0) is equal to zero or,

this value failing to exist, equal to 0.                      is, therefore, the value of S at

which for any strictly positive increase in the tax rate it becomes possible

for some individuals of type two to obtain an education.                      Clearly, if y2aE

then       equals zero.          is defined analogously.            Lastly, define   to be the

smallest value of a       for   which p1(0)        1, whenever such a number exists in the

unit interval.

       The following proposition characterizes the expected utilities for each

type of agent.




                                                   9
Propositionj: EtJiCO) is continuous and LUiCO) C ElJi(Oi) for 5ic(0l] and for

all 1.      Furthermore:

Ci)      EU1(eJ is increasing and concave on [0,d1]. linearly increasing on

            with marginal utility of (ji/X1)—y1, linearly decreasing on

with marginal utility y2—y1, linear on [0283] with marginal utility of

                   linearly decreasing on [03.83] with marginal utility y3—y1,

and linearly decreasing on [63.1] with marginal utility p—y1•

U1               is linearly decreasing on             with marginal utility of -y2,

increasing and concave on °2'°2' linearly increasing on [ee] with

marginal utility of (f(X1+X2])-y2, linearly decreasing on [o3j3] with

marginal utility of y3—y2. and linear on [3.l] with a marginal utility of

MY2
Ciii] EU(O) is decreasing on [0183] with marginal utility of -y3. increasing

and concave on [83.03]. and linearly increasing on [ol] with marginal

utility of t—y3.

Proof:       Continuity of the Liii's follows directly from the fact that the

            are continuous. At    ,
                                      EUf(y).       At 80, EU2y. Given f(y)—E >
      and    y<E (i.e.            it follows that f()>2 and hence that

                  for 0s (0,1].

      We prove Ci); the remaining statements can be demonstrated similarly.

                                                              +
On [0.Oi].           is given by LUiCS) =      p1(9)[f(y1)]       (i—p1(o))[(l—8)y1+y1]
where p1(8) =                             Note that EU1(01)>EU1(8) for all 0c[0.Gl).
                 81i/[X1CE—(l—9)y1)].
Calculation yields dEU1/d819..0 =                                                   which is
                                        [(f[y1)—2y1)—A1y1(E—y1)]/[CEy1)A1)
positive since fCy1)' L+y1 >            2y1
                                              (if 01 >0) and p>A1y1.           Furthermore,

d2EU1CO)/d02        —2j.i[E—y1)y1[f(y1)—y1—E]/(L—Ci—8)y1]31 C         0     Since EU1 lm

increasing at zero, is concave throughout, and EU1(01) >                       for all 8 c
                                                                      LU1C8)



                                              10
          it follows that EU1 is increasing on the interval (O.8).                            On the

interval 1'°2' EIJi is given by EU1(e)                = (1—O)y1 — E        i-
                                                                                (p8/A1)
                                                                                          +
                                                                                              f(y1).
Differentiation gives: dEU1/de = —y1 +           WA1 > 0.         On the interval

                                           —                +             since for O<02(O)c1.
EU1(8) is given by EU1(e) =      (I—e)y1        (i-ely2         f(y1),
s(e) = E —                 Differentiation gives dtlJ1/de                 y2—y1 C 0.          On the
           (1—e)y2.
interval (02.03]. EU1 is given by EU1(e) = (l—e)y1 — E +                            fCy1).
                                                                         (jie/(X1+X2))
                                                                                          +

Differentiation gives dEUu/dO =            + W(X1+A2).            Marginal utility in this
region is positive if y1Cz/(A1+A2) and negative if the reverse inequality

holds.    In the interval [03,831 we have                         =
                                                                         (1-e)y1—Ci-e)y3+f(y1).
Differentiation yields dEli/dO = —y1+y3           <    0.       Finally, if 0 lies in the

interval (03.1]. EU1 is given by EU1(e) = (l—0)y1—E +pO .                        Differentiation
gives dEIJ1/dG     —y1+p. This is negative since p is simply the average of the

yr's. This cospletee the proof of (i). Paris (ii) end (iii) are demonstrated

eisilmrly.

      Figure 1 depicts EUi as a function of 0 for a particular set of parameter

values.




3. Majority Voting Equilibrium

      The equilibrium is determined by majority voting on tax rates. We assume

that individuals vote sincerely.
                                                 a
Definition:      An ectuilibrium is a tax rate 8 ,          0 S 8         I such that for all

O'e(O,l), the sass of agents with EUi(0) a alice') is strictly greater than

 B.

      Generically, each of the Liii's has a unique maximizer on (0.1].                           The

discussion that follows assumes that the maximizers are unique, although the

case where uniqueness does not obtain is easily handled. Denote the maximizer




                                           ii
for group i by 0.          Note that uniqueness does not imply that individual

preferences are single peaked; this is generically not                  true in this model

(e.g see Figure 1). Thus it is not possible to simply Invoke the preferred

tax rate of the median voter as the equilibrium tax rate.

     As a first step in the characterization, note that                          necessarily

corresponds to a local maximum of EUiCO). and hence Proposition 1 can be used

to restrict the set of possible values of e.              The possible values for 01 are

                   are (0.03l}. and for              are (0,1). For all groups EU1(01) '
         for a2

        (for   °10•'1 so zero can be a global maximum for an individual of

group i only if it is not feasible for all individuals in that group to obtain

an education at any tax rate.         Also, it Is possible for a tax rate of one to

be a global ssxisus for group one, but only If G=1, i.e. only if there is no

tax rate at which any individual of group three can obtain an education.

     The following proposition helps establish which value is taken by 01.

Pronosition 2: Assume y2CE. Then EU1(O) >               Et11(02) if   and only if y1 > E and


 01(A1+k2) C y1.
 EcQt: If' E>y1 then E1J1(0)>EU1C0) for 0<01. If E5y1 then EU1(0)f(y1)+yçE.

 and EU1(02) =             +              +                  -E.      Hence EU1(O)-E1J1(02) =
                   f(y1)       (1-12)y1       52W(A1+X2)
                       0 as y1      W(A1+A2). II
 ö2(y1—p/(A1+A2fl1
      Note that the condition above is identical to the one that determines

 whether EU1(O) is Increasing on the interval [82.03].                         The intuition

 underlying the proposition is easily understood.              The net subsidy obtained by

 individuals in group one for a given 8 is e[(pJN(811—y11. At 0, N(02)X1+X2.

 Hence, for 0 e [o203]1 the net subsidy will either sonotonically increase or

 decrease depending upon whether W(X1+X2)               y1. The net subsidy at 0=0 is 0.

 Thus, the sole determinant of whether EU1(0] is greater than EU1(02] (given




                                                12
y1>E) is likewise        whether the net eubsidy at           le positive or             negative.    i.e.

the seine condition as before. A necessary condition, therefore, for 0 to
equal 03 rather than   is
        There is one case for which       the   equilibrium is ieaediate.                 If any     At is

at    least as great as .5, then this group's O is clearly a majority voting
equilibrium. The following analysis considers the case where A. < .5 for each
1.    Thus, the sum of any two      of   the At's exceeds .5.
        For a tax    rate    0 to be a majority voting equilibrium it must win
against    all alternatives, and, in particular, against all local alternativem.

This observation leads to the following result;
                     U
Theorejnj:     If B is a majority voting equilibrium then at least one of the

Liii's has a local maximum at 0.

CQQL       Assume that      no group has a local maximum        at       0.        If   0 equals     zero,

EUi(0) must be upward sloping at 0 for all i.             But then           there exists some 0 >
0    which all three groups prefer to 0.              If 0 equals one, EUi(0)                    must   be

decreasing    for all I as 9 approaches 1.           Again,   there       is some B <        1   which is
                                                                     U
preferred by all three groups. Now assume that 0 < B                     C    1.    Because 0 is not
a local maximum      for   the i's, either a small decrease or increase in 0
                           any of
must increase utility for at least two of the groups, which is sufficient to
rule out   0 as a majority voting equilibrium.

        This theorem establishes that the potential aajority voting equilibria

all lie in the set (0.03.03.1). Thim set can be further reduced, however, by

noting that an implication of Proposition 1 is that both groups two and three

strictly prefer a tax rate of zero to a tax rate of 02 (for 02 not equal to

zero).     This follows directly from the fact that at                         both     groups two and

three    pay taxes   but do not receive an education. This leaves {003l) as the




                                                13
only equilibrium candidates.        In particular, there is only one possible

interior equilibrium.

     The preceding propositions and theorem allow us to construct Table 1.

which characterizes the equilibria that can result as a function of the values

of the parameters of the economy.

     As can be seen readily from Table 1, there are several cases where a

majority voting equilibrium does not exist.      In the present context this is

perhaps not too surprising.      Proposition 1 implies that preferences are

typically not single peaked end, as is well known, in this case a majority

voting equilibrium nay fail to exist.11

     The fact that preferences are not single peaked is due entirely to the

discrete nature of the education decision.              Although the resulting

non—existence of equilibrium is unattractive, we believe that discreteness is

Inherent to the formulation cf the question we study and not a feature to be

assumed away. The resulting problem of non—existence has been dealt with by

the majority voting literature       in two related but distinct ways.   One has

been to impose a greater institutional structure on the collective choice

mechanism than is implicit in the majority voting concept (see e.g. Shepale

and Weingast (1987)). The other is to propose criteria for what constitutes a

"reasonable" met of outcomes without specifying particular rules to pick cut

one or nore of the elements of this set (mee, for example, the concept of

uncovered set in McKelvey (1986) and Miller (1980)). Given the complexity and




10The existence of a mole interior equilibrium km an artifact of the three
income group distribution an entire range of interior equilibria can be
cbtained in the case of many discrete income groups.
For an example in Table 1 see case 3Am. Given the profile of preferred tax
rates (0203.0). 2 beats 83 0 beats 2' and 03 beats 0.


                                         14
diversity of the institutions involved in the educational system and the

potential arbitrariness of any particular set of rules to pick an equilibrium,

our discuesion will focus on the implications of majority voting for

resolution of the educational subsidy problem.         These outcomes provide a

benchmark    against which other procedural outcomee can be compared.


4.   Equilibrium   Outcomes

     Table 1 lists the equilibrium outcomes for all configurations of the
parameters describing the econoey.      This information can be used to address

two issues. One is to examine how an economy's total income relative to the

cost of education effects the choice of subsidization, holding the

constant. The second is how changes in the distribution of income affect this

choice.     Addressing each of these in turn serves as a useful way to organize

the implications of the model.

      To examine the relationship between total income and the equilibrium

subsidy, consider the patterns that emerge as. we move from panel 1 to panel 4.

This movement corresponds to increases in total income relative to the cost of

education.      In panel 1 the economy is sufficiently poor that even if it

devoted all of its resources to subsidizing education, at most only all the

rich would be able to attend.         Consequently, both group two and three's

preferred tax rate is zero which is then the majority voting equilibrium.

      In panel 2 the economy is wealthier, although total income does not yet

permit any group 3 individual to attend school even were society to devote all

of its resources to education. This situation is potentially more inteting

than that of panel U it is now economically feasible for the middle class to

share in the benefits of taxation. One may, therefore, be inclined to believe




                                         15
that a positive rate of subsidization will be chosen.        As Table 1 shows,

however, no such majority voting equilibrium will emerge;     the only possible

majority voting equilibrium is zero. Should y2 individuals desire a positive

tax rate, this rate must be strictly greater then 82 since at this rate the

middle class is worst off.   (At °2 the exploitation of the middle class by the

rich is at its maximum since this is the largest tax rate compatible with no

middle class individual obtaining an education. )   flut, there is always a lower

tax rate (e.g. °2 Itself) which is preferred by both y1and y3 since y1's

preferred tax rate is     end EU3 is sonotonically decreasing on [0.1].

     In panel 3 the economy has enough incose to send the rich, the middle

class, and at least sone of the poor to school.      In the extreme case it is

economically feasible to provide education for all individuals, though this

option would exhaust all income. The main feature of the economy is that in

equilibrium no group three individual obtains en education.      There are many

aubcases in panel 3. These correspond to two divisions: (1] whether group two

individuals can afford an education independently of the value of the subsidy

and (2) whether y1 is greater or smaller than gJ(X1+X2) (for the significance

of this Inequality, see PropositIon 2).      Group two's preferred tax rate is

always 03 In 3A, with one possible exception discussed later, whenever an

equilbriua exists it is 03 end supported by an alliance of the rich and siddle

class. The rich switch between 03 and °2' generating en equilibrium of 83 or

nonexistence respectively,     In B, the rich prefer either 93 or zero and,

unlike in any of the cases discussed before, en alliance between the rich and

poor Is feasible.   The reason for this alliance in case Eb is that there is

not enough income to ensure that a sufficiently large number of the poor get

educated end the rich are made worse off by any strictly positive tax rate




                                       is
    (since all revenue must be shared        with     the middle class and

    This   yields zero as the equilibrium.
H
           Panel 4 covers the case of economies with p>E, i.e., economies with

    sufficient income to educate everyone and still have resources left over.

    There are also many suboases in panel 4.            These correspond to the following

    divisions; (1) whether group two or group three individuals can afford an

    education independently of the value of the subsidy (2) whether y1 is greater

    or smaller than ii/(14X2) and (3) whether the median income (y2) is greater or

    smaller than         the   mean.   In case C the poor can afford an education

•   independently of any subsidy.          Taxation, therefore, is simply a means of

    redistributing income asong all members of society the barrier to entry

    aspect no longer plays a role in generating preferences over taxes. The main

    feature of our model effectively disappears; preferences are single peaked and

    the median voter result applies.          Consequently the equilibrium tax rate is

    either zero or one according to whether y2 is greater or smaller than M-

    Henceforth     our   discussion will focus on cases A end B.

•
           Whenever e2=i, it is the equilibrium since one is always            the    preferred
    tax    for    group 3.      Group 2, however, may     find   it   profitable to restrict

    education     to y1 end    y2 individuals (i.e. 2=e3• If it         does, the equilibrium
    (when    it   exists) is either 03 or 0. It is 93 when the rich and              the   middle

    class    both find it in their best interests to tax so as to extract as much

    revenue as possible from y3 without allowing the latter to obtain sn

    education.

            In panel 4, whenever an equilibrium exists it is the preferred tax rats

    of the aiddie class (with one exception, discussed later).                    If y2CE or

                   and pJ(X1+A2)>y1 the preferred tax rate of the middle class may be




                                                 iT
either 83 or 1.     Because these two outcomes have very different implications

for the resulting pattern of educational attainment, it is of interest to ask

what factors influence the value of 02 in these cases.              We can express the

difference between the two levels of utility as:

WI                                   —
        EIJ2C1)—E1J2183) =   Cry2)
Note first that If vy2 > E—y3, then 02=1 since Eg—(A1+A2)y2)/[ja—(A1+X2)y3]<l.

Similarly, if        C          and Y3M >          then 02 =
                         E—y3               y2E                03
       Differentiation and some algebraic manipulation can be used to show the

following:

Proposition 3; the difference in expected utilities in {6) is:

(a) decreasing in E

WI increasing in         holding A3 constant

Cc) increasing in A1     holding     A2 constant if y1>2y3

Cd) increasing in A2 holding A1 constant if y2>2y3

Ce) increasing in

Cf) increasing in y3

(g) ambiguous with respect to

       To provide intuition for some of the results, consider what happens when

the cost of education increases. At a tax rate of 1, the amount transferred

from the rich to the middle class is unchanged (though E has gone up, this is

also true at 03).     03. on the other hand, has increased since y3 individuals

now need a larger subsidy in order to afford an education. This allows y1 and

     individuals to "exploit" y3 individuals more than before since it takes a

greater tax rate than previously for l'3 individuals to be able to afford an

education.    Hence? an increase in E makes 0 relatively more attractive than

one.




                                              18
        When the proportion of' the population that is rich increases at the

expense of the middle class,            the economics underlying the relative

attractiveness of 1 versus 03 is more subtle. The increase in gi     brought on by
this change serves to sake a tsx rate of 1 relatively sore attractive since

the net subsidy received by a y2 individual is greater than before.            The

increase in g also decreases 03 since, for the same tax rate as before, sore

revenue is generated.        Recalling expression (5) it is easy to show that the

net subsidy at 03 decreases.        These two effects unambiguously sake one sore

attractive relative to e.           Sisilerly, when either y1 or y3 increase, p

increases   and        falls. Again it can be shown unambiguously that this change

relatively    favors   a tax rate of 1 over a tax rate of

        In the preceding discussion the analysis was restricted to those cases in

which the equilibrium was the preferred tax rate for two groups. There are

four exceptions to this- When WA1 > E a W(X1+A2) and y1>E (panel 2), then

                               In this case an equilibrium may exist at 6O, the
31=02 02=1. and e=O.
preferred tax rate for a member of group three, since there may not exist any

tax rate that both group one and two both prefer to zero.             There is no

coalition that is able to block 0=0 in favor of some other tax rate. This is

also possible in the case 3Ab where yaI(A1.A2)>E. and y2CE.             Lastly, in

cases 3Db and 'iBbii where y1ap/(A1+A2)>y2>ja>Dy3, we have              0203 and
           Zero, group one's preferred tax rate, cannot be ruled out as an
33=1.
equi 1 ibriuja.




5.   Discussion

        Having discussed the outcomes presented in Table 1 in sose detail, it is

instructive to note eose general points that arise in the analysis.




                                           19
     1.   There Is no simple ranking of preferred tax rates among groups, e.g.

it is not the case that the rich are typically for low taxes and the poor for

high taxes1 as would be the case if individuals voted over pure redistribution

schemes rather than the subsidization of education.

     2.   A majority voting equilibrium in this framework is essentially a

coalition between (at least) two of the three groups.       The alliance that

emerges is a function of the total income in the economy, its distribution,

and the cost of education.    In the poorest economies (panels 1 and 2), the

poor and middle classes form an alliance. In panel 3, however1 the alliance

first switches to the rich and middle class but, as the economy becomes even

wealthier (35b), the rich say form an alliance with the poor. In panel 4 the

alliances are either between the middle class and the rich or the middle class

and the poor.

     3, Although decreases in E never reduce aggregate second—period income,

utility for a particular group say strictly decrease. For example, a decrease

in E that results in a change from an equilibrium of zero (in panel 1 or 2] to

an equilibrium of        in panel 3 sakes group three individuals strictly

worse—off. Similarly, if a decrease in E changes the equilibrium from 83 in

panel 3Aa to one in panel 4A, group 1 can be made strictly worse-off.     Note.

furthermore, that equilibrium levels of indivdual utilities are discontinuous

functions of E.

     4.    Clearly, Table 1 illustrates that income distribution matters. An

important message that emerges, however,       is that the dependence of the

equilibrium rate of subsidization is not likely to be captured by looking at a

few staple statistics describing income distribution, such am the ratio of

median to mean income, or the Cmi coefficient. The model predicts that the




                                       20
relationship between income dIstribution arid subsidization is quite subtle, a

conclusion that should be kept in sind in empirical work.

6. Conclusion

     Governmental support for education varies greatly both internationally

and across states and localities within the United States. One possible cause

of this variation is the interaction of income distribution and the political

system.   This paper has explored this hypothesis within a simple setting in

which individuals are able to affect the private cost of education via

subsidization.   Rather than repeat the findings here, we outline what we

believe to be several important avenues for future research aimed at producing

models with sufficient richness to analyze actual data on education funding.

First, the cost and quality of education have been taken as exogenous.        In

reality, the quality of educational systems vary as do their costs.     In the

came of higher education both affordability and quality are important

attributes of the mystem,    In primary and secondary education, tuition is

typically zero and the variation is primarily in quality. These features need

to be incorporated into the analysis. The (endogenous) existence of private

alternatives is also an important feature to introduce, since this alternative

will necessarily affect people'm preferences over the allocation of resources

to public education.12 In the case of primary arid secondary education it is

also important to develop models in which location is stressed since much of

this education is both locally financed and conmujeed.13 Finally, the analysis

here has taken place in a static setting. It is also of interest to study




12Glomm and Ravikuasr (1990) study a model in which purely public and purely
private systems are compared.

13Recent work along these lines includes Renabou (lYQi) and Durlauf (1991).


                                      21
dynamic versions of these models that permit one to understand how the

educational system and income distribution will evolve over time and the
                                14
nature of their interactions.




14Building on the earlier work of Becker and Tomes (1979) and Loury (1981),
recent papers by Calor and Zeira (1990) and Ljungqvist (1991) study the
evolution of income distribution in dynamic models in which credit constraints
affect educational attainment.      In these models, however, there is no
endogenous choice of policy; all features of the educational system are taken
to be exogenous. Durlauf (1991) Ia an exception.

                                      22
                               Table 1   VotIng Equilibria



     Parameter Restrictions
                                            1 2 83           EquilIbriUIfl




                                            1   0    0           0
1.
            p1A1E

2.          )   La   p/(A1+X2)             82 0      0           0

                                           02
                                                1    0         OOrNE


3.                > E a p


       A. y2<E
                                                     0          NE
           a. y1<j.t/(A1+A2)               02   03
                                                     0
                                           83   83              83
                                                     1          NE
                                           82   83
                                                     1
                                                83              03

           b.                              2 93      0        0 or NE

                                                                NE
                                           2 03      1


       B. y2aE
                                                     0
           a. y1<pI(X1+A2)                 03 03                03
                                                     1
                                           83 03                03

           b.                              0    83 0            0
                 y1>g/(A1+X2)
                                           0    03
                                                     1        QorNE




                                           23
4. s>E
    A.                      02
                                     1        1       1


                                     1        1       1
                            03
                                              1       NE
                            02       03
                                              1
                            03       03               03

    B. y2E y3CE
         a.

                1.
                            03 03                 1
                                                      03
                                         1        1   1
                            03
                i. Y2M      0        03           1
                                                      03

         b. y1>jil(X1#A2)
                1.          0        03
                                                  1   NE
                     y24&
                            0            1        1   1


               11.          0                     1   0 or NE
                                         03

     C. y3aE
         a.                 0        0        1

         b. y2<gi           0        1        1




                                24
l4                                 I


12                I
                                   I




10


 S                                 I
              I




 oa 4
4    EU
          3   I                        .


                           •50 A           '°   &
                      FIGURE ONE
                                    References


Alesina, A.. "Macroeconomic Policy in a Two Party    System as a Repeated   Came,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics 102 (1987):651-678.

          and Tomes, H. • 1'An Equilibrium Theory of the Distribution of Income
Becker,G. ,
and Intergenerational Mobility." Journal of Political Economy 87 (1979),
1153—1189.

Behrean, J., Follak, R., and Taubnan, P., "Family Resources, Family Size! and
Access to Financing for College Education," Journal of Political Economy 97
(1989): 398—419.

Benabou, F., "Location, Production, and Education: The Workings of a City,
simeo, MIT 1991.

Buchanan, J., and Tullock, C. The Calculus of Consent. Ann Arbor, 1962,

Creedy J., and Francois, F., 'Financing Higher Education and Majority Voting,"
Journal of Public Economics 43 (1990), 181—200.

Downs,   A. An Economic Theory of   Deaocracy. Mew York, 1957

Durlauf, S    "Persistent Income Inequality I:   Human Capital Formation and the
Emergence of Poverty," mimeo, Stanford, 1991.

Fernandez, H. and Rodrik, 0., "Resistance to Reform:  Status Quo Bias in the
Presence of Individual-Specific Uncertainty," forthcoming, Aeerican
Economic Review (1991).

Calor, D. and Zeira, J, , "Income Distribution and Macroeconomics", aimeo Brown
University, 1990.

Gloam, C. ,and Ravikumar, B.," Public vs. Private Investment in Human Capital:
Endogenous Growth and Income Inequality," miaeo, Virginia, 1990

Hansen, 14.,   "Income Distribution Effects of Higher Education," Anerican
Economic Review (1971): 335—340.

Hansen. 14. Lee, and Weisbrod, Burton. Benefits, Coats and Finance of Higher
Education. Chicago: Markham, 1959.

Johnson, C., "Subsidies for Higher Education," Journal of Labor Economics 2
(1984): 303-318.

Lommerud, K., "Educational Subsidies When Relative Income Matters, "        Oxford
Economic Papers 41 (1989): 640-652.

Lott, J., "An Explanation for Public Provision of Schooling: The Importance of
Indoctrination," Journal of Law and Economics 33 (1990):   199-231.

Loury, C., "Intergenerational Transfers end the Distribuilon of Earnings,


                                         25
Econometrica 49 (1981), 843—867.

Ljungqvist, L. •     "Economic Underdevelopment: The Case of a Missing Market for
Human   Capital,"   miseo, Madison, 1991.

McKelvey,    B., "Covering. Dominance, and Institution Free Properties of Social
Choice,'    American Political Science Review, 1983: 284—3i4.
Meltaer, A. and Richard, S.. "A Rational Theory of the Size of' Government,"
Journal of Political Economy 89 (1981): 914—927.

Miller, N. • "A New Solution Set for Tournaments and Majority Voting,"
American Political Science Review, 1980: 68—96.

Peitzman, S.,   "The Effect of Government Subsidies in Kind on Private
Expenditure: The Case of Higher Education," Journal of Political Economy 81
(1973):     1—27.

Perotti, IL, "Political Equilibrium, Income Distribution and Growth." miaeo,
MIT, 1990.

Persson, T. and Tabellini, G., "Is Inequality Harmful for Growth? Theory and
Evidence," mirieo, Berkeley, 1990.

Schumpeter, J., Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. New York, 1947. -

Shepsie. K., and Weingast, B., "Institutional Foundations of Committee Power,
American Political Science Review 81 (1987), 85—104.

Stigiitz, J. "The Demand for Education in Public and Private School Systems,"
Journal of Public Economics 3 (1974): 349-385.




                                         26
