                           NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




     SELF-SELECTION AND INTERNAL MIGRATION IN THE UNITED STATES




                                     George J. Borjas

                                    Stephen G. Bronars

                                     Stephen J. Trejo




                                 Working Paper No. 4002




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 February 1992




This paper is part of NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                             NBER Working Paper #4002
                                                             February 1992



      SELF-SELECTION AND INTERNAL MIGRATION IN THE UNITED STATES




                                          ABSTRACT


       Within the conceptual framework of the Roy model, this paper provides an empirical

analysis of internal migration flows using data from the National Longitudinal Surveys of

Youth. The theoretical approach highlights regional differences in the returns to skills:

regions that pay higher returns to skills attract more skilled workers than regions that pay

lower returns. Our empirical results suggest that interstate differences in the returns to skills

are a major determinant of both the size and skill composition of internal migration flows.

Persons whose skills are most mismatched with the reward structure offered by their current

state of residence are the persons most likely to leave that state, and these persons tend to

relocate in states which offer higher rewards for their particular skills.



George J. Borjas                                              Stephen G. Bronars
Department of Economics                                       Department of Economics
University of California                                      University of California
 at San Diego                                                  at Santa Barbara
La Jolla, CA 92093                                            Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER


Stephen J. Trejo
Department of Economics
University of California
 at Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
I. Introduction

    The population of the United States is highly mobile, with about 3

pertent of the population moving atross state lines in any given year, and

almost 10 pertent of the population changing states over a five-year period

(15, p. 51]. As fertility rates remain at low levels following the baby

boom, internal migration has become an increasingly important source of

regional demographic change and a major determinant of concurrent shifts in

regional economic growth.

     The theoretical and empirical study of internal migration has a long

hiatory in economics [10,113. Guided by the income-maximizing models of

Hicks [14] and Sjaaatad (23], early empirical research focused on explaining

the size and direction of migration flows, as well as determining why

certain groups of individuals, such as the highly educated, are more likely

to migrate than others (5,9,22]. Later work fruitfully emphasized the role

of the family in migration decisions [6,17]. However, despite this

extensive early literature and the central role played by internal migration

in the operation of a competitive economy, we believe it is fair to conclude

that the study of internal migration has not been at the forefront of

research in mainatream labor economics over the past decade.1

     This recent disinterest is not symptomatic of a more general

 indifference to the study of geographic mobility. By contrast, the analysis

 of international migration has flourished in recent years [1,4]    The

 immigration literature suggests that embedding the Hicks-Sjaastad income-

 maximizing approach within Roy's (213 self-selection model generates

 important new insights [3].



                                        2
    The current paper presents an application of this more general approach

to the analysis of internal migration flows within the United States. We

argue that the Hicks-Sjaastad framework is too restrictive for studying

internal migration. Ira key predictions are that persons migrate from low-

income regions to high-income regions and that increases in mobility costs

deter migration. In turn, these predictions focus empirical work almost

exclusively on the size and direction of population flows across regions.

Although the data generally support these predictions, there are many other

interesting and important questions left unaddressed.

     The Hicks-Sjaastad model emphasizes the fact that mean income levels

differ across regions, and these income differentials (net of migration

costs) generate unidirectional migration flows. Conversely, the theoretical

approach suggested by the Roy model stresses regional differences in the

returns to skills (as well as regional differences in mean income) .   These

skill-prite differentials determine the skill composition of migration

flows. Regions that pay higher returns to skills attract more skilled

workers than regions that pay lower returns. Secause the economic impact of

migration depends on hioh people move as well as on how many people move,

we believe that these issues are as important as those that have dominated

 the literature.

      Of course, earlier studies have recognized that migrants ate self-

 selected. The development of econometric techniques to account for

 selection bias [12] led to several applications of this methodology to the

 analysis of migrant earnings. Nakosteen and liner [18] and Robinson and

 Tomes [20] report the standard selectivity-corrected earnings functions in



                                        3
the mover and stayer samples. These estimates, however, are based on a

conceptual framework which accommodates only one potential destination, and

the studies fail to test for the presence of the equilibrium sorting

predicted by the economic theory of selection.

     Within the conceptual framework of the Roy model, we provide an

empirical analysis of internal migration flows using data from the National

Longitudinal Survey of Youth. Aa shown in Table 1, internal migration is

quite prevalent among these young men and women.2 More than a quarter of

the sample currently (i.e. ,   in   1986) resides in a state other than the state

of birth, and about 18 percent are living in a different state than at age

14. The data also indicate that roughly 6 percent of the sample moves

across state boundaries in any given year.

     Our empirical analysis indicates that interstate differences in the

returns to skills are a major determinant of both the size and skill

composition of internal migration flows. Persons whose skills are most

mismatched with the reward structure offered by their current state of

 residence are the persona most likely to leave that state, and these persons

 tend to relocate in states which offer higher rewards for their particular

 skills. These results suggest that the Roy model provides a useful

 framework for analyzing internal migration flows in the United States.




 II. Theory

      Consider a country partitioned into k distinct geographic regions,

 indexed by i—I     k. To simplify the exposition, we initially aaswne that

 there are no costs of relocating across regions. Individuals compare their



                                            4
earnings opportunities in the various regions and move to the location that

maximizes their earnings. We alâo assume that the initial distribution of

individual skills is the same in all regions. At the time of birth,

therefore, individuals are randomly allocated across regions in terms of

their skills. The population log earnings distribution in region i is given

by:



                                                            k
                          logw—+v                    i—l                     (1)




where       is the mean income that would be observed in region i in the

absence of any internal migration, and v is a random vsriable with mean

zero and variance       that measures person-specific deviations from mean

 income in region 1.

        The assumption that the initial skill distributions are identical

 across regions makes the income distributions in (1) independent of initial

 conditions: the same earnings generation process applies to all individuals

 currently residing in a given region, regardless of where these individuals

 were born.3 However, because of regional differences in natural resources,

 physical capital, and aggregate economic conditions, mean incomes         and the

 distributions of the random variables v will vary across regions.

        An income-maximizing individual chooses to reside in region j whenever:



                                log w. >   max[log    w.]                     (2)
                                     J
                                           isi



 The characteriatics of the sorting generated by (2) cannot be described
without additional restrictions on the distribution of the random variables

             A simplifying assumption which allows a complete
V1     vk.
characterization of the equilibrium sorting is that individual earnings are

perfectly correlated across regions, so that Corr(vi vj)l for all i.

The population income distribution of region i can then be written as:




                       log wi —     +           i—l     k                  (1')




     This specification implies that the same random variable v determines

an individual's potential earnings in each of the various regions. Thus, v

indexes an individual's ability or skills, and equation (1') assumes that

the earnings determination process can be characterized by a one-fattor

model of ability. The coefficient q. can be interpreted as a factor-loading

parameter, or more generally as the "rate of return" to skills in region i.

 It is convenient to label the regions such that they are ranked in terms cf

 rj with 771<772<.. <77k. We assume that v is a continuous random variable with

 mean zero and a range defined over the real number line.

      Although the assumption that earnings are perfectly correlated across

 regions is quite strong (because it implies that the ranking of individuals

 by skill level is the same in all regions) ,   it enables us to derive a number
 of testable implicstions from a multi-region selection model. Furthermore,

 this framework may provide a reasonably accurate representation of earnings

 opportunities across regions within the United States, given the relatively

 strong regional similarities in economic, legal, and social institutions.

      Note that the random variable v need not be observed by the researcher.
Individuals sort themselves across regions on the basis of all of their

skills, not just those that happen to be econometrically convenient. By

using a one-factor model of ability, we assume that the relative prices of

all skills ste the same across regions, and so the composite commodity

theorem allows us to focus on a single skill that is being "sold" across

regions. It is possible to analyze the migration decision within the

context of a multi-factor model of ability, but we do not pursue this

generalization because it detracts from the main points that we make in this

paper.

     Using equations (1') and (2), region j is preferred to region i

whenever (.-n)v > (p.-p9. This implies that v > (j-p.)/(r.-v.) for j>i,

and that v < (bL-P)/('7-n) for j<i (because                       has the same sign as

j-i). Region j is chosen only if it is preferred to all other regions. As

a result, individuals sort themselves scross regions according to the

 following inequalities:




      Choose region 1:       v <          mm       —i
                                                   pl-p.
                                                                                     (3a)
                                    i—2          k 'i 'l


                                                                            p. -p.
         Choose region j:     max
                                      Mi-p.
                                                    < v <        mm         L! (3b)
             (l<j<k)      i—I     j-l 'j 'i                    i—j+l    k


                                                      TMiTMk
         Choose region k:     v >          max                                           (3c)
                                    i—I          k-I '7k 7i



         So long as the range of v extends far enough, equations (3a) and (3c)
imply that some individuals will choose to reside in the "extreme" regions 1

and Ic (i.e., the regions with the lowest and highest values of i').   It   is
less apparent, however, that all of the interior regions will be populated.

Depending upon the parameter values, it is possible to have regions for

which equation (3b) is never satisfied, and hence no individuals locate in

these regions.

       Because unpopulated regiona are of no interest empirically, we restrict

our attention to regions where some individuals choose to reside, Equation

(Sb) implies that a necessary condition for region j to be inhabited is:




                                            <                                (4
                                  'j"'j-l        '7j÷l'7j


Thia   can be rewritten as:




                              >
                                                 + jj-lj+l                   (5)
                          j
                                        j÷lj-l
       We   assume that equation (5) is satisfied for all regions j (j—2

 1). Equation (5) then defines the Existence Condition that mean income in

 region j must satisfy in order for region j to attract and retain a

 population. This condition greatly simplifies the characterization of the

 equilibrium sorting. In particular, repeated use of the Existence Condition

 to make pairwise comparisons of the arguments in the min(') and max(')

 expressions in (3) yields the following inequalities:



                                                S
    Choose region 1:     v <Mi-p2
                               —                                         (6a)
                                   '2 "i



                         p. •1-p.
                                         Cv         -
                                               < ______                  (Gb)
    Chooseregion
        (l<j<k)
                   j:
                          qj
                               -
                                   'i_               'j
    Choose region k:      V>         -                                   (6c)
                                   '1k '7k-l




    Figure 1 illustrates the nature of the equilibrium skill sorting when

there are five regions. The least skilled workers move to the region with

the lowest rste of return to skills, while the most skilled workers choose

the region with the highest rste of return. Persons with intermediate

levels of skills move to intermediate regions, with the more skilled workers

choosing regions with higher rstes of return. In effect, income-maximizing

behavior induces a positive correlation between the average skill lewd of a

region's inhabitants and the region's rate of return to skills:




            E(vlchoose i) > E(vlchoose j) if and only if     >             (7)


     The assumption that earnings are perfectly correlated across regions

implies that individuals who rank highly in the income distribution of one

region would also rank highly in the income distribution of any other

region. Skilled workers, therefore, are attracted to high-ti regions because

 these workers can then enjoy a more generous return on their superior
skills. In contrsst, unskilled workers choose regions with less income

inequslity becsuse this minimizes the economic penslty for lacking human

capital. In essence, skill prices play an important allocative role in the

internal migration decision.

     This insight helps explain the economic content of the Existence

Condition. In order for region j to be inhabited, the inequality in (5)

requires that mean earnings in region j exceed a weighted average of mean

earnings in the "neighboring" regions j-l and j+l. Note that these

neighboring regions need not be geographically adjacent, but are instead

neighbors in en economic sense. Because neighboring regions offer

relatively similar rewards for the skills of potential migrants, these are

the regiona which compete with region j in attracting human capital.

     Suppose that mean earnings in region j are below mean earnings in both

neighboring regions. The Existence Condition is not satiafied and no

 individuals choose to locate in j .   For   some persona to reside in region

mean earnings in j must exceed mean earnings in either region j-l or region

 j÷l, or both. Because these neighboring regions offer either a lower or a

 higher rate of return to skills than region j, they hold a natural advantage

 over j in attracting residents. In other words, for the same mean earnings,

 skilled individuals (v>O) prefer the region with a higher rate of return to

 skills, while unskilled individuals (v<O) prefer the region which least

 penalizes their lack of skills. Therefore, if mean earnings were equal in

 all three of these regions, or if mean earnings in j were lower than mean

 earnings in both of the neighboring regions, region j does not make a

 competitive offer to potential migrants. In contrast, a sufficiently higher



                                         10
mean income in region j than in either of its neighboring regions

compensates potential migrants for region j's relative disadvantage and

attracts a population.

     The Existence Condition imposes a specific pattetn of economic

opportunities across populated regions. In effett, the Existence Condition

rules out the case where the relationship between p and ry is U-shaped and

the case where p is constant across regions. Consider any three regions

chat are adjacent in tens of the race of return to skills they offer. All

three regions can be populated if p is monotonically increasing or

decreasing in r, or if p and i are related in an inverted-U shape. However,

if the relationship between p and r   is   flat or U-shaped for any three

neighboring regions, then the middle region would not be able to compete

with its neighbors and would fail to attract any residents.

      This discussion suggests an important avenue for future research.

 Regions can attract migrants only if they make competitive offers. In a

 more general model, the parameters that summarize regional income

 distributions are themselves endogenous, and the equilibrium income

 dist±ibutions are determined simultaneously with the equilibrium skill

 sorting of workers across regions. This general equilibrium model would

 also introduce the role played by the prices of fixed factors, such as land.

 Although research on this topic is in its infancy (see, for instance, [13)

 and [19[), Lt is clear that this type of analysis will provide a much deeper

 characterization of spatial equilibrium.

       The discussion also highlights a feature of the k-region selection

  model that is shared by the standard two-region Roy model. In both models,



                                           11
the ranking of skill prices across regiona completely determines where a

region ranks in tens of the average skill level of its inhabitants. As

long as the Existence Condition is satisfied, mean incomes play no role in

determining the skill ranking of regions. Of course, mean incomes do affect

the size and skill composition of the population rhst chooses to reside in

any given region, and in this wsy mesn incomes influence the sversge skill

level of a region's inhabitants. It is obvious from Figure 1, for example,

that a region attracts more residents when its mesn income rises.

     Our approach not only raises a number of new substantive issues

regarding the internal migration ptocess, but also simplifies the empirical

analysis of internal migration flows. Earlier work has been hampered by the

fact that there are k(k-l) possible migration flows in a k-region model, and

the size and composition of each of these flows depend on all of the

parameters of the model. Given the Existence Condition, equation (6)

 implies that the size and akill composition of the population choosing

region j can be completely determined from the parameters of the income

 distributions for that region and the two neighboring regions, greatly

 diminishing the number of parameters that influence migration flows into any

 given region. In fact, our framework implies that internal migration can be

 analyzed using an ordered qualitative choice model.

      Our theory also implies that region j can be both a source and a

 destination for migrants. As long as skill prices differ across regions,

 the spatial missorting of individuals at the time of birth is likely to be

 substantial. Skilled individuals, for instance, may be born in low-r7

 regions and subsequently move to high-n regions, while less able workers



                                        12
move in the opposite direction. Two-way population flows occur naturally as

the mismatches caused by being born in the wrong region are corrected.

     The introduction of migration costs does not alter any of the key

results. For concreteness, consider the migrstion decisions of persons born

in region i. Migration to region j (jsi) takes place whenever:



                            log w. -        >   max[log   wr -   Cit]               (8)




where       is a time-equivalent measure of the costs of migrating from region

i to region j ,     with   CO± For simplicity, we assume that migration costs

C are the same for all persons currently residing in region i.5 Of

 course, we do allow migration costs to vary when moving from region i to

 different destination regions (i.e., C#C. for r#s).

        Assuming initially that every region receivea at least one migrant from

 region i (a restriction analogous to the Existence Condition), the

 equilibrium sorting of individuals born in region i can be derived:




    Choose region 1: v <                -                                           (Pa)
                                       '2 l


                            p. -p.-(C. .        -C..)            p-p. -(C..-C. .
                                                                          ' i,j+l
     Choose region j:                                   <V <                        (9b)
          (l<j<k)                  '1jj-l



     Choose region k: v >                   -
                                                                                    (Pc)
                                         '1k '7k-l




                                                  13
    Figure 2 illustrates the sorting of workers born in region three when

there are five regions and it is costly to move. It is spparent that the

equilibrium sorting resembles that obtained when mobility is costless:

skilled workers move to high-,7 regions and unskilled workers move to low-,7

regions. The introduction of migration costs, however, alters the cutoff

points determining who moves to which region. These thresholds now depend

on mean incomes net of migration costs. This fact obviously implies that

fewer persons will leave their region of birth.

     A simple perameterization of migration costs reveals exactly whith

interregional flows are most likely to be affected by the fact that internal

migrstion is costly. Suppose that the costs of moving from region i to

region j are C—C for i#J, and 0 otherwise. In this specification,

migration costs are simply the fixed costs of moving that do not depend on

the distance of the move or any other factors which vary with the precise

identities of the origin and destination. From Figure 2, it is clear that

these fixed costs cancel out of all of the cutoff points except those

bordering the region of origin.

     Consider an increase in the fixed costs of moving. Obviously, this

increases the fraction of region i residents who decide not to migrate. For

 "small" changes in ,   the   pool of individuals who previously would have

migrated but now decide to remain in i is drawn entirely from those

 individuals who would have moved to neighboring regions (i.e., regions with

 neighboring values of ij).    Therefore small changes in fixed migration costs

 do not alter the size or skill composition of the outflow to non-neighboring

 regions. Put differently, small changes in fixed migration costs only



                                          14
change the incentives of "marginal" migrants.

     Of course, the larger the increaae in fixed migration costs, the more

likely it is thst no one will move to the neighboring regions i-l and i+l.

Sufficiently high levels of migration costs make it unlikely that all

regions are destinationa for persons originating in region i. Moreover,

those regions which fail to attract migrants from region i are those which

most resemble region i in terms of the payoff to skills.

     We noted above that our model generates two-way migration flows without

resorting to imperfect information or informational asymmetries among

participants in the marketplace. The existence of migration costs adds

further substance to this insight. As fixed migration costs increase, fewer

people move to neighboring regions from any region of origin. There is a

tendency, therefore, for persons to migrate to relatively "extreme" regions

 (i.e., regions with high or low levels of ,fl.   But   these are precisely the

 regions where the costs of being mismatched sre largest, and hence extreme

 regions will also be the origin of sirable migration flows. This suggests

 that extreme regions simultaneously experience large inflows and outflows of

 migrants. Of course, the the magnitude of these flows depends on the exact

 distribution of skills, on the levels of fixed and variable migration costs,

 and on the parameters of the income distributions in each of the k regions.

 It is therefore difficult to quantify the importance of this tendency

 without additional restrictions on the model.




 III. Empirical Analysis

       The theory developed in the previous section generates sharp empirical



                                         15
predictions about the relationship between regional differences in the

returns to skills and such diverse factors as the migration propensities of

individuals, the direction and composition of migration flows, and the

spatial distribution of skills. To test these predictions, we analyze the

1979-1986 waves of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY)

gecause young workers have not yet accumulated a   great   deal of job- and

location-specific human capital and because they have a long working life

remaining over which to collect returns, they should be especially

responsive to economic incentives for migration (recall the high rates of

geographic mobility reported in Table 1)

     NLSY respondents are between the ages of 14 and 22 at the time of the

first interview, and the subsequent annual interviews provide a detailed

history of each individual's labor market activity and geographic mobility,

In order to focus exclusively on internal migration, we exclude individuals

born outside the United States or ever observed to reside abroad. In order

to mitigate the impact of extraneous factors on migration flows, we also

exclude individuals who left school after 1984 or who were ever members of

the military.

     The NLSY reports each individual's state of residence at age 14 and his

state of residence at the time of each of the eight interviews,6 tecause

tracking geographic location is central to our analysis, we exclude

 individuals for whom this information is incomplete. We define as movers

 those individuals who reside in a different State in 1986 than at age 14,

 regardless of where they lived during the intervening years. Similarly,

 non-movers are those who reside in the same State in 1986 as at age 14, even



                                       16
if they lived elsewhere in between.

    We use state at age 14 as the place of origin for two reasons. First,

this maximizes the sample size because alternative definitions such as state

of residence when the individual first enters the labor market are not

available for those older respondents who had already joined the labor forte

when the survey began in 1979. Second, and more importantly, state of

residence at age 14 is likely to be exogenously determined by parental

location decisions. Alternative definitions introduce endogeneity becauae

the location at the time of labor market entry already reflects the

individual's initial decision as to where he would like to live and work.

Our definition instead exploits the fact that optimal location decisions for

parents and children need not coincide, so spatial mismatches can arise at

age 14. We focus on the subsequent migration decisiona made by young

workers as they attempt to correct these mismatches.

     Although SMSAs may better approximate local labor markets, the

preceding considerations led us to adopt states as the geographic unit of

analysis, because the NLSY does not report SMSA of residence at age 14. In

 addition, state boundaries are stable over time and create an- exhaustive

 partition of the United States, whereas SMSAs do not share these features.

      We construct four alternative measures of a worker's skills. The first

 messure is the number of years of completed education (as of 1986). The

 second measure is based on aptitude test scores. Between July and October

 1980, the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB) was

 administered to shout 94 percent of the NLSY respondents. The ASVAB

 consists of 10 tests that measure knowledge and skills in areas ranging from



                                        17
word knowledge and arithmetic reasoning to mechanical comprehension and

electronics information. The military sums the scores of four of these

tests (word knowledge, arithmetic reasoning, paragraph comprehension, and

half of the score in numeric operations) to create the Armed Forces

Qualification Test (AFQT). The AFQT is a general measure of aptitude, and

its score is standardized so that the population distribution has mean zero

and a standard deviation of one.

     The fins], two measures of worker skills are based on an individual's

average hourly wage, defined as the ratio of annual earnings to annual hours

of work. We exploit the panel aspect of the NLS? to estimate individual-

 specific fixed effects. As a result, the wage-based skill measures are

 available only for the subsample of workers who have at least two years of

 wage data.7 These wage observations need not be in consecutive years.

      The wage-based skill measures are constructed as follows, Consider the

 earnings function:



                           —                                                   (10)
                  log          $iSTATEt + 2YEAR + 3Xt + Ejjt


 where wi is individual i's hourly wage in state j in year t. The wage is

 a function of a vector of dummy variables indicating the current state of

 residence (STATE) , a vector of dummy variables indicating the year of the

  observation (YEAR) , and a vector of control variables (X) .
                                                                 The control

  variables include age, age squared, years of completed education, job

  tenure, union status, marital status, health status, metropolitan residence,

  industry, and occupation.



                                          18
    The error term in (10) depends on the state/worker match. Ve assume

that ci_17j(vi+ui). This decomposes the wage residual into rhe product of

the stock of (unobservable) person-specific human capital (v.) and the

state-specific return to human capital (ii)    plus   a random error term


(nu) .    Differences   in the return to human capital across states generate

heteroakedasticity in the earnings function.

     Because we have at least two obaeriationa on hourly wage rates for each

individual in the sample, we can compute estimatee of the v.. If all atates

paid the same return to skills, the v. could be estimated by simply adding

peraon-apecific intercepts to the regression. However, because skills are

rewarded differently across statea, we add separate intercepts for each

worker/state pair in the sample. The error specification implies that these

worker/state intercepts are proportional acroaa states (i.e., that          is

proportional to 'ii). Note also that the vector of control variables (X)

should include only those characteristics that vary over the sample period.

Differences in earninga due to person-specific factors that are not time-

varying (auch as race and aex) are captured by the v..

      The first wage-based measure of worker skills is obtained by estimating

 (10) using data differenced from person-apecific means, and then calculating

 for each individual his average reaidual (appropriately weighted for state

 of residence).8 This procedure yields point eatimates that are identical to

 thoae that would reault from adding thouaands of worker/state intercepts to

 the regression. This skill measure, which we call the "standardized wage,"

 repreaents the number of standard deviations that a worker's hourly wage is

 above or below the mean wage for workers with similar demographic



                                         19
characteristics.

         The second wage-based messure of skills does not control for

demographic characteristics. This "unstsndardized wage" is calculated as

described above, except that the control vector X is omirred from equation

(10) .     The unstsndardized wage measures the number of standard devistions

that a worker's wage is sbove or below the stste sversge, without

controlling for sny observsble fsctors.

         Given our ssmple selection criteria, some messure of worker skills is

available for a total of 6666 individuals in the NLSY. However, not all

individuals report esch of the four different skill measures. AFQT scores

are available for 6510 individuals, and only 5182 individuals report the

necessary information to construct standardized and unstandardized wages.

The empirical results presented below are based on the maximum sample size

possible for each skill measure, Virtually identical results were obtained

when the empirical analysis was performed on the subsample of 5064

 individusls who reported all four skill measures.

          Table 2 presents means and standard deviations of the four skill

 measures and selected demographic charsoteristics. The summary statistics

 are provided for the entire sample, as well as separately for movers and

 non-movers. On average, movers are more skilled than non-movers, regardless

 of how skills are measured,

          Tsble 3 reveals that, although the four skill measures represent

 different aspects of ability, they are highly correlated across individuals.

 The top panel presents the matrix of correlation coefficients for chess

 variables, and the bottom panel presents partial correlations that first



                                            20
control for age, sex and race. The correlations among the skill measures

are uniformly strong and positive, and the correlations ate not appteciably

weaket within age/race/sex groups.

     Before proceeding with mote formal statistical teats, Tables 4 and 5

display the patterns of interstate migration that emerge from the NLSY data.

Table 4 describes out-migration from selected states (the 25 states with

the largest sample sizes) .   The first column gives the number of persons in

our sample who resided in each state as of age 14, and the second column

reports the frsotion of these "natives" who left the state by 1986. The

remaining columns describe how the skills of movers differ from the skills

of those who remained in the state. In order to facilitate interstate

 comparisons, we normalize the mean skill level in each state to be zero.

 Thus a weighted average of the skills of movers and stayers equals zero in

 each state.

      There is substantial interstate variation in the abilities of out-

 migrants. For example, Massachusetts exports its most able workers.

 Compared to the overall state average, migrants from Massachusetts score

 about .4 higher on the AFQT, have completed more than an additional year of

 schooling, and command higher wage rates. On the other hand, states such as

 Minnesota and West Virginia export young workers who are below-average in

 all skill measures.

      Table 5 provides a complimentary description of in-migration. The

  first oolumn gives the number of persons residing in each state as of 1986,

  and the second column reports the fraction of these individuals who lived

  elsewhere at age 14. The remaining columns present the average skill levels



                                         21
of in-migrants, measured relative to the mean skill level of natives in the

migrant's state of origin.9

     As was the case with out-migrants, the data reveal substantial

variation in the skills of in-migrants. For instance, the average person

migrating to Connecticut baa one more year of education than the average

native in the migrant's home atate (as well as higher AFQT scores and wage

ratea) .   This   does not neceaaarily mean that Connecticut is importing highly

skilled workers in an absolute sense, but rather that Connecticut attracts

young workers who are more able than the average native in those atatea that

export workera to Connecticut.

      The model preaented in Section II implies that the equilibrium sorting

of skills across states ia largely determined by the parameters r. ,    the

state-specific returns to skills. In the context of the model, relative

skill prices are proportional to the extent of earnings inequality, and so

we use the standard deviation of the wage distribution within each state to

measure the returns to skills. Because of the small sample sizes for some

states in the NLSY data, we use samples of male, private sector workers from

 the 5/100 1980 Census microdata to estimate wage dispersion within each

 state.

      We construct two measures of wage dispersion. The first is the

 standard deviation of the log hourly wage, which we call the

 "unstandardized" dispersion in wages. The alternative "standardized"

 measure of dispersion is the root mean square error from state-specific log

 wage regressions. This measure represents an estimate of the residual wage

 variation that remains after controlling for observable demographic



                                           22
characteristics. The control variables in these wage regressions include

education, age, age aquared, and dummy variables indicaring marital status,

immigrant status, and metropolitan residence.

     The state-specific measure of unstandardized wage dispersion ranges

from .579 (Maine) to .745 (Alaska), wirh a mean of .654 and a standard

deviation of .032. The standardized measure of wage dispersion has a mean

of .339 and a standard deviation of .040. The standardized and

unstandardized measures of wage dispersion are highly correlated across

states, with a correlation coefficient of .895. Southern and western states

tend to display greater wage dispersion than the rest of the country.

     According to the self-selection model, migration decisions are

motivated by an initial mismatch between workers and states. The larger the

initial mismatch for a given worker, the more likely he is to leave his

native state. Skilled workers are more likely to leave states where skill

prices are relatively low, even though mean earnings in the state are

 sufficiently high to retain other workers. Conversely, unskilled workers

 are more likely to leave states where wage dispersion, and hence skill

 prices, are relatively high. The theory thus predicts that the correlation

 between skill levels and out-migration rates should be more positive in

 states with little earnings inequality than in states with a large amount of

 dispersion.

      To test this implication, we esrimate probit models where the dependent

 variable is a dummy identifying those individuals who eventually left their

 native state, and the independent variables include a measure of skills as

 well as dummy variables for race (white, black, or Mispanic) and sex.



                                        23
Separate probita are estimated for each of the four alternative skill

measures. In order to allow the magnitude of the initial mismatch to

influence the probability of out-migration, we segregate the sample

according to state of origin. In particular, we divide the sample into four

approximately equal-sized partitions, with the grouping based on the rank

order of the unstandardized wage dispersion in each individual's native

statej° Through the use of interaction terms, we allow the effect of

skills on out-migration rates to differ according to which state group the

individual resided in at age 14.

     Table 6 reports the resulting estimates. For each skill variable in

each of the sample partitions, the table presents the probit coefficient and

the implied effect of a one standard deviation change in skills on the out-

migration rate, computed at sample means. The first column reports these

statistics for the quarter of the sample who, at age 14, resided in states

ranking lowest in unstandardized wage dispersion. The remaining columns

present the same information for individuals originating in states with

progressively more wage dispersion.

      The positive coefficients indicate that out-migration rates sre higher

 for the more skilled, regardless of the origin state. However, the results

 also suggest that this correlation is stronger in states with less wage

 dispersion (columns 1 and 2) than in states with more wage dispersion

 (columns 3 and 4). For example, a one standard deviation increase in

 education raises by about 4.8 percentsge points the probability that a

 worker leaves a state from the lowest wage dispersion group, while the same

 change in education has s much smaller impact (1.5 percentage points) on the



                                        24
out-migration rate of individuals from states in the highest dispersion

group. The same pattern emerges for the other skill measures. Because low

levels of wage dispersion indicate low returns to skills, the results

confitm the theoretical prediction that high ability workers are more likely

to leave states with relatively low skill prices.

     The theoretical model also predicts that skilled workers move to states

with greater wage dispersion and unskilled workers move to states with less

wage dispersion. We test this implication by viewing the change in wage

dispersion between the native (age 14) state and the current (1986) state as

a choice variable. For individuals currently residing in their native

state, this change is zero. Among movers, the mean change in the

unstandardized wage dispersion is .012, while the mean change in the

standardized dispersion is .013. Therefore, on average, the young workers

in the NLSY migrate to states with greater wage dispersion. The self-

selection model predicts that changes in wage dispersion should be

positively related to skill levels.

      We begin resting this hypothesis by estimating least-squares

 regressions of the change in wage dispersion on race and sex dummies and, in

 separate regressions, the four alternative meesures of skills. Table 7

 presents the estimated coefficients of the skill variables. For

 readability, the coefficients have been multiplied by 100. The regressions

 reported in the first two columns were run on the entire sample including

 non-movers. Regardless of whether the dependent variable is defined using

 the unstandardized or standardized measure of wage dispersion, there is a

 strong and statistically significant positive relationship between each of



                                        25
the skill varisbles and the change in wage dispersion.

     The last two columns of Table 7 present similar estimates for the

subsample of movers. The coefficients are uniformly larger than those

obtained from the full sample. Evidently, skills endowments have an

important influence on the direction of internal migration flows. Moreover,

these effects are economically important. For instance, a one standard

deviation increase in schooling raises the change in wage dispersion by

about 25 percent, and a comparable increase in the AFQT score yields an even

larger rise.

     An alternative way of investigating patterns of internal migration is

to model the direction but not the magnitude of the change in wage

dispersion. Each migrant has two choices: move to a state with less wage

dispersion than the native state, or move to a state with greater

dispersion. This discrete representation of migration patterns may be

superior to the continuous dependent variable used in Table 7 if our

measures of wage dispersion are plagued by substantial measurement error.

     Table 8 presents the results of this alternative specification. Probir

models are estimated on the subsample of movers, with the dependent variable

identifying those workers who moved to states with greater wage dispersion

than their native state. The estimated coefficients confirm the results of

Table 7 in that there is a strong positive relationship between skill levels

 and the probability of moving to a state with increased wage dispersion.

      The theoretical model also implies that persons locate across states

 according to a rank ordering of their abilities. In the absence of mobility

 costs, the state with the highest returns to skills attracts the most able



                                        26
workers, whereas the state with the second highest returns to skills

attracts workers who are less able than those in the first state but more

able than those in the state with the third highest returns to skills, and

so on. Put differently, ranking states by the average skills of their

residents should produce the same outcome as ranking states by the extent of

wage dispersion. Allowing for mobility costs dampens but does not

fundamentally alter this pattern.

     An empirical test of this implication can be conducted by estimsting an

ordered probability model of en individual's state of residence in 1986.

Before doing this, however, it is important to determine whether the initial

distribution of persons across states is random with respect to skills.

Table 9 reports correlation toefficients between skill levels and wage

 dispersion in the nstive state. There is a strong negstive correlation

 between the average skills of natives and wage dispersion. In other words,

 states with more wage dispersion tend to start out with less skilled youth.

 If mobility costs are sizable, it is unlikely that migrant self-selection

 will offset this initial distribution of skills and yield a positive

 relationship between skill levels and wage dispersion in the destination

 stste. To control for the nonrandom initial distribution of skills, we

 normalize mean skills among natives in each state to be zero. By

 construction, these normalized skill measures are uncorrelated with wage

 dispersion in the native state (or, for that matter, with any other

 characteristic of the native state)

       In order to ease the computational burden, we once again divide the

  sample into four approximately equal-sized partitions, but this time the



                                        27
grouping is based on the rank order of the unstandardized wage dispersion in

each individual's 1986 state of residence.11 The state groups are defined

so that group 1 has the lowest wage dispersion and group 4 has the highest.

In the absence of mobility costs, individuals sort perfectly into these four

groups on the basis of their labor market skills. Let v. represent a latent

variable measuring individual i's skill level. The self-selection model

generates the following equilibrium sorting of workers by skill level:



                                               1 if v. <
                                                           "1

           Choice of location in 1986 —
                                               2 if "1 <
                                                           vi   <
                                                                          (11)
                                                    —               —
                                               3 if v <
                                                     2
                                                           v.1 < v3
                                               4ifv 3 <v.i

As can be seen from equation (6) in Section II, the cutoff values

and v3 depend on the parameters of the regional earnings distributions.

     Let     denote an observable proxy for the skills of person i, and let

F. be a vector of race and sex dummy variables. Parameterize each

individual's overall skill level as v_a1Z+o2F+e where e. represents

skills not captured by our skill measures. If unobserved skills are

normally distributed, then the equilibrium sorting is described by an

 ordered probit model.12 Maximum likelihood estimation yields estimates ci

 a1 and a2 as well as two of the three cutoff values (one of the thresholds

 is arbitrarily normalized to zero). The self-selection model predicts that

 more skilled workers locate in regions with higher returns to skills, and

 this implies that the coefficient ml should be positive.

      Table 10 reports the estimation results. The skill measures used in


                                          28
the first and third columns are normalized relative to the state of origin

(in order to control for the initial skill distribution), and the

coefficients on these variables are positive and statistically significant.

These results confirm the prediction of the self-selection model. However,

empirical support for the theory disappears when the skill measures are not

normalized, as in the second and fourth columns of Table 10. This reflects

the dominant role played by the initial nonrandom distribution of skills

across states.




TV. Conclusion

     This paper has analyzed the internal migration of young workers in the

United States. Our research is motivated by the realization that migrants

are not randomly selected from the population. We therefore adapt the Roy

model of self-selection in order to study internal migration. This approach

 generates new theoretical insights, raises questions ignored by previous

 research, and simplifies the empirical analysis of multi-directional

 migration flows.

      The self-selection model provides s framework for simultaneously

 analyzing questions related to the size, direction, and skill composition of

 internal migration flows. Income-maximizing behavior generates an

 equilibrium sorting of skills in which regions offering high rewards for

 skills attract skilled workers and unskilled workers move to regions with

 low skill prices. Because skilled workers currently residing in regions

 with low skill prices and unskilled workers living in regions with high

 skill prices are mismatched spatially, these workers are likely to migrate.



                                        29
Migrants are expected to relocate in regions where the returns to skills are

more compatible with their skill endowments. Our model extends the earlier

Hicks-Sjaastad framework by emphasizing the role of skill prices in

allocating workers across regions.

     Our analysis of data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth

suggests that the self-selection model provides useful insights into the

internal migration process. Individuals are more likely to migrate the

greater is the mismatch between their skill endowments and the returns paid

to skills in their native state. Moreover, the direction and skill

composition of internal migration flows seem to be guided by comparative

advantage, Skilled workers tend to move to states with greater wage

dispersion than their native state, whereas unskilled workers are more

likely to move to states with less dispersion.




                                        30
                                      FOOTNOTES

      *This research was funded by the U.S. Department of Labor. We     thank

Dan   Hamermesh for helpful commenta.
       1.    We do not mean to imply that internal migration research ceased

altogether. A large number of studies have appeared since the mid-1970a

which provide useful extensions of the empirical literature (e.g., [2,7,8]).

       2. The sample will be described in greater detail in Section III.

       3. This assumption ignores the possibility that persona born in region

i are distinctly different, on average, from persona born in region j ,        and

therefore the income distributions should also be subscripted for region of

birth. The main results of our model are unaffected by this complication.

       4. If the dollar costs of moving from region i to region j are given

by 0ij' then time-equivalent costs are given by the ratio 0.1w.. We assume

 that this ratio is "small" in deriving equation (8)

        5. It is not difficult to allow mobility costs to vary across

 individuals. In the simpler two-region model with a normal distribution of

 skills, it can be shown chat introducing variable mobility costa does not

 alter any of the results if earnings and mobility costs are uncorrelated, or

 if the variance of mobility costs is small relative to the variance of

 earnings.

        6.    The District of Columbia is considered to be a separate state.

        7. In constructing the wage-based skill measures, we restricted the

 sample as follows. Observations with computed hourly wage rates of less

 than $50 or greater than $100 were considered outliers and excluded. We

  also excluded observarions for which any of the following variables were



                                            31
missing: industry, occupation, job tenure, health atatua, years of

completed education, school enrollment status, marital status, union status,

and whether the respondent resided in a metropolitan ares.

     8. We estimate the parameters in (10), including the v, by a two-step

procedure that corrects for heteroskedasticiry across states. In the first

step, equation (10) is estimated by ordinary least squares and state-

specific estimates of wage dispersion are calculated from the residuals.

The second step uses these estimated variances to reestimate (10) by

generalized least squares.

     9. We measure the skills of in-migrants relative to the state of

origin because there exist sizable regional differences in mean AFQT scores,

years of education, and earnings.

     10. The partitions are roughly but not exactly the same size because

all individuals from the same native state were grouped into the same

partition. Grouping states according to their standardized (rather than

unstandardized) wage dispersion produces similar empirical results.

      11. This contrasts with Table 6, where the grouping was based on wage

dispersion in each individual's native state. The aggregation of states

 into four groups insures that adequate samples are observed in each region

 and also simplifies estimation of the ordered probit model.

      12. For a discussion of ordered response models, see Maddala [16, pp.

 46-49]




                                       32
                                    REFERENCES

1. 3. M. Abowd and R. B. Freeman, Eds. , "Immigration, Trade, and the Labor
Market," University of Chicago Press, Chicago (1991).

2. A. P. Eartel, The migration decision: What role does job mobility play?,
American Economic Review, 69, 775-786 (1979).

3.  G. 3. Borjas, Self-selection and the earnings of immigrants, American
Economic Review, 77, 531-553 (1987).

4. G. .1. Borjaa, "Friends or Strangers: The Impact of Immigrants on the
U.S. Economy," Basic Books, New York (1990).

5,  5. Eowles, Migration as investment: Empirical tests of the human capital
approach to geographic mobility, Review of Economics and Statistics, 52,
356-362 (1970).

6.  .1. DaVanzo, "Why Families Move: A Model of the Ceographic Mobility of
Married Couples," Report R-1972-DOL, Rand Corporation, Santa Monica (1976).

7. 3. DaVanzo, Repeat migration in the United States: Who moves back and
who moves on?, Review of Economics and Statistics, 65, 552-559 (1983).

8.  G. S. Fields, Place to place migration: Some new evidence, Review of
Economics and Statistics, 61, 21-32 (1979).

9. M. 3. Greenwood, An analysis of the determinants of geographic labor
mobility in the United States, Review of Economics and Statistics, 51, 189-
194 (1969).

 10. M. 3. Greenwood, Research on internal migration in the United States: A
 survey, Journal of Economic Literature, 13, 397-433 (1975,.

 11.  M. 3. Greenwood, Humap migration: Theory, models, and empirical
 studies, Journal of Resional Science, 25, 521-544 (1985).

 12. J. 3. Heckman, Sample selection bias as a specification error,
 Econometrics, 47, 153-161 (1979).

 13.  3. 3. Heckman and G, Sedlacek, Heterogeneity, aggregation, and market
 wage functions: An empirical model of self-selection in the labor market,
 Journal of Political Economy, 93, 1077-1125 (1985).

     14. 3. R. Hicks, "The Theory of Wages," Macmillian, London (1932).

     15.  L. Long, "Migration and Residential Mobility in the United States,"
     Russell Sage Foundation, New York (1988).

     16. G. S. Maddala, "Limited Dependent and Qualitative Variables in


                                           33
Econometrics, Cambridge University Press, New York (1983).

17. J. Mincer, Family migration decisions, Journal of Political Economy,
86, 749-775 (1978).
18. RA. Nakosteen and M. Zimmer, Migration and income: The question of -
self-selection,   Southern Economic Journal, 46, 840-851 (1980).

19.  .3. Roback, wages, rents, and amenities: Differences among workers and
regions, Economic Inguiry, 26, 23-42 (1988).

20.  C. Robinson and N. Tomes, Self-selection and interprovincial migration
in Canada, Canadian Journal of Economjts, 15, 474-502 (1982).

21.  A. D. Roy, Some thoughts on the distribution of earnings, Oxford
Economic Payers, 3, 135-146 (1951).

22. A. Schwartz, Interpreting the effect of distance on migration, Journal
of Political Economy, 81, 1153-1169 (1973).

23.  L. A . Sjaastad, The costs and returns of human migration, Journal of
Political Economy, 70, 80-93 (1962).




                                         34
                                                                V
                                 74?3            '1514




Figure 1. Residential location in a S-region model, with zero
           mobility costs.
p12 c31-032)      p2-p3-C32            p3-p4+C34     p4-p5-(C34-035)   v
                                                          '?514



    Figure 2. Residential loration in a 5-region model for persons
               born in region 3, with positive mobility roars.
                                      TABLE 1

                           INTERSTATE MIGRATION RATES
                     NATIONAL LONGITUDINAL SURVEY OF YOUTH




                          Whites                  Blacks             Hispanics

                     Males    Females     Males        Females    Males     Females

% Living in          27.70     32.22       25.86        24.89      20.45     26.7'
Different State
Than at Birth

                     18.79     23.18       15.11        15.63      12.66     12.67
%    Living   in
Different State
Than at Age 14

% Living in           18.06     20.60      16.07         13.65       8.65     10.21
Different State
Than in 1979

%    Moving Across
States.Per Year:

      1979-1980        7.56        7.73     6.95           5.73      3.59      3.76

      1980-1981        6.55        7.20     7.79           4.79      4.85      5.67

      1981-1982        8.70        6.68     5.88           4.48      4.85      4.16

      1982-1983        6.04        7.40     6.00           5.73      3.38      454

      1983-1984        5.19        5.77         3.36       4.06      2.95      2.84

      1984-1985        5.30        4.82     4.20           4.17      3.38      3.21


       1985-1986       6.26        9.25         5.16       5.10      3.38      3.59



    Sample Size        1772        2097         834        960       474       529
                                       TABLE 2

                              MEANS OF VARIABLES
                      (standard deviationsin parentheses)

                       Overall Sample            Movers     Non-Movers

Age                           24.85                25.13      21.79
                              (2.23)               (2.21)     (2.23)

Percent Female                53.80                57.53      52.96

Percent Black                 26.91                22.59      27.88

Percent Hispanic              15.05                10.39      16.09

Percent Movers                18.33               100.00        0.00

Length of Time in              5.90                 3.27        6.50
Current State (yrs)           (2.20)               (2.70)      (5.59)

Average Real Wage              5.63                 5.79        5.59
(1986 dollars)                (3.10)               (3.24)      (3.07)

AFQT Score                    -0.40                -0.21       -0.44
                              (0.89)               (0.93)      (0.66)

Years of Education            12.03                12.36       11.95
(in 1986)                     (1.98)               (2.18)      (1.92)

Unstandardized Wage           -0.10                -0.06       -0.11
                              (0.78)               (0.79)      (0.78)
Standardized Wage             -0.19                -0.10       -0.21
                              (090)                (0.89)      (0.91)

Sample Size                    6666                 1222        5444
                                   TABLE 3

                        CORRELATION OF SKILL MEASURES
                 (asymptotic standard errors in parentheses)


                   AFQT Score     Education     Unstandardized Standardized
                                                      Wage           Wage
AFQT Score              1.00


Education               0.584        1.00
                        (.008)

Unstandardized          0.355         0.307          1.00
    Wage                (.013)        (.013)

Standardized            0.408         0.331          0.820            1.00
    Wage                 (.012)       (.012)         (.005)




                     PARTIAL CORRELATIONS OF SKILL MEASURES
                         CONTROLLING FOR AGE, SEX, RACE
                  (asymptotic standard errors in parenthesea)

                    AFQT Score    Education      Unstsndardized Standardized
                                                       Wage           Wage
AFQT Score               1.00



Education                0.586        1.00
                         (.008)

Unsrsndardized           0.318        0.289           1.00
    Wage                 (.013)       (.013)

 Standardized            0.318        0.257           0.940            1.00
     Wage                (.013)       (.013)          (.002)




 NOTE: Partial correlations are obtained by computing simple correlations
 between the residuals from regressions of each skill mesaure on age, sex, and
 race variables.
                                    TABLE 4

OUT-MIGRATION RATES AND AVERAGE SKILLS OF OUT-MIGRANTS RELATIVE TO NATIVES IN
                    THEIR STATE OF ORIGIN, SELECTED STATES

                                                                 Unstand.        Stand.
State                N      Rate       AFQT        Education       Wage           Wage

Alabama             246      .191      0.089         0.071        -
                                                                    .011         -   .100
California          661      .097      -   .013      -    .049    - .116         -   .079
Colorado            122      .254      0.120         0.233        -
                                                                    .152         -   .006
Connecticut         119      .193      0.180         0.841        0.163          0.145
Florida             240      .204      0.151         -    .058    0.020          0.085
Georgia             283      .113      0.264         0.386        0.045          0.474
Illinois            195      .221      0.376         0.678        0.160          0.116
Indiana             118      .271      0.298         1.092        0.250          0.237
Massachusetts       113      .124      0.434         1.303        0.180          0.389
Michigan            318      .255      0.161         0.465        - .007         0.098
Minnesota           148      .223      -    .111      -   .181    - .205         - .307
Missouri            177      .254      0.074         0.021        - .111         - .040
                    258      .233      0.370         0.521        0.079          - .112
New Jersey
New York            412      .201      0.122          -   .030    0.009          - .038

North Carolina      264      .167      0.159          1.000        -      .073   0.167
Ohio                411      .180      0.088          0.207       0.081          0.131
Oklahoma            103      .155      -    .245      0.919        -      .101   -   .209
Pennsylvania        309      .133      0.122          0.670       0.071          0.060
South Carolina      171      .082      0.394          1.091       0.306          0.609
Tennessee           140      .136       -   .001      -   .062    0.034          0.391
Texas               456      .096      0.307          0.196        0.060         0.023
Virginia             160     .138      0.383          0.675        0.102         0.040
Washington            84     .214      0.234          0.040        -      .134   -   .139
West Virginia        114     .228       -   .212      -   .162        -
                                                                          .143   -   .172
Wisconsin            256     .125       0.219         0.355        0.114         0.025

ALL STATES         6666      .183       0.144         0.282        0.027         0.062


NOTE: N equals the number of respondents residing in a given state at 14 years
of age. The out-migration rste equals the fraction of reapondents who were
living in a different state in 1986 than they were at age 14. The reported
means of AFQT, education and the standardized and unstandardized wages in this
table are the differences between the mean of each skill variable for out-
migrants and the overall mean of the skill variable for all residents of the
state at age 14.
                                     TABLE 5

 IN-MIGRATION RATES AND AVERAGE SKILLS OF IN-MIGRANTS RElATIVE TO NATIVES IN
                    THEIR STATE OF ORIGIN, SELECTED STATES

                                                                        Unstand.        Stand.
State                  N     Rate       AFQT           Education          Wage           Wage

Alabama               216    .078       -   .014         -   .557        0.053          0.289
California            709    .158       0.145            0.385           0.070          0.167
Colorado              135    .326       0.462            0.317           -       .038   C.085
Connecticut           112    .143       0.429            1.177           C.467          0.539
Florida               314    .392       0.115            -    .165       0.026          0.088
                      309    .188       0.327            0.991           0.316          0.180
Georgia
Illinois              190    .200       - .095,          0.214           0.026          0.087
Indiana               101    .149       0.103             -   .502       0.026          0.128
Massachusetts         108    .083       0.094            0.600           0.247          0.035
                      258    .081       0,212            0.818           0.192          0.169
Michigan
Minnesota             131    .122        -      .001      0.466           0.078         0.236
Missouri              162    .185       0.012             0.282           0.130         0.182
New Jersey            230    .139        -.062            0.335           -      .111    - .020
New York              386    .148        0.174            0.696           -      .230    - .066
                                                          -.216           0.007          - .038
North Carolina        258    .147        0.020
                                                                                         - .284
Ohio                  366    .079        -.114               -   .412        -   .477
                                                                                         - .008
Oklahoma              108    .194        0.671            1.157              -.185
                                                                                         - .089
                      314    .146        0.157            0.246              -   .203
Pennsylvsnia
South Carolina        176    .108        0.418            0.323              0.344       0.272
Tennessee             135     .104       -      .048     -1.186              0.511       0.676
Texas                 534     .228       0.051               0.201           0.075       0.111
                      182     .242          -
                                                .215         -.055           -
                                                                                 .024    -   .040
Virginia                                                                                     .169
                        89    .258       0.251               0.343           -   .176    -
Washington
                        97    .093       0.145               -.073           0.620       0.672
West Virginia
Wisconsin              249    .100          0.302            0.316           -   .300    -   .008

                      6666    .183          0.144            0.282           0.027       0.062
ALL STATES


 NOTE: N equals the number of respondents residing in a given state in 1986.
 The in-migration rate equals the fraction of respondents who were living in a
 different state at age 14 than they were in 1986. The reported means of AFO.T,
 education and the standardized and unstandardized wages in this table ate the
 differences between the mean of each skill variable for in-migrants and the
 overall mean of the skill variable for all residents of their state of origtn
 (state at sge 14).
                                        TABLE 6

                      THE EFFECT OF SKILLS ON MIGRATION RATES
                          IN MOVER/NON-MOVER PROZIT MODELS
                      (asymptotic t-statistics in parentheses)


                                  Unstandardized wage dispersion in
                                      state of residence at age 14:

                             First          Second       Third            Fourth
Skill Measure               Quartile       Quartile     Quartile      Quartile

AFQT Score                     .1172         .1874         .0700           .0976
                               (2.65)        (4.80)        (1.71)          (1.92)

Effect of One S.D.             .0283         .0465         .0166           .0234
Change in AFQT on
Migration Rate
Education                      .0868          .0636        .0090           .0288
                               (4.55)        (3.86)        (0.55)          (1.33)
Effect of One S.D.             .0482          .0347        .0047           .0152
Change in Education
on Migration Rate

Untandardized                  .1113          .0355        .0114           .0252
    Wage                       (2.16)         (0.74)       (0.23)          (0.40)

Effect of One S.D.             .0241          .0075        .0024           .0053
Change in Un. Wage
on Migration Rate

Standardized                   .0987          .0876        .0181           .0857
     Wage                      (2.18)         (2.10)       (0.41)          (1.62)

Effect of One S.D.             .0247          .0218        .0044           .0213
Change in St. Wage
on   Migration Rate

NOTE: The probit model also includes      race and sex dummy variables.
                                      TABLE 7

                 THE EFFECT OF SKILLS ON THE CHOICE OF OESTINATIOH
                            (t-statistics in parentheses)


Dependent Variable: (Difference in wage dispersion between state of residence
                        in 1986 and at age 14)

                            Entire Sample                   Movers Only
                      Change in       Change in       Change in       Change in
                       Unstand.         Stand.         Unstand.         Stand.
Skill Measure         Dispersion      Dispersion      Dispersion      Dispersion

AFQT Score/100           .1224          .1651            .4197          .5545
                       (4.52)         (4.88)           (3.08)         (3.45)

Education/lOO            .0479          .0580            .1454          .1720
                       (4.41)         (4.27)           (2.81)         (2.68)

Unstandardized           .0862          .0860            .3779          .3725
  Wage/100             (2.62)         (2.09)           (2.34)         (1.85)

Standardized             .0735          .0732            .2983          .2743
  Wage/lOO             (2.63)         (2.09)           (2.06)         (1.55)




HOTE: The regressions also include race and sex dummy variables
                                   TAZLE 8

      THE EFFECT OF SKILLS ON THE CHOICE OF DESTINATION (FROBIT MODELS)
                   (asymptotic t-statistics in parentheses)


Dependent Variable: Dummy variable indicating whether wage dispersion
                         increased between state of residence at age 14 and
                        state of residence in 1986

                                       Movers Only

                         Change in                        Change in
                      Unstandardized                     Standardized
Skill Measure            Dispersion                       Dispersion

AFQT Score                 .0755                              .0995
                         (1.69)                             (2.23)

Education                  .0377                               0418
                         (2.21)                             (2.45)

Unstandardized             .2159                              .1134
    Wage                 (3.98)                             (2.13)

Standardized               .1346                              .0846
    Wage                 (2.86)                             (1.82)




NOTE: These probit models also include race and sex dummy variables
                                    TAELE 9

      CORRELATION BETWEEN SKILLS AND WAGE DISPERSION IN STATE OF ORIGIN
                 (asymptotic standard errors in parentheses)


                  Unstandardized               Standardized
                     Dispersion                 Dispersion

AFQT Score              -   .2072                   -   .2162
                        (.0131)                     (.0121)

Education               -   .0782                   -   .0884
                        (.0122)                     (.0122)

Unstandardized          -   .0328                   -
                                                        .0367
    Wage                (.0139)                     (.0139)

Standardized            -
                            .0835                   -.1040
    Wage                (.0138)                     (.0138)
                                      TABLE 10

                 THE EQUILIBRIUM SORTING OF SKILLS ACROSS STATES
                     (asymptotic t-statistics in parentheses)

Dependent Variable: Quartile of state in 1986, where states are ordered by
                 their wage dispersion

                            Unstandardized                Standardized
Skill Measure                 Dispersion                   Dispersion

AFQT score,                  .1652         .               .1464
differenced from           (9.62)                        (8.58)
mean score in
state of origin

AFQT score                   .            - .0922          .          - .1127
                                        (-5.48)                     (-6.69)

Education,                   .0294         .               .0179
differenced from           (4.18)                        (2.61)
mean in state
of origin

Education                     .           - .0209          .          - .0124
                                        (-3.09)                     (-1.80)

Unstandardized                .0730                         .0638
Wage, differenced          (3.67)                        (3.18)
from mean in state
of origin

Unstandardized                .            .0409                       .0254
Wage                                     (2.07)                      (1.28)


Standardized                  .0523            .            .0314
Wage, differenced           (3.05)                        (1.82)
from mean in state
of origin

Standardized                     .        - .0281           .         - .0827
Wage                                    (-1.67)                     (-4.90)


NOTE: These coefficients are obtained from ordered probit models that also
include race and sex dummy variables.
