                            NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




     NEAR-RATIONALITY, HETEROGENEITY AND AGGREGATE CONSUMPTION




                                     Ricardo J. Caballero




                                  Working Paper No. 4035




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  March 1992




I am very grateful to Phillip Cagan, Jordi Gall and Michael Gavin for their comments, and to
the National Science Foundation, Sloan Foundation, and NBER (John Olin Fellowship) for
financial support. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Economic fluctuations.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                             NBER Working Paper #4035
                                                             March 1992




     NEAR-RATIONALITY, HETEROGENEITY AND AGGREGATE CONSUMPTION




                                          ABSTRACT


       The simple permanent income model provides a good description of the medium-long

run behavior of aggregate non-durables consumption, while it fails in describing its short run

behavior. In this paper I present a non-representative agent model with near-rational

microeconomic units that simultaneously explains the observed excess smoothness of

consumption to wealth innovations, the excess sensitivity of consumption to lagged income

changes, as well as small conditional asymmetries found in the data. In spite of the presence

of large non-diversifiable idiosyncratic uncertainty, the estimated dollar equivalent utility cost

of the microeconomic near-rational strategy required to explain the aggregate facts is only

0.26y percent of consumption per year, where y is the coefficient of relative risk aversion.




                                                            Ricardo J. Caballero
                                                            NBER
                                                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                            and Columbia University
                                     1 INTRODUCTION
    It is well known that, when applied to nondurables consumption, the simplest form
of the Permanent Income (PIH) model (Hall 1978) does not survive formal hypothesis
testing. Simply put, there is more serial correlation on aggregate consumption than what
is implied by the simplest PIH model. Alternatively, in the income space, there is excess
smoothness to income innovations and excess sensitivity to lagged income (Deaton 1987,
Campbell and Deaton 1989).2
    Figure 1 plots the actual path of the logarithm of postwar U.S. quarterly aggregate
nondurables consumption (dashed line) and the path implied by a simple PIH model (solid
line) for the period 1954:1—1989:4; both series are per capita and in deviation from their
deterministic trends.3 This figure suggests that the simple PIll model describes well the
medium-long run stochastic behavior of consumption, but that its description of short
run dynamics is not so accurate.
   Cochrane (1989) takes the point of Figure 1 one step further. Essentially, he feeds the
area between the two curves into a representative agent utility function and concludes
that the economic departure between the two paths is negligible.4 In his words, "...high
frequency deviations like lagged responses or failure to adjust consumption immediately
in response to information announcements have especially low utility costs. But it is
precisely the exact timing of the use of information and the exact timing of consumption
changes that have been the focus of empirical work and the source of rejections since Hall
(1978) and Hansen and Singleton (1983)..."
    As Cochrane (1989) recognizes, however, his near rationality argument does not nec-
essarily apply to non-representative agent models. One of the key elements in his cal-
culations is that fluctuations in the representative agent's consumption level are small,
which does not hold for individual consumers if non-diversifiable idiosyncratic uncer-

    'In this paper I do not address the asset pricing failure of Pill type models.
    3The logarithm of per capita PIll consumption corresponds to the logarithm of per/capita disposable
income1 except for a constant and a deterministic trend, which are left unconstrained (i.e., the figure
does not capture deterministic discrepancies). This approximation of wealth is justified by the fact that
(detrended) per/capita disposable income follows a process very close to a random walk.
    4This is an oversimplification of Cochrane's argument. He derives the utility loss under a wide variety
of alternatives and shows that the second order nature of the loss stems from the representative agent's
first order conditions and the actual volatility of aggregate consumption.

                                                    2
                                   Figure 1
                   U.S. Aggregate Nandurables Consumption
                               1954:1—1989:4

      0
      C

      (0

      C

C     q
      C
0
4-)
a.    N
E     P
Ce)
      C
C
a
C)    C
'I-   P
      C
a
a) N
a P
   7
      P
      7
      cc
      P
      C
       I 54   58   62    66      70          74   78   82   86   90
                                      time
tainty is significant. Yet, the idea of near-rationality — now at the microeconomic level
— seems realistic. In particular, Akerlof and Yellen's (1985) version of it; which in this
context means that an individual does not adjust his consumption level continuously,
but waits until the departure between his actual and PIH consumption levels is "large."
This defines the purpose of the paper: To study whether plausible combinations of ml-
croeconomic near-rationality and non-diversifiable idiosyncratic uncertainty, can generate
aggregate dynamics consistent with actual U.S. consumption data.
    The empirical section proceeds in two steps: It first estimates a non-representative
agent version of an Akerlof-Yellen type model, without imposing the constraint that
individual consumers' utility losses be small; and asks whether such model can account
for the short-run behavior of aggregate consumption. It then goes back to the initial
motivation of microeconomic consumption policies, and asks whether the utility losses
implied by the estimates are indeed small. The answer to these two questions turn out to
be affirmative. First, the model simultaneously explains the observed excess smoothness
of consumption to wealth innovations and the excess sensitivity of consumption to lagged
income changes. It also explains small conditional asymmetries found in the data: in good
times consumers respond more promptly to positive than to negative wealth shocks, while
the opposite is true in bad times. And second, the estimated dollar equivalent utility
cost of the near-rational microeconomic strategy is only 0.267 percent of consumption
per year, where 7 is the coefficient of relative risk aversion.
   Section 2 presents the microeconomic model and its connection with aggregate out-
comes. The results are presented in Section 3, and Section 4 computes the implied
microeconomic utility loss. Final remarks are provided in Section 5.


                                2 THE MODEL
   There is a large number of individuals, approximated by a continuum, and indexed
by i E [0, 1]. The PIll model determines a consumption function for each individual:

                                  n(t) =

where n'(t) is NH nondurables consumption and m(t) is wealth, for individual i at time

                                           4
i. Individual i's marginal propensity to consume out of wealth is A, and it may change
over time. Equivalently,
                                          4(t) = A1(t) + h(t),                                           (1)
where 4 lnn, A1 lnA, and it 1nm.
   The logarithm of actual consumption by (near-rational) individual i, c(t), on the
other hand, remains constant most of the time and is reset only when z(t) c1(t) — 4(t)
reaches a lower trigger point L or an upper trigger point U.3'5 To simplify the exposition,
I assume that L =         —U   and that when either of the trigger points is reached, z1(t) is
brought back to zero.1'8
    FIom the definition of z4 as the log-departure between actual and PIH consumption, it
is possible to write the rate of growth of individual i's consumption of nondurables (equal
to zero, except at a measure zero set of points in time when it is infinite) as follows:

                                        dc1(t) = d4(t) + dz1(t).

A simple aggregate counterpart of this equation is easily obtained by (a) multiplying each
side of it by a(t), the share of individual i's consumption in aggregate consumption, (b)
assuming that a1(t) is not too different from the share of individual i's PIll consumption
in PIll aggregate consumption, and (c) integrating each side of this equation with respect

    5Although the motivation icr the (L, C, U) policy in this paper is near-rationality, it i5 well known that
it can be obtained as an optimal response when there are fixed adjustment costs (see e.g. ilarrison, SeIlke,
and Taylor 1983).
    6Actual consumption being constant between adjustments isjust a convenient simplification. It is trivial
to extend the model to the case where — when not adjusted discretely — consumption grows at a positive
and constant rate, or even at a stochastic rate — as long as this growth rate does not match exactly the
(stochastic) rate of growth of PJH consumption.
    7These symmetry assumptions are harmless for the purpose of this paper; see Caballero (1990b). In the
empirical and utility loss computation sections, however, I center the inaction interval around the constant
that makes the sample averages of aggregate PIll and actual consumption equal which is a weak (long
run average) budget constraint.
   or   course, the specific form of this near-rational microeconomic rule needs not be taken literally.
having fixed barriers is just a mathematical simplification of the idea that as consumers get further away
from their Pill consumption level, on average, they are more likely to update their actual consumption
level. See Caballero and Engel (1992) for a discussion of this point.




                                                     5
toi:
                            dCQ) = dC(i) +                a(t)dz1(t) di,
where capital letters denote aggregates. This can be written more compactly by assuming
that changes in the z1's are approximately independent of the ai's. Then:

                                  dC(t) = dC(t) + dZ(t),

where, after exchanging derivatives and integrals,

                                   dZ(t) =
                                             djzi(i)di.
Thus, dZ represents the change in the average departure of (the log of) actual and PIH
consumption across all individuals. Letting f(z, t) represent the cross scclional density
of z's at time t permits us to write dZ as:

                                 dZ(t) =
                                            djzf(z,t)dz,
or
                                  dZ(t) =
                                            j       zdf(z, t) dz.
    This says that the dynamic difference between the aggregate rate of consumption
                                                                                         (2)


growth and its NH counterpart can be described in terms of the changes in the cross
sectional density of the z's, which is intuitive. Alternatively, one can describe the path of
aggregate consumption directly through the gross flows of microeconomic units upgrading
and downgrading their consumption patterns:

                                   dC(t) = P(t)       —
                                                          AdO),                          (3)

where P0) and MO) are the consumption upgrading and downgrading flows, respectively.
The connection between (2) and (3) comes from the fact that the evolution of P0) and
M(t) is closely related to the evolution of the cross sectional density of the ;'s. In order
to describe this connection more fully, one needs to make explicit the properties of the
driving processes. For this, let each individual's PIT-I consumption be described by the

                                                6
process:
                                       dc,t(t) =   9d1   + adW1(i),                              (4)
where W1 is a standard Brownian Motion such that E[dW1(i)dW(i)] =                   (a/adi for
{j i;j E [O,1]}. The parameters 9, a and a2, are the aggregate drift, and aggregate
and total (the sum of aggregate and idiosyncratic) variances, respectively.
    Since Brownian motions are continuous processes, the upgrading flow in a time-
interval di, starting at 1, P(fl, must be a function of the number of consumers in the
"neighborhood" of the lower trigger barrier, —U, at time I. No unit is "at" —U since
this is a trigger point, thus the leading term defining the neighborhood is the first (right)
derivative of the density at —U, f(—U,t). How deep is the neighborhood (i.e. how
many units are "close" to —U) and how many of these units reach the trigger point
in the time-interval di is determined by the quadratic variation of Brownian motion,
(a2/2)dt: the larger is a the deeper is the neighborhood, and about half of these units
will move in the direction of the barrier in a small time interval. The upgrading flow
is then obtained by multiplying the number of upgrading consumers by the size of their
adjustment, U. This yields:

                                      P(t) =

A similar derivation shows that:


                                  M(t) =
                                               _Uçf(U-,l)dl.
Thus, the actual rate of growth of aggregate nondurables consumption is:9

                            dC(i) =
                                      U {f1(—U,i) + f2(Lr,t)} di,                               (5)

which can be compared with the equation describing the aggregate rate of growth under

  9See Propositions 2 and 3 in Caballero (1990a) for a formal derivation of a similar equation in the
context of durable goods.




                                                    7
the PIH, obtained from integrating equation (4) over 1:

                                    dC(t) = Odt + aAdWA(t),                                         (6)

with W4@) a Standard Brownian motion.
    Equations (5) and (6) show that the rates of growth of actual and PIE consumption
— dC and dC, respectively — are described by very different mechanisms. The latter
results from aggregating the infinitesimal changes of all units in the system, while the
former corresponds to the sum of large changes in the consumption patterns of an in-
finitesimal fraction of the population. The key elements to determine in equation (5) are
the derivatives of the cross sectional density at its boundaries, f(—U,t) and f(U,t). I
postpone the formal description of these terms until the appendix. In what follows I pro-
vide an informal discussion of the behavior of such derivatives, which I use to summarize
the main empirical implications of the model.
2.1 THE MECHANISM
In order to clarify the mechanisms underlying the basic results, let me use a formally
implausible but useful example.'0 Imagine that the economy has not had an aggregate
surprise for a long time, so f(z, t) has converged to a density like the one depicted by
the solid curve in Figure 2, where the skewness is due to the presence of a positive drift
in consumers' wealth (0 > O).h1 In this steady state dZ(t) = 0, dC(i) = dCt) = Gdt,
and f(—U) > f(U—) (solid tangents), which says that the positive steady state rate
of consumption growth is supported by a larger fraction of consumers upgrading their
consumption patterns than consumers downgrading theirs (i.e., f2(—U) = 1f2(U)I +
29/(Uo)).
   Now assume that this economy is followed by a sequence of positive and constant ag-
gregate shocks: dW4(t) = w(dt) > 0. This causes an immediatejump of PIH consumption
growth to the new rate dC(t) = Odt + to. The rate of growth of actual consumption,

   '°It is formally implausible in the sense that the path described can not be generated by a Brownian
motion.
   jjf the no-action microeconomic policy is to let consumption grow at the rate 9' instead of zero, the
relevant drift for the density is (9 — 0').


                                                  S
                                           Figure 2
                                    Cross Sectional Densities
      (0



      U,




V     C"
 N
.1
'4-



      c'J




      C
            —0.16   —0.12   —0.08     —0.04   0.00   0.04       0.08   0.12   0.16   0.20
                                               2
on the other hand, only picks up slowly as more and more units approach the barrier
that triggers upward changes, and fewer approach the downgrading barrier. In terms of
equation (5), the slopes of the cross sectional density at the boundaries —indexing the
number of consumers altering their consumption patterns— change slowly over time. In
this process — i.e. while the slopes change sufficiently to match the NH rate of consump-
tion growth — part of the "force" of the new driving force is absorbed by the shift in the
cross sectional density (and slopes at the boundaries), which induces excess smoothness
of aggregate consumption to wealth innovations.
    The other prominent fact about consumption, excess sensitivity, is best understood
by terminating the expansion;12 in this case dC falls immediately back to & dt, while
dC returns more slowly as the "abnormally" large (small) number of units close to the
upgrading (downgrading) barrier introduce inertia. This is illustrated by the return of
the slopes of the cross sectional density at the boundaries back to those of the solid line
in Figure 2. That is, excess sensitivity results from the slow use of the "force" absorbed
(stored) by the cross sectional density during the expansion.
    The same example can be used for the case in which there is an initial contraction,
showing that excess smoothness and excess sensitivity occur in both directions.

2.1.1 FURTHER IMPLICATIONS

Besides the excess smoothness and sensitivity features, the model has more subtle im-
plications arising from the rich dynamics generated by the endogenous evolution of the
cross sectional density. The magnitude and timing of the response of consumption to
wealth innovations depend on the shape of the cross sectional density at each point in
time, which depends on the stochastic environment faced by consumers and on the path
of aggregate shocks in particular.
    For example, if the economy has been experiencing a sequence of positive shocks,
most consumers are likely to be grouped on the upgrading half of their state space)3
This translates into a cross sectional density with shape as depicted by the solid curve in

  '2For a clear distinction between the excess smoothness and sensitivity findings, see Campbell and Deaton
(1989).
  '3See the discussion in terms of the slopes at the trigger barriers in the previous section.


                                                     10
Figure 3, where the value of Z(i), denoted by Z1 in the figure, is very low. At this point,
a further reduction in Z(t) is very difficult, not only because of the stationary nature of
Z(t) (as it would happen in a partial adjustment model) but also because of the closeness
of the cross sectional density to the invariant (to positive aggregate shocks) uniform one.
This limit uniform distribution has the property that the fraction of consumers upgrading
their consumption patterns after a positive (continuous) aggregate shock AH — which
leads to a change in PIH consumption equal to AH — is equal to zH/U, and since
the size of their change is U, the product of these two quantities is approximately AH,
precisely the PIH response. This limit is never literally reached; however it suggests that
when Z(t) is low, consumption —satisfying C(t) = C(t) + Z(t)— is unlikely to exhibit
much excess smoothness with respect to a new positive wealth surprise. Conversely,
actual consumption should respond very little to a negative innovation in wealth, since
most of this would be absorbed by the increase in Z(t) owing to the change in the shape
of the cross sectional density. Exactly the opposite happens if the economy has been
experiencing a sequence of negative wealth shocks, so that the initial cross sectional
density looks like the dashed curve in Figure 3 (with mean Z2).
    Figure 4 illustrates the response of consumption to changes in PIll consumption (due
to wealth shocks) for different histories of aggregate shocks. The 450 line depicts the
PIll responses, while the dashed and solid lines portray the responses as indicated by a
near.rational model simulated with the parameters found in the empirical section and
shown in Table 1 below. The solid line corresponds to a case in which consumption has
been growing very fast (4 percent per quarter) for some time. The increasing slope of
this curve shows that in "good times" there is more excess smoothness to negative than
to positive wealth shocks. Exactly the opposite happens in a case in which consumption
has been declining for a long time at the rate of 4 percent per quarter. This is illustrated
by the short-dashes line. Finally, the long.dashes line represents an intermediate case
where the responses are fairly symmetrical.
    It is also apparent from this figure — which has a very large range of values for AC
and AC — that the nonlinearities are not very pronounced. Of course this conclusion
depends on the value of the parameters chosen, but, as said before, the figure was con-
structed with parameters obtained from actual U.S. data (see the next section). I will

                                            11
                                           Figure 3
                                    Cross Sectional Densities
      co




      I',



      4


      Cr,

'I-


      N




      0
            —0.16   —0.12   —0.08     —0.04   0.00   0.04   0.09   0.12   0.16   0.20

                               ç                            az
                                         Figure 4
                                 Endogenous Smoothness
   02
   0
   CD
   0•
   0
   0•
   0
   c'J
   P
   0
4-' 0
UP
Co
   P
   0
   P
   I
   (0

   I0
   0•


   C                    -1----     I
   C
         —0.08 —0.06   —0.04     —0.02     0.00     0.02   0.04   0.06   0.08
                                           AC
return to this point later when presenting the empirical evidence on nonlinearities.


                                         3 RESULTS
    The model presented up to now has the potential to account for the short-run behavior
of aggregate consumption. The purpose of this section is to find out whether it can
actually do it and to estimate the basic parameters of the model. The latter will be used
in the next section to compute the implicit utility loss for near-rational agents.
    This section is divided into two parts. The first part reproduces the basic consumption
facts and characterizes the PIll part of the model, i.e. C. The second part focuses on
the dynamic part of the model, i.e. on Z, and provides estimates of the inaction index,
U, and of the amount of microeconomic level uncertainty, a.
   The data are per capita for the U.S. for the period 53:1-89:4 (CITIBASE, quarterly).

                     3.1 THE PIH MODEL AND BASIC FACTS

    Aggregating the first difference version of (1), yields:

                                dC(t) = dA(t) + J       a1()dh1(t) di,

whith dA(t)      f' a(t)d).(t) dt, or
                                      dC(t) = dA(t) + dH(t),                                         (8)

where dli is the rate of growth of aggregate wealth.'4 I let .A(t) be a linear function of
time that is estimated from the cointegrating relationship between C(t) and C(t).15
    The first two columns in Table 1 summarize the basic facts. The coefficients flAk
show the average response of current consumption and PIH consumption, respectively,
to (unexpected) changes in wealth. These are obtained from simple univariate OLS

  '4Which corresponds to the rate of growth of tJIPA's measure of disposable income. This is justified by
the fact that detrended disposable income is appropriately described by a random walk process.
  Thus, I run the regression (C(t) — H(t)) = fib +fi1t and set d(1) =

                                                   14
regressions of the rate of growth of actual and PIH consumption on the rate of wealth
growth. A comparison of the coefficients for actual and PIH consumption yields a measure
of the ezeess .srmooihness of consumption to unanticipated wealth (income) changes.'5
The coefficients /3w(—1) show the other well known fact about consumption: its exCess
.sems;t;v;ty to lagged (therefore anticipated) income changes. Actual consumption growth
is positively correlated with lagged disposable income growth, while NH consumption
growth is uncorrelated with lagged income growth.
    Finally, a measure of symmetry in the response of consumption to (contemporaneous)
wealth shocks can be constructed by splitting wealth growth into positive and negative
surprises. The last two rows of Table 1 show, first, that the excess smoothness finding
applies both to positive and negative innovations in wealth, and second, that there is no
strong evidence of an asymmetric response of consumption to wealth changes; and the
weak evidence suggests more excess smoothness when wealth surprises are positive than
when they are negative.


                                        3.2 DYNAMICS

    The next step is to estimate equation (5). The key ingredients of this equation are
U, a and the path of the slopes of the cross sectional density at the boundaries. The
latter is the most difficult and time consuming part of the problem, since it requires to
track down the path of the cross sectional density; this amounts to solving the following
stochastic partial differential equation:

                            df(z,t) = f2(z,t)dC(t) + -f22(z,t)dt,

subject to the boundary conditions: f(—U,t) = f(U,i) = 0, f(Of,t) = f(0,i) and
f(O, t) — f1(0—, t) = f1(U, 2)— f(—U,t), for each combination of parameters, U and

   '6This is a somewhat stronger concept of excess smoothness than the one used in the literature, where
it is used to denote the fact that the variance of actual changes in consumption is less than the variance
of changes in Pill consumption. here, the ratio of actual to Pill consumption growth variances is 0.64.
This is larger than the number obtained by Campbell and Deaton (1989), who used labor income instead
of disposable income to construct Pill consumption. The qualitative result is the same, however.



                                                   15
                               Table 1: Basic Parts and Reslllts_
                                          Facts         Dynamic Modell
                                      ACIAc
                         U             —         —         17.3
                                       —         —
                                                           (0.3)
                         CA                                 1.8
                         a             —         —          9.0
                                       —         —
                                                           (2.0)
                                       —
                   % Expl.(AZ)                   —          60.0
                        /3AH          0.398   1.000        0.385
                                     (0.060)   —          (0.025)
                       Pan—I)         0.160   0.069        0.209
                                     (0.067) (0.084)      (0.035)
                       PAir'          0.333   1.000        0.373
                                     (0.108)    —         (0.043)
                       fit,,..        0.466   1.000        0.417
                                     (0.110)    —         (0.043)

Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses. Entries in the upper part of the table are in
percents. % Expl.(AZ) is the percentage departure between the actual rate of consuxnp-
tion growth and the PIH consumption growth explained by the model. U: maidmum
departure from NH allowed by consumers. CA: aggregate uncertainty (annualized), aj:
idiosyncratic uncertainty (annualized). The coefficients in the bottom panel were ob-
tained from the following regressions (all of them with a constant): (1) AX =
(2)   AX =   /9ay(_l)AY(—1),     and (3) AX = $+AH + PAH-AH. With AX equal
to AC, AC, and AC; the rates of growth of actual, NH, and estimated consumption,
respectively. AH is the rate of growth of wealth, and AH and AH denote changes
above and below the mean, respectively. .AY(—1) is the rate of growth of disposable
income, lagged once.




                                            16
                                        Tahle 2, Nnn1nerities
                               V
                                            a1c    ac         AC
                                   fJ1ez   0.510 1.000      0.446
                                                          —
                                   $      (0.086)
                                           0.359
                                          (0.080)
                                                         1.000
                                                          —
                                                                 (0.035)
                                                                  0.333
                                                                 (0.033)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. All regressions include a constant. The sample is
54:1-89:4. AX(t+1) = $j,ezl[flex]AH(t+1)+fJrig;1 [rigi]aH(t+l), where AX is equal to
AC, AC and        £',
                   1[flex] [(AH(t + 1) > AHIZ(t) < 2) or (AH(t + 1) <&JIIZ(t)>
2)] and 1[rigi] 1[(AH(t + 1) > A7UIZ(i) > 2)or(AH(t + 1) <AHIZ(t) <2)].

a.'7 The appendix describes the procedure in detail.

   The results are presented in the last column of Table 1. The first row shows that,
on average, individual agents let their consumption pattern depart from the level of
consumption indicated by the PIH by up to 18 percent before updating their patterns.
The second and third rows show that the standard deviation of common or aggregate
shocks is about 2 percent per year, while the standard deviation of total uncertainty
faced by individuals is about 9 percent per year, yielding a ratio of aggregate to total
uncertainty of about 0.2. These estimates of uncertainty do not seem at odds with
previous aggregate and microeconomic evidence (see e.g. Hall and Mishkin 1982). These
parameters in conjunction imply that, on average, individual consumers change their
consumption patterns approximately every four years.
   The next rows illustrate the fit of the model and its conformity with the basic con-
sumption facts. The fourth row shows that the model accounts for approximately 60
percent of the discrepancy between the actual and PIll rates of consumption growth
while the next four rows show that the model mimics well the excess smoothness and
sensitivity features, including the slight asymmetry with respect to positive and negative
wealth changes.'8
    Table 2 illustrates some of the aspects of the nonlinearities described in Section 2. For

   '7The path of C provides estimates of 9 and
  '3Adding a drift term to the consumption pattern, whereby average consumption growth is fully ac-
counted for by planned consumption growth, leaves the results of Table 1 virtually unchanged.

                                                    17
                                                                               4




this, I have split wealth surprises into two groups according to the                es in Figure 4: The
first one, denoted fit; contains the observations for which the sb                 is likely to be large:
positive innovations in wealth given that the beginning of period                  ue of Z is below its
mean (i.e. given that previous times where favorable), and negative changes in wealth
given that the beginning of period value of Z is above its mean (i.e. given that previous
times where unfavorable). The second one, denoted rigi, contains the complement)9
This yields the equation:

                     AX(i + 1) = /31jl[f1ex]AH(t + 1) + /371911[b]AH(t + 1),

where

           l[flex]    1[(H@ + 1) > ATHIZ(t) < 2)or(AH(t + 1) c ATIIIZ@) > 2)],

           l[rigi]    1[(AH(t + 1) > a3?IZ(1) > 2)or(AH(,t + 1) C ASJZ(t) c
and   tsX denotes AC, AC and ô.                  According to the above discussion, we would
expect to observe less excess smoothness — that is, a larger /3 — during fiez than during
rigi periods. The first column in Table 2 shows that this is indeed the case, although
as usual with non-linearities, this proposition cannot be supported at high significance
levels. Moreover, Figure 4 shows that for the parameters reported in Table 1, one ought
to expect nonlinearities to be small. Column 3 shows that if the estimated consumption
path is used instead of the actual one, the results are similar to those in column 1, though
the estimates are more precise (and the asymmetry smaller), which suggests that the lack
of precision of the asymmetry estimates in column I may be partly due to nonsystematic
noise.20
    Of course one cannot take the mild non-linearity alone as a proof of the validity of
the model here proposed; however taken in conjunction with the simultaneous account-

   '9The asymmetry in AC cannot be explained by standard mean reversion arguments. If lagged consump-
Lion growth is added to the regressor. flj,t and Prpi become 0.494 (0.087) and 0.335 (0.083), respectively
(standard errors in parentheses).
   '°Moreover, adding independent white noise errors to the estimated consumption path helps matching
the variance of actual consumption and its serial correlation properties.


                                                   18
ing for excess smoothness and sensitivity, it does contribute to supporting the model's
explanation of short run consumption behavior. Still, to transform the model's expla-
nation into an actual Akerlof-Yellen near-rationality argument, one must show that the
microecomomic utility loss of not updating consumption continuously is small. I turn into
this in the next section.


                              4 NEAR- RATIONALITY?
   The (present value) utility cost of following the near-rational policy for an individual
that has current departure 40) is equal to (the subindex i is suppressed for simplicity):


                     p00°   J1 (u (ee(t))        U (e(0(0)) C6'g(z, 2) dz dt,                 (9)

where T is the return point,2' chosen to set the first order term of the departure equal to
zero,22 UG) is the consumer's instantaneous utility function, S is the discount rate, and
g(z, t) is the density of z at time 2, conditional on z = z(O) at 2 = 0.
    I follow Cochrane (1989) and divide the integrand in equation (9) by the corresponding
marginal utility evaluated at the PIH consumption level. This transforms the utility value
expression into a dollar equivalent expression. Dividing the integrand again, now by PIH
consumption, one transforms expression (9) into a weighted (by the discount factor)
average of flow costs expressed in term of percentage of PIH consumption sacrificed.
Finally, multiplying by S one gets the annuity value of this present value cost. I denote
this expression by F (40)).

             F (40))
                              j.
                            6 Jo
                                   pT+U
                              / Jr—u
                                  /
                                          (U(et)) —
                                                                         e6'g(z, 2) dz dl.   (10)
                                                Ut(e(t))et(t)
Preserving the first two terms of the Taylor expansion of U(ett)44t)) around 41) = 0,
and taking the average of F (z) over the ergodic density of z, g(z), yields an expression

 21Which was set to zero before for expository simplicity.
 "This plays the role of the feasibility constraint in Cochrane's (1989) analysis.


                                                   19
for the average yearly cost — in terms of percentages of NH consumption — due to the
near-rational policy (see the appendix):
                   flu                     T+U
             G Ej        F(z)g(z)dz   =h U (o —?)+ (et — 1)2)g(z)dz,
where   is the coefficient of relative risk aversion. And since T is chosen so as to satisfy
the budget constraint (weak form), f(e' — l)g(z) dx = 0, C reduces to:

                              C = 7 T+U (?— l)2g(z)dz.                                 (11)

Evaluating this expression at the parameters found in the empirical section of the paper
yields:
                                       C = 0.00267,
a very small number for reasonable values of 7. This closes the argument of the paper: Not
only a non-representative agent/discontinuous action microeconomic policy can generate
aggregate dynamics consistent with the behavior of U.S. nondurables consumption, but
also the degree of inaction required to do so imposes very small costs on individual
consumers.


                             5     FINAL REMARKS
   The model presented in the paper provides a structural interpretation of the main
features of aggregate consumption. Excess smoothness and sensitivity arise naturally
from the endogenous evolution of the cross sectional density of individuals' short-run
deviations from the NH. The endogenous nature of the cross section distribution also
determines that the aggregate departure from the PIH varies over the business cycle,
enriching the characterization of postwar U.S. data.
   In the framework discussed in the paper, heterogeneity plays a key role. Idiosyncratic
shocks do not wash away because microeconomic consumption policies are nonlinear.
Thus, in this context information about the cross section distribution of consumers'
departures (the z's) helps explaining the path of aggregate consumption. In the absence

                                             20
of rnicroeconomic data, however, one needs to make a "guess" on the path of the cross
sectional distribution. This defines a "distribution" extraction problem, which is what I
have done when estimating the model. The estimates suggest that on average consumers
keep their consumption levels within 17 percent of their PIH consumption level, and
that they face uncertainty about the driving forces of their PIH consumption of about 9
percent per year (80 percent of which can be attributed to idiosyncratic uncertainty).
    Despite the fairly large occasional microeconomic departures from PIH consumption
(when z is close to the barriers), the implied average cost of the microeconomic policy
is fairly small: 0.267 percent of PIH consumption. In short, near.rational microeco-
nomic consumers — in the Akerlof-Yellen (1985) sense — generate aggregate dynamics
consistent with U.S. postwar nondurables consumption data.




                                          21
                                         APPENDIX

A. DERIVATION OF EQUATION (5)
   This section of the appendix starts with the observation that the diffusion forward
Kolmogorov equation associated to the controlled Brownian motion z1, with driving pro-
cess described by equation (4), is:

                           dh(z,t) = -h(z,Odt + 9h(z,t)di,                             (A.1)

subject to the initial condition:
                                       h(z,O) =
and the boundary conditions:

                                            = h(LT,t) = 0,

                                     h(0,t) = h(0,t)
and
                      h2(0, t) — h(0, t) =    h(U, t) — h(—U, 1),
where h(z, t) is the probability density of z1 at time I, conditional on the information
available at time zero.
   If f(z, 0) = )i(z) and there are no aggregate shocks, then a direct application of
the Glivenko-Cantelli theorem determines that (A.1) and its boundary conditions also
describe the path of the cross sectional density f(z, t). Although this step is not directly
applicable in the current paper because there are aggregate or common shocks (CA > 0),
Proposition 1 in Caballero (1990a) shows that similar argument holds conditional on the
realization of aggregate shocks. In this case the boundary conditions remain unchanged
but the partial differential equation (A.1) is replaced by the flochastic partial differential
equation:
                         df(z, ) = j-f.7(z I) di + f,(z, t) dC(t).                     (A.2)
LEMMA Al:        Let f(z, I) denote the cross sectional density at time t, satisfying the

                                             22
boundary conditions described above for h(z, t), and evolving according to (A.2), then:


                                                                                       (a)


                                      jfn(;odz = 0,                                    (6)

                                    jzfz(z,t)dz = —1,                                  (c)

                         zf,,(z, 2)   dz =   U {f2(—u, 2) + f7(U,   i)}.               (d)
PROOF:      Parts (a) and (b) are proved by integrating (A.2) with respect to z between
—U and U, noticing that the integral of the left hand side is zero for all 2 and that the
diffusion term in dC cannot be offset by any other term in the equation. Parts (c) and
(d) follow directly from integration by parts, and using the boundary conditions and
parts (a) and (6) of this lemma. Q.E.D.
    It is now straight forward to obtain equation (5). For this note that:

                   dC(t) = dC(t) +             = dC(t)
                                       dZ(2)
                                                         +Jzdf(z,t)dz.
Replacing (A.2) in the last expression, yields:

                               a2       U                           U
            dC(2) = dC(t) + -jdt L zf2(z, 2) dz + dC(t) L zf1(z, 2) dz.             (A.3)

Equation (5) is obtained by using Lemmas (Ic) and (id) in (A.3):

                        dC(t) = uç {ic—ut 2) + f.(U, i)} dt.

B. ESTIMATION OF EQUATION (5)

   The difficulty of estimating equation (5) is due to the presence of the slopes f(—U, 2)
and f(U, 2). The value of these slopes at 2, however, depends not only on the realization
of aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks but also on the shape of the cross sectional density
inside the interval (—U, U) in previous periods. In other worth, in order to characterize

                                               23
the boundaries of the cross sectional density over time, one needs to track down the path
of the entire density. This is the strategy followed in the paper.
   For each pair (U, a), and the realization of the aggregate path {C;}>0, equation (A.2)
determines a path of a simulated cross sectional density, f(z, i), where f(z, 0) is taken as
given and equal to the corresponding "steady state" density (defined as the density that
solves (A.1) with dh(z,t) = 0). The estimation procedure consists in searching over U
and a until finding the pair (U, a) that minimizes the sum of squared departures between
the rate of growth of actual and PIll consumption.
    The realization of {C}oo is not observed (estimated) continuously but only at quar-
terly frequency. Instead of solving an extremely cumbersome filtering problem, I take the
change in C in a quarter to be homogeneously distributed within the quarter. In this
case the Fourier representation of the density at time t is (see Caballero lQGOa):

                                                  cr2(r2n2   •'\
                      f(z,i) = g(z; U) +   Ee     2kiTh+*)An(1)wn(z 2),
                                           n>O


where the   time unit is a quarter, O C, g(z; 9) is the "steady state" density achieved
if 6 remains constant forever:

                                  1 e"'—r".'
                                    '-"' if               —Uz<0
                                                       if OczcU,

with 'It    291/a2,

                             fnir\ pe_fl&
                                      I'
                                                                   if —U<z<U
                             \UI           e(2_i[)(_1)TI+1 if 0 C z       U,

and, finally,
                      A(t) =                j eTh'w(z,t)f(z,t — l)dz.
                               U(1 +entU)

C. DERIVATION OF G




                                                 24
   A simple application of the Law of Iterated Expectations determines that:

         T+t.J                  oo   r+u (U(et*C") —
       fu F(z)g(z)dz =      of                                         e_$tg(z)dzdt.   (A.4)


Keeping the first two terms of a Taylor expansion of               around z(t) = 0, yields:

                       —
                                         = ((1 — e) +         — 1)2)     Y(z).         (AS)
                   Ul(ee(t))ee(t)

Replacing (A.5) in (A.4) and rearranging, yields:

                           C=   0]' e di JT         Y(z)g(z) dz.

Equation (11) in the paper follows immediately from this expression after imposing the
feasibility constraint, 1(1 — &)g(z) dz = 0.
   The explicit expression for g(z) is obtained from the solution to the Kolxnogorov
equation (Ad) (with its boundary conditions) when dh(z, I) = 0, and it corresponds to
g(z; 9).




                                          25
References
 [1J Akerlof, C. and 3. Yellcn (1985) "Can Small Deviations from Rationality Make
    Significant Differences to Economic Equilibria?" American Economic Review 75
    pp.708-721

 [2] Caballero, Ricardo J. (1990a) "Expenditure on Durable Goods: An Explanation for
     their Slow Adjustment," mimeo Columbia University.

 [3] Caballero, Ricardo 3. (1990b) "A Fallacy of Composition" mimeo Columbia Univer-
     sity.

 [4] Caballero, Ricardo 3. and Eduardo M.R.A. Engel (1992) "Beyond the Partial Adjust-
     ment Model" forthcoming in American Economic Review — Papers and Proceedings,
    May.

 [5] Campbell, 3. and A.Deaton (1989) "Why is Consumption So Smooth?" Review of
    Economic Studies 56-3 pp.357—374.

 [6] Cochrane, John H. (1989) "The Sensitivity of Tests of the Intertemporal Allocation
     of Consumption to Near-Rational Alternatives" American Economic Review 79-3
    pp.319—337.

 [7] Deaton, Angus 5. (1987) "Life-Cycle Models of Consumption: Is the Evidence Con-
     sistent with the Theory?" In Advances in Econometrics: Fifth World Congress, vol.
     2, ed. by Tnman F. Bewley. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press.
 [8] Hall, Robert E. (1978) "Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle-Permanent Income
    Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence" Journal of Political Economy 86 pp.971—987
 [9] Hall, Robert E. and Frederick S. Mishkin (1982) "The Sensitivity of Consumption
     to Transitory Income: Estimates from Panel Data on Hoseholds," Econometrica 50
     pp. 461-481.

[101 Hansen, Lars P. and Kenneth 3. Singleton (1983) "Stochastic Consumption, Risk
    Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns," Journal of Political Econ-
    omy 91 pp.249—265.

                                         26
[11] Harrison, J.M.. T.M. Selilce, and A.J. Taylor (1983) "Impulse Control of Brownian
    Motion," Maihemaies of Operations Research 8 pp.454—466.




                                        27
