NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES

CONCEPTUALLY BASED MEASURES OF
STRUCTURAL ADAPTABILITY

Kala Krishna

Working Paper No. 4039

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 1992

This is a preliminary draft circulated for comments only. This paper is part of

NBER's research program in International Trade and Investment. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors arid not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4039
March 1992

CONCEPTUALLY BASED MEASURES OF
STRUCTURAL ADAPTABILITY

ABSTRACT

This paper provides definitions and measures of the extent of
adaptability of an economy to exogenous changes in product prices, factor

availability and technological change. It is argued that flexibility can in
general only be defined relative to the exogenous changes that occur. Using
a dual approach, measures of flexibility in response to the particular exogenous

shock are developed. In addition, a decomposition of the total change in
National Income into its component parts including gains due to flexibility or
losses due to inflexibility is developed.

Kala Krishna
fletcher School of Law & Diplomacy
Tufts University
Mugar, 250
Medford, MA 02155
and Harvard, M.I.T. and NBER

1. Introduction
The objective of this paper is to provide conceptually based and, we

hope, empirically implementable measures of structural adaptability.' Our
work on adaptation can be broken down into two parts. The first part is to
define adaptation in terms of a primitive concept and imbed this definition in

a suitably general model. The second is to use the model to derive the
empirical counterpart of the definition and to construct the relevant measures

for a number of countries over time. This paper deals with the first part of
the project. The second part is the subject of ongoing research.

By "conceptually based," we mean a number of things. First, the

measure should be based upon a primitive concept.

For example, the

primitive concept associated with adaptability is "flexibility", i.e. the ability
to adjust in response to exogenous changes.2
The exogenous changes studied here are price, factor endowment, and

technology changes.

In order to be "empirically implementable," a measure should be
implemented by way of a technique which is relatively general. For example,

our definition of structural flexibility can be implemented using the revenue
function. This model of production is quite general, although it does make a

number of restrictive assumptions about technology and market structure.
Finally, the measure should be estimable given existing data and estimation
techniques. With structural flexibility, implementation involves estimating the

revenue function, a difficult but not hopeless task.

A natural conceptual definition of structural flexibility is the ability

of an economy to respond to changes in exogenous parameters. A larger

response would be associated with greater "flexibility".

Since on the

production side of an economy the basic endogenous variable is the allocation

of factors of production across sectors, flexibility will be associated with the
rate at which physical marginal products diminish as factors are reallocated in

response to exogenous parameter changes. The definition of structural
flexibility will depend on the parameters that are changing. An economy may
be flexible in adjusting to price changes but not in adjusting to endowment or

technology changes. Thus, definitions of flexibility can only be relative to
given shocks.

It is important to define structural flexibility for at least two reasons.

Firstly, different economies are thought of as being more or less flexible on

a priori grounds. However, there is no hard evidence to support this in the
absence of empirically implementable definitions that are conceptually based.

Secondly, flexibility has been closely associated with the economic
performance of high growth economies, such as the NICs. A major reason to

develop measures of structural adjustment, therefore, is to look at the
relationship between performance and flexibility.

At this juncture, we would like to stress that our main objective is

simply to develop a rigorous and empirically implementable measures of
adaptability; we are not suggesting that our proposed definitions are the only

valid ones. Instead, our definition is developed in the spirit that it captures

some important aspects of the term in question and is what we call
"conceptually based". Our measures of adaptation are both appealing, as they

capture the intuitive idea that a more flexible economy adjusts more to
exogenous changes, and empirically implementable. In contrast to the large
literature that exists on macroeconomic structural adjustment,3 our approach
is micro-based.

In what follows we shall rely on the dual approach to a large extent

and make considerable use of the revenue function,4 R(p,v). With p and v
denoting exogenously given vectors of prices and endowments, respectively,
the revenue function is defined to be:

2

R(p,v) = max p'x subject to (x,v) being in the feasible set.
x
The reader is reminded that, given constant returns to scale, the revenue
function is homogeneous of degree one in both prices and endowments. Its

derivative with respect to prices equals the vector of equilibrium outputs,

Rjp,v) = x(p,v), while its derivative with respect to endowments equals the
shadow prices (i.e., equilibrium returns) of the factors of production, R(p,v)

= w(p,v). The revenue function can also be defined as the value function for
the program that minimizes factor payments subject to the constraint that price

weakly falls short of costs:

R(p,v) =

mm

w'v such that p c(w).

w

As will become apparent, our definition of flexibility is related to the second

order derivatives of the revenue function.5 In sections 2, 3 and 4 below we
develop indices of adaptation with respect to changes in prices, endowments
and technology, dealing with each change in isolation. Iii each case, our index

measures the percentage gain or loss of national income attributable to the

economy's ability (or inability) to respond to exogenous changes.
Consequently, it is possible for us to decompose, the growth of national
income between any two periods, during which prices, endowments and
technology all simultaneously change, into gains and losses attributable to the

economy's adaptability, or lack therof. This is the subject of Section 5.
Section 6 concludes.

3

2. Adaptation to Price Changes
Our definition of price flexibility is a very natural one. Essentially,
flexibility is defined in terms of the curvature of the production possibilities
frontier, or PPF. The PPF for a two-good economy is depicted diagrammatic-

ally in Figure 1. At any instant in time, with factor allocations given, the PPF

is depicted by the curve FBG. Over the medium and long run, however,
factors of production can be reallocated between sectors, which yields the
smoother curve DBE. Initially prices are such that production is at point B

and national income, in units of good 1, is given by OV. As prices change
from P to P', the production point moves from B to A, and national income

falls to OT. If production had not adjusted, however, income would have
fallen to OS. Thus, by adjusting its production structure the economy enjoys
a gain of ST. It is the benefit of this adaptation that our measure of adaptation

is designed to capture.
Consequently, our index of structural adjustment is given by:
=

R(p',v)

—

R(,p°,v)

—

(p' —p'1)'R(p°,v)

R(p',v)
= R(,p',v)

—p"R(p°,v)
R(p',v)

=

(1)

pI/[x(p1,v) — x(p°,v)}
R(,p',v)

O.
The index is defmed, in the first line of the equation, to be the actual change

in nominal national income less the change in income that would have
occurred if the economy had kept on producing base period outputs (that is,

4

if it had been totally inflexible), divided by first period income. The second
and third lines show that this is equal to the growth rate of the value of output

at current or period 1 prices.6. This is why we use the notation I(p'). With
endowments given, the index captures the gain from adjusting production in
response to exogenous price changes. Dividing by period one income ensures

that this index is homogeneous of degree zero in both p° and p'.7 The last
line simply points out that the properties of the revenue function ensure that
the index is non-negative.
Alternatively, we could define an analogous index taking period 1 as

the initial period and period 0 as the new period. This would give us:
R(p°,v) — R(,p',v)

—

(p°—p')' Rj,p',v)

R(p°,v)

—
—

R(,p°,v)

—p°'R(p',v)

R(,p°,v)

=

p°'[x(,p°,v)

—

(2)

x(p',v)]

.RCp°,v)

0.
which is the change in income between period 1 and period 0 less the change

that would have occurred had the economy been totally inflexible and not
adjusted its production, divided by period 0 income. In other words, it is the

change in the value of output evaluated at period 0 prices, relative to period

0 income.8 Dividing by period 0 income ensures that the measure is
homogeneous of degree zero in both p° and p'.

It is easily seen from the first equality in the above equations that the
numerator of our price flexibility indices can be interpreted as the error from

5

a first order approximation of the revenue function. By the mean value
theorem then, the numerator of this index is also equal to the second order
terms evaluated at some point between the two prices:
=

(p'-p°YRjp,v)(p'-p°)
2R(,p ',v)

(,fi) — (p°—p')'R(p
—

*

,v)(p°—p')

(3)

2R(,p°,v)

p• p*
Thus our measure of adaptation is fully defined by the price changes and the

matrix of second order derivatives with respect to price of the revenue function

at some point between the two prices.9 Note that our analysis focuses on

discrete changes since one cannot think of adaptation with infinitesimal
changes. As we know from the envelope theorem, the gain from adapting
optimal behavior to changes in exogenous parameters is, at the optimum, nil.
For infinitesimally small changes in prices, the index is automatically zero.

3. Adaptation to Changes in Endowments

We can defme flexibility with respect to endowment changes in a
manner analogous to our index of price flexibility. Here it is convenient to

use the dual of the Lerner-Pearce diagram, illustrated in figure 2. For
illustrative purposes, consider an economy with two factors and one good.

The curve, p = c(w), depicts the price equals cost condition. If factors of
production are perfectly substitutable then the price equals cost curve is given

by the L shaped curve ABC.'° Imperfect substitutability is reflected in the

flattening of the curve, as in the case of DBE in figure 2.". Consider a
change in the endowment of labor, with capital fixed. This makes the factor

6

payments line steeper. If the economy is perfectly flexible, wages do not
change, and income (per unit of capital) rises from OF to 00. With imperfect
substitutability, the return to labor falls, while the return to capital rises, with
the net effect being that income only rises to OH. The distance OH measures

the loss due to imperfect factor substitutability. It is this loss which is the
basis for our measure of flexibility.
Consider the function:
—

(v —

—[R(p,v')

-

—[R(p,v')

—

—

—

—

(v'—V')' R,jp,vG)]
R(p,v')

R(p,v&)

v"R(p,v°)]

R(,p,v')

=

(4)

v"[w(p,v") — w(p,v')]
R(p,v')

O.
The first line of the equation above shows that the function, 1(v1) can be
interpreted as the difference in the response of an economy which is perfectly

flexible (that is, which can absorb factors at given wages so that the change
in national income is the change in endowments times original wages), and that

of an economy which can only fully absorb factors of production if wages
change. 12 Rearranging terms to get the last line shows that 1(v1) equals the
change in the value of period 1 endowments as v changes from V to v'. Note
that 1(v1) falls as the economy becomes more flexible, thus it is not an index
of the gain from adaptation, but rather of the loss due to imperfect flexibility.

By the definition of the revenue function, this index is always non-negative.

7

An analogous measure based upon period 0 endowments, I(v°), is easily
constructed.'3

As in the case of price flexibility, our measure of endowment
flexibility is related to the properties of the second order derivatives of the
revenue function. Examining the first line of the equation earlier above, it is

easily seen that it is the error from a first order expansion of the revenue
function, i.e. it equals the negative of the second order terms evaluated at
some endowment, vtm, between v' and v° and hence corresponds to a positive

definite quadratic form:

1(v) =

i (v' —v°'Rjp,v )(v' —v°)
]
2
R(p,v')

—[...

(5)

O.
The index thus measures the curvature of the revenue function with respect to
v. Note that I(•) is zero for a perfectly flexible economy by this definition and

that as I(•) rises, the economy becomes less flexible. We should note that an

economy which is not flexible with respect to price shocks could be very
flexible in response to endowment changes."

4. Adaptation to Changes in Technology

The third parameter change we can deal with is a change in
technology with prices and endowments constant. Consider first the simplest

such change, which is a Ricks-neutral change in technology which varies
across industries. Now notice that this can be represented by x = aitFi(vi) in
the ith sector, where x1 represents output, a' total factor productivity and v1 the

factor input vector used in the ith sector. The revenue function is then:

8

max E p1x1
1

subject to x' =

aitFi(vi)

a

for i=l,...,n, E1v' = v.
Alternatively, we can write this problem as:

max E piaitP subject to P =
for i=1,...,n, E1v1=v.

Notice that in this case, technological change can be thought of as a change in

effective prices.

R(Ap,v,I) where

Thus, R(p,v,A41)

A.j

is the

diagonalization of the Hicks-neutral technology vector which has a" as its ith

element, and I is the identity matrix.

Consequently, the gains from adapting to Hicks-neutral technical
change can be measured in a manner analogous to that used in our measure of
price flexibility:

I(AJ)

=

R(Ap,v) — R(Ap,v)

—

(P'Ai—P'AI)RAP(4P,V)

R(Ap,v)

=

R(Ap,v) —
R(AJp,v)

= p'AJ[x(AJp,v)

—

(6)

x(A,?p,v)]

R(Adp,v)

O.
where we use x(Ap,v) to denote the derivative of the revenue function with
respect to the effective price, that is it equals the vector of optimal P's. Thus,
9

the index is defined as Ihe growth in national income less the growth that
would have accrued to the economy if it had not changed its factor allocations.

The difference is the percentage increase in national income attributable to
adjusting factor allocations in response to the change in effective prices. It is
easily confirmed that this measure is homogeneous of degree zero in

and

Ad°.

Figure

3 provides a diagrammatic exposition of our index of

flexibility in response to Hicks-neutral changes in technology. Initially, the

economy is at point F, which represents Ad°x(Ad°p,v). Now suppose
technology changes from A° to Ad', and suppose the technological change is

faster in good 1 than in good 2. If factor allocations remain constant in the
two sectors at base period levels, output would be Ad'x(A..°p,v) in the second

period, which is depicted by point D in Figure 315 The movement from F
to D corresponds to (p'A,11 - p'Ad°)x(Ad°p,v). This gives AB as the increase

in income due to technological change in the absence of flexibility. As factor

allocations change, the economy moves from D to F, so BC represents the

gain from adaptation. Our index, using period 1 technologies as the base,
equals BC/OC.'6

Factor-augmenting technical change is equally easily handled, in this

case, in a maimer analogous to that used to analyze endowment flexibility.
We consider the case of factor augmenting technical change which is uniform

across all industries.

Thus, the effective endowment of each factor i,

regardless of the industry in which it is used, be given by aitvi. With AF'
denoting the vector of factor augmentation coefficients, and Ad' now denoting
the diagonalization of Ar', the supply of effective factors is now given by Ad'v.

Thus, for given prices, the wages per factor can be higher and keep price
equal to cost. Hence, the revenue function can be written as:

10

R(p,v,Ad') = miii w'v such that p c((Adt)'w).
w

where w is the vector of factor returns. Alternatively, this revenue function
can also be formulated as:

R(p,A11v,I) =

w'A1tv such that p c(w).

mm

w

where w must now be interpreted as the return per effective factor. Con-

sequently, the appropriate index of flexibility in response to changes to
effective factor endowments would seem to be:

I(Afl =

—[R(p,Ad'v,I)

—

R(p,A4°v,I)

—

(v1'A —V'A5RA j,p,Av,1)]

R(p,Av,I)
—[R(p,AJv,I) — v'ARA

j,p,Av,l)]

R(p,Av,I)

-

v'A[w(p,A?v)

o.

-

w(p,Av)]

R(p,AJv,I)
(7)

where w(j,,A1v) denotes the derivative of the revenue function with respect to

effective factor endowments, i.e. the equilibrium return per effective factor.

The first line of the equation above is the difference between the change in
national income in an economy which is perfectly flexible (that is, can absorb

the change in effective factor endowments at given wages), and that of the
sample economy. This difference is the loss due to imperfect factor
substitutability. This index is always non-negative and. is homogeneous of
degree zero in both A and A,1°. An analogous measure based upon effective

11

endowments in period 0 is easily constructed)7 Thus, the effects of any
combination of Hicks-neutral or uniformly-factor augmenting technical change

can easily be interpreted using our indices of price or endowment flexibility.
The interpretation of more general forms of technical change will be explored
in subsequent work.

5. Decomposing the Growth of National Income

Clearly, the above measures allow for an easy interpretation of the
sources of growth in an economy in which each exogenous variable (price,

endowment or technology) changes one at a time. Our measures also allow

for a straightforward interpretation of changes in national income in an
economy in which all three parameters vary simultaneously during the period

of analysis. We illustrate the technique with the analysis of an economy in
which both prices and endowments change during the comparison period, with
technology held constant.

The total change in income between the two periods can be
decomposed into:

R(p',v') — R(p°,v°)

=

[R(p°,v')

—

R(p°,v°)j + [R(p',v') —

= [ [v'—v°I'w(p°,v') + vO'[w(pO,vt)_w(p0,v0)J }
(8)

+

[ [p'—p°I'x(p°,v') + pl'[x(pI,vl)_x(p0,v1) I

Alternatively:

12

R(p',vt) — R(,pa,v°)

(9)

=

[R(p',v°)

=

[ (p'—p°]"x(p0,v0) + p"[x(p',v°)—x(p°,v°)]

+

[ [vl_vle'w(pt,vl) + v°'[w(p',v')—vv(p',v°)] ]

—

R(p°,v°)] + [R(p',v')

—

R(,p',v°)]

Looking at the algebra above, one can decompose the change in national

income by first changing endowments, and then prices (VP) or by first
changing prices and then endowments (PV). Figure 4 illustrates these two

alternative paths. We assume that endowments increase between the two
periods, so that the period 1 PPF lies economy produces at point B, while at
period 1 prices and endowments, it produces at point A. If faced with period
1 prices, but period 0 endowments it would have produced at point D, while

if it had been faced with period 1 endowments and period 0 prices it would
have been at point C. Thus, the VP path corresponds to moving from B to C
as endowments change, and then from C to A as prices change. Similarly, the

PV path involves moving from B to D as prices change, and then from D to
A as endowments change. Each price change can in turn be decomposed into

a pure price effect and the gain due to flexibility, while each endowment
change can be decomposed into a pure endowment effect and the loss due to

imperfect flexibility, as illustrated in the above equations.

Using the

techniques presented earlier, one can easily extend the technique to allow for
Hicks-neutral and factor-augmenting technical change as well.

A problem with the approach presented above is that although the

total change in national income is independent of the path, the quantities
attributable to the various effects do depend upon the path chosen for the
decomposition. The usual index number problems apply as the indices are

13

J

affected by the choice of the evaluation point. This is a problem common to
all empirical work and cannot be avoided in this analysis either.

6. Conclusions
On the theoretical side, at least three issues need to be worked on.
First, the measure of adaptation in response to changes in technology needs to

be extended to allow for other kinds of changes in technology. If technological changes can be thought of as a combination of factor augmenting and

Hicks neutral changes in technology, we can deal with it in our existing
framework. We are as yet unsure of how to deal with other kinds of technical
change. In particular, we cannot deal with factor augmenting technical change

where the rate of technical change varies across industries. However, we are

not terribly concerned about this, as this is not likely to be a constraint in
practice since most cross-national estimates of technical change focus on the
Hicks neutral ease.

A second, more substantial, issue is dealing with the dependence of

our measures of adaptation on the choice of the evaluation point. This is, of

course, the standard index number problem.

Most problematic is the

dependence of our decomposition of the change in income on the choice of the

path. In both cases, we hope to be able to better deal with the issues on the
basis of further theoretical work.

A third issue is extending the analysis to study the flexibility of
particular sectors rather than the whole economy, and to extend our analysis
to cases where endowments are not exogenous, for example, when capital is

mobile internationally or where there are migrant workers. The two are
clearly related.

If we wish to study the flexibility of a sector, it is

inappropriate to take endowments of factors as given; rather, we should let

endowments be endogenous and take factor prices as given. However, this
simply involves treating factor prices as product prices and inputs as negative
14

outputs in the revenue function. We can use the same approach if factors are

mobile internationally and the economy can be thought of as a small open
economy.

This final point suggests that our work may shed light on the capital

mobility debate spawned by the work of Feldstein and Horioka (1980). This
work argues that a close positive correlation between savings and investment

for an open economy is indicative of an absence of international capital
mobility. This is important as it implies that policies that increasing savings
will also raise investment domestically. However, as pointed out by Obstfeld

(1986), this depends on the particular pattern of shocks. It is quite possible

to construct a pattern of shocks such that, despite capital being perfectly

mobile, a close positive relation exists between savings and investment

nationally both in time series and cross sectional data)8 The policy
implications of observed correlations between savings and investment could

therefore be very different from those of Feldstein and Horioka (1980).
Mobility of capital is related to flexibility in response to changes in the "price'

vector of different sources of capital in the above framework. An application
of interest is to directly look for estimates of flexibility in response to changes

in the price of capital in order to shed light on this debate. The approach
outlined above also appears promising in getting estimates of the extent of
mobility of other factors.
In terms of the empirical work we hope to do, computing our indices

requires estimating revenue functions. Moreover, these revenue functions
should be capable of allowing different degrees of substitutability in inputs and

transformation between outputs. The appropriate starting point here is work
on particular functional forms for the revenue function that already exist in the

literature. These functional forms have been used extensively in the past in
developing CUE (computable general equilibrium) models such as the ORANI

model of the Australian economy)9 In addition, much work has been done
15

on estimating revenue functions. In international trade, this literature has
focused on estimating import and export demand functions as in Kohli (1978)
and Lawrence (1989).

16

References

Dixit, A. and V. Norman. 1980. Theoiy of International Trade. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Dixon, P. B., et al. 1982. ORANZ: A Multisectoral Model of the Australian

Economy. New York: North Holland Publishing Co.

Feldstein, M. and C. Horioka. 1980. "Domestic Saving and International
Capital Flows," Economic Journal 90: 3 14-29.
Feldstein, M. and P. Bacchett.a. 1991. "National Savings and International

Investment." In B.D. Bemheim and J. Shoven (eds.), National
Savings and Economic Performance.

Chicago:

University of

Chicago Press.

Frenkel, J. 1991. "Quantifying International Capital Mobility in the 1980s."

In B.D. Bernheim and J. Shoven (eds.), National Savings and
Economic Performance. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Kohli, U. 1978. "A Gross National Product Function and the Derived
Demand for Imports and Exports." Canadian Journal of Economics

11: 167-82.

Krishna, K. 1991. 'Openness: A Conceptual Approach." Mimeo.
Lawrence, D. 1989. "An Aggregator Model of Canadian Export Supply and

Import Demand Responsiveness." Canadian Journal of Economics

22: 503-521.
Obstfeld, M. 1986. "Capital Mobility in the World Economy: Theory and

Measurement," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy 86: 55-104.

Richardson, J. D.

1971.

"Constant Market Share Analysis of Export

Growth." Journal of International Economics 1: 227-39.

17

Taylor, L. 1991. Income Distribution, Inflation, and Growth. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press, forthcoming.
Young, A. 1983. "Structural Change and Structural Flexibility in National
Economics". Unpublished Masters Thesis. Fletcher School of Law
and Diplomacy.

Young, A. 1989. "Hong Kong and the Art of Landing on One's Feet: A
Case Study of a Structurally Flexible Economy." Unpublished Ph.D.

Thesis. Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy.

18

Notes
1.

This paper is related to a larger project by Krishna dealing with

conceptually based definitions of a number of terms such as "openness", b; the
TMterms of trade', and "trade diversification".

2.

Young (1983, 1989) defined 'structural flexibility" as the ability to

change the relative shares of factors of production accounted for by the

different sectors of an economy. Arguing that this ability explains the
remarkable economic performance of the East Asian NICs, Young measured

rates of factor reallocation in a large sample of economies, showing that the
NICs had indeed experienced some of the most rapid rates of structural change

in the world. This paper defines flexibility more broadly as the ability to

respond to exogenous changes. Further, while Young argued that crossnational differences in flexibility were due to incomplete markets, labor market

barriers, and political intervention in the market place, the approach of this

paper emphasizes cross-national differences in technologies, within a
framework of perfect competition.

3. For some recent work on macroeconomic adjustment see Taylor (1991).
4. A good reference source for those unfamiliar with the general approach is
Dixit and Norman (1980). Our convention will be to define vectors as column

vectors, and denote their transposes by "'"s as row vectors. There are m
factors and n goods so that v is mx 1 and p is n x 1.
5.

The standard way to decompose the effects of price, technology, and

endowment changes on national income would be to do the following. Let r(P,

v, A) denote the revenue function capturing the production side of the
economy, where P denotes price, v denotes the endowment vector and A
denotes the technology level. Then assuming that P, v, and A change over

19

time but the function r(') does not, differentiating the revenue function and
using the fact that the derivative with respect to P is output and with respect

to v is wages, gives:

f±
dir

='' o'1p + xi!v + &i
dtA'
di

dt

'—'

The percentage change in income is decomposed into the appropriately
weighted sum of percentage price changes, percentage factor endowment

changes and percentage technology changes. The weights on prices and
endowments are the production value shares and the factor value shares in
income respectively. The weight on technology is the same as the weight on
prices if technological change is Hicks neutral. The weight on technology is

the same as the weight on the factors if technological change is factor
augumenting. Note that flexibility does not even enter here.

6. In terms of figure 1, the index is (OT-OS)/OT = ST/OT.

7. Since, in this section, we are examining price changes in isolation, we

ignore the issue of homogeneity in endowments. As will be seen further
below, when accounting for all types of changes our flexibility measures are
homogeneous of degree zero in prices, factors and factor productivity.

8. In terms of figure 1, this is UV/OV.
9. Note that we are assuming the revenue function is differentiable and hence,

there are at least as many factors as goods. This is easy to motivate in terms
of the specific factors model.

10. For example, if the production function is given by x = AK + EL, then
one unit of the good can be made with either 1/A units of capital, or 1/B units

or labor. Thus, the unit cost is given by mm [wL/B,wK/A] so that the price
equals cost line is L shaped.
11.

In the extreme, if there are fixed coefficients in production, the

20

production function is given by x = min[KIaK, L/aJ, so that the cost of
malcing a unit of the good equals wLaL + WKaK, which is a straight line.
12.

Note that if there are as many produced goods as factors, w is

independent of v as the minimization would occur at the intersection of the
price equals cost conditions for the two sectors, that is, at a kink. In this case,
output changes are sufficient to ensure full flexibility. This independence of w

from v is the key factor in multi-good and multi-factor generalizations of the
Rybczynski theorem.
13.

(v -

[R(p,v°)

-

—[R(p,v°)

—

—

—

—

R(p,v')

(v°—v')'R(p,v')I

R(p,v°)
—

v°'R(p,v')]

R(p,v°)
=

v°'[w(p,v') - w(p,v°)]
R(p,va)

14. An obvious example is the standard HOS model in trade with the same
number of goods as factors and no specialization. It is well known that in this

model, factor prices remain fixed as endowments change so that there is
complete flexibility in response to factor changes. However, the response to
price changes can be large or small depending on technology.

15. One finds point D by multiplying the outputs at E by the percentage
increase in total factor productivity in each industry. The reason that the
scaling up of outputs by the technological change parameters lies on the PPF
is due to the specification of technological change chosen. The initial allocation

of factors remains efficient as it remains on the contract curve; only the labels

on the isoquants change in this case.
21

16. The measure, evaluated at period 0 endowments, is:
I(Ad5 =

R(A:p,v) — R(Ap,v) —.p'A—P'Ad')RA,(AjP,v)
R(Ap,v)

=

R(A:p,v) — P'4RAP(AP,v)
R(Ap, v)

=

p'A[x(Ap,v)

—

x(Ap,v)]

R(4p,v)

0.
17.

1(4) =

-[R(p,A:vJ)

- R(p4jv,1) R(p,4v,1)

=

=

—[1?(j,,4v,o

—

V'A:.RA

(p,AJv,1)]

v'4[w(p,4v) - W(P,4v)]
R(p,4v,I)

18. Tn more recent work Feldstein and Bacchetta (1991) update the work of
IFeldstein and Horioka (1980) and examine ways of incorporating alternative
explanations of their findings. IFrenkel (1991) also deals with such issues.

19. SeeDixonetal. (1982).

22

r
C

0

(9

D

H
Ui
0)

C)

0)

0

LL

0
a.

U
(Id

00

0

0

0

it

C-)

C)

0)
0

'C

ox
C

t.L

0

-D

00
C
C-)

CM —

<C

m

cc
II

0
I-

Ct)
C)

U-

=

0)

0
c'J

00
0

a

rD
0
0

(5

ci)

0)

0
C

•0

0
0

(5

0

Number

Author

Til]e

3975

Philippe Weil

Equilibrium Asset Prices With Undiversifiable Labor 01192
Income Risk

3976

Miles Kimball

Precautionary Saving and Consumption Smoothing
Across Time and Possibilities

01/92

Philippe WeLl
3977

0. Steven Olley
Arid Pakes

The Dynamics of Productivity in the
Telecommunications Equipment Industry

01/92

3978

Janet Currie
Sheena McConnell

The Impact of Collective Bargaining Legislation
On Disputes in the U.S. Public Sector: No Policy
May Be the Worst Policy

01/92

3979

Jeffrey I. Bernstein

lnfomiation Spillovers, Margins, Scale and Scope:
With an Application to Canadian Life Insurance

01/92

3980

S, Lad Brainard

Sectoral Shifts and Unemployment in Interwar Britain 01/92

3981

Catherine J. Morrison
Amy Ellen Schwartz

State Infrastructure and Productive Performance

3982

Jeffrey I. Bernstein

Price Margins and Capital Adjustment: Canadian Mill 0l92
Products and Pulp and Paper Industries

3983

Laurence Ball

Disinflation With Imperfect Credibility

3984

Morris M. Kleiner
Robert T. Kudrle

Do Tougher Licensing Provisions Limit Occupational 02/92
Entry? The Case of Dentistry

3985

Edward Montgomery
Kathryn Shaw

Pensions and Wage Premia

02/92

3986

Casey B. Mulligan
Xavier Sala-i-Martin

Transitional Dynamics in Two-Sector Models of
Endogenous Growth

02/92

3987

Theodore Joyce
Andrew D. Racine
Naci Mocan

The Consequences and Costs of Maternal Substance
Abuse in New York City: A Pooled Time-Series.
Cross-Section Analysis

02/92

3988

Robert .1. Gordon

Forward Into the Past: Productivity Retrogression
in the Electric Generating Industry

02/92

3989

John Y. Campbell

Interternperal Asset Pricing Without Consumption
Data

02/92

3990

Ray C. Fair

The Cowles Commission Approach, Real Business
Cycle Theories, and New Keynesian Economics

02/92

3991

Edward E. Learner

Wage Effects of a U.S. Mexican Free Trade

02/92

Agreement

01/92

02/92

Number

Author

Title

3992

Olivier Jean Blanchard
Philippe Well

Dynamic Efficiency, the Riskless Rate, and Debt
Ponzi Games Under Uncertainty

02/92

3993

Adam B. Jaffe
Manuel Trajtenberg
Rebecca Henderson

Geographic Localization of Knowledge Spillovers
as Evidenced by Patent Citations

02,92

3994

Raquel Fernandez
Richard Rogerson

Human Capital Accumulation and Income Distribution 02/92

3995

Robert B. Barsky
J. Bradford De Long

Why Does the Stock Market Fluctuate?

02/92

3996

Steven N, Durlauf
Paul A. Johnson

Local Versus Global Convergence Across National
Economies

02/92

3997

Lawrence F, Katz
Alan B. Krueger

The Effect of the Minimum Wage on the Fast Food
lndustiy

02/92

3998

Hans-Werner Sinn

Privatization in East Germany

02/92

3999

Joel Slemrod

Taxation and Inequality: A Time-Exposure Perspective 02/92

4000

Olivier Jean Blanchard
Peter Diamond

The Flow Approach to Labor Markets

02/92

4001

Alberto Giovannini

Bretton Woods and Its Precursors: Rules Versus
Discretion in the History of International Monetary
Regimes

02/92

4002

George J. Borjas
Stephen 0. Bronars
Stephen J. Trejo

Self-Selection and Internal Migration in the United
States

02/92

4003

Martin liD. Evans
Karen K. Lewis

Peso Problems and Heterogeneous Trading: Evidence 02/92
Prom Excess Returns in Foreign Exchange and
Eurom arkets

4004

Noriyuki Yanagawa
Gene M. Grossman

Asset Bubbles and Endogenous Growth

02/92

4005

Mark W. Watson

Business Cycle Durations and Postwar Stabilization
of the U.S. Economy

03/92

4006

Eli ana Cardoso

Inflation and Poverty

03/92

4007

Ishac Diwan
Dani Rodrik

Debt Reduction, Adjustment Lending, and Burden

03/92

Joel Slemrod

Do Taxes Matter? Lessons From the 1980s

4008

Sharing

03/92

Number

Author

Tle

Date

4009

Ernst R. Berndt
Zvi Griliches

Auditing the Producer Price Index: Micro Evidence
From Prescription Pharmaceutical Preparations

03/92

Joshua (3. Rosett

4010

Ernst It. Berndt
Catherine J. Morrison
Larry S. Rosenbium

High-Tech Capital Formation and Labor Composition 03/92
in U.S. Manufacturing Industries: An Exploratory
Analysis

4011

Philip L. B rock
Stephen I. Tumovsky

The Growth and Welfare Consequences of Differential 03/92
Tariffs With Endogenously-Supplied Capital and Labor

4012

Steven Shavdll

Suit Versus Settlement When Parties Seek
Nonmonetary Judgements

03/92

4013

Robert H. Porter
3. Douglas Zona

Detection of Bid Rigging in Procurement Auctions

03/92

4014

James H. Stock
Mark W. Watson

A Procedure For Predicting Recessions With Leading 03/92
Indicators: Econometric Issues and Recent Experience

4015

Anil K. ICashyap

Monetary Policy and Credit Conditions: Evidence
From the the Composition of External Finance

03)92

03)92

Jeremy C. Stein
David W. Wilcox
4016

David Folkerts-Landau
Peter M. Gather

The European Central Bank: A Bank or a Monetary
Policy Rule

4017

David Folkerts-Landau

The Private ECU: A Currency Floating on Gossamer 03/92

Peter M. Gather

Wings

4018

David Ncumark
Jonathan S. Leonard

Inflation Expectations and the Structural Shift
in Aggregate Labor-Cost Determination in the 1980s

4019

David Neumark
Sanders Korenman

Sources of Bias in Women's Wage Equations: Results 03/92
Using Sibling Data

4020

Kevin A. Hasset
Gilbert E. Metcalf

Energy Tax Credits and Residential Conservation
Investment

03/92

4021

Martin Feldstein

The Effects of Tax-Based Saving Incentives on
Government Revenue and National Saving

03/92

4022

Benjamin M. Friedman

Learning From the Reagan Deficits

03/92

4023

Janet Currie
Sheena McConnell

Finn-Specific Determinants of the Real Wage

03/92

4024

Michael D. Bordo
Angela Redish

Maximizing Seignorage Revenue During Temporary
Suspensions of Convertibility: A Note

03/92

03/92

Number

Author

Title

Date

4025

John H. Cochrane

A Cross-Sectional Test of a Production-Based Asset
Pricing Model

03/92

4026

Tor Jakob Klette
Zvi Griliches

The Inconsistency of Common Scale Estimators When 03/92
Output Prices Are Unobserved and Endogenous

4027

Ann P. Bartel

Training, Wage Growth and Job Performance:
Evidence From a Company Database

4028

Jeremy C. Stein

Convertible Bonds as "Back Door' Equity Financing 03/92

4029

George J. Borjas
Stephen J. Trejo

National Origin and Immigrant Welfare Recipiency

03/92

4030

David Card
Philip B. Levine

Unemployment Insurance Taxes and the Cyclical
and Seasonal Properties of Unemployment

03/92

4031

Bruce Russet
Joel Slemrud

Diminished Expectations of Nuclear War and
Increased Personal Savings: Evidence From
Individual Survey Data

03192

4032

Martin Feldstein

College Scholarship Rules and Private Saving

03/92

4033

Michael D. Bordo

The Bretton Woods International Monetary System:
An Historical Overview

03/92

4034

Lisa M. Lynch

Differential Effects of Post-School Training on
Early Career Mobility

03/92

4035

Ricardo J. Caballero

Near-Rationality, Helerogeniety and Aggrgate
Consumption

03/92

4036

Orley Ashenfelter
David Genesove

Testing For Price Anomalies in Real Estate Auctions 03192

4037

David U. Blanchflower
Lisa M. Lynch

Training at Work: A Comparison of U.S. and British 03/92

Robert 3. Barm
Xavier Sala-i-Martin

Regional Growth and Migration: A Japan-U.S.

Kala Krishna

Conceptually Based Measures of Structural
Adaptability

4038

4039

Awyn Young

03/92

Youths

03/92

Comparison

03/92

Copies of the above woldng papers can be obtained by sending $5. per copy (plus $l0./order for postage
and handling for all locations outside the continental U.S.) to Working Papers, NBER, 1050 Massachusetts
Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138. Advance payment is required on all orders. Please make checks payable to the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

