                            NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




        IS JAPAN CREATING A YEN BLOC IN EAST ASIA AND THE PACIFIC?




                                      Jeffrey A. Frankel




                                  Working Paper No. 4050




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OP ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambiidge, MA 02138
                                   April 1992



This paper was written for the NBER conference on "Regionalism and Rivalry: Japan and the
U.S. in Pacific Asia," Apr11 3-5, 1992, Del Mar, California. It is forthcoming in a book
edited by Jeff Frankel and Miles Kahier. The author would like to thank Menzie Chinn,
Benjamin Chul, Julia Lowell and Shang-Jin Wei for extremely efficient research assistance.
He would also like to thank Miles Kahier, Robert Lawrence, and other participants at the Del
Mar conference, plus participants at a seminar of Stanford University's Asia/Pacific Research
Center, for useful comments. Finally, he would like to thank the Japan-United States
Friendship Commission (an agency of the U.S. government) for research support. This paper
is part of NBER's research programs in International Trade and Investment and International
Finance and Macroeconomics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                NBER Working Paper #4050
                                                                April 1992




             IS JAPAN CREATING A YEN BLOC IN EAST ASIA AND THE PACIFIC?



                                              ABSTRACT

        mc paper reaches seven conclusions regarding the Yen Bloc that Japan is reputed to be

forming in Paci tic Asia. (I) Gravity-model estimates of bilateral trade show that the jgyg) of trade in

East Asia is biased mb's-regionally, as It is within the European Community and within the Western

Hemisphere, to a greater extent than can be explained naturally by distance. One might call these

three regions 'super-natural' blocs, in cootrast to Kmgman's "natural" trade blocs. (2) There ia no

evidence of a special Japan effect. (3) Once one properly accounts for rapid growth in Asia, the

statistics do not bear out a     toward mntra-regionat bias of trade flows. (4) The world's strongçst

trade grouping Is the one that includes the U.S. and Canada with the Asian/Pacific countries, i.e,

APEC. (5) There Is a bit more evidence of rising Japanese influence in East Asia's financial markets.

Tokyo appears to have acquired significant influence over interear rates in a few Asian countries,

though overall Its Influence Is as yet no greater than that of New York. (6) Some of Japan's financial

and monetary influence takes place through a growing role for the yen, at the expense of the dollar,

The yen has become relatively more important in exchange rate policies and invoicing of trade and

finance in the regon. (7) But this trend is less the outcome of Japanese policy-makers' wishes, than

of pressure from the U.S. government to internationalize the ysn.



                                                                Jeffrey A. Frankel
                                                                Deparonent of Economics
                                                                787 Evans Hall
                                                                University of California
                                                                Berkeley, CA 94720
                                                                and NEER
                  Is Japan Creating a Yen Bloc in East Asia and the Pacific?




        A debate got underway in 1991 over whether a global trend toward three economic blocs

-- the Western Hemisphere, centered on the United States; Europe, centered on the European

Community; and East Asia, centered on Japan -- is good or bad. Krugman (l991a), Bhagwati

(1990, 1992), and Bergsten (1991), argue that the trend is, on balance, bad. Krugman (1991b)

and Lawrence (199k) argue that it is, on balance, good) Most appear to agree, however, that

a trend toward three blocs is indeed underway.

         There is no standardly agreed definition of an "economic bloc. A useful definition

might be a group of countries who are concentrating their tradc and financial relationships with

each other, in preference to the rest of the world. One might wish to add to the definition the

criterion that this concentration is the outcome of government policy, or at least of factors that

are nomeconomic in origin, such as a common language or culture. In two out of the three

parts of the wnrld, there have clearly been recent deliberate political steps toward economic

integration. In Europe, the previously-lethargic European Economic Community has burst forth

with the programs of the Single Market, European Monetary Union, and more. In the Western

Hemisphere, we have the Caribbean Basin Initiative and (more seriously) the Canadian-U.S.

Free Trade Agreement, followed by a prospective North America Free Trade Area and

Enterprise for the Americas Initiative.


      Those who fear Ihe blocs do so because they think they will tend to he protectionist.. Froot and Yoffie (19Q1)
in this volume pursue this logic, and point out some implications of foreign direct investment. Knigmass (199th)
argues in fsvor of the three blocs on the grounds that they are 'natural,' in a sense explained below. Lawrence's
(t991c) argument in favor of blocs is that they can cement politically pro-liberalization scntment in individual
countries.
         In East Asia, by contrast, overt preferential trading arrangements or other political moves

to promote regional economic integration are lacking, as has been noted by others.2 The

ASIEAN countries (Association of SouthEast Asian Nations), to be sure, are taking steps in the

direction of turning what used to be a regional security group into a free trade area of sorts.

But when Americans worry, as they are wont to do, about a trading bloc forming in Asia, it is

generally not ASEAN that concerns them. Rather it is the possibility of an East Asia- or

Pacific-wide bloc dominated by Japan.

         Japan is in fact unusual among major countries in n having preferential trading
anangements with smaller neighboring countries. But the hypothesis that has been put forward

is that Japan is forming an economic bloc in the same way that it runs its economy: by means

of policies that are implicit, indirect, and invisible. Specifically, the hypothesis is that Japan

operates, by means of such instruments as flows of aid, foreign direct investment, and other

forms of finance, to influence its neighbors' trade toward itself.3 This is a hypothesis that

should not be accepted uncritically, but rather needs to be examined empirically.

          After examining some of the relevant statistics, this paper argues that the evidence of an

evolving East Asian trade bloc centered on Japan is not as clear as many believe, Trade

between Japan and other Asian countries increased substantially in the late 1980s, But intro-

 regional trade bias did not increase, as it did, for example, within the European Community.

  The phrase "Yen Bioc could be interpreted as referring to the financial and monetary aspects

 implicit in the words, rather than to trade flows. The second half of the paper does find



    2        Petri (t991 b).

        For on of maty examptes, see Donbusch (t559).

                                                    2
evidence of growing Japanese influence in the Pacific via financial and monetary channels, rather

than primarily via trade flows. But it does not find evidence that the country has taken

deliberate steps to establish a Yen Bloc.




PART I: IS A TRADE BLOC FORMING IN PACIFIC ASIA?



       We must begin by acknowledging the obvious: the greatly increased economic weight of

East Asian countries in the world. The rapid outward-oriented growth of Japan, followed by

the four East Asian NICs (Newly Industrialized Countries) and more recently by some of the

other ASEAN countries, is one of the most remarkable and widely-remarked trends in the world

economy over the last three decades. But when one asks whether a yen bloc is forming in East

Asia, one is presumably asking something more than whether the economies are getting larger,

or even whether economic flows among them are increasing. One must ask whether the share

of intra-regional trade is higher, or increasing more rapidly, than would be predicted based on

such factors as the CINP or growth rates of the countries involved.



Adjusting Intra-regional Trade for Growth

       Table 1 reports three alternative ways of computing intra-regionat trade bias. The first

part of the table is based on a àimple breakdown of trade (exports plus imports) undertaken by

countries in East Asia into trade with other members of the same regional grouping, versus trade




                                                3
with other parts of the world.4 For comparison, the analogous statistics are reported for

Western Europe (the EC Twelve) and for North America (the United States, Canada, and

Mexico).       The share of intra-rcgional trade in East Asia increased from 33 per cent in 1980

to 37 per cent in 1989. Pronouncements that a clubbisb trade bloc is forming in the region are

usually based on figures such as these. But the numbers are deceptive.

       All three regions show increasing intra-group trade in the 1980s. The region that has

both the highest and the fastest-increasing degree of intra-regional trade is not Asia but the

European Community, reaching 59 per cent in 1989. The share of intra-regional trade in East

Asia has not even been increasing appreciably faster than that in North America.

       Quite aside from the comparison with Europe, it is easy to be misled by intra-regional

trade shares such as those reported in the first three rows of Table 1. If one allows for the

phenomenon that most of the East Asian countries in the 1980s experienced rapid growth inlQtaj

output and trade, then it is possihie that there has in fact been no movement toward intra-

regional bias in the evolving pattern of trade. The increase in the intra-regional share of trade

that is observed in Table 1 could be entirely due to the increase in economic size of the

countries. To take the simplest case, imagine that there were no intra-regional bias in 1980, that

 each East Asian country conducted trade with other East Asian countries in the same proportion

 as the latter's weight in world trade (15 Ye [= 57813842]). Total trade undertaken by Asian

 countries increased by 108 per cent in dollar terms over this nine-year period, while total trade

 worldwide increased by only 53 per cent. Even if there continued to be no regional bias in

 1989, the observed intra-regional share of trade would have increased by one-third (to 20 %



     These statistics are presented in more detail in Table I in Frankel, 1991c.

                                                        4
[= 1200/5892]) due solely to the greater weight of Asian countries in the world economy.

       Consider now the more realistic case where, due to transportation costs if nothing else,

countries within each of the three groupings undertake trade that is somewhat hiased toward

trading partners within their own group (East Asia, North America, and the European
Community). Although East Asian trade with other parts of the world increased rapidly [by 93

% [751.5/388.5]], trade with other Asian countries increased even more rapidly [by 137 % in

dollar terms [448/189]]. Does this mean that the degree of clubbishness or within-region bias

intensified over this period? No, it does not. Even if there was no increase at all in thebias

toward intra-AsianIrade, the more rapid growth of total trade and output experienced by Asian

countries would show up as a rate of growth of intra-Asian trade that was faster than the rate

of growth of Asian trade with the rest of the world.

       Think of each East Asian country in 1980 as conducting trade with other East Asian firms

in the same proportion as their weight in world trade (15 %) multiplied by a regional bias term

to explain the actual share reported in Table 1 (33 96). Then the regional bias term would have

to be 2.18 (=.33/.15). An unchanged regional bias term multiplied by the East Asians' 1989

weight in world trade would predict that the 1989 intra-regional share of trade would be 44 per

cent (2. 18x.20 = .436). The actual intra-regional share, however, did not increase to nearly this

level. Thus the East Asian bias toward within-region trade, far from rising, actually diminished

in the 1980s1 The implicit intra-regional bias fell to 1.9 (=.37/.20), as shown in the middle

rows of Table 1.




                                                 5
A Test on Bilateral Trade Flows

        The analysis should be elaborated by use of a systematic framework for measuring what

patterns   of bilateral trade are normal around the world; the so-called '1gravity" modeL5 A

dummy variable can then be added to represent when both countries in a given pair belong to

the same regional grouping, and one can check whether the level and time trend in the East

Asia/Pacific grouping exceeds that in other groupings. We do not currently have measures of

historical, political, cultural and linguistic ties. Thus it will be possible to interpret the dummy

variables as reflecting these factors, rather than necessarily as reflecting discriminatory trade

policies. Perhaps we should not regret the merging of these different factors in one term,

because as noted there are in any case no overt preferential trading arrangements on which

theories of a Japanese trading bloc could rely.6

        The dependent variable is trade (exports plus imports), in log form, between pairs of

countries in a given year. We have 63 countries in our data set, so that there are 1,953 data

points (=63x62/2) fur a given year2 The goal, again, is to see how much of the high level of

trade within the East Asian region can be explained by simple economic factors common to

bilateral trade throughout the world, and how much is left over to be attributed to a special




     See Deardorff (1984, pp.503-04) for a survey of the (short) subject of gravity equations.

     Krugman (1991) has made a crude first pass at applying the gravity model to the question whether Europe and
North America are separate trading btoca, but did not get as far as including other countries, or including a variable
for distanre.

     There are some miming values (245 in 1985 for example), normally due to levels of trade too small to be
recorded. In the 1990 results reported here, Taiwan trade ia missing. Detsila on the countries are given in an
Appendix.

                                                          6
regional effecL.



           One would expect the two most important factors in explaining bilateral trade flows to

be the geographical distance between the two countries, and their economic size. These factors

are the essence of the gravity model. A large part of the apparent bias toward inn-regional

trade is certainly due to simple geographical proximity. Indeed Krugman (l99lb) suggests it

may alt be due to proximity so that the three trading blocs are "natural" (as distinct from
"unnatural" trading arrangements between distant trading partners such as the United States and

Israel). Although the importance of distance and transportation costs is clear, there is not a lot

of theoretical guidance on precisely how they should enter. We experiment a bit with functional

forms. We also add a dummy "Adjacent" variable to indicate when two countries share a

common border.



           The equation to be estimated is:




                1og(T1) =e+11og(GNP1GNP)                +I?'2log(GNP/pop1GNP/pop)


     +1og (DISTANCE)              +    (ADJACENT) ÷y (EEC1J) +y2 (WH) '13 (ASIA1)




The last four explanatory factors are        dummy variables.




     Details on   the data sources, groupings of countries, method for computing distance., etc, are available on
request.

                                                        7
         Entering GNPs in product form is empirically well-established in bilateral trade

regressions.      it can be easily justified by the modem theory of trade under imperfect
competition.5 In addition there is reason to believe that (INP per capita has a positive effect,

for a given size: as countries become more developed, they tend to specialize more and to trade

more.

         The results are reported in Tables 2, 3, and 4. We found all three variables to be highly

significant statistically (> 99% level). The coefficient on the log of distance was about -.56,

when the adjacency variable (which is also highly significant statistically) is included at the same

time. This means that when the distance between two non-adjacent countries is higher by 1 per

cent, the trade between them falls by about .56 per cent,'° We tested for possible non-linearity

in the log-distance term, as it could conceivably be the cause of any apparent bias toward intra-

regional trade that is left after controlling linearly for distance. Quadratic and cubic terms

turned out to be not at all significant. We report here only results without them.

         The estimated coefficient on ONP per capita is about .29 as of 1980, indicating that

richer countries do indeed trade more, though this term declines doring the 1980s, reaching .08

in 1990. The estimated coefficient for the log of the product of the two countries' (3NPs is

about .75, indicating that, though trade increases with size, it increases less-than-proportionately

(holding GNP per capita constant). This presumably reflects the widely-known pattern that small




     The specification implies that trade between two equal-sized countries (say, of size .5) will he greater than
trade between a large and small countiy (say, of size .9 and .t). This property of models with imperfect
competition is not a property of the classical Heckacher-Ohlin theory of comparative advantage. Helpman (t987)
and Helpman and Krugman (t985, section 1.5). Foundations for the gravity model are ales offered by Anderson
(t979) and other papers surveyed by Deardorff (t984, pp.503-06).
    "   The coefficient on the log of distanre was about .8 when the adjaceiscy variable was not included.

                                                         8
economies tend to be more open to international trade than larger, more diversified, economies.



       If there were nothing to the notion of trading blocs, then these basic variables would soak

up all the explanatory power. There would be nothing left to attribute to a dummy variable

representing whether two trading partners are both located in the same region. In this case the

level and trend in intra-regional trade would be due solely to the proximity of the countries, and

to their rapid rate of overall economic growth. But we found that dummy variables for intra-

regional trade    statistically significant, both in East Asia and elsewhere in the world. If two

countries are both located in the Western Hemisphere for example, they will trade with each by

an estimated 1/2 a per cent more than they would otherwise, even after taking into account

distance and the other gravity variables. Intra-regional trade goes beyond what can be explained

by proximity, what Krugman (l991b) calls a "natural" trading bloc. We might refer to such

intra-regional trade bias as evidence of HsupernatuH trading blocs.

       When the boundaries of the Asian bloc are drawn along the lines of those suggested by

Malaysian Prime Minister Mahatir in his proposed East Asian Economic Caucus, which excludes

Australia and New Zealand (and also China, in the version tested here), the coefficient on the

Asian bloc appears to be the strongest and most significant of any in the world. Even when the

boundaries are drawn in this way, however, there is no evidence of an increase in the intra-

regional bias of Asian trade during the 1980s: the estimated coefficient actually decreases

somewhat from 1980 to 1990. Thus the gravity results corroborate the back-of-the-envelope

calculation reported in the preceding section. The precise pattern is a decrease in the first half

of the decade, followed by a very slight increase in the second half, matching the results of Petri



                                                9
(1991a).Lt None of these changes over time is statistically significant.

        It is perhaps surprising thai the estimated ygj of the intra-regional trade bias was higher

in East Asia as of 1980 than in the other two regions. One possible explanation is that there has

historically been a sort of 'trading culture" in Asia. To the extent that such a culture exists and

can be identified with a particular nation or ethnic group, I find the overseas Chinese to be a

more plausible factor than the Japanese

         Of the three trading blocs, the EEC and the Western Hemisphere are the twothat show

rapid intensification in the course of the 1980s. Both show an approximate doubling of their

estimated intra-regional bias coefficients. As of 1980, trade within theflEC is not strong enough

  after holding constant for the close geographical proximity and high incomes per capita of

European countries -- for the bias coefficient of .2 to appear statistically significant. The EEC

coefficient increased rapidly in level and significance in the first half of the l980s, reaching

about .4 in by 1985, and continued to increase a bit in the second half. The effect of two

countries being located in Europe pgj, when tested, does not show up as being nearly as

strong in magnitude or significance as the effect of membership in the EEC.

        The Western Hemisphere coefficient experienced all its increase in the second half of the

decade, exceeding .9 by 1990. The rapid increase in the Western Hemisphere intra-regional bias

in the second half of the 19 SOs is in itself an important new finding. The recovery of Latin

American imports from the United States after the compression that followed the 1982 debt crisis

must be part of this phenomenon. The Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement signed in 1988 may

also be part of the explanation.


   "Petri infers, from the data on intra-regional trade shares, a decrease in East Asian interdependence in the early
t9SOs, foEnwed by a reversal in the second half of the decade,

                                                         10
            We consider a sequence of nested candidates for trading blocs in the Pacific. The

    significance of a given bloc effect turns out to depend on what other blocs are tested at the same

    time. One logical way to draw the boundaries is to include all the countries with.eastern coasts
•
    on the Pacific, as in the statistics considered in the preceding section. We call this grouping

    "Asian Pacific" in the tables. Its coefficient and significance level are both higher than the

    EAEC dummy. When we broaden the bloc-search wider and test for an effect of APEC

    (Association of Pacific Economic Cooperation), which includes the United States and Canada

    in with the others, it is highly significant. The significance of the Asian Pacific dummy

    completely disappears, and that of the EAEC dummy returns.

            APEC appears to be the correct place to draw the boundary. When we test for the

    broadest definition of a Pacific bloc, including Latin America, it is not at all significant, and the

    other coefficients do not change. (It is called "Pacific Rim" in the tables.) It remains true that

    the intra-regional biases in the EEC and Western Hemisphere blocs each roughly doubled from

    1980 to 1990, while intra-regional biases in the Asia and Pacific areas did not increase at all.

    The only surprising new finding is the APEC effect: the United States and Canada appear to be

    full partners in the Pacific bloc, even while simultaneously belonging to the significant but

    distinct Western Hemisphere bloc. The APEC coefficient is the strongest of any. Its estimate

    holds relatively steady at 1.3 (1980), 1.0 (1985), and 1.2 (1990).12

            One possible explanation for the apparent intra-rcgional trade biases within East Asia and



        °     Others have reported the high volume of trans-Pacific trade. But it has been difficuh to evaluate such
    statistics when no account is taken of these countrieC collective size. A higher percentage of economic activity in
    a larger region will consist of intrs-regional than in a smatter region, even when there is no intra-regional bias,
    merely because smaller regions tend by their nature to trade across their boundaries more than larger ones. In the
    limit, when the unit is the world, 100 per cent of trade is intra-'regional."

                                                            11
within the APEC grouping is that transportation between Pacific Asian countries is mostly by

water, while transportation among European or Western Hemisphere countries is more often

overland, and that ocean-shipping is less expensive than shipping by rail or road, This issue

bears further investigation. The issue of water versus land transport should not affect results

regarding changes in intraregional trade bias in the 1980s, however, given that the nature of

shipping costs does not appear to have changed over as short a time span as five or ten years.

        Several further questions naturally arise.         ASEAN negotiated a preferential trading

arrangement within its membership in 1977 (although serious progress in removal of barriers did

not get underway until     l987).' In early    1992, the members proclaimed plans for an ASEAN

Free Trade Area, albeit with exemptions for many sectors. Does this grouping constitute a small

bloc nested within the others? We include in our model a dummy variable for common

membership in ASEAN.t4 It tums out to have a significant coefficient only                  if none of the
broader Asian blocs are included. The conclusion seems to be that ASEAN is not in fact

functioning as a trade bloc.

        We know that most East Asian countries are very open to trade of all sorts. So we added

a dummy variable to indicate when flgt one of the pair of countries is located in Pacific Asia,

to supplement the dummy variable that indicates when both are. Its coefficient is significant,

but still leaves a significant coefficient for the East Asian bloc term.

       We also know that Singapore and Hong Kong are especially open countries, and engage

in a certain amount of entrepot trade. Once again, a dummy variable for these two countries'


   ° Jackson (199t).

     'In tests similar to ours, Hamilton and Winters (1991) found the A5HAN dummy to reflect one of the most
significant trading areas io the world.

                                                    12
trade with other Asian Pacific countries is highly significant (with a coefficient of .9) when it

is included, but does not otherwise change the results.

        We tried a few more extensions as well. We disaggregated trade into manufactured

goods, agricultural products, fuels, and other raw materials. The results changed little. Raw

materials show the greatest Asian bloc effect it' judged by the estimated coefficient.

Manufactures shows the greatest effect if judged by t-statistics. Desirable extensions for the

future, besides further disaggregation, include adding factor endowment terms.

        What about bilateral trade between Asian/Pacific countries and Japan in particular? Like

intra-regional trade overall, trade with Japan increased rapidly in the second half of the 1980s.

Most of this increase merely reversed a decline in the first half of the l980s however.'5 More

importantly, the recent trend in bilateral trade between Japan and its neighbors can be readily

explained as the natural outcome of the growth in Japanese trade overall and the growth in trade

levels attained by other Asian countries overall. Lawrence (l991b) has calculated that, out of

the 28 percentage point increase in the market share of Pacific Asian developing countries in

Japanese imports from 1985 to 1988, 11 percentage points is attributable tO improved

competitiveness (as reflected in increased exports from Pacific Asia to worldwide markets), and

18 percentage points is attributable to the commodity mix of these countries' exports. There is

no residual to be attributed to Japan's development of special trading relations with other

countries in its region.'6

        We confirmed this finding (though without as yet decomposing trade by commodity) by


    " Petri t991a.
   " The empiricat literature on whether Japan is so outlier in its ttading patterns, particularly with respect to
imports of manufactures, includes saxonl,ouse (1959), Noland (1991) and Lawrence (1991a), among others.

                                                       13
adding to our gravity model a separate dummy variable for bilateral Asian trade with Japan in

particular. It was not even remotely statistically significant in any year, and indeed the point

estimate was a small negative number. (The results are not reported in this version of the

paper.) Thus there was no evidence that Japan has established or come to dominate a trading

bloc in Asia.17

        To summarize the most relevant effects, if two countries both lie within the houndaries

of APEC, they trade with each other a little over 1 per cent more than they otherwise would.

The nested EAEC bloc is less strong, and has declined a bit in magnitude and significance

during the course of the 1980s. The Western Hemisphere and EC blues, hy contrast, intensified

rapidly during the decade. Indeed1 by 1990, the Western Hemisphere bloc was stronger than

the EAEC bloc, if one takes into account the existence -of the APEC effect. There was never

a special Japan effect within Pacific Asia.

        In short, beyond the evident facts that countries near each other trade with each other,

and that Japan and other Asian countries are growing rapidly, there is no evidence that Japan

is concentrating its trade with other Asian countries in any special way, nor that they are

collectively moving toward a trade bloc in the way that Western Europe and the Westem

Hemisphere appear to be. - We now turn from trade to finance.




    °   To save apace, the results for the Japan dummy are not reported in this version of the paper. Nor are the
results showing the effects of the two dummy variables meant to capture effects of openness of Asian countries in
general and of Hong Kong/Singapore in particular. ITabtas showing these results appeared with the April 1992
conference version of this paper.]         -      -


                                                       14
PART IL JAPAN'S FINANCIAL JNFLUENCE IN THE REGION



       In the case of financial flows, proximity is less important than it is for trade flows. For

some countries the buying and selling of foreign exchange and highly-rated bonds is
characterized by the absence of significant government capital controls, transactions costs or

information costs. In such cases, there would be no particular reason to expect greater capital

flows among close countries than distant ones. Rather, each country would be viewed as

depositing into the world capital pool, or borrowing from it, whatever quantity of funds it

wished at the going world interest rate. Thus even if we could obtain reliable data on bilateral

capital flows (which we cannot), and whatever pattem they happened to show, such statistics

would not be particularly interesting.



Tokyo's Influence on Reelonal Financial Markets

       Many Asian countries still have substantial capital controls, and financial markets that

are in other respects less than fully developed. Even financial markets in Singapore and Hong

Kong, the most open in Asia, retain some minor frictions. Where the links with world capital

markets are obstructed by even small barriers, it is an interesting question to ask whether those

links are stronger with some major financial centers than with others. This question is explored

econometrically below.

        Information costs exist for equities, and for bonds with some risk of default. These costs

may be smaller for those investors who are physically, linguistically, and culturally close to the

nation where the borrower resides. Proximity clearly matters as well in the case of direct


                                                15
investment, in part because much of direct investment is linked to trade, in part because

linguistic and cultural proximity matter for direct investment.



Forei2n Direct Investment

       Table 5 shows the standard Ministry of Finance figures for Japanese direct investment.

The steady stream of direct investment by Japanese firms in East Asia and the Pacific (incloding

Australia) has received much attention. But the table shows that, whether measured in terms

of annual flows or cumulated stocks, Japan's direct investment in the region is approximately

equal to its investment in Europe, and is much less than its investment in North America.€

       It has been argued that once one scales the Table 5 figures for GNP among the host

countries, an Asian bias to Japanese direct investment might indeed appear.'9 But if one scales

the FDI figures by the host region's role in world trade, one finds that Japan's investment in

Asia and Oceania is almost exactly in proportion to their size. There is no regional bias. Its

EDT in the United States and Canada, on the other hand, is more than twice what one would

expect from their share of world trade. Japan's investment in Europe is about half the

continent's share of trade.

       Furthermore, Ramstetter (1991a, p.95-96; 1991b, p.8-9) has forcefully pointed out that

the standard Ministry of Finance figures on Japanese foreign direct investment actually represent

statistics on investment either approved by or reported to the government, and greatly overstate

the extent of true Japanese investment in developing countries. The more accurate balance of



     see also Koroiya and Wakssugi (1991).

     Nigel Holloway, 'Half-full, half empty, Far Eastern Economic Review, December 1991, p-69.

                                                  16
payments data from the Bank of Japan show a smaller percentage of investment going to Asia.



Tokvct vs. New York Effects on Asian Interest Rates

         Statistics also exist on Japanese portfolio investment. But, in the case of portfolio capital,

looking at quantity data is not as informative as looking at price data -- that in, at interest rates.

For one thing, the quality of the data on interest rates is much higher than the quality of the data

on capital flows. For another, the interest rate test is more appropriate conceptually. If the

pqicnlial for arbitrage keeps the interest rate in a given Asian country closely in line with, say,

Tokyo interest rates, then this constitutes good evidence of close links between the two national

capital markets, even if the amount of actual arhitrage or other capital flow that takes place

within a given period happens to be small.

         Many East Asian countries have moved to liberalize and internationalize their financial

markets over the last ten to fifteen years!° A number of studies have documented Japan's

removal of capital controls over the period 1979-84 by looking at the power of arbitrage to

equalize interest rates between Tokyo and New York or L.ondon,2'                             Australia and New

Zealand, while lagging well behind Japan, also show signs of liberalization during the course

of the 1980s!2 Hong Kong and Singapore register impressively open financial markets,

    ' Frankel (t99ta) presents the 1980s evidence (or Japan, Australia, New Zealand, Singapore, Hong Kong and
Malaysia. Faruqee (199t) examines interest differentials for Korea, Malayaia, Singapore and ThaLtand (via-a-via
yen interest rates in London), but does not take into account exchange rate expectations.

        These include Otani and Tiwari (t981), Ito (1986), and Fran]cel (1984). The interest rates in the calculations
are covered on the forward eschange or Eurocurreney markets so as to avoid exchange risk. [Teats that took at
real or uncovered interest differentiala, rather than covered interest differentials, include Ito (19St) and Fukeo and
Okubaj
       The frequently large negative covered differential that had heen observed for Australia up to mid-1983 (see,
e.g., Argy, 1987) largely vanished thereafter,

                                                          17
showing smaller interest differentials even than some open European countries like Germany.

(Hong Kong has long had open capital markets. Singapore undertook a major liberalization in

1978, though it has tried to segment its domestic money market from its offshnre "Asia dollar

market. 't23)    Malaysia has officially liberalized following Singapore,24 though its covered
differential has remained considerably higher.

         We can apply a simple test to the hypothesis that a particular Asian country is dominated

financially by Japan, versus the alternative hypothesis that ties to capital markets in the other

industrialized countries are equally strong. We run the following OLS regression to see how

the interest rate in a typical Asian country depends on interest rates in Tokyo and New York.




 Under the null hypothesis that the country's financial markets are insufficiently developed or

liberalized to be directly tied to any foreign financial markets, the coefficients on foreign interest

rates should be zero. Under the alternative hypothesis that the country's financial markets are

closely tied to those in Tokyo, the coefficient on Tokyo interest rates should be closer to 1 than

to 0; and similarly for New York.25

         Table 6 presents estimates for three-month interest rates in Hong Kong and Singapore.

For the Hong Kong interest rate, the influence of the New York market appears very strong.




      See MOreOO (198 8). Fdwards and Khsn (1985) includes another test of covered interest parity for Singapore.

      Abdd;n (1986) and Gtick and Hutchison (1990, p.4S).

    ° It ahoold be noted that if eapitat markets in Tokyo and New York are closely tied to each other, as they
indeed are, then msltteollioearity might make it difficolt to obtain statistically significant estimates. But this does
oot mean that there is anything wrong with the test. A finding that the coefficient 00 the Tokyo interest rate is
statistically greater tItan 0, or than the coefficient on the New York interest rate, remains valid.

                                                          18
This is not surprising; not only does the Colony have open financial markets, but its currency

has since October 1983 been pegged to the U.S. dollar," so that there is nothing to inhibit

perfect arbitrage between its interest rates and U.S. interest rates. Neither Tokyo, London, nor

Frankfurt, has significant influence in Hong Kong on average over the sample period (from 1976

to 1989). For the Singapore interest rate, the influence of New York is again very significant;

but now there is also a significant, though smaller, weight on Tokyo. The evidence suggests

that both countries have had open financial markets ever since the mid-1970s, with New York

having the dominant influence, but with Tokyo also having a one-quarter effect in the case of

Singapore.
       To see whether the influence of the foreign financial centers changed over the course of

the sample period, we can allow for time trends in the coefficients, also reported in Table 6.

For Hong Kong, it is clear that London used to have a strong influence, and equally clear that

the British influence has been diminishing over time. For Singapore, there is no sign of change

in New York's role, but there is weak evidence of a role for Frankfurt that has been gradually

diminishing over time, and of a gradually increasing role for Tokyo.

        Similar tests were also run for four other Pacific countries: Australia, New Zealand,

Taiwan and Korea (not reported here, to save space). There is evidence of a I..ondort effect in

Australia that has been slowly increasing during the sample period, and a Frankfurt effect in

New Zealand that gave way to a Tokyo effect late in the sample period. [There also appears

 a Frankfurt effect in Taiwan and Korea with little time trend.]

        Overall, there is only weak evidence in Table 6 of a special role for Tokyo as a financial



      See, e.g.. Batassa awl Wifliamson (t990, p32).

                                                       19
center exerting influence in its part of the world. But during most of the sample period

examined, most Asian countries had not yet opened their financial markets to external influence

by ggjy foreign center.

        The foregoing tests of quarterly data will now be expanded to an analysis of monthly data

for the six Pacific Asian countries, from the mid-1970s to 1990? In each ease, we test for

the influence of all four financial centers: New York, London, Frankfurt, and Tokyo.

        When local interest rates are regressed against foreign interest rates, the U.S. is the

dominant influence in each of the four East Asian NICs, though the Japanese interest rate is also

statistically significant in Korea and Singapore. In Australia and New Zealand, only the British

interest rate is important. (The Japanese interest rate actually appears with the wrong sign, as

does the U.S. interest rate in the case of New Zealand.) When the regressions are run on first

differences (rather than levels), as they probably should be, the significance levels fall sharply.

In the case of Singapore, the U.S. interest rate is still the dominant influence, but the results for

the others are less clear.

        We can add an interactive time trend to see if the foreign influences change over the

sample period. The United Kingdom is tosing influence in Hong Kong, where the U.S. gains

at its expense, and Singapore, where Japan is the one to gain at the U.K. 's expense. More

surprisingly, Japan appears to be losing influence in Taiwan, at the expense of Germany, and

in Korea and Australia, at the expense of the U.K. Again, when these tests are run on first

differences, significance levels disappear. During most of the sample period, financial markets

   27
      The full sample runs from March 1973 to December i990, but data availabitity restricts the sample for many
countries. One country baa less than tan years of data availatle Taiwan, which runs only from May t983 to April
1989. Details are available in an Appendix on recjuest. Imese results may replace Table 6 (which ie taken from
Franks], 1991e) in the final version of the paper.)

                                                      20
in most of these countries were insufficiently liberalized to respond to foreign interest rates,

regardless of nationality.

       These tests leave some important questions unanswered. First, what would such tests

show for the last three years? Economic relationships have been changing rapidly in
international financial markets. Korea and Taiwan, for example, have begun to liberalize and

internationalize only very recently. Second, are the barriers that remain between a given country

and the major world financial centers due to currency factors or country factors? Most of the

Asian countries experience frequent changes in their exchange rates against the yen and the

dollar. Financial markets in a country like Singapore could be very open and yet observed

interest rates could differ from those in Tokyo or New York because of premiums meant to

compensate investors for the possibility of changes in the exchange rate. The question of

whether the yen is playing an increasing role in the exchange rate policies of East Asian

countries is an important one to address, but it should be kept distinct from the question whether

financial links to Tokyo (irrespective of currency) are strengthening.

          Table 7 analyzes the determination of interest rates in five Pacific countries with

 monthly data for l9S8-91, a time period more recent than that in Table 6, There is more

 evidence of an important role on the part of Tokyo than there was in the earlier period. For

 Singapore, where the influence of Tokyo in Table 6 was less than New York but rising over

 time, estimates in the first row, based simply on interest rates, suggest that the Japanese

 financial center has now surpassed its American rival. For Taiwan, Tokyo dominates so

 strongly that New York doesn't even seem to matter. For Hong Kong and Australia, on the

 other hand, New York dominates. For Korea, the two major financial centers appear to be


                                                21
 equally strong.

         As noted above, a country could have close financial ties with a foreign country and yet

if exchange rate changes are important, the simple regression agaiost the foreign interest rate

 would be inappropriately designed to show this relationship. We can take out currency factors

by using the forward exchange market. We simply express the foreign interest rates so as to

be "covered5 or hedged against exchange risk. Doing so in Table 7 changes the results for

Australia and Singapore toward a Tokyo effect that is smaller than the New York effect.2t

(Usable forward rate data are not available for the other countries.)

         For four of these countries, there exists another way of correcting for possible exchange

rate changes: direct data on forecasts of market participants collected in a monthly survey by the

Currency Forecaster's Digest of White Plains, N.Y." One advantage of using the survey

responses tn measure expected exchange rate changes is that the data allow us to test explicitly

whether there exists an exchange risk premium that creates art international differential in interest

rates even in the absence of barriers to intemational capital flows. Such a differential would be

compensation to risk-averse investors for holding assets that they view as risky.5° An

        For the case of Australia, the coefficient on the covered foreign interest rate is close enough to 1 to constitute
statistical support of the hypothesis that 'covered interest parity' holds. That is, capital controls and other barciera
to the movement of capital between Sydney and New York are close to zero. ('lie Durbin-wataon statistics
improve substantially when the forward rates are included, confirming that the equation that uses covered interest
rates is a more appropriate specification.)

       The Currency Forecasters' Direst data is proprietary, and was obtained by suhacription by the Institute for
Interaatinnal Economics,

    a The forward rate data allow us to eliminate factors associated with the currency in which countries' assets
are denominated, but they do not sllnw us to distinguish between two currency factore the exchange risk premium
and expectations of depreciation. Fur the case of Australia, for example, the support for covered interest parity
suggests that barriers to the movement of capital between Sydney sad New York are low, and so differences in
interest rates are due to currency factors. But when the Australian interest rate is observed to exceed the U.S.
interest rate, is this because the Australian dollar is confidently expected to depreciate, or is it because investors
have no idea what the exchange rate will do aid demand so be compensated for this risk? The survey data may be

                                                          22
advantage of the Currency Forecasters' Digest data in particular is that they are available even

for countries like Taiwan and Korea where financial markets are less developed. A potential

disadvantage is the possibility that survey data measure the expectations of marker participants

imperfectly.

        For Singapore, the survey data corroborate the finding from the forward rate data that,

once expected depreciation is eliminated as a factor, the New York effect dominates the Tokyo

effect. For Korea, the survey data also show that the Tokyo effect becomes smaller than the

New York effect. For Australia and Taiwan, both effects largely disappear.



The Role of the Yen in AsiaxLExdhnngeE.afeYolicies

        The finding that eliminating exchange rate expectations from the calculation leaves Tokyo

with relatively little effect on local interest rates in most of these countries does not mean that

the Japanese influence is not strong. It is likely, rather, that much of the influence in the Pacific

comes precisely through the role of the yen. If Pacific countries assign high weight to the yen

in setting their exchange rate policies, then their interest rates will be heavily influenced by

Japanese interest rates.

        No Asian or Pacific countries have ever pegged their currencies to the yen in the post-

war period. But neither are there any Pacific countries that the International Monetary Fund

classifies as still pegging to the U.S. dollar. (As already mentioned, Hong Kong pegs to the

dollar; but the Colony is not an official member of the IMF.) Malaysia and Thailand, and a

number of Pacific island countries, officially peg to a basket of major currencies and are thought



able to distinguish between these two hypotheses, whereas the forward rate data cansot.

                                                      23
to give weight to both the dollar and yen, but the weights are not officially announced.

       It is interesting to estimate econometrically the weights given to the dollar, yen, and other

major currencies in exchange rate policies of Asian/Pacific countries, especia1l those who

follow a basket peg but do not officially announce the weights. This involves regressing changes

in the value of the currency in question against changes in the value of the yen, dollar, etc.

       There is a methodological question of what numeraire should be used to measure the

value of the currencies. A simple solution is to use the SDR as numeraire. This approach

suffers from the drawback that the SDR is itself a basket of five major currencies including the

dollar and yen. An alternative approach that is a little neater theoretically is to use purchasing

power over local goods (the inverse of the local price level) as the numeraire. Whatever the

numeraire, under the null hypothesis that a particular currency is pegged to the dollar or yen,

or to a weighted basket, the regression results should show this clearly, featuring even a high

R2. We focus here on the purchasing power measure.

       Regressions of changes in the real value of the Hong Kong dollar against changes in the

value of the five major currencies show highly significant coefficients on the U.S. dollar during

the periods 1974-80 and 1984-90 [not reported here]. The weight on the dollar is statistically

indistinguishable from 1 during most of the latter 7-year period, and the R2 reaches .96 during

the last four years.    Occasional sub-periods show apparently significant weights on other

currencies (the yen during 1979-81, the franc during 1983-85, and the mark during 1986-88).

Overall, however, the numbers bear out Hong Kong's peg to the dollar.

       Regressions of changes in the real value of the Malaysian ringgit against the five major

currencies, reported in Table Ba, give a large significant weight to the dollar. Some sub-periods


                                                24
show a significant weight on the mark, and during 1986-88 even the pound is significant. But

the yen is not significant during any three-year sub-period. The constant term is negative (and

statistically significant), indicating a trend depreciation, and the R5 is fairly low, indicating that

the basket "peg" was loose (even if one allows for a crawling peg).5'

        The Singapore dollar shows significant weights (of about .2 each) on the U.S. dollar and

mark during the period 1974-77. The regression for 1977-79 shows a rough basket peg

(R2 =.83) with significant weights of .09 on the yen, .47 on the dollar, .25 on the mark, and

.09 on the pound. The weight on the dollar diminishes thereafter, and the weight on the yen

increases. By 1983-85, the yen weight (at a significant .20) has temporarily passed the dollar

weight (at a significant .19). From 1986 to 1990 only the dollar is significant.

        The results for the real value of the Thai baht, reported in Table 8b, show a very close

peg to the dollar from 1974 to 1980, whereupon the dollar weight falls somewhat. Beginning

in 1986, a pattern emerges of significant weights on the yen and pound, in addition to the dollar.

During the period 1988-90, the haM exhibits a close-to-perfect peg (P2 = .99) to a basket with

estimated weights of .82 on the dollar, .13 on the yen, .06 on the mark, and .02 on the pound.

        Korea also claimed to have a sort of basket peg in the 1980s, but with large adjustments.

Regressions of the change in the real value of the won show a statistically significant weight on

the value of the dollar during the period April 1980 to March 1986, with art estimated coefficient

of .4 to .5. (The Canadian dollar, which was reputed to be included in the Korean basket, also

shows up with a significant coefficient of .2 during part of the period.) There is a significant

constant term (the "alpha") during this period: the value of the won declined during the early


    " This turns out to be tn'e of almost all currencies worldwide that purport to be on a basket peg (exclodtn
a peg to the SDR).
1980s, whether measured by inflation or depreciation, relative to foreign currencies. The dollar,

like the other major currencies, is insignificant during the period April 1985 to March 1987.

Its influence re-emerges from April 1986 to March 1988. But then during the final two-year

sub-periOd, April 1988 to March 1990, the yen (with a highly significant coefficient estimated

at .18) suddenly eclipses the dollar (with an insignificant coefficient of .l1).32

         To summarize, there is some evidence of increased yen influence in the case of the

Singapore dollar in the early 1980s and the Thai baht in the late l980s. The only place where

the yen appears to have become as important as the dollar is Korea in the period since 1988.



The Role of the Yen In Reserves anti Invoicing

          There is other evidence that the yen is playing an increasing role in the region. As Tahie

9 shows, Asian central banks in the course of the 1980s increased their holdings of yen from

13.9 per cent of their foreign exchange reserve portfolios to 17.1 per cent.53 Foreign exchange

market trading in the regional financial centers of Singapore and Hong Kong, though still

overwhelmingly conducted in dollars, now shows a much higher proportion of trading in yen

than is the case in Europe.

          The yen is also being used more widely to invoice lending and trade in Asia. The

countries that incurred large international debts in the 1970s and early 19 SOs subsequently shifted




       The results for the won are reported in Frankel (1992), [With value measured in terms or purchasing power.
Value is measured also in terms of the 501k in a related paper to be pubtished by the Hoover Institution, but the
regreaaiona are against the dollar and yen alone.J
    '   The deutsche mark and Swiss franc are the two currencies that suffered the largest loss in share in the regioa

        Tavias and Oseki (1992, p.35).

                                                           26
the composition away from dollar-denominated debt and toward yen-denominated debt. Table

9 shows that the yen share among five major Asian debtors nearly doubled between 1980 and

1988, entirely at the expense of the dollar. Table 10 shows that the share of trade denominated

in yen is greater in Southeast Asia than in other regions, and that was an especially rapid

increase from 1983 to 1990 in the share of Southeast Asian imports denominated in yenY




PART ifi: CONCLUSIONS



         We may draw eight conclusions.

(1) The 1e4 of trade in East Asia, like trade within the European Community and within the
Western Hemisphere, is biased toward intraregional trade, to a greater extent than can be

explained naturally by distance. By way of contrast to Krugman's natura1 trade blocs, one

might call these three regions "super-natural" blocs. (2) There is no evidence of a special Japan

effect within Asia. (3) Although growth in Japan, the four NICs, and other East Asian

countries, is rapidly increasing their weight in world output and trade, the statistics do not bear

out a jgg toward intra-regional bias of trade and direct investment flows. (5) The intra-

regional trade bias did increase in Europe in the 1980s, in the Western Hemisphere in the late

1980; and in the grouping that includes the U.S. and Canada together with the Asian/Pacific

countries, i.e., APEC. (6) The APEC trade grouping appears to be the world's strongest,

whether judged by rate of change of intra-group bias or (as of 1990) by level of bias. Far from


   '   Tavias and Ozeki (1991, 92) give further statistics and discussion.

                                                         27
being shut out of a strong Asian bloc centered on Japan, the United States and Canada are in the

enviable position of belonging to bQth of the world's two strongest groupings.

       (7) There is more evidence of rising Japanese influence in the East Asia's financial

markets than is the case for trade. Tokyo appears to have recently acquired a dominant

influence over interest rates in Singapore and Taiwan. lt also has important and increasing

effects on interest rates elsewhere in the Pacific, though overall its influence is as yet no greater

than that of New York. (8) Some of Japan's financial influence takes place through a growing

role for the yen, at the expense of the dollar. There has been a gradual increase in the yen's

relative importance in invoicing of trade and finance in the region, and in some countries'

exchange rate policies.

        This still leaves a question raised at the beginning of this essay. Are the financial and

monetary trends the outcome of deliberate policy measures on the part of Japan? Gradually-

increasing use of the yen intemationally is primarily the outcome of private decisions by

importers, exporters, borrowers and lenders. It is difficult to see signs of deliberate policy

actions taken by the Japanese govemment to increase its financial and monetary influence in

Asia. To the contrary, at least until recently, the Japanese government has resisted any tendency

for the yen to become an international currency in competition with the dollar.

        It has been the U.S. government, in the Yen/Dollar Agreement of 1984 and in subsequent

negotiations, that has been pushing Japan to internationalize the yen, to promote its worldwide

use in trade, finance, and central bank policies.36 It has also been the U.S. government that

has been pushing Korea and other East Asian NICs to open up their financial markets, thereby


    3' Frankel (1984).

                                                 28
allowing Japanese capital and Japanese financial institutions to enter these countries. It has again

been the U.S. government that has been pushing Korea and Taiwan to move away from policies

to stabilize the value of their currencies against the dollar.3' The increasing role of the yen in

Pacific Asia may or may not be a good idea. But it is an idea that originated in Washington,

not in Tokyo.




                                  a                *                *



                                                References

Abidin, A.Z., 1986, "Financial Reform and the Role of Foreign Banks in Malaysia," in
Financial Policy and Reform in Pacific Basin Countries, Hanson Cheng, ed. (Lexington Books:
Lexington, MA), pp.305-309.

Anderson, James, 1979, "A Theoretical Foundation for the Gravity Equation," American
Economic Review 69, 1, March, 106-116.

Argy, Victor, 1987, "International Financial Liberalisation -- The Australian and Japanese
Experiences Compared," Bank of Japan Monetary and Economic Studies 5, 1, 105-168.

Balassa, Bela, and John Williamson, 1990, Adjusting to Success: Balance of Payments Policy
in the East Asian NICs, Policy Analyses in International Economics 17, Institute for
Jntemational Economics; Washington, DC), April.

Bergsten, C.Fred, in "Comment on Krugman," in Policy implications of Trade and Currency
        A Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole,
Wyoming, August, p.43-57.

Bhagwati, Jagdish, 1990, "Regional Accords Be-GATI' Trouble For Free Trade," Wall Sweet
Journal, Dec. 5.



    ' Balassa and Williamson (1987), Noland (1990) and Frankel (1959). Financial negotiations betweesi the U.S.
Treasury and the governments o( Korea and Taiwan were a response to congressional passage of the 1988 Omnibus
Trade Bill.

                                                       29
Bhagwati, Jagdish, 1992, "Regionalism vs. Multilateralism: An Overview," Conference on New
Dimensions in Regional Integration, World Bank, Washington, D.C., April 2-3.

Deardorff, Alan, 1984, "Testing Trade Theories and Predicting Trade Flows," in R.Jones and
P.Kenen, eds., Handbook of International Economics vol. 1 (Elsevier Science Publishers:
Amsterdam), Ch.l0, 467-517.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, 1989, "The Dollar in the 1990s: Competitiveness and the Challenges of
New Economic Blocs," in Monetary Policy Issues in the 1990s (Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City).

Edwards, Sebastian and Mohsin Khan, 1985, "Interest Rate Determination in Developing
Countries: A Conceptual Framework," IMF Staff Papers 32, Sept., 377-403.

Eken, Sena, 1984, "Integration of Domestic and International Financial Markets: The Japanese
Experience," Siaff Papers 31, International Monetary Fund, 499-548.

Faruqee, Hamid, 1991, "Dynamic Capital Mobility in Pacific Basin Developing Countries:
Estimation and Policy Implications," Working Paper 91/115, International Monetary Fund,
November.

Frankel, Jeffrey, 1984, The Yen/Dollar Agreement_Liberalizing Japanese Capital Markets,
Policy Analyses in International Economics no. 9 (Institute for International Economics:
Washington, D.C.).
Frankel, Jeffrey, 1989, "And Now Won/Dollar Negotiations? Lessons From the Yen/Dollar
Agreement of 1984" in Korea's Macroeconomic and Financial Policies (Korean Development
Institute: Seoul), December.

Frankel, Jeffrey, 199la, "Quantifying International Capital Mobility in the 1980's," in National
Saving and Economic Performance, D. Bernheim and J. Shoven, eds, (University of Chicago
Press: Chicago), 227-260.

Franlcel, Jeffrey, 1991b, "The Japanese Cost of Finance: A Survey,"
Spring, 95-127

Frankel, Jeffrey, 1991c, "Is a Yen Bloc Forming in Pacific Asia?" in Finance and the
International Economy, The AMEX Bank Review Prize Essays, edited by R.O'Brien, Oxford
Universfty Press, UK.

Frankel, Jeffrey, 1992, "Liberalization of Korea's Foreign Exchange Markets, and Tests of U.S.
versus Japanese Influence," forthcoming, Seoul Journal of Economics." [An earlier version was
presented at a conference on U.S.-Korea Economic Relations, and is forthcoming, R. Myers,
ed., Hoover Institution.]

Froot, Kenneth, and David Yoffie, 1991, "Strategic Trade Policies in a Tripolar World,"

                                               30
Working Paper No. 9 1-030, Harvard Business School;revised.

Fukao, Mitsuhiro and T. Okubo, "International Linkage of Interest Rates: The Case of Japan
and the United States," International Economic Review 25, February.

Click, Reuven, 1987, "Interest Rate Linkages in the Pacific Basin," Federal Reserve Bank of
San Francisco Economic Review No. 3, pp.31-42.

Click, Reuven, and Michael Hutchison, 1990, "Financial Liberalization in the Pacific Basin:
Implications for Real Interest Rate Linkages," Journal of the Japanese and Intemational
Economies 4, 36-48.

Hamilton, Carl, and L.Alan Winters, 1991, "Opening Up International Trade in Eastern
Europe," Economic Policy Panel, Prague, October.

Helpman, Elhanan, 1987, "Imperfect Competition and International Trade: Evidence from
Fourteen Industrial Countries," Joumal of the Japanese and International Economies 1, 62-81.

Helpman, Elhanan and Paul Krugman, 1985, Market Structure and Foreign Trade, Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.

Ito, Takatoshi, 1986, "Capital Controls and Covered Interest Parity," NBER working paper no.
1187, and Economic Studies Quarterly 37, 223-241.

Ito, Takatoshi, 1988, "Use of (Time-Domain) Vector Autoregressions to Test Uncovered Interest
Parity," Review of Economies and Statistics 70, 296-305.

Jackson, Tom, 1991, "A Came Model of ASEAN Trade Liberalization," Open Economies
Review 2, no.3, pp. 237-254.

Komiya, Ryutaro and Ryuhei Wakasugi, 1991, "Japan's Foreign Direct Investment," Annals
of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, Jan.

Krugman, Paul, l99la, "Is Bilateralism Bad?" in E.Helpman and A.Razio, eds., International
Trade and_Trade Policy, Cambridge, MIT Press.

Krugman, Paul, l99lb, "The Move Toward Free Trade Zones," in Policy Implications of Trade
and Currency Zones, A Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,
Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August, p.7-42.

Lawrence, Robert, 199th. "How Open is Japan?" in Trade With Japan: Has the Door Opened
Wider?, Paul Krugman, ed., (University of Chicago Press, Chicago), 9-50.

Lawrence, Robert, 1991b, "An Analysis of Japanese Trade with Developing Countries,"
Brookings Discussion Papers No. 87, April.


                                             31
Lawrence, Robert, 199k, "Emerging Regional Arrangements: Building Blocks or Stumbling
Blocks?" in Finance and the International Economy, The AMEX Bank Review Prize Essays,
edited by R.O'Brien, Oxford University Press, UK.

Moreno, Ramon, 1988, 'Exchange Rates and Monetary Policy in Singapore and Taiwan," in
Monetary Policy in Pacific Basin Countries, Hanson Cheng, S. (Kluwer Press: Boston).

Noland, Marcus, 1990, Pacific Basin Developing Countries; Prospects for the Future (Institute
for International Economics: Washington, D.C.).

Noland, Marcus, 1991, "Public Policy, Private Preferences, and the Japanese Trade Pattern,"
Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C., November.

Otani, Ichiro, 1983, "Exchange Rate Instability and Capital Controls: The Japanese Experience
1978-81," in: D. Bigman and T. Taya, eds., Exchange Rate and Trade Instability: Causes.
Consequences arid Remedies, (Ballinger, Cambridge, MA).

Otani, I., and S. Tiwari, 1981, "Capital Controls and Interest Rate Parity: The Japanese
Experience, 1978-1981, IMF Staff Paoers 28, 793-815, Dec.

Petri, Peter, 1991a, "Japanese Trade in Transition; Hypotheses and Recent Evidence," in fld
With Japan: Has the Door Qperted Wider?, Paul Krugman, S., (University of Chicago Press,
Chicago).

Petri, Peter, 1991b, "One Bloc, Two Blocs or None? Political-Economic Factors in Pacific
Trade Policy,' Economics Working Paper No. 297, Brandeis University, April.

Ramstetter, Eric, 1991a, "Regional Patterns of Japanese Multinational Activities in Japan and
Asia's Developing Countries," Economic and Political Studies Series No. 74, Kansai University,
Osaka.

Ramstetter, Eric, 1991b, "An Overview of Multinational Firms in Asia-Pacific Economies: An
Introduction to the Commonplace Ignorance," Faculty of Economics, Kansai University, Osaka.

Saxonhouse, Gary, 1989, "Differentiated Products, Economies of Scale, and Access to the
Japanese Market," in Robert Feenstra, ed., Trade Policies for International Competitiveness
(University of Chicago Press, Chicago), 145-174,

Schott, Jeffrey, 1991, "Trading Blocs and the World Trading System," The World Economy 14,
no.1, March.

Tavlas, George and Yuzuru Ozeki, 1991, "The Japanese Yen as an International Currency,'
IMF Working Paper WPJ91/2, International Monetary Fund, Jan.

Tavlas, George and Yuzuru Ozeki, 1992, The Jntemationalization of Currencies: An Appraisal
of the Japanese Yen, Occasional Paper 90, International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C.,
Jan.
         Table lz Summary Measures of Intra-regional Trade Biases


                             Pacific     North        European
                              Asia      America       Coimnunity
(1)
Intra—             1980       .33           .32             .51
regional           1986                     .35             .57
trade /                       .32
total
trade              1989       .37           .36             .59

(2)
Intra-
regional           1980      2.2            1.9             1.3
bias,
holding
constant           1989      1.9            1.9             1.5
for size
of      exports
                             Pacific    western       European
                              Asia     flemisphere    Coinunity
.( 3)
holding            1980       .70            .53            .23
constant
for GNP,       1985           .40            .34            .44
population,
distance, etc. 1990           .60            .97            .46




Sources:

{1) Schott (1991) and Direction of Trade, International Monetary
Fund, as computed in Frankel (1991c).
(2) computed as the ratio of (1) to shares of world trade, as
described in text.

(3) Gravity regressions, reported in Tables 2,            3, and 4,
respectively. They include also significant coefficients on the
APEC bloc, among other variables.
                                                                      Table 2
                                                     GRAVITY MODEL OF BILATERAl. TRADE:         1980
                      LBS    Variable (Bilateral Exports       &   Importe} and   first three   PER   variables are in log form.
                                                          All others are      dummy   variables
                     Per
                    Capita                                                                              Aelan              Pacific
     C       GNPs    0BPs                               EEC           RH          ASIAN     EAEC                   APEC
                               Distance Adjacent                                                       Pacific               Rim
                                                                                                                                     BJR2    SEE

 ll.356'    0.763* 0.268'        —0.597'    0.649*     0.092         0.449'       2.308*                                              0.68
    0,563   0.018 0.021           0.041     0.185      0.166         0.157        0.408                                              /0.68   1.26
 12.047' 0.759' 0.283'           —0.538'    0.775'     0.193         0.498'                2.363'                                     0.70
    0.552   0.017   0.020         0.041     0.180      0.181         0.153                 0.212                                     /0.70   1.23

 —12.052' 0.759' 0.283'          _0.538*    0.772*     0.193         0.499'       0.081    2.341*                                     0.70
   0.553 0.017 0.020              0.041     0.181      0.161         0.153        0.462    0.247                                     /0.70   1.23
 —11.972' 0.753* 0.287'          0.543'     0.764*     0.214         0.527'                             2.066'                        0.71
   0.542 0.017 0.020              0.040     0.178      0.179         0.151                              0.158                        /0.71   1.21
 12.128' 0.753*     0.290*       _0.532*    0.770*     0.227         0.535*       0.087    0.730        1.650*                        0.71
    0.546   0.017   0.020         0.040     0.179      0.179         0.151        0.455    0.332        0.232                        /0.71   1.21
 —11.09'    0.733' 0.281*        —0.586'    0.694'     0.207         0.503'                                       1.663'              0.71
   0.532    0.017 0.020           0.039     0.177      0.176         0.150                                        0.133              /0.71   1.21
—11.58'     0.739* 0.287'        —0.557'    0.724'     0.234         0.526'       0.062    0.704        0.355     1.319'              0.71
  0.551     0.017 0.020           0.040     0.177      0.178         0.150        0.451    0.330        0.335     0.248              /0.71   1.20
—10.03'     0.762' 0.259*        —0.630'    0.701'     0.033         0.268                                                  0.018     0.68
  0.564     0.018 0.021           0.021     0.187      0.184         0.168                                                  0.014    /0.68   1.27
—11.55'     0.739' 0.288*        —0.563'    0.716'     0.227         0.474'       0.062    0.599        0.380     1.321'    0.008     0.71
  0.554     0.017 0.020           0.041     0.176      0.174         0.178        0.452    0.330        0.335     0.240     0.013    /0.71   1.20




-                                     95%   level.
    Statistically significant at
*                                     99%   level.
    Statistically significant,t
    Standard errore appear below each coefficient.
                                                                           Table 3
                                                       GRAYnY MODELOF BILATERAL TRaDE:       3.935
                         IRS Variable   (Bilateral     Exports & Imports) and first three 0135 variables are in log form.
                                                             All others are dummy variables.
                         Par                                                                                                              -



                       Capita                                                                        Aoian              Pacific
       C       GNPn      GNPS    Distance   Adjacent       EEC       WIT        ASEAJ3    EAZC       Pacific    APEC      Rim
                                                                                                                                  RJR2        SEE

    _l0.54*   0.791*    0.242*    _0.729*     0.705*      0.306!    0.2751      1.735'
      0.527   0.017 0.020           0.040                                                                                          0.72
                                              0.184       0.179     0.162       0.392                                             /0.72   1.21
    —10.92'   0.794* 0.240*       —0.683'     0.304k      0.39r     0.312                1.841*                                    0.73
      0.519   0.017 0.020           0.040     0.161       0.176     0.159                0.205                                    /0.73   1.19
    10.92'    0.794* 0.248*       0.663*      0.806*      0.397     0.311—     —0.046    1.854*                                    0.73
      0.520   0.017 0.020           0.040     0.152       0.176    0.159        0.446    0.239                                    /0.73   1.19
    —10.85'   O.778 0.251'        —0.665'     0.796'      0.424    0.341                              1.697*                       0.73
      0.510   0.017    0.019       0.039      0.178       0.174    0.157                              0.153                        0.73   1.15
    —10.91'   0.778' 0.252'       —0.679'     0.602*      0.431—   O.343       —0.045    0.414        1.474*                       0.73
      0.514   0.017 0.019           0.039     0.179       0.174    0.157        0.442    0.322        0.225                       /0.73   1.10
    _10.07*   0.761* 0.243*       0.720       0.739*      0.418'   0.3231                                      1.522*              0.74
      0.506   0.017 0.019          0.038      0.178       0.156    0.173                                       0.130              /0.74   1.17
 —10.42'      0.755' 0.247*       _0.698a     0.766*     0.439!    0.33        —0.071    0.398       0.469     1.029'              0.74
   0.524      0.017 0.019          0.039      0.179      0.173     0.156        0.440    0.321       0.327     0.244              /0.74   1.17
 —10.09'      0.791* 0.239*       —0.775'     0.731'     0.239     —0.024                                      0.041'              0.72
   0.520      0.017 0.020          0.041      0.185      0.179      0.183                                      0.013              /0.72   1.20
—10.28'       0.765* 0.250*       —0.723'     0.730*     0.415     0.142       —0.073    0.370       0.450     1.034'   0.030      0.74
  0.527       0.017 0.019          0.040      0.179      0.173     0.177        0.439    0.320       0.327     0.244    0.013     /0.74   1.17




•     Statietically significant at 90% level.

      Statistically significant at 95% level.
*                                       99% level.
      Statistically significant at
     Standard errors appear below each coefficient.
                                                                    Table 4
                                                  GRAVITY ROOKI. OF HILATKRBL TRADE:      1990
                    LIIS   Variable (Bilateral Exports     &
                                                           Impnrte)    and    first three PER variables are   in   log face.
                                                       All others are dummy variables
                    Pet
                  Capita                                                                          Asian               Pacific   p2
    C     ORBs     ONPi      Distance   Adjacent     EEC       We            AROSE     EEOC      Pacific      SPEC      Rim             SEE


2.765*   O.707    0,079*       0.589*    0.732*     0.341      0.934*        1.079*                                              0.75
0.360    0.016    0.017         0.038    0.166      0.166      0.148         0.370                                              /0.75   1.11

2.535*   0.779    0.082k                 0.794*     0.412      0.957*                 1.997*                                     0.76
0.351    0.010    0.017         0.030    0.162      0.163      0.145                  0.215                                     /0.76   1.09
2.538*   0.779*   0.082                  0.797*     0.412      0.955*    —0.109       2.032*                                     0.76
0.351    0.016    0.017         0.030    0.163      0.163      0.145      0.450       0.261                                     /0.76   1.09
2.568*   0.773*   0.006*                 9.790k     ,437*      0.903*                             1.746*                         0.77
0.346    0.016    0.016         0.037    0.160       0.160     0.143                              0.152                         /0.77   1.00
2.515*   0.773*   QQ57*                  0.794k      D.446     0.906*    —0.107       0.6121      1.456*                         0.77
0.346    0.016    0.016         0.037    0.100       0.160     0.143      0.443       0.331       0.213                         /0.77   1.00
3.024*   0.756*   0.083*                 0.730*      Q•444*    0.940*                                      1.597*                0.77
0.340    0.016    0.016         0.036    0.150       0.159     0.141                                       0.120                /0.77   1.07
2.831*   0.760*   0.085        —0.579    0.750*      Q,45Q*    0.967*    —0.144       0.6049      0.289    1.194k                0.77
0.348    0.016    0,016         0.037    0.159       0.159     0.142      0.440       0.320       0.309    0.231                /0.77   1.07
3,Q35*   0.700*   0.073*                 Q730*       0.296*    0.789                                 .                0.015      0.75
0.365    0.017    0.017         0.040    0.167       0.167     0.170                                                  0.013     /0.74   1.12
2.868*   0.760*   0.080*                 0.743k      0.454*    0.925*    —0.143       0.6001      0.284    1,190*     6.39x10    0.77
0.300    0.016    0.016         0.030    0.160       0.159     0.163      0.440       0.320       0.309    0.231      0.012     /0.77   1.07




* Statistically significant at      90% level.

    Statistically significant at 95% level.
*   Statistically significant at 99% level.
    Standard errors appear below each coefficient.
                           Table 5: Japan's Foreign Direct Investment


                Overseas Direct Investment by Area and Country
                                                                                                                  (In millions of     dollars)


                                                 Ff1909                               Ff1990                          ContolnliveToLaL



    U.S. A.
                                      Ca,,
                                      2,660
                                                 Account

                                                  32,540       49.2
                                                                           Case
                                                                           2,269
                                                                                      Aiiiauot
                                                                                       26,129
                                                                                                 r:"      45.9
                                                                                                                   Cute
                                                                                                                   22,944
                                                                                                                            Aninunc
                                                                                                                            120,529         42.0
    Con,da                              190           1,302     2.0          197        1,004               1.9     1,281     5,616          1.9
     Subtotal lNnrth Ameriru)         2,848       33,902       20.2        2,420       27,192             47,9     24,225   134,165         43.9
    Fnnama                              263           2,044      3.0         206        1,342               2.4    3,821     16,244          0.2
    Branil                               39             349      0.5          15          611               1.1     1,461     6,545          2.1
    Caye,nn                              41           1,659      2.1          34          588        .      1.0       261     1,332          2.4
    Ituhne,au                            14            020       0.9           4          121               0.2      110      3,159           (.1
    Mexico                                   9          39       4.1          14          168               0.3      274      1,974          0.6
    Bermuda                              11            229       0.3          17          300               0.6      136       079           5.0
    AnLille,                                 6          38       0.1              7         9              0.0        04       795           5.3
    Peru                                 —               —        —           —            —                —         90       606           0.2
    Chile                                10             47       0.1          11           20              0.1        90       311           0.1
    Argentina                                1           3       0.0                      213              0.4       131       431           0.1
    Venecerlus                               4          70       0,1                       77              0.1       113       341           0,1
    British Virgin Islands                   4         118       0.2                       15              0.0        17       305           0.1
    Puerto Itiun                         —               3      0.9                        22              0,0        II       167           0.1
    CnIombia                                 2           4       0.1                       59              0.1        65       131           0.0
    BOlter,                              17           19        0.0                         9              0.0       474        059          0.1
       SubIatal(LnUuAmericnl            421        5,238        7.8         339         3,020              0.4     7,107     40,493         13.2
    Indonesia                           140            631      0.9          155        1,105              1.0     1,073     11,040          3,7
    Slang Kocug                         330           1,899     2.9         244         1,700              2.1     3,743     9,850           3.2
    Sicugapore                          181           1.902     2.9          139          040              1.5     2,559     0,510           2.1
    Ileeublis of Korea                   81            609      5.9           54          284              0.5     1,847     4,139           1.3
    Chins                               126          439        0.6          165          349              0.0       050     2,923           0.9
    Thailasd                            403        1,270        1.9         377         1,154              2.0     2,465     4,422           1.4
    Meluyeie                            119          673        1.0          169          725              1.3     1,509     3,231           1.0
    Toiwen                              165          494        0.7         122           046              0.8     2,400     2,731           0.0
    Philippienu                          07          202        0.2          58           208              0.5       050     1,090           0.5
    IndIa                                 9           19        0.0           7           20     ,         0,2       167        90           0.1
    Brunei                               —               0      0.0           —            —'               —         31       109           0.0
    PahieLon                              0       -     03      0.1            3            9              0.0        19       110           1,4
    Other.                               16             17      0.0    '      26           69              0.1      273        234           0.1
       Sabtotal(AsLu)                 1,727       8,239        12.2        1,409        7.054             12,4    19,634    47,519          15.2
    Saudi Arabia,Kawait                  —              32      0,0           —           20             , 0.0         4     1,441           0,5
    Iran                                 —                      0.0           —            —                —       100
                                                         1                                                                   1,006           0.3
    United Arab Emiretae                  2              6      0.0           —            .-               —         47       441           0.1
    Saudi Arabia                         —              —        ..           —            —                —        101       309           0.1
    Bshrain                               1             24      0.0           —            —                —        23        129           0.0
    OLlirre                               2             3       0,0               I         1              0.0       07         45           0.0
       SobLotaI(Middla    Bait)           5            60       5.1               I       27               0.2      340      3.431           1.1
    U. K.                              285        0,239         7.9         370         6,606             12.0     3,134    22,509           7,3
    Netherlands                        112        4,547         6.7         138         2,744              4.8       790     2,010           4,1
    Luuenrbarg                          13           634        1.0           7           224              0.4       150     5,607           1.8
    9'. 5. Germany                     110         1,083        1.6         134         1,242              2.2     1,197     4,600           1.5
    France                             168        1,130         1,7         171         1,257              2.2     1,320     4,150           1.3
    SwitxsrLaod                         19            397       0.8                       110
    Spain                               58             101      0.7
                                                                              10
                                                                             43           320
                                                                                                           1.3
                                                                                                           0.6
                                                                                                                     354
                                                                                                                     320
                                                                                                                             2,495
                                                                                                                             1,807
                                                                                                                                       '    0.0
                                                                                                                                            0.0
    Brlgiom                             23            320       0.5          30           367              0.1       331     1,720          0.1
    Irelecid                            11             132      0.2           15           43              0.1       100       014          0.2
    Italy                               47            314       0.5          52          217               0.4       337       000          0.3
    Nerwuju                              12            280      0.4           19         130               0.2        71       640          0.2
    U.S.S.R.                      -      13             19      0.0           15          21               0.0        43       247          0.1
    Tarkey                                4            40       0.1           6           59               0.1       34        034          0.1
    AenLria                              7              16      0,0           11          39               0.1       74        164          0.1
    Portugal                             10            74       0,1           3           09               0.1       47        113          0.1
    Creene                               —              —        —                1        4              0.0         18       101          0.0
    Other,                               IS            48       0.1          21           71              0,1        102      237            0.1
      SuubtnLul(Earopn)                910       10,938        21.0         056       14,294              23.1     7,425    10,205          10.1
    Liluaria                            72            043       1.0          00          531              0.9       930      4,022          1.0
    Zairu                                —'             —        —            —            —                —        56       202           0.1
    Nigrriu                               1              1      0.0           2             1             0.0        93        129          5,1
    Zoetbin                              —              —        —            —            —                —         17       142          5.0
    Othoru                               10            37       0.0          18           10              0.1       242       411           0.1
      Soblotel IAOricnJ                 88            071       1,0          70          951               1.0     1,459     3,930          1.0
    Aoatraliu                          449        4,290         6.3         407        3,008              0.4      2,760    16,003          9.2
    Now Onelnnil                        47            101       0.2          40          231              0.4       371       025           3.3
    I'npon New Gains,                    1             IC       0.11          4            9              5.0       212       220           3,!
    North Murisos                       12            134       3.2          48          134              3.2       330       4011          0.1
    Vnuuatu                              0             40       2.1           2            4              2.5        65       100           0.5
    Fiji                                12           IS         3.5          06'          47              5.1        07        109          0.3
    OLhore                              73           95         3.1          38           72              0.1       130       212           0.1
    Subtctol (Oconnin)                 604        4,510         0.6         172        4,160              7.3      3,05?    18.090          0.9
            Total                     6.500      07,310       160,0        5,903      50,211             320.0    63,229 310,000           135.0



Soorce: Financial Statistics                             of Japan, 1991k Ministry of Finance, p. 95.
                                                               Table 6;
                                 Japanese. U.S., U.K., and German           Interest Rate Effects
                                                     in Hong   Kong and Singapore


                                          Hong Kong                        Singapore
                                 without          with            without          with
                                  trend           trend            trend          trend
    Constant term                                 —1.70            —l.l6          —0,65
                                  (1.08)          (1.13)           (0.67)         (0.67)

    Tokyo effect                  -0.23           —0.11             O.231**
                                  (0.17)          (0.69)           (0.07)         (0.22)

    Tine trend in                                 —0.00                            0.02*
    Tokyo effect                                  (0.01)                          (0.01)

    New York effect                1.32*1*        0.61              0.75*1*        0.65*
                                  (0.15)          (0.52)           (0.09)         (0.33)

    Time trend in                                 0.01                             0.00
    flew York effect                              (0.01)                          (0.01)

    London effect                  0.10                            —0.07          —0.09
                                  (0.11)          (0.47)           (0.06)         (0.16)
    Time trend in                                                                 —0.00
    London effect                                 (0.01)                          (0.00)
    Frankfurt   effect             0.14           —l.74             0.19
                                  (0.20)          (1.13)           (0.12)         (0,54)
    Time trend in                                  0.04*
    Frankfurt effect                              (0.02)                          (0,01)


         H                         .83              .85             .87                .68

         0.w.                     1.50              1.61           1.53         1.92
    sample period                  1976.4    to   1989.3            1974.1 to 1988.1

*     Statistically      significant at 90 per cent significance level.
***   Statietically      significant at 99 per      cent   significance level.

(Standard errors reported in parentheses.)
                                           Table fl

            Japanese and U.S. Interest Rate Effects In Five Pacific Countries


Regressions of local interest rate againsti
1)   Japanese     and U.S. interest rates
2)   Japanese     and U.S. interest rates adjusted for expectations
of   exchange     rate changes as reflected in Currency Forecasters' Digest
3)   Japanese     and U.S. interest rates adjusted for forward discount



                     Constant      Tokyo        New York         iV   D.W.
                       term       effect         effect
    Sing—            2.29***       0.82***            Q43***    .85   0.53
    !22c!Si         J0.84)        J0.Ofl          L0°9L
            2)        3.30***     —0.01            0.27***      .71   0.43
                     (0,39)       (0.03)          (0.05)
            3)        l.47***      0.29***         0.41***      .72   1.41
                     (0.45)       (0.05)          (0.06)
    Austra—                        o.74***            2.11*as   .73
                                                                 •
                                                                      O.1
    ha 1)            (2.32)       (0.18)          (0.26)
            2)       13.90***      0.10*         —0.07          .03   0.20
                     (1.40)       (0.06)          (0.12)
            3)        353***       0.07            0.67***      .76   1.36
                     (1.13)       (0.21)          (0.20)
     Taiwan          —4.93         1.91***         0.32         .53   1.17
            1[_      (4.04)       (0.32)          (0.45)
            2)        7.14         0.07               0.10      .05   0.82
                     (0.67)       (0.08)          (0.12)
     Korea                         1.29***            1.16***   .59   0.78
            1)       (33)         (0.19)          (0.26)

            2)       11.65***      0.04               0.27***   .55   1.28
                     (0.32)       (0.04)          (0.07)

     Hong                          0.25*              1.66***   .79   0.59
     Kong 1)         (1.51)       (0.15)          (0.17)


*     Statistically different     from zero at 90 % significance level.
***   Statistically different     froa zero at99 % significance level.
(Standard errors are reported in parentheses.)
                                                              Table   Ba

                                       WEIGWIS ASSIGNED TO FOREIGN CDRflENCIES IN DETERMINING
                                               CHANGES IN VALUE OF MALAYSIAN RINGCIT



                    Constant    Yen    Dollar      Hark      Pound         Franc    E2   D.W.

   74.1—91.10        —.0026     .01      .16        .07        .01          —.01   .22   1.59
                    _797**     0.55     6.74*t*    2.35S**    0.33         —0.22

   74.1—76.12        —.0044     .05      .15        .09       —.06          —.01   .24   1.59
                    _2.74*     0.37     1.29       0.90      —0.69         —0.17

   77.1—79.12        —.0017     .05      .29        .15        .04          —.07   .45   1.73
                    _1.82*     1.27     3.36"      2.19's     0.76         —0.78

   60.1—82.12        —.0041     .00      .11        .15        .03          —.06   .35   1.52
                     4•j4t**   0.08     2.l7       2.13"      0.83         —0.88

   83.1—85.12        —.0014     .07      .11       —.07        .00           .12   .32   1.90
                    —1.55      1.24     2.65*fl   —0.59       0.00          0.98

   66.1—86.12        —.0021     —.04     .12        .06       —.06          —.02   .44   1.49
                    —3.78k"    —1.45    2.86"      0.70       2.55t**      —0.24

   88.1—90.12        —.0025     —.01     .17       —.10        .04           .09   .30   1.55
                    _5.52*     —0.50    2.75"     —0.76       1.56          0.71



   *                 statistically   significant at 90% (951) (99%J level.
       (**} [***J
   t—statietice reported below coefficients.


Note: The value of currencies, both domestic and foreign, here refer
    to purchasing power over Malaysian goods, as aeaeured by the CPI.
                                                                 Table   fib


                                           WEIGHTS ASSIGNED TO FOREIGN CURRENCIES IN DETERMINING
                                                       CHANGES IN VALUE OF THAI RENT


                           Constant       Yen        Dollar      Mark          Pound     Franc     82    PiL
1974.1—91.3                  —.0039       .01          .30       —.01           —.02       .03     .38   1.43
                                         0.61         937fr**   —0.03          —0.63      0.85
74.1—76.12                   —.0000      —.00         1.00        .00          —.00       —.00   1.00    2.05
                            —0.90       —0.00       240.?1**t     .42          —.36       —.10
77.1—79.12                   —.0010       .03          .09        .02           —.00      —.05     .96   1.70
        .                   335**        2.69•       22.16***    1.10          —0.01
80.1—32.12                   —.0061       .01          .47        .11           .00       —.10     .58   1.47
                                         0.15         5.82a**                                              .
                                                                 0.96          0.04      —0.00
33.1—85.12                   —.0020       .01          .03       —.01          —.07        .09     .32   1.51
                                         0.29         0.91      —0.06                     0.89
86.1—80.12                   —.0006       .06          .63       —.03            .05       .08     .00   2.04
                            —1.72k       3.52**t     10.02***   —0.69          3.29***    l.76
88.1—90.12                    .0001       .13          .82        .06            .02      —.01     .99   1.77
                             0.61       19.351*      45.42*t*    l.99k*        2.72e**   —0.22

    *       (**}   (***J   Statistically significant at 90% (95%) (99%) level.
   t—statiatics reported below coefficients.

Note: The valoe of currencies, both domestic and foreign, here refer
       to purchasing power over Thai goods, as measured by the cpi.
                                                            Table Sc

                                      WEIGHTS ASSIGNED TO FOREIGN CURRENCIES IN DETERMINING
                                               CHANGES IN VALUE OF SINGAPORE DOLLAR


                   Constant          Yen        Dollar       Mark        Pound     Franc      N2    D.W.
                   ________

                     —.0015          .06           .24        .13         —.01     —.04       .45   1.55
74.1—91.13
                    3. 96**         393***       9.68***     4.19*       —0.58     —1.26

                     —.0025          .02           .24        .26         —.07      -.00      .46   1.40
74.1—76.12
                    —1.74k          0.20         2.22**      2.84**t     —0.97     —0.05

                     —   .0010       .09           .47        .25          .09      —.09      .83   1.90
77. 1—79.12
                    —1.32           353***       8.07***     4.820**      2.32t*   —1.44

                     — .0013         .11           .22        .22          .07      —.12      .74   1.42
80.1—82.12
                    —1.50           3.725*5      473***      3.825*1      2.055*   _2.04**

                     —               .20           .19       —.08         —.02       .07      .41   1.55
93.1—85.12               .0012
                    _1.70*          3.97         3.09       —0.78        —0.53      0.77

                                     .01           .14        .02          .02       .01      .46   2.59
96.1—88.12           — .0004

                    —0.83           0.36         393*a*      0.33         1.14      0.12

                     —   .0010       .02          .15        —.05          .04       .06      .32   2.31
88.1—90.12
                    —l.65           0.87         3.29***    —0.42         1.29      0.46



*   **   [*5*) statistically     significant at 90% (95%) [99%) level.

t—etatistics reported below coefficients.

Mote: The value of currencies, both domestic and foreign, here refer
     to purchasing power over Singpore goods, ae measured by the cPI.
                                                Table 9
           Share   of the Ten in flcht—Denceiination and Official Raeene Holdinga
                                          In per cent
                                                                    Ten ehare in
                   Ten share in erternal debt                      official
                         of five countries                          holdinga
         mdc—        Korea    Hal-      Phil-      Thai—   Total   Aaia*   World
         nesia                ayaia                land    of S

 1980    20.0        16.6     19.0      22.0       25.5    19.5     13.9    4.4

 1901    19.3        14.1     15.9      20.6       23.2    17.8     15.5    4.2

 1982    21.0        12.3     13.3      19.2       24.0    17.2     17.6    4.7
 1983    23.3        12.5     14.2      20.0       27.3    18.5     15.5    5.0
 1984    25.0        12.8     21.2      20.0       29.2    20.3     16.3    5.8
 1985    31.7        16.7     26.4      24.9       36.1    25.8     26.9    8.0
 1906    33.9        22.0     30.4      25.5       39.9    29.3     22.9    7.9
 1987    39.4        27.2     35.7      35.2       43.1    36.0     30.0    7.5
 1988     39.3       29.5     37.1      40.5       43.5    37.9     26.7    7.7
 1989    35.2        26.6     36.6      32.6       40.9    35.7     17.5    7.9
 1990                                                               17.1    9.1

tsalected Asian countries (nDt including Japan).
Source: Tavlaa and   Ozeki   (1992, p.39).
                                            Table 10
                       Share       in Deoination of Foreign Trade
                               of the Ten

                                     in per cent
               Denomination of exports          Deooaination of imports
             Southeast Asia       All regions     Southeast Asia
                                                                   [All_regions
1983            48.0                 40.4               2.0             3.0

1986            37.5                 38.5               9.2             9.7

1987            35.3                 34.7              13.9            11.5

1988            41.2                 34.3              17.5            13.3

1959            43.5                 34.7              19.5            14-1

1990            48.9                 37.5              19.4            14-4


       Source: Japanese Ministry of Finance, Annual Recort,
              as reported in Tavtas and ozeki (1992, p.33).
