                            NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




   LABOR MARKET SEGMENTATION, WAGE DISPERSION AND UNEMPLOYMENT




                                         Kevin Lang

                                     William T. Dickens




                                  Working Paper No. 4073




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   May 1992




This paper was supported in part by a Sloan Faculty Research Fellowship (Lang) and the
Institute of Indusuial Reladons, Berkeley (Dickens). We are grateful to Gustavo Gonzaga for
exceUent research assistance and to Olivier Blanchard, Lawrence Katz, Douglas Orr, lames
Rebitzer, Robert Rosenthal, Andrew Weiss and participants in seminars at Berkeley, Boston
University. McGill and the NEER for helpful comments and discussion. This paper is part of
NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                               NBER Working Paper #4073
                                                               May 1992




      LABOR MARKET SEGMENTATION, WAGE DISPERSION AND UNEMPLOYMENT




                                              ABSTRACT


           This paper briefly reviews the empirical evidence on labor market segmentation and

    presents some new results on the sirnitarity of the pattern of segmentation across 66 different

    countries. The paper goes on to consider how unemployment might be understood in a labor

    market segmentation framework.

           Existing models of unemployment in a dual labor market suggest that unemployment

    should be concentrated among those who are ultimately employed in high wage jobs. In fact,

    unemployment seems to be cnncentrated among workers who are more likely to be found in low

    wage jobs. This happens even though at least some workers find low wage jobs easy to obtain,

    We develop a segmented labor market model capable of explaining these facts and then explore

    its implications for the aggregate unemployment rate. We find that it fits well with the facts.




    Kevin Lang                                                 William T. Dickens
    Department of Economics                                    Department of Economics
    Boston University                                          University of California
    270 Bay State Road                                         Berkeley, CA 94720
•   Boston, MA 02215                                           and NBER
    and NBER
                                      1

     Labor market segmentation is not as naturally part of a discussion of

unemployment as it may at first seem. On the one hand, in some of its

versions, labor market segmentation is much broader than a theory of

unemployment. It is a research program with an agenda that differs markedly

from that pursued by most economists. On the other hand, in its aore narrow

form, it is a theory of wage determination and of the allocation of workers to

jobs with different wages, and not a theory of unemployment.

     As a consequence, we begin by developing a model of labor market

segmentation and expl.oring its consequences for unemployment, The model is

simultaneously concerned with the microeconomic aspects of unemployment —    who

is unemployed —' and with the macroeconomic aspects — what determines the

aggregate level of unemployment. We find that unemployment will be more

prevalent among low skill workers who also end up disproportionately in low—

wage jobs. At the macroeconomic level, unemployment will be positively

correlated with the average wage and the fraction of low productivity workers.

In terms of observable variables, unemployment is, under certain

circumstances, positively correlated with the average wage and the fraction of

workers in the low—wage sector.

     In our previous work, we have stressed that labor market segmentation

models share two key elements. The first is a theory of wage determination

where wages for similar workers differ among sectors of the economy. Early

advocates of labor market segmentation models argued that the labor market

could be usefully described as consisting of a small number of segments with

different patterns of wage determination. Flovever more recent work which is

more closely linked with mainstream traditions has placed more emphasis on the

differences in wages across segments thsn on the frugality of the segmentation

approach.
                                      2

     In addition to a theory of wage determination every model of labor

market segoentation requires a theory of how workers are allocated to aectors,

It is here that labor market segmentation theory departa moat sharply from

mainstream economics. Jobs in high—wage sectors are not allocated by strict

price rationing. Some people who are qualified for and who desire jobs in the

high—wage sectots are unable to get then.

     These two elements are -not sufficient to generate unemployment. It is

possible for high and low—wage sectors to coexist without any unemployment

ensuing. Workers who were unable to get high—wage jobs might simply accept

eaployment in low-wage sectors. Indeed many development economists believe

that labor market segmentation is an important aspect of labor markets in

developing countries even though open unemployment aay be very low. Those

excluded trots the modern sector find employment in the informal sector.

     Thia is not to say that discussions of unemployment are absent from the

literature on labor market segmentation. On the contrary, some of the early

work on lahor market segmentation was motivated by the desire to explain high

rates of unemployment among young blacks. Thus although labor market

segmentation theories were interested in unemployment, the emphasis was on who

is unemployed rather then on the level of unemployment. One of our objectives

is to formalize the insights from this tradition.

     Piore (1975, formalized by Rebitrer and Taylor, 1991) argues that labor

market segmentation is a response to flux and uncertainty. The primary (high—

wage) sector is organized so as to shelter workers and firms from that

uncertainty. The brunt of the ilux Is felt in the secondary (low—wage) sector

where jobs are frequently short—term. In good times, therefore, unemployment

consists primarily of what neoclaaaital economists would call frictional

unemployment among workers in the secondary sector although there may be an
                                      3

absolute shortage of jobs in the secondary sector in bad times. Workers in

the secondary sector may experience frequent spella of uuemployment

interrupted by relatively short—term employment in low—wage jobs.

     WisI (1991) finds that at least for young white working class males,

low—wage jobs appear to be readily available. Vacancy rates in these johs are

high. The short duration of employment may reflect the low value placed on

holding such jobs as well as the demand fluctuations eaphasired by Piore.

High-wage jobs are much more difficult to obtain and being hired by a high—

wage employer appears to be largely a matter of luck.

     To summarize the insights from this literature — unemployment is

concentrated among the types of workers who are disproportionately represented

in the low—wage sector. Ironically, this finding is readily accommodated by

aarket—clearing models of unemployment. Workers whose wages are low are

likely to have a value of leisure near there wage. Fluctuations in their

value of leisure will cause thes to cove in and out of the labor force.

Unemployment arises if noneaployment spells are misclassified as unemployment

or if Labor force reentry is associated with abort—term unemployment.

     Rowever, the relation between potential earnings and.uneeiployment is not
                                                                              -


as easily explained within the context of models in which markets do not

clear.   Therefore, one of the objectives of this paper is to develop a formal

model with this implicstion. Raving developed such a model, we then ask

whether it is capoblie ofexplsining empirical regularities with regard to the

aggregate unemployment rate. Our findings are quite supportive of the model.

     Obviously, the relevance of these models depends on the importance of

labor market segmentation. Consequently, our first step is to establish the

importance of sectorsi. wsge differentials. To s large degree this has been

accomplished in previous work (Dickens and Katz, l987s&b; Katz snd Summers,
                                             4

1990).   We review this work only briefly. Instead, we concentrate on the

international evidence. We find strong evidence of a widely—shared pattern of

interindustry wage differentials.

     We then develop our theoretical model in steps. In section II, we

develcp a simple bilateral search model with homogeneous firms and workers.

This section is intended to make it clear how segmentation can be generated in

the model and to show how technical detail can be handled so that discussion

of technical detail can be dispensed with in later section. Section III

considers the case of      heterogeneous   firms and homogeneous workers   Although

this represents a natural step along the way to our model with heterogeneous

workers, the section serves primarily to clarify some issues regarding the

desirability of activist policy in the presence of labor market segmentation.

We suggest that this case is much weaker than some authors have previously

claimed. Saction IV considers the, case of heterogeneous workers and shows

thot for some parameter values low—productivity workers will have higher

unemployment rates than more productive workers. Moreover wage differentials

will often exceed differences in productive potential. In section V, we show

that owners of capital are made better off and all workers worse off if

employers make arbitrary distinctions among workers. Section VI develops the

macroeconomic implications of the model end compares them wirh empirical

findings.



I. The International Pervasiveness of the Industry Ware Structure

     There   is   a   large and growing literature on interindustry wage

differentials. The resurgence of this literature (Dickens and Katz, 1987a&b;

Krueger and Summers, 1987, 1988; Katz and Summers, 1990) began in the United

States, but has been widely replicated since then. The universal finding is
                                              S

    that there are large wage differentials across industries within a country.

    Where it is possible to conduct such tests, the wage differentials cannot be

    accounted for by measurable individual characteristics or by working

    condi.tions. It, of course, reeains possible that the wage differentials are

    accounted for by unmeasured worker or job characteristics, but we argue

    elsewhere (Dickens and Lang, 1992) that thia is unlikely.

          Industry is only imperfectly correlated with labor market segment. 'Host

    industries have a mix of types of workers. Automobile assembly may be carried

    out almost exclusively by workers in the high—wage sector, but manufacture of

    some components may involve workers in the low—wage sector. Janitorial and

    security personnel may be high paid and integrated into the firm's internal

    market or may be low paid contract workers. Nevertheless, since industries

    which pay high wages tend to pay high wagos to workers in all occupations,

    industry is likely to be at least a reasonable proxy for sector of employment.

          Our first tack is therefore to determine the extent to which it is

    possible to talk about a single 'industry wage structure." Previous research

    has   suggested that the wage structure   is quite similar in countries such as

    the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union with very different economies (Krueger

    and Sumzsers, 1987; Dickens and Katz, 1987). However, other countries show

    much lower rates of correlation. Is this because there are a few different

    patterns around which countries cluster or because countries differ in the

    extent   to which they conform to a common pattern? In the latter case, it will
    be easier to consider the effect of labor market     segmentation on   unemployment.
              To answer this question we collected data on wages paid in 32 one and

    two digit industries in 66 countries for the year 1985. We conducted e
b
    maximum likelihood factor analysis of these date. We could easily reject the

    hypothesis of no common fctors (Chi—square statistic of 1,116 with 97 degrees
                                       6

of freedom pC.000I) A single factor explains 47% of the standardized variance

in the wages for these countries. This is remarkable when one considers that

a high fraction of the variance —   particularly   in developing countries —   is
prohably measurement error due to different definitions of the industries and

different composition of the relatively highly aggregated industries in

different countries. The single factor is nearly perfectly correlated with

the vector of average wages in each industry across countries. Only thirteen

of the 66 countries have loadings less than .5 on the factor. Most of these

are LDGa. We have begun to search for correlates of the leadings and it

appears that they are positively correlated with real COP par capita and

investment as a fraction of COP,

        We could also rejecc the hypothesis ef only one coaaon factor with-a

high degree of confidenoe (Ohi—aquara statistic of 436 with 96 degrees of

freedom). Hcwever the aeccnd factor explains only 12% of the standardized

variance in our wage data set, The first factor of the two factor modal

continues to have all the prcpertiea of the factor fron the single factor

model. The second factor shows no obvious pattern either for the industry

values or for the countries which load on it. None of the variables we have

explored are correlated with it. Table 1 presents the values of the

standardized orthogonal factors for the 32 industries. Table 2 contains the

loadings for all countries fcr both factors, These results suggest that we

can talk about a common pattern of labor market segmentation to which

countries conform to differing degrees.



II. The Pasic Modal

     The basic inndal which is extended in later sections, draws on the iacdel

sketched in Lang (1991) and fcrnslizad in Montgomery (1991). It is
                                          7


essentially a larga economy version of the model developed in the latter

paper.

     There are N identical workers and bN identical firms where N is assumed

to be large. Initially, we do not formally model the determination of b.

later wa will assume free entry until tha point that expected profits are zero

but will not otherwise model the firm's entry decision. Each firm haa exactly

one job available. Firma announce the wages they will pay to any worker they

hire and cannot credibly promise to hire excess workers even where this is an

optimal atrategy. Wârkera each apply to a single firm. If a fira receives

only one application, it hirea that worker. If it receives more than one

application it chooses randomly among the applicanta.

     We denote firm i's profits by


(1) i — Fi(v_wi) — d

where F is the probability that the firm fills its vacancy, V is the value of

the worker1a output, w is the wage and d is the coat of looking for a worker,




C.laim:   The following is a sub—game perfect equilibrium. All workers apply
randomly to firma with the probabilities assigned to each firm identical for

all workers, A worker's probability of applying to firm i satisfies the

following conditions:


(2) EMiwi_K                       wi>K

where EM is the probability of getting a job and apply to the firm with

probahility equal to zero if w       K.

      All firma offer a wage equal to


(3) w — —KC.ln K —   ln   v)/(l— K/v).
                                        B




     Before passing to a proof of this claim, it   is   important to be clear that

although (2) can be interpreted as an equilibriws condition, at this stage it

is a statement about strategies. Given that all workers use the came mixed

strategies, equation (2) tells us the probability of applying to each firm

given   any combination of wage offers by the firms.



Entf: It is obvious that given the strategies of the other workers, no

worker can make himself better off by choosing a different strategy. Equation

(2) ensures that the worker gets the same expected wage wherever he applies

except for firma which pay less than K and where he would be worse off if he

applied.

     To show that the optimal wage for firms to set is given by equation (3),

we derive expreaaiona for P and EN, the filled job and employment rates.

     Let p he the probability that each worker applies to a given firm. Then

the probability that a worker who applies to that firo will be employed is


(4) EM -    (l(lq))/Nq.

Let z — Np, the expected number of applicants to the firm. Then as N gets

large 1


(5) EM


where z is the expected number of applicants at the firm.

     The probability that a firm fills its position is given by


             is just the Poisson approximation to the hinomial distribution.
                                       9



(6) F — 1 — (1_q)N


which tends to


(1)   F—I—c'

as N gets large.

      Substituting for F and w in equation (1) yields


(8) lri_ (l—e5v — Kr    —   d.


      Maximizing with respect to z gives


(9) K/v — e2—      0



      Solving for z and substituting for z in (5) and than for EN in (2) gives

equation (3). The value of K can be derived from the zero profit condition

(assuming free entry ensures zero profits), and is unique, but has no closed—

form solution and is of no intrinsic interest.

      It is easily verified that w is increasing in v (holding K fixed) so that

if firms differ with respect to v, those with higher values of output will pay

higher wages. These results parallel those derived by Montgomery (1991).

Nevertheless, when employment is endogenous, it must be interpreted with

caution. One response of firms with more productive workers will be to hire

more workers, thereby lowering their marginal product. Our point here is only

to derive the basic behavior of workers faced with wage differences across

firma and to point out that such differentials can be endogenous within our

framework.

      We have concentrated on this equilibrium, because we find it   the   moat

plausible. We expect that there are equilibria in which both workera and
                                         10

firms play mixed strategies but none in which all workers play pure

strategies. An equilibrium in which firms, at least, play pure strategies

seems preferable.



III. Two—Sactors/Hosioseneous Workers

     The standard 1-larris—Todaro model and its more recent efficiency wage

variants (Bulow and Summers, 1986) assume that workers are homogeneous and

that there are two sectors which either pay different wages for exogenous

reasons cr for reasons related tc technology, Typically the low—wage sector

is assumed to he a market—clearing sector. Unemployment occurs among

individuals trying to cbtain employment in the high—wage sector. There are

some small differences between the implications of the Harris—Todaro models in

which jobs are allocated by lottery and the gulow—su.smters model in which

individuals essentially wait in line for a high—wage job. We will return to

these differences shortly.

     To show the relation between cur model and the standard models, we begin

by considering the case of two sectors with exogenously determined wages. All

firms within a sector are identical. All workers are identical. In the

equilibrium in which all workers have the sane strategies, workers randomize

where they apply with equal probability of applying to eech firm within a

sector, but apply with greater probability to any single firm in the high—wage

sector than to any single firm in the low—wage sector. Thus unemployment

ratea are higher among workers who apply to high—wage firms, and vacancy rates

are lower in that sector,

     Sc far, the model is a minor varIation on the Harris—Todaro model. There

is, in   effect, a lottery   for jobs in both sectors. However, even in this

fore, the model has implications which depart froa previous models. In the
                                              11

    standard Harris—Todaro model increasing employment in the high—wage sector

    increases   the   desirability of queuing for employment in the high—wage sector

    and therefore increases unemployment       Equilibrium is achieved by expanding

    queuing in the high—wage sector until unemployment in that sector equals what

    it would have boon in the ahsence of the employment expansion. In the Harris—

    Todaro model, while the unemployment rate in each sector (by assumption zero

    in the low—wage sector) is unchanged, the shift of applications towards the

    high—wage and high unemployment increases the unemployment rate. Essentially

    the same argument applies to the BulowjSummers waiting—time model.

         It is worth noting in models of this type that shifting ono worker from

    applying to the low—wage sector to applying to rho high—wage sector has only a

    second—order effect on output. In essence this arises because the expected

    wage and honco the expected output (net of unemployment) is the same in the

    two sectors in equilibrium. Dickens and Lang (l9SS) argue that if a worker

    could he costlessly shifted fror employment in the low—wage sector to

    employment in the high—wage sector, this would be desirable since firms would

    be no worse off given that the marginal profit on a worker is zero and the

    worker would be strictly better off, In the standard queue unemployment

    models, the case of costless transfer makes little sense. All the benefits

    frost expanding employment in the high—wage sector will be dissipated by

    increased unemployment in that sector.2


         2gujow and Summers claim that in the waiting time model there are
    henefits to expanding employment in the high—wage sector, The difference
    between their analysis and ours is that we compare equilibria while they
    include the benefits that arise out of the transition. Workers who are
•
    waiting for high—wage employment are made strictly better off by an expansion
    of the high—wage sector, end thus receive a one—time benefit. Given the
    reality that we start from a distortionary tax base so that the costs of
    financing the expansion of employment are finite and that the benefits are of
    strictly limited duration, this one time benefit from expanding high—wage
•
    employment provides a very weak basis for advocating industrial and other
    activist policies.
                                         12

       Because there is unemployment in both sectors in our model, it is

possible that expanding employment in one sector will reduce the unemployment

rate in both sectors end bring down the aggregate unemployment rate. -     To see

under what circumstances this is possible, we begin by elaborating our model

slightly.

       Let p be the probability that a worker applies to a high—wage fira and 1—

p the probability thet he applies to a low—wage firm. Let m be the fraction

of firms which enter the high—wage sector snd I—a the fraction that enter the

low—wage sertor. Thn


(10)      — p/(cxhN),           q1 —   (l—p)/((l—a)bN).

The employment and filled job rates for each of the sectors are:



(11)   gg-   ob(le0H/p, l me]
(12) Fh —    15p/(ob)              F1—




Labor market equilibrium, of course, requires that expected earnings be equal

in the two sectors.

       To complete the model we need to model entry into the two sectors. This

will turn out to be the essential part of the model which determines whether

subsidizing high—wage or low—wage employmont is desirable. We begin by

assuming that there is a fixed entry cost in the low—wage sector but that

entry costs rice as the number of entrants in the high—wage sector increases.       is



We sssume that output prices in the two sectors are fixed. This is equivalent

to assuming that there is a unique equilibrium filled job rate in the low—wage

sector. In the high—wage sector, we assume that the structure of entry tosts
                                            13

is such that the filled job rate which firms require in order to enter the

sector is given by



(13) Fh_ '11+ 72ob.


     Note that together with the labor market equilibrium condition, (11) end

(12) imply that


(14) in (l_Fh)/Fh —
                        (wh/'l)   in (l—F1)/F1.


     Suppose now that government adopts a balanced—budget tax polity in which

it subsidizes entry into or employment in the high—wage sector and taxes it in

the low—wage sector. Then the filled—job rate fires require to enter the low—

wage sector will rise. By equation (14) the filled—job rate must also rise in

the high wage sector. Since the unemployment rate is positively related to

the filled—job rate, the unemployment rate also rises in both sectors. We

have already seen that when the unemployment rate within each sector is

unaffected by the increased high—wage employment, the effect on aggregate

output is zero.3 In this case since the unemployment rate in both sectors

rises, the output effect is negative.

     What   happens   is that the decline in employment opportunities in the low—

wage sector shifts workers into the high—wage sector to a greater extent than

the subsidy creates employment opportunities. Thus not only do we shift

workers from the low unemployment to the high unemployment sector, but we

increase the unemployment within each sector, thereby increasing overall

unemployment.


     31t is easy to see that if unemployment increases in both sectors,
average output falls. The output of the average person is phwh + (1—
p)EM1w1. Since equilibrium requires EMhwhEMlwl, changes in the proportion of
workers applying to each sector have no effect on output. However,, a higher
unemployment rate Deans a lower EMh and 'l' So average output decline.
                                            14

     It should be evident that had we reversed our assumptions about the

relation batween the number of      firms   entering the sector and the cost of

entering so that the cost was unaffected by entry in the high—wage sector and

equation (13) applied in the low—wage sector, unemployment within each sector

would have decreased and welfare increased as a result of the tax/subsidy

program. The effect on aggregate uneaployment is ambiguous since the policy

continues to shift workers to the high—unemployment sector.

     In general it is deer that the welfare effects will depend on the

elasticity of entry with respect to the tax/subsidy. Vithout strong priors

about how this elasticity varies among sectors, we can make no strong

statements about the desirability or lack thereof of subsidizing high—wage

employment. Also, other modifications of the model such as worker

heterogeneity in aversion to unemployment can lead to different results. Our

results should nevertheless sound a note of caution regarding the desirability

of policies designed to "capture worker rents."



IV. Heterogeneous Workers

     The two-sec tot   model with horogeneous workers is largely uninformative

regarding who will be unemployed. The evidence (Clark and Summers, 1979)

suggests that isuch of job search ends with employment in "bad jobs (short—

term jobs) whcn it     does   not end in labor force withdrawal.4 The homogeneous

worker model in which esiploynent is concentrated amcng those seeking high—wage

employment is not consistent with the descriptive literature on segmented

labor markets. There the emphasis was on the unemployment of disadvantaged

workers "confined' to the low—wage sector. To investigate this question, we


            would say that the evidence suggests that job—seekers are
 disproportionately bad workers. This distinction is not important, for our
 argument.                                       -
                                      15

need to develop the model for the case where workers are heterogeneous. As

will be seen, the results of the model sre substantielly modified by this

change.

     To model this formally1 we assume that there are two types of workers

both with productivity v. The number of workers of each type (N1 end N2) is

assumed to be large. Firms pay an entrence fee of d if they wish to edvertise

for a worker. They can hire only one worker. Firms announce the wage they

will pay if they hire a worker. They can observe worker type but cannot

condition the wage oi the type   Workers observe the wege and apply to a

single firm. If more than one worker applies to the firm, the firm chooses

randomly among the type 1 workers, and, if there are no type 1 applicants,

among the type 2 workers. Thus firms have lexicographical preferences.

Equivalently, it is a partial tie—breaking rule. They maximize profits, but

for equal profits, they prefer type 1 workers. This is similar to the

situation which would arise if there were an infinitesimal productivity

difference between the two types, but simplifies the mathematics. Blanchard

and Diamond (1990) aasuise a similar lexicographical preference for workers

with shorter unemployment durations. However, because their wage—setting

assumptions are quite different, they reach conclusions which differ

significantly from ours.

     We again consider only the case where all workers of a given type have

identical strategies. As in the homogeneous worker models, these strategies

are probabilities of applying to firms. Let      and 22 be the expected number

of applicants of type 1 and type 2 at the firm. Divan the large number of

workers and firms, each firs acts as if its behavior does not affect the

behavior of other firms, Similarly workers disregard the effect of their

behavior on other workers.
                                              16

       Under these circumstances, fires maximize their profits which are given

by


(17)          z—(l—a

subject to


                   1
(18)                          k1
and

(19)      e    (1—e         )w/z2 C

and

(20)                   0,     C

where Ic1 and Ic2 are the expected wages for type 1 and type 2 workers if they

apply to other firms, Equation (18) is the condition that type 1 workers will

apply until their expected wage in the firm is the same as elsewhere.

Equation (1) is the equivalent expression for type 2 workers. The additional

term reflects the fact that firms will always hire type 1 workers in

preference to type 2 workers. Although they era also equilibrium conditions

equations (18) and (19) summarize the strategies of type I and type 2 workers

in a manner analegcus to equation (2).



Claim: There is a sub—game perfect equilibrium with symmetric strategies by

 all workers of a given type in which some firms offer the optimal wage for the

 case where there era only type 1 workers and others offer a wage equal to Ic1.

 Only type 1 workers apply to the high—wage firms, end only type 2 workers

 apply to low—wage firms, The ratio of type 2 workers to low—wage firms is

 given by


 (21)
              27        —log(1 — d/(v—k1)).
                                             1?




The ratio of type I workers to high—wage firms is given by (9).



Proof: We first show that if firma follow the strategies stated above1 the

workers' strategies constitute an equilibrium of the sub—game. If a type 1

worker deviates and applies to a low—wage job, he receives k1 with certainty

which is equal to his expected wage if he applies to a high—wage job, There

is thus no incentive to deviste, A type 2 workers expected wage is

                   —t
(22)        k1 (l—e 2)/z2 —    k1d/[(v-k1)(log(.l-d/(-k1))]
where we have used (21) to derive the right—hand—side of the equslity.

       A type 2 worber who devistes receives


(23)        ew1 —       —klog(k1/v)/(v—k1)

where we have used (3) and (9).

       To see that (22) exceeds (23), note that if (23) were greeter then (22),

we would have


(24)
            log(l—d/(v—k) k1 log(k1/v) >
                                                  d.

But the left—hand—side of (24) is less then


(25)        d (k1/(v—k1)) log(v/k1) — d Iog(v/k1)/((v/k1._l)) <   d.

So deviation will not be optimal for type 2 workers,

       We now show that it will not be optimal for firms to deviate from their

equilibrium strategies. Both high—wage and low—wage firms make zero expected

profit, From section 2, it is obvious that it will not be profitable to offer

sriy other wage whIch attracts only typel or only type 2 workers. Therefore we
                                                     18

need only show that any wage which attracts both types of workers is not

profitable -

        Suppose the wage was act so that a1 and a2 were both positive. Denote
the expected number of applicants by x1 and x2. We show that a1 + a2
                                                                                           <   z2so
                                                                                               with
that the offer cannot be profitable. Since equations (18) and (19) hold

equality



(26)         (1—c
                            x1
                        )(l—e       )/(z2xl) — e
                                                     1 x  (1—c    )/x2-


        The left—hand—side of (26) is declining in a2. Therefore a sufficient

condition for the offer to be profitable ia


                      —(x1+x2)        —a1 )/(x1(x1+X2)) > e —a1      —a2
                                 )(l—e                          (l'-e    )/x2.
 (27)          (1—c


Rearranging terms gives


                                    x —(a1+x2)                —x1
                                                                  )/(x1(x1+x2)) — R.
 (28)          (1—s      )/x2 C    e (I—s                 )(1—e


 At a1 —    0, (28) holds with equality. The remainder of thia part of the proof
 is a tedious exercise in ehowing that the derivetive of the tight—hand—side

 with respect to a1 > 0.

         Teking derivatives gives


                           —(x1+x2)                              —a1      a1 a1       a1
                                                                       )(2e —e /a1 —e
 (29) dR/dx1 — ((1—c                   )/(x1(x1+x2fl1(l5

 This will be positive iff the term in square brackets is positive. To

 determine whether this is positive note that it is increasing in a2; we need

  therefore only verify that



  (30)          2eXl(xl_l)(l_e_1)/xl +           1   >    0.
                                       19

The left hand side (excluding the + 1) is most negative when x1 —   0   in which

case expression (30) holds with equality. For positive l the inequality

hplda, Therefore inequality (28) holds, and the alternative offer will not be

profitable.




     It is surprising that large wage differentials can result from small

productivity differentials when wages are determined endogenously. The reason

is that even if there is only an infinitesimal difference in productivity,

firms will always prefer the higher productivity worker if they cannot offer

them different wages. Fligh—wage firms will attract large numbers of type 1

workers. Consequently, type 2 workers who apply there will have a low

probability of getting a job. To attract type 2 workers, firms would like to

commit to hiring them rather than type 1 workers if both types of workers

apply. In the absence of such commitments, firms can set a wage that does not

attract type I workers. Thus an equilibrium arises in which type 1 workers

apply to high—wage firms and type 2 workers apply to low—wage firms.

     •Thus in this example both wages and employment rates are higher for the

type 1 workers. It is worth noting that from cross—section data on wages and

employment alone, the model is indistinguishable from a standard human capital

model with heterogeneous jobs and workers. in a standard hedonic model, weges

could be regressed on some measure of worker type such as education, and we

would observe a positive return to education. If no measures of worker type

were available, we could regress wsges on measures of joh type. The return to

joh type would be interpreted as a compensating differential or as s proxy for

unobserved worker skill.

     Aeidm from the finite wage differential between the two types of workers,

the equilibrium has the interesting feature that vacancy rates are high in
                                       20

low—wage firms and that the unemployment rate for type 1 workera is higher.
                                                                           of
Consequently, this model goes only part way towards generating the type

segmentation described in labor market segmentation literature. Equally

productive workers have different wages, and those confined to the low—wage

sector are worse off. Vecancies are higher in the low—wage sector than in the

high—wage sector. However, in contrast with the literature,    the model

suggests lower not higher unemployment rates for the disadvantaged    group.5

     This last result can be reversed if we are willing to drop the assumption

that the two groups dre only infinitesimally different in productivity. When
                                                                           exist
type 2 workers are less productive than type 1 workers equilibria may

whera both types apply to high—wage jobs and only type 2 workers apply to       low—

wage jobs or where only type I workers apply to high—wage jobs   end both apply

to low—wage jobs.6 In this tese it is easy to generate examples      in which the

equilibrium corresponds to the descriptive literature. We present two such

 examples -

      First,   suppose that type 1 workers produce 2 and type 2 workers produce

 1.65. The cost to firms of entering the market is .94. Then the high—wage

 sector pays 62. Only type l's apply- They have an employment rate of .5.


            wsgee are exogenous, it is easily shown that the concentration of
 unemployment among applicants to high—wage jobs can be reversed when workers
 are heterogeneous. Consider the following example. There are two high—wage
 jobs and three low—wage jobs. Similarly there are two type 1 and three type 2
 workers. High—wage jobs pay 2 while low—wage jobs pay I. It is readily
 verified than the following is an equilibrium — both type I workers apply to
 the high—wage jobs and all three low—wage workers apply to the low—wage jobs.
 The employment rate for high—wage applicants is .75 which is higher than the
 19/27 (.70) employment rate for low—wage applicants.
      6obviously there are some parameter values for which the separating
 equilibrium will be the uniqus sub-gsme perfect equilibrium. There are also
 parameter values for which there is a unique wage, but these can only arise if
 type I workers and type 2 workers are present in just the right ratio for the
 given value of d, We conjecture that there are no sub—game perfect equilibria
 in which both types apply to both types of jobs.
                                                  21

     •   The low—wage sector pays .49, Type 1 workers have an employment rate in thia

         sector of .84 while type 2 workers have an employment rate of .46. Obviously.

     A   type   2 workers have a higher overall unemploymant rate than do type 1 workers.

         Horeover, at least to type 1 workers, low—wage jobs seem plentiful. This is

         reflected in the different vacancy rates — 28% in the low—wage sector and 20%

         in the high—wage sector. It is worth noting that the wage penalty exceeds the

         productivity difference. Type 1 workers are leas than 25% more productive but

         their expected wage is almost twice that of type 2 workers.7

                In our second example, type 2 workera apply to both types of jobs. Type

         I workers continue to have productivity equal to 2 but type 2 workers have

         productivity equal to 1.60. The parameter d is set equal to 1.19. In this

         case there is an equilibrium in which high—wage firms pay .5. Type 1 workers

         hsve an employment rate of .82 while type 2 workers have sn employment rate of

         .22 in this sector. The wags in the low—wage sector is .32 and the employment

         rate is .35 for type 2 workers, Thus relative tu the high—wage sector, jobs

         seem plentiful for type 2 workers although, reflecting low vacancy rates (.07

         in the low—wage sector and .04 in the high—wsge sector), they are not

         plentiful in an absolute sense, Again both the wage differential between the

         two sectors and the expected wage differential between the two types of

         workers are lsrge relative to the produttivity differential,




         V. Ca2jtalist Exploitation$plitting the ¶Jorking....class

                One of the recurring themes in ldsrxist labor economics is that

•1       capitalists use various devices to create false distinctions and thus disunity

         among workers (Bowles, 1985; Roemer, 1979). gy generating a hierarchy within


              7me sverage wage received by type 1 workers cannot be calculated without
         assumptions about the relative number of the two types of workers.
                                      22


the ranks of the working class, capitalists prevent workers from recognizing

their coasson interests. In addition, if the favored" workers recognize that

they are being exploited, they may nevertheless be reluctant to challenge

employers or the distinctions out of fear of losing their favored status, One

such distinction discussed in the Marxist literature is race (Reich, 1981).

     The major difficulty with arguments of this type is that it is often

difficult to demonstrate that the division helps capitalists or hurts workers.

If firms TMhuy off" workers from organizing, it is probahle that they are

helping some workers and hurting others    The workers who are bought off"

must be hetter off than they expect to be if they resist capitalist

exploitation. Thus upward—sloping wage profiles may be a mechanism for

ensuring the cooperation of senior workers (Stone, 1975) and may be injurious

to the positions of workers as a class sod individual workera over    their

lifetimes. However, senior workers presumably benefit from this policy.

     In particular, in most models of discrimination, it is difficult tu see

how capitalists benefit from the discrininacion except from the long run

benefit of maintaining their position. Discrimination serves primarily to

 transfer resources from blacks to whites, thereby buying white cooperation and

 forestalling worker uoity

      In the model in the endogenous wage model of the previous sectiun

 discrimination is advantageous to capitalists, as a class, in the short run.

 By dividing previously homogeneous workers such as blacks and whites,

 capitalists hurt both types of workers in the short run while making

 themselves better off. Thus dividing the work force can be advantageous even

 in rho absence of a nmtural tendency towards worker unity in opposition to

 capitalists.

      To see this suppose that blacks and whites are equally productive. In

 the absence of discrimination, firms would choose randomly among black and
                                           23

•   white workers who would, in turn, have equal wages and employment

    probabilities. Now suppose that firms could collectively agree to give hiring

    preference to whites, We sew in the last section that in the long run the

    equilibrium would involve blacks receiving lower wages and lower expected

    wages net of unemployment and would not affect the wages of whites. In the

    long run, free entry drives firaa' profits to zero so that the discrimination

    harms blacks and helps neither white workers nor capitalists,

          In the short run, however, before new firma can enter to take advantage

    of the lower wages paid to blacks, hiring black workers at the lower    wage will

    be profitable. Of course, in the short run equilibrium the expected profit

    from hiring blacks at low wages and whites at high wages must be the same.

    Thus hiring whites must be profitable which can only be achieved by lowering

    their expected wage, The following theorem cakes this argument more precise.



    Theorem: If the number of firma is fixed at the level determined by the

    nondiscriminatory equilibrium, firms make positive profits in the

    discriminatory equilibrium. Workers who are given hiring preference receive

    lower wages and have a lower employment rate than in the nondiacriminatory

    equilibrium. Workers who are disfavored in the hiring process, receive lower

    wages but have a higher employment rate than in the nondiscriminatory

    equilibrium, Both types of workers have lower expected wages than in the

    nondiscriminatory equilibrium. Alternatively, if the number of firms is fixed

    as the number present in the discriminatory equilibrium and firms cease to

    discriminate, firma earn negative profits



    ftpf: Since profits in the two sectbrs must be equal, after agreeing to

    discriminate against blacks, firma will distribute theeselves an that the
                                      24

                                                                   than in the
expected number of applicants is higher in the high—wage sector
                                                                               in
law—wage sector and thus higher than in the nondiscriminatory equilibrium

the high—wage sector and lower than in the low—wage sector    than in the

nondiscriminatory equilibrium. Since the expected number of applicants       and


the employment rate are negatively related it follows that the employment

rate for favored workers will be lower and the employment rate    for disfavored

workers will be higher in the diacrininstory equilibrium than in the

nondiscriminatory equilibrium. Recall from section II that we can treat the

expected number of applicants as a choice variable for    the firm. From

                                                                is the
equation (9) choosing a lower expected number of applicants

discriminatory equilibrium than in the 0ndiscrininatory equilibrium is

consistent with profit maxiaizatton by high wage firms only     if the expected

                                               workers is lower in the
wage net of unemployment (K) for the favored

 discriminatory equilibrium than in the nondiscriminatory    equilibrium. From

 (3) dw/dX >0. Therefore the wage is also lower in the discriminatory

 equilibrium. Since the disfavored workers receive a wage     equal to the


 expected wage of the favored workera their wage and expected wage must be

 lower than in the ncndiacriiainatory equilibrium.



      In the static model we have developed here, the discriminatory
                                                            action of the
 equilibrium tan only arise by the conscious collective

 capitalists. However, it is obvious that in a more dynamic model this
                                                                                     to
 equilibrium can be supported by appropriate strategies regarding responses

  out of equilibrium moves. In particular, a firm would find it advantageous tO
                                                                                   if on
  commit to hiring black workers in preference to white workers. However,
                                                                               the
  the next move all firma responded by not discriminating against blacks,

  deviating firm would make an expected loss in future periods    which might be

  sufficient to deter it from deviating.
                                                 25

        Thus capitalists can use arbitrary divisions among workara to increase

their own profits at the expense of all workers. It appears possible to

generate this type of equilibrium without resorting to the sort of conspiracy

which some people would tall cooperative equilibria.



VI. 5e.gsLented Labor Markets and the Unemoloyment Rate

        In thia section we consider the implications of the segmented labor

market model for the aggregate unemployment rate. We consider the case where

there are a large number of different cities with free mobility of labor anong

the cities. In this 'case the expected wage for type 1 workers must be k1 and

the expected wage for type 2 workers must be 1c2 in all cities. Wages and the

size of the sectors may differ across the cities berause of differences in the

productivity of the different types of workers in the cities and because of

differing entry costs,

        Let the ratio of type 1 workers in low—wage jobs to type one workers in

high—wage jobs be a,          and   the ratio of type 2 workers in low— and high—wage

jobs to type I workers in high—wage jobs be             and y, respectively,8 Then the

unemployment rate in the city is given by


(31)         EM —
                        (EMIh+ oEM11+ $EM2h ÷ 72l)/(l+0+P+r)

where   EMi is the employment rate of workers of type i in jobs of type j.

        The average wage among employed workers in the city is given by


(32)           —
                       (EMlhwh+ oEH11w1+ fiEM2w+7EM21w1)/(EM1÷aEM11÷flE1'f2÷.yEM21).


        Substituting (32) into (31) gives


(33)               —
                       (EMlhwh+     11w1+ EM2hwh+EMllwl)/Lw(l4m÷$÷7)].


        81n generel either a        oi   or herb will be zero.
                                              26




       Recalling that the expected wage is          ior type I workers end k2 for type

two workers regardless of the sector in which chey are employed gives


(34)        EM —              +
                   (k1(l+a)

       Somewhat surprisingly, the employment (and therefore the unemployment)

rate in the city depends only on the average wage in the city and on the

fraction of workers who are type I.          In the case of homogeneous workers the

average wage is a sufficient statistic for the unemployment race. We need

informacion on neither che relative wages in the two sectors nor their

relative size. It is worth noting that this result is quite general. We have

not made use of the details of our model.

       If it were possible to control for a and 5, then conditional on these

variables, unemployment and the size of the low—wage sector would be

positively correlated.            Of course, it is not possible to control for a and

but these variables are related to worker heterogeneity within sectors. Using

the occupational categories of Carnoy and Rumberger (1980), Ocr (1991) has

derived estimates of the size of the 1ow and high-wage sectors and the degree

of worker heterogeneity within sectors as well as the average wage in a cross—

section of U.S. cities.           lie finds that the unemployment rate is positively

correlated with both the average wage and the relative size of the secondary

sector.



VII. Segoiented Labor Markets and Unenolnynent; An         Assessment

     9Orr's paper was not developed with our model in mind. None of his
variables corresponds perfectly to our theoretical constructs, but his
empirical work represents the closest approsimation we ceuld find. We are
grateful to him for providing us with additional specifications net available
in his paper.
  -                                          27

      There are two types of regularities which a theory of unemployment should

account for. In the first place, we are interested in the microeconomics of

unemployment — who ia unemployed and, in a more dynamic context, the pattern

of hazard rates for exit from unemployment. In addition, we are concerned

with the macroeconomics of unemployment — what accounts for intertemporal and

international variation in the level and duration of unemployment.

      In our view the labor market segmentation approach provides a fruitful if

underdeveloped approach to accounting for these regularitiea. The approach

remains underdeveloped, because aa yet there is no agreed upon approach to

segmentation. Economists who work within the labor market segmentation

perspective share the view that wages do not adjust to clear the labor market,

but this shared perspective allows considerable freedom to approach modelling

in different ways. Because of this potential for divergence, we suspect that

some economists will believe that we have not really addressed the labor

market segmentation perspective. Instead, some will argue that we have

developed a model of search unemployment while others will argue thst we hsve

developed an efficiency wage model. Both comments would be true, but these

approaches ere not inconsistent with the lshor market segmentation

perspective.

      Whet our formal modelling has brought out is the ability of such

modelling to generate the relation between low wages and high unemployment

which was emphasized in the early literature on segmented labor markets. In

most models there is little resson to expect a relation between innste

productivity and unemployment. Our model improves on these models since it

can generate the desired correlation, but it must be recognized that the

opposite correlation can also be generated at least for sufficiently smell

productivity differences.
                                      28

    In addition, many models predict that unemploymant duration and post—

employment wages will be positively correlated. tmile out mode). is not

dynamic and cannot therefore address this question explicitly the one—period

model suggests a more compler relation. In our example where both type 1 and

type 2 workers apply to the high wage section, but only type 2 workers apply

to the low—wage sectors, the shortest durations would be among the type 1

workers applying to the high—wage sector while the longest durations would be

among the type 2 workers applying to this sector.

     A natural way td extend the model is to make it dynamic in a manner

analogous to Blanchsrd end Diamond (lg9D). If we assume that skills

deteriorate with unemployment, our model, like theirs, implies negative

duration dependence of unemployment. Moreover, higher aggregate unemployment

rates would lower the fraction of high quality workers in the labor force end

generate hysteresis in aggregate unemployment rates.

     In sum, the labor market segmentation approach is a promising avenue for

the investigation of unemployment at both the microeconomic end macroeconomic

levels.
                                       29

REFERENCES

Blanchard, Olivier J. and Diamond, Peter, "Ranking, Unemployment Duration, and
Wages," NECK Working Paper, 1990.

Bowles, Samuel, "The Production Process in a Competitive Economy: Wslrasian,
Neo—Hobbesian, and Harxian Models, American E.conomic Review, 75 (March 1985):
16—36.

Eulow, Jeremy 1. and Summers, Lawrence H., "A Theory of Dual Labor Markets
with Application to Industrial Policy, Discrimination and Keynesian
Unemployment," Journal of Labor Economics, July 1986, 376—414

Carnoy, N. and Ruzsberger, K   "Segmentation in the U.S. Labor Market: Its
Effects on the Mobility and Earnings of Whites end Blacks," Cambridge Journal
of Economics, 4 (Junc 1980): 117—32.

Clark, Kim and Summers, Lawrence H.," Labor Market Dynsmica and Unemployment:
A Reconsideration," Ernokings Facets on Economic Activity, No. 1 (1979): 13—
60.

Dickens, William T. and Katz Lawrence F., "Intcrindustry Wage Differences and
Industry Characteristics," in Kevin Lang and Jonathan S. Leonard, eds.
Unemoloyment and the Structure ofi..abor Markets. Oxford:Basil Blackwell, 1987.

Dickens, William T. and Katz, Lawrence F. , "Interindustry Wage Differences end
Theoriea of Wage Determination," MEEK Working Paper, 1987.

Dickens, William T. and Lang, Kevin, "A Test of Dual Labor Market Theory,"
American Economic Review, 75 (September 1985): 792—805.

Dickens, William ¶2. and Lang, Kevin, "Why It Matters What We Trade: A Case for
Active Policy," in Laura D'AndreaTyson, William T. Dickens, and John Zysman,
eds., The Dynamics of Trade and Emolovment, Cambridge, MA: Ballinger, 1988.

Dickens, William T. and Lang, Kevin "Labor Market Segmentation Theory:
Reconsidering the Evidence," in William Dsrity, Jr. ed, Controversies in Labor
Economics, NY: Kluwer, forthcoming, 1992.

Katz, Lawrence F. and Summers, Lawrence H, "Industry Rents: Evidence and
Implicationa," Erookings Pacers en Economic Activity, (1989): 209—75.

Krueger, Alan and Swamers, Lawrence P.   "Reflections on the Interindustry Wage
Structure," in Kevin Lang and Jonathan 5, Leonard, eds. , Unecplcyeenr and the
Structure of Labor Markets. Qxford:Easil Blackwell, 1987.

Krueger, Alan and Summers, Lawrence H.," Efficiency Wages and the Inter—
Industry Wage Structure," Econometrics, 56 (March 1988): 259—93.

Lang, Kevin "Persistent Wage Dispersion and Involuntary Unemployment,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106 (Feb. 1991): 181—202.

Montgomery, Jemes D .," Equilibrium Wage Dispersion and Interindustry Wage
Differentials," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106 (Fcb. 1991): 163—180.
                                       30


Orr, Douglas V .111 Segmented Labor Markets and Local Unemployment Rates,
Eastern Washington University, unpublished. 1991.

Piore, Michael, 3 ,"Notes for a Theory of Labor Market Segmentation," in
Richard C. Edwards et al,, eds., Labor Market Segmentation, Lexington, MA:
D.C. Heath, 1975.

Rebitser, James and Taylor, Lowell, "A Model of Dual Labor Markets when
Product Demand is Uncertain," QWAflerlv Journal of Economics, forthcoming
1991.

Reich, Michael, Racial Ineouslity: A Politicsl Economy Analysis, Princeton.
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1981.

Roemer, John, "Divide and Conquer: Microfoundations of a Marxian Theory of
Wage Determination," Sell Journal of Economics., 10 (Autumn 1979).

Stone, Kathrine, "The Origin of Job Structures in the Steel Industry," in
Richard C. Edwards et ml., eds., Labox Market Seamentation, Lexington, MA:
D.C. Heath, 1975.

Wisi, Howard, "Getting A Coed Job: A Case Study of Mobility in a Segmented
Labor Market," Industrial Relations. (forthcoming), 1991.
                  31


                TABLE 1.

           Factor scores




Industry          Factor 1   Factor 2

FOOD              0.56670    —0.03886
EEVERACES         0.29004     0.20975
TOBACCO           0.24957     0.56074
TEXTILES          1,00276    —0.13598
APPAREL           1.94317    —0.25218
LEATHER           1.29356    —0.24779
FOOTWEAR          1.46189    —0.28176
WOOD PROD         0.92414    —0.25131
FURNITURES        1.00104    —0.34971
PAPER            —0.50041     0.00016
PRINT/PUBL       —0.64398     0.03131
IND CHIN         —0.56831     0.70669
OTHER CR94       —0.26609     0.75676
REF PETROL       —1.61949     3.97735
COAL/PET PR      —0.97309     1.62394
RUBBER PROD      —0.37961    —0.24478
PLAST PROD        0.35907     0.08102
POTTERY/CHINA     0.23095    —0.06389
CLASS PROD       —0.01511     0.21659
OTHER NIN PR     —0.11155     0.08483
IRON/STEEL       —1.36486    —0.59199
N.FERROUS MET —1.01851       —0.64635
FABR METALS       0.17669    —0.01273
MACHINERY        —0.21395    —0.15863
ELECT MACH        0.03046     0.18566
TRANSP EQUIP     —0.55172    —0.01614
SCIENTIF EQ       0.34500    —0.01370
OTHER MANUF       0.71655    —0.52841
MINING           —3.02770    —3.11332
CONSTRUCTION     —0.23518    —0.39395
TRANSP/COMM      —0.68521    —0,65663
AGRICULTURE       1.58416    —0.43664
