NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES

GLOBAL FINANCIAL MARKETS AND THE RISK PREMIUM
ON U.S. EQUITY

K.C. Chan
G. Andrew, Kamlyi

Rent M. Stulz

Working Paper No. 4074

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1992
This paper is part of NBER's research program in Asset Pricing. Any opinions

expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working #4074
May 1992

GLOBAL FINANCIAL MARKETS AND THE RISK PREMIUM
ON U.S. EQUITY

ABSTRACT

We document that there is a significant foreign influence on the risk

premium of U.S. assets. Using a bivariate GARCH-in-mean process for
conditional expected excess returns, we fmd that the conditional expected
excess return on U.S. stocks is positively related to the conditional covariance

of the return of these stocks with the return on a foreign index but is not
related to its own conditional variance. Further, we are unable to reject the
international version of the CAPM. Evidence is presented for different model

specifications, multiple-day returns and alternative proxies of foreign stock
returns including the Nikkei 225 Stock Average, Morgan Stanley Japan and
Morgan Stanley EAFE indices.

K.C. Chan
Associate Professor
Faculty of Finance
College of Business
Ohio State University
1775 College Road
Columbus, OH 43210

René M. Stulz
Riklis Chair in Business
College of Business
Ohio State University
314 Hagerty Hall
1775 College Road
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER

G. Andrew Karolyi
Assistant Professor
Faculty of Finance
College of Business
Ohio State University
1775 College Road
Columbus, OH 43210

1. Introduction
What drives the risk premium on U.S. equity? If the U.S. capital markets
are segmented from foreign markets or if U.S. assets constitute most of the

wealth traded on internationally integrated markets, the risk premium on
U.S. assets should be determined in the U.S. and should not be affected
by foreign capital markets. Until the mid-1970s, these conditions seemed
to prevail. However, since then, capital markets have apparently become
increasingly integrated internationally and the market value of U.S. assets
has become a smaller fraction of world wealth. These developments suggest
that the risk premium on U.S. assets may now be determined primarily on

world capital markets rather than on U.S. capital markets. In this paper,
we investigate this issue and find empirical evidence of a significant foreign
influence on the risk premium of U.S. assets.
The capital asset pricing model implies that the risk of the market portfolio is measured by the variance of its returns and that, therefore, the risk
premium for the market portfolio increases with the variance of the portfolio's
returns. Further, with risk averse investors, the addition of a mean preserving
spread to the distribution of the return of the market portfolio increases the
risk premium, so that even if the capital asset pricing model does not hold,
one would typically expect a positive relation between the risk premium and
the variance of the market portfolio. Merton (1980) estimates the relation
between the risk premium and volatility using contemporaneous variance estimates. French, Schwert and Stambaugh (1987) provide evidence that there
is a positive relation between the conditional expected excess returns on the
market portfolio and the conditional variance of its returns using a general-

ized autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity (GARCH) representation
developed by Engle (1982) and Bollerslev (1986). They use daily data from
January 1928 to December 1984 for the excess returns on the market with
Standard and Poor's S&P 500 index proxying for the market portfolio.
For most of the 8ample period studied by French, Schwert and Stambaugh (1987), foreign capital markets were substantially segmented from the
U.S. capital markets and their capitalization was small relative to the cap-

italization of U.S. markets. There is now substantial evidence that stock

markets are reasonably well-integrated. For instance, Cho, Eun and Senbet (1986),Wheatley (1988), Korajczyk and Viallet (1989), Gultekin, Guitekin and Penati (1989), Cumby (1990), Harvey (1991), Bekaert and Hodrick
(1992) and Campbell and Hamao (1992) provide evidence of integration, es—
pecially during the 1980s, using a variety of asset pricing models with monthly data. Further, as Figure 1 indicates, the capitalization of U.S. stocks has
become a smaller part of the capitalization of the world market portfolio of
common stocks. These two developments suggest that the S&P 500 is unlikely to have been an adequate proxy for the world market portfolio over the
last decade.
Using the capital asset pricing model, the evidence that stock market-

s are fairly well integrated suggests that the risk premium on the market
portfolio of U.S. assets depends on the covariance of its returns with the returns on the world market portfolio. This covariance is a weighted average
of the variance of the market portfolio of U.S. assets and the covariance of
the returns on the market portfolio of U.S. assets with the market portfolio
of non-U.S. assets, where the weights are the proportions of U.S. and foreign stocks in the world market portfolio. Even if the capital asset pricing
model does not hold, however, this covariance may be an important determinant of the risk premium on the U.S. market portfolio. For instance, in
Merton's (1973) intertemporal capital asset pricing model, the risk premium
on a portfolio is still an increasing function of the covariance of the returns
of that portfolio with the market portfolio.
In our empirical work, we model the daily excess returns of the S&P
500 and of a portfolio of non-U.S. assets jointly using a bivariate GARCH-inmean representation. We find that the conditional expected excess returns on
the U.S. market portfolio are significantly related to the conditional covariance of the S&P 500 with Japan's Nikkei 225 index, but not significantly to
the conditional variance of the S&P 500. We obtain a similar though weaker
result if the market portfolio of foreign assets is approximated by the Morgan Stanley EAFE index (which is a value-weighted index comprising stocks

from Europe, Australia and the Far East) and the Morgan Stanley Japan
index. We also show that this result is robust to a number of alternative
econometric specifications as well as different measurement intervals for the
2

returns data. This result implies that the impact of foreign stock markets on
the risk premium of the U.S. market portfolio cannot be neglected.
When we compare the restricted version of the model which corresponds
to the international version of the CAPM, we find that we cannot reject the
model at the 0.05 significance level. However, given the small number of
aa8ets used in our tests, one might argue that this significance level is too
low. At the 0.10 level, the model is rejected when the Nikkei indices are used,
but not otherwise. Further, at that level of significance, we cannot reject a
two-factor model that implies that Japanese and U.S. market risks are priced
identically across countries when the Nikkei or the EAFE indices are used.
We view this evidence as supportive of the notion of international integration
among equity markets.
The paper proceeds as follows. The estimated model is introduced in
Section 2. Section 3 presents the main empirical results. Section 4 investigates the robustness of the results to alternative econometric specifications
and returns measurement intervals. Section 5 presents some concluding remarks.

2. The Model
We assume that:

(Al) Markets are internationally integrated.
(A2) Investors are period per period mean-variance optimizers in a common
numeraire, which we take to be the U.S. dollar.

(A3) The aggregate relative risk aversion, A =
W, is
constant, where A is the i-th individual's relative risk aversion and
W is his wealth at time i.
Assumption (Al) implies that assets with the same risk have the same
expected excess returns irrespective of where the assets are traded. Assumption (A2) ensures that the capital asset pricing model holds. The assumption
3

of a common numeraire implies that there are no preferred currency habitats
for individual investors.1 Assumption (A3) implies that the risk premium
changes only when the volatility of the market portfolio changes.
An alternative to assumption (A2) used in some of our tests is:

(A2') Investors use the currency of their home country as the numeraire.
Assumption (A2') corresponds to a world where the exchange rate reflects
changes in the relative price of goods across countries and investors consume
different baskets of goods in different countries. With this assumption, the
world market portfolio of stocks is a portfolio where each stock position is

financed in the country in which the stock is traded. Hence, the excess
returns on a stock equal the returns of that stock in its own currency net
of the returns of the risk-free asset in that currency. The interpretation of
these own-currency returns is that they are equal to dollar returns hedged
against currency risk with a hedge ratio of one — i.e., one goes short one
unit of foreign currency for each purchase of one unit of foreign currency
stock. This approach, pioneered by Solnik (1974), leads to a linear pricing
relation between expected own-currency excess returns and their conditional
covariance with the world market portfolio of own-currency excess returns.2
With these assumptions, we have:

(1)

E(R,+1 — Ro+iI2) = )tVar(R,,t+i — Ro+1)

where E(.) is the conditional expectation operator, ig is the investors' infor-

mation set at t, R,,,+i is the return on the world market portfolio from

t to t + 1, and R4 is the risk-free rate for the same period of time.
Var(R,+j —R+1l) is the conditional variance of the excess return on the
1See Adler and Duina (1983) and Stulz (1983) for reviews of the literature on interna
tional asset pricing and discussions of the role of preferred currency habitats.
2There is no theoretical reason for the hedge ratio of one to be the minimum-variance

hedge. When it is not, Sercu (1980) shows that the appropriate returns are those of
self-financing portfolios of stocks hedged against exchange rate risk using the minimumvariance hedge. Bailey, Ng and Stula (1992) provide evidence, however, that a hedge ratio
of one cannot be improved upon for the Nikkei 225 by using conditional minimum-variance
hedge ratios.

4

world market portfolio for the period t to t + 1 given the information set f2.
With assumption (A2), all excess returns are computed in dollars, whereas
with the preferred currency habitats assumption (A2'), excess returns are
own-currency returns, so that the excess return on the market portfolio is a
weighted average of own-currency returns.
Using the capital asset pricing model and equation (1), we have:

(2)

E(rd+lI1Z*) =

where lower-case r denotes excess returns and Cov(rdl+l, rmi+iIit) is

the

conditional covariance of the excess return on the U.S. domestic market portfolio with the excess return on the world market portfolio.
The return on the world market portfolio can be written as:

(3)

= wdgrd+1 + (1 —

where w4 is the capitalization of the U.S. market portfolio as a fraction of

world wealth at time t, rdt+1 is the excess return on the U.S. domestic market
portfolio and rff+1 is the excess return on the foreign market portfolio.
Using equation (3), (2) can be rewritten as:

(4)

E(rai÷iIflt) = \[wdtVar(rdt+jlcl) + (1 — wd)Cov(rd+l, rji+iIIlt)]

In this paper, we focus on equation (4). If the U.S. market portfolio
equals the world market portfolio, the weights become Wdt = 1 for all t and
equation (4) reduces to the relation examined by French, Schwert and Stambaugh (1987). If the returns of the U.S. market portfolio are not related to
the returns of the market portfolio of non-U.S. assets, equation (4) still differs from that of French, Schwert and Stambaugh (1987) since the conditional
variance of the U.S. market portfolio is multiplied by the weight of the U.S.
market portfolio in the world market portfolio.
With daily data from a single country, equation (4) has a straightforward
interpretation because it corresponds to a portfolio strategy that can be easily
5

implemented: buy the market portfolio at the close of trading and hold it until

the next day's close of trading. With daily data from several countries, the
trading hours generally do not overlap in calendar time. Using close-to-close
returns for each country, it is not possible to implement directly a portfolio
strategy of buying the world market portfolio at the close of U.S. trading
at time t and selling it at the close of U.S. trading at time t + 1 because
the foreign markets typically close before the U.S. market. To reduce the
problem created by non-synchronous trading hours, one could use returns
measured over longer periods of time, so that the non-overlapping period
becomes a smaller fraction of the measurement interval. We choose instead
to use daily data and address the problem of non-synchronous trading hours
directly. Our use of daily data has two motivations. First, the period for
which it is reasonable to investigate the effect of foreign stock markets on the

U.S. risk premium is reasonably short, so that our tests would lack power
with infrequently sampled data. Since existing tests of international asset
pricing models that focus on stock returns use monthly data, the use of
daily data is a contribution of this paper to the international asset pricing
literature.3 Second, the results of French, Schwert and Stambaugh (1987)
that are most supportive of the positive relation between conditional expected
excess returns and conditional variances are obtained using daily returns.
In using daily returns, we consider an investor who makes his portfolio
decisions at the close of trading in the U.S. markets. When the investor forms
his portfolio, he uses expected returns and the variance-covariance matrix of
returns conditional on information available at that time. If we had foreign
returns computed from the close of the U.S. market to the next close of the
U.S. market, we would use these returns as part of the information set. Since
foreign returns measured over the same calendar time as U.S. returns are not
available, we have to model the joint dynamics of the U.S. and foreign returns
to reflect the non-synchroneity of trading hours. Specifically, at the close of

the U.S. market the investor knows the return on the U.S. market and the
return on the foreign market at its close earlier in the calendar day. Since
3Engcl and Rodriguez (1989) and Giovannini and Jorion (1989) use weeldy data but
test asset pricing models using returns on foreign currencies rather than on foreign stocks.
Chang, Pinegar and Ravidiandran (1991) use daily returns in a study of the integration of
European equity markets where the problem of non-synchronous trading is not significant.

6

the U.S. market closes after most foreign markets, part of the next day'8
return of the foreign market has already accrued when the investor makes
his portfolio decision. As long as contemporaneous returns on the domestic
and foreign markets are correlated, the investor can use today's U.S. return
to improve his forecast of tomorrow's foreign return. Our approach accounts
explicitly for this correlation.
The information iii the U.S. close-to-close return today about the next
day's foreign return gives the appearance that foreign market returns are predictable using the previous day's U.S. return. This predictability is spurious,
however, since it cannot be exploited through a portfolio strategy if foreign
markets are efficient. The foreign return does not contain similar information
about the next calendar-day U.S. return since on the previous calendar day
the foreign markets closed before the U.S. market and hence the information
in the foreign returns is incorporated in the previous day U.S. return.4
Given that the lack of synchroneity in trading hours affects our modeling

strategy, it is important to make sure that it does not affect our results.
We therefore set up two further experiments. First, we know that as the
measurement interval is lengthened, the lack of synchroneity becomes less

important. Our robustness tests indeed show that our result that there is
a significant foreign effect on the U.S. risk premium holds if we use longer
measurement intervals for the returns. Second, we demonstrate that it holds
if we use open-to-open U.S. returns and hence allow the investor to form his
expectations at the open of U.S. markets.
In the following, we assume that the information set of investors, C, is
proxied by a set of instruments that includes only past returns of the U.S.
and the foreign portfolios for the sample period.5 We therefore propose the
parameterization:
41f we had used the close of trading in foreign market. as the time when the investor
make. his portfolio decision instead, today's foreign return would be useful to forecast
the same calendar day U.S. return, but the U.S. return would not be useful to forecast
tomorrow's foreign return. Hence, in this case, the returns dynamics would have to be
modelled differently.

5This is in contrast to the instrumental variables approach of Harvey (1991) that conditions the market risk premium on a set of macroeconomic variables.

7

(5a) ra*+i = aa + f3awaha÷i + I3dc(i — wdg)h+1 + Odlfdl + Od2d—1 + d+1
(5b)

= aj +i3 wjihJi+l+/3fc(1_Wff)hct+l+OjiEjl +9j2fj—i +4's dt +/1+i
where the conditional variances, hj+i and ha+i, and covariances, h1+1,
depend only on past returns. The specification for each country allows the
returns to depend on two lagged disturbances to incorporate the effects of

infrequent trading on the dynamics of the index returns.6 We also allow
the foreign returns to depend on one lagged disturbance of the domestic
returns through q5j to take into account the lack of synchroneity in trading
hours. As explained above, with our timing conventions, foreign returns
have no information for domestic returns since, on a given calendar day, the
information in foreign returns is incorporated in domestic returns before the
in the
close of trading of domestic markets; hence, there should be no
domestic returns equation.7
An important element in the empirical implementation of the model is
the specification of the dynamics of the conditional variances and covariances
over time. We use a general specification drawn from the ARCH process
originally proposed by Engle (1982), which allows the conditional covariance
matrix to be related to its own past values and past squared disturbances.
We posit the following general process:

N10 H " and H ——
(6b)

ff4 = EE +

h+1
h1+i hj+i
fhd+1

+ G'4Q

6Stoli and Whaley (1990) show how the effects of infrequent trading and bid/ask spreads

can cause stock index returns to follow an ARMA-type process. See also Muthuswamy
(1990).

TOur method of addressing the non-synchroneity in trading hours could be improved
in future research since we omit the covariance attributable to the unanticipated return
on the foreign market between the close of that market and the close of the U.S. market
because that return is unobservable. Instead, we implicitly assume that the true covariance

is a constant proportion of the estimated covariance. If this assumption is incorrect, we
would expect our results to be sensitive to alternative measurement intervals, but we show

in section 4 that they are not.

8

denotes the 2x2 variance-covariance matrix conditional on information as at time t and 4-f1 denotes the vector of disturbances from
equations (5a).-(5b). is an upper triangular matrix of coefficients, whereas
and Q are free matrices of coefficients. This model was originally proposed
by Baba, Engle, Kraft and Kroner (1989) (BEKK). The important feature
of this specification is that it builds in sufficient generality allowing the conditional variances and covariances of the two stock markets to influence each
other and, at the same time, does not require a large number of parameters
to be estimated (11 for the bivariate system used here). Even more importantly perhaps, the BEKK process guarantees that the coefficient matrices
in the system are positive definite. To see the level of generality we gain
by implementing this specification, we can contrast it with the multivariate
where

ARCH model adopted by Bollerslev, Engle and Wooldridge (1988) (BEW),
where the conditional variances depend only on past squared residuals and
covariances on past products of disturbances. The important cross-market
effects, highlighted by Hamao, Masulis and Ng (1990) for the national stock
markets of the U.S., U.K. and Japan, are ignored in the BEW specification.
A more general BEW process could be specified to capture these effects but
positive semi-definiteness of the conditional covariance matrix in that system
is no longer assured. We discuss estimation results with alternative processes
in section 4.

3. Description and Interpretation of Empirical Results
3.1 Data
We use three indices for non-U.S. assets. The first index is the Nikkei 225
Stock Average. The data for the Nikkei 225 index is collected from the Asian
Wall Street Journal and the exchange rates used to obtain dollar returns are
collected from the Journal also. The Nikkei 225 is a price-weighted index of
stocks traded in the first section of the Tokyo stock market. For this index,
we have data from January 3, 1978 to December 31, 1989. In addition to the
Nikkei 225 index, we used two value-weighted indices published in Morgan
Stanley's Capital International Perspectives that are available from January
3, 1980 to December 31, 1989. These indices are the Morgan Stanley Japan

9

index in yen and the Morgan Stanley EAFE index in dollars. We use the
indices only on calendar days when they are available in both countries and
make no distinction between single and multiple-day returns. The Morgan
Stanley Japan index is the Japanese component of EAFE and hence is a
value-weighted index. The EAFE index does not include all stocks for each
market, since it generally ignores small capitalization stocks. However, it is
widely used by practitioners as a benchmark for the performance of non-U.S.
stocks and internationally diversified index funds generally try to replicate the
performance of that portfolio. It includes no adjustment for cross-holdings in
Japan and other countries, so that it may give more weight to Japan than is
warranted, as argued by McDonald (1989) and French and Poterba (1991).

Table 1 provides summary statistics for the data, including the crosscorrelations among the various portfolio excess returns. The U.S. index and
dollar-denominated foreign equity index excess returns are obtained using
the three-month U.S. Treasury bill yields; those for the yen-denominated
Nikkei 225 index are computed with the three-month Gensaki interest rate.
Panel A indicates that the excess returns series exhibit significant negative
skewness for the S&P 500 and the Nikkei yen excess returns and generally
positive excess kurtosis. These results suggest that the returns distribution
deviates from normality. The Kolmogorov D statistic and tests based on Beand Jarque (1982) confirm this formally. The autocorrelation coefficients
are exhibited in Panel B for the raw excess returns and squared returns series. The significant positive and declining autocorrelations for the squared
series indicates some second-order dependence that the GARCH models in
this study seek to capture. Finally, the cross-correlations between the S&P
500 returns and those of the various foreign index returns are shown in Panel
C. The significant contemporaneous lead correlations from U.S. to foreign
stocks in the raw returns reflect the lack of synchronization of trading hours
for the respective markets. Equations (5a,b) of the model proposed in the
previous section attempt to control for this effect. More interestingly, the
cross-correlations computed for the squared returns series suggest significant
cross-market dependence in the volatility. Again, the dynamics of the conditional covariances applying the BEKK process of equation (6) can capture
such cross-market dependence in the volatility of the returns.
10

Equations (5a,b) require computation of market weights. We obtain
these weights from Morgan Stanley's Capital International Perspectives. Since the weights are published quarterly, we use the beginning of quarter
weights reported by Morgan Stanley and compute the weights within each
quarter by adjusting dynamically the beginning of quarter weights using the
realized returns on the indices. For each quarter, we extend the interpolation to the beginning of the next quarter and compare the weights that result
from our method to those reported by Morgan Stanley. In this comparison,
the reported weights are always very close to the predicted weights.

3.2 Empirical Results
Panel A of Table 2 reproduces estimates of equations (5a,b) that use,
respectively, the dollar-denominated excess returns on the Nikkei 225 index,
the yen-denominated excess returns on the Nikkei 225 index and the Morgan
Stanley Japan index and the dollar-denominated excess returns on the EAFE

index as the returns on the foreign market portfolio. The estimates are
obtained using dummy variables in the returns equations (5a)-(5b) for four
days of October 1987, namely October 16, 19, 20 and 21, since it appears
that the distribution of returns on these days differs dramatically from the
distribution of returns for the other days in our sample. The point estimates
obtained without the dummy variables for the parameters of interest are
quite similar to those reported here, but statistical inference becomes more
complicated because of the serious departures from the normality assumption.
The estimates of the equation for U.S. returns with the dollar returns of
the Nikkei 225 as the foreign market portfolio returns show that the conditional covariance of the U.S. returns with the Nikkei return has a significant
positive effect on U.S. conditional expected returns, but that the conditional
variance of the U.S. returns has no effect. This result holds whether one uses
standard t-statistics or the alternative t-statistics robust to departures from
normality suggested by Bollerslev and Wooldridge (1990). Hence, this result
provides support for the hypothesis that the U.S. risk premium is determined
on global markets during the sample period. The lack of significance of the
5Because of the large sample size of this analysis, the appropriate criteria for statistical significance for sample statistics and estimated coefficients are unclear. We highlight
throughout the text and tables, critical values at conventional significance levels but caution the readers that a more conservative cutoff may be appropriate.

11

coefficient on the variance is surprising. Since the conditional variance and covariance have a significant correlation (0.57 if we use the dollar-denominated

Nikkei returns), one might be tempted to attribute the lack of a significant
effect of the conditional variance to multicollinearity. ilowever, if we estimate
a univariate model for the U.S. returns for our sample period, the coefficient
on the variance is not significant either. A more plausible explanation is that,
if the returns are measured with error, the error in the returns decreases the
precision of our variance estimate more than it decreases the precision of our

covariance estimate since returns squared involve taking the square of the
error whereas products of domestic and foreign returns involve multiplying
two errors that are imperfectly correlated. The estimates obtained with the
yen-denominated excess returns of the Nikkei 225 are qualitatively similar to
those obtained with dollar-denominated returns.
The estimates using the Morgan Stanley Japan index and EAFE as foreign market portfolios are consistent with those obtained using the Nikkei
225. In both equations, the covariance has a positive coefficient that is
significantly different from zero using standard i-statistics. Using robust
i-statistics, the covariance coefficient is significant at the 0.10 level for the
Morgan Stanley Japan index, but is insignificant at the same level for the
EAFE index. The point estimates of the covariance coefficients are almost
the same for the equations using the Nikkei 225 and EAFE. The variance
of the U.S. has a positive but statistically insignificant coefficient in both
equations.
Table 2 also reports results for foreign excess returns. The results are not

completely symmetric to those for the U.S. When we use the dollar excess
returns on the Nikkei, the covariance with the U.S. returns has a positive
but insignificant effect on the expected excess returns of the index, but the
variance of the Nilckei has a significant positive coefficient. The same result
holds for the equation estimated with the yen-denominated excess returns on
the Nilckei, except that in this case the covariance has a significant positive
coefficient with the standard i-statistic and an insignificant coefficient with
the robust i-statistic. With the Morgan Stanley Japan and EAFE indices,
the variance of the foreign index has an insignificant positive coefficient; the
covariance has a negative insignificant coefficient for the EAFE but a positive
12

significant coefficient for the Morgan Stanley Japan index at the 0.05 level
using the standard t-statistic and at the 0.10 level using the robust t-statistic.
For all indices, we tested the hypothesis that the expected returns are
determined in the home country — i.e., that Japanese expected returns do not
depend on the covariance of Japanese returns with U.S. returns and that U.S.
expected returns do not depend on their covariance with Japanese returns.
Though the results are not reported, this hypothesis is easily rejected for
all indices. Consequently, irrespective of the index used to proxy for foreign
stocks, the covariance of foreign stock returns with domestic stock returns
has an important effect on the expected returns on domestic stocks.
Table 2 also provides measures of the fraction of the total variation of
returns captured by our explanatory variables. Whereas the fraction of the
total variation explained for the U.S. returns, denoted R, is small but respectable given the difficulty of forecasting daily returns, it would be virtually
negligible if we ignored the international effect presented in this paper. For
instance, if we set the coefficient on the conditional covariance equal to zero
in the U.S. returns equation when the dollar return on the Nikkei 225 is used
as the foreign return, the R? falls from 1.16% to 0.29%; in contrast, it falls to
only 0.94% if we set the coefficient on the conditional variance equal to zero
and to 0.25% if both coefficients on conditional variance and covariance equal
zero. Note that if the coefficients for the conditional variance arid covariance
are are set to zero, the R2 captures the proportion of the total variation that
is due to just the lagged moving average terms which are posited to capture
the effects of asynchronous trading of the component stocks in the domestic
and foreign market indexes. Further, the R2 for the U.S. returns equation
in this case is substantially larger than that for a simple univariate model
(0.28%). Although the fraction of the total variation explained for the foreign
returns, R, is much larger than the fraction explained for the U.S. return,
it becomes comparable to the fraction explained for the U.S. return if j is
set equal to zero, as one would expect.
Figures 2 and 3 plot, respectively, the conditional expected excess returns
and conditional variances and covariancea for the U.S. when the foreign index
uses dollar-denominated returns on the Nikkei 225 and show that all the series
exhibit substantial variation over time. For the U.S. returns, the conditional
13

daily expected excess returns have a standard deviation of 0.09% and a mean

of 0.04%, whereas the unconditional daily excess returns have a mean of
0.025% and a standard deviation of 0.97%. Further, the sample mean and
standard deviation of the daily conditional variance are, respectively, 0.94
and 0.54, whereas for the covariance they are 0.09 and 0.22. As a measure of
the economic significance of the international effect on the U.S. risk premium,
our results suggest that a doubling of the conditional covariance from its mean
value of 0.09 to 0.18 doubles the conditional expected excess return on the
U.S. portfolio from 0.04% to 0.075%. Note that a doubling of the conditional
covariance is an increase of slightly less than half the standard deviation of
the conditional covariance, indicating that such an increase is not unusual.
Similarly, a doubling of the conditional risk premium is also an increase of
slightly less than half its standard deviation.
Panel B of Table 2 presents the estimates of the coefficients of the dynamics of the covariances from equation (6). The individual coefficient estimates
are difficult to interpret but the significance of the diagonal coefficients of the
and Q matrices suggest that the GARCH effects are pervasive and strong.
Moreover, most of the off-diagonal coefficients are also significant. This result confirms the evidence of Hamao, Masulis and Ng (1990) that modelling
the cross-market dependence in the conditional volatility of U.S. and foreign
stock returns is important.
Table 3 provides evidence on whether the coefficients on conditional
variances and covariances of Table 2 conform to the predictions of the international CAPM (ICAPM). The ICAPM implies that all the /3 coefficients

of Table 3 should be equal.9 Table 3 presents estimates of the models of
Table 2 with the /3 coefficients constrained to be equal. Irrespective of the
foreign portfolio used, the world price of risk is positive and significantly
different from zero. With the ICAPM, the estimate for the price of risk corresponds to the representative investor's coefficient of relative risk aversion.
The estimates for this coefficient vary from 9.6 to 18.1 depending on the

foreign portfolio used. Although the estimate is high, it is not altogether
91n footnote 7, we argue that our approach may generate measures that understate
the true covariance. If it does, our test of the ICAPM is more conservative because our
estimate of the covariance effect, /3dc, is biased upwards and hence away from the other
coefficients.

14

unreasonable in light of the literature. For instance, although greater than
the estimates obtained by Friend and Blume (1975) and Hansen and Singleton (1983), it is substantially smaller than those presented by Wheatley
(1988) and comparable to those of Harvey (1991) in tests of international
asset pricing models.
The last column of Table 3 presents x2 statistics that compare the unrestricted version of the model to the restricted version. The restricted version
cannot be rejected at the 0.05 level. However, one might argue that a more
conservative approach is warranted since we have only two assets. If we use
the 0.10 significance level as our benchmark, we cannot reject the ICAPM
when the foreign portfolio is EAFE or Morgan Stanley Japan; however, we
can reject the ICAPM if the foreign portfolio is the Nikkei, whether we use a
dollar-denominated or a yen-denominated Nikkei. This limited success with
the Nikkei may reflect the fact that the Nikkei is not a value-weighted index
and hence gives more weight to small stocks. Hence, whereas our results are
supportive of the ICAPM, the lack of rejection may also reflect the limited
power of our tests.

4. Further Tests
In this section, we first relate the results to earlier work. We then examine the robustness of the results concerning the international effect on the
risk premium and conclude with more tests of the international capital asset
pricing model.

4.1 Relation to Previous Work
French, Schwert and Stambaugh (1987) relate conditional expected returns on the S&P 500 index to the conditional volatility of the index using
a univariate GARCU-in-mean process. They find that conditional expected
returns are positively related to conditional volatility. Their test is not nested
in the test discussed in Section 3 since they estimate the process followed by
the S&P 500 using only U.S. data. We replicated the French, Schwert and
Starnbaugh (1987) study over our sample periods for the U.S. and Japan,
but do not present the estimates here.'° Over our sample periods, the result
10Fench, Sdtwert and Stambaugh (1987) estimate a GARCH(1,2) process, whereas the

15

obtained by French, Schwert and Stambaugh (1987) does not hold for U.S.
returns as the conditional expected returns on the U.S. market portfolio are
not significantly related to the conditional variance of the returns of that
portfolio." In contrast, however, there is evidence that the conditional expected return of the foreign indices is related to their conditional volatility.'2
These results are consistent with the results obtained in Table 2 since in that
table the coefficient of the conditional volatility of the U.S. index in the U.S.
returns equation was insignificant, whereas the coefficient on the conditional
volatility of the foreign index in the foreign returns equation was significant
for the Nikkei 225 whether denominated in yen or in dollars.
Bollerslev, Engle and Wooldridge (1988) investigate a trivariate conditional CAPM that includes three portfolios, namely a portfolio of stocks, a
portfolio of long-term bonds and a portfolio of short-term bonds. Their approach is similar to ours in that they model the joint distribution of returns
using a GARCH-in-mean process. However, they posit dynamics for the
variance-covariance matrix of returns that allow variances and covariances to
depend only on their past values, in contrast to the dynamics we posit which
allow for additional cross-market dependence in variances and covariances.
They find a positive price of covariance risk, which is a result analogous to
our finding of a positive price of risk in the equations estimated in Table 3.
Existing research on international asset pricing has focused mostly on
unconditional returns. The most notable exception is Harvey (1991), who
allows for the price of risk to change over time in a pooled cross-sectional time-

series test using monthly returns on a variety of countries. He models asset
returns dynamics with instrumental variables and uses a generalized methodof-moments estimator to test the restrictions of the international CAPM.
He finds evidence that the world price of covariance risk is not constant
and rejects the hypothesis that Japanese stocks are priced according to the
international CAPM.
estimates reproduced in this paper are obtained for a GARCH(1,1) process. None of the
conclusions of this paper are affected if this alternative specification is introduced.
11Glosten, Jagannathan and Runlde (1989) demonstrate the instability of the relation
estimated by French, Schwert and Stambaugh (1987) for different specifications of the
conditional variance.
12See Chan and Karolyi (1991) for similar findings on the Nikkei 225 Stock Average
index.
16

4.2 Robustness and Stability of the International Effect
4.2.1 Synchroneiiy
As discussed in Section 2, the use of daily data raises the issue of lack of
synchroneity in the returns measurement intervals across countries. There is
no way of eliminating this lack of synchroneity, but by using longer measurement intervals, its importance should fall since, as the interval length increases, the fraction of the interval for which returns are observed on both markets
also increases. Hence, one way to evaluate the robustness of our results and

the appropriateness of our approach to deal with the non-synchroneity in
trading hours is to reestirnate our equations on longer observation intervals.
Results with the dollar-denominated Nikkei excess returns are reproduced
in Table 4 for two-day, three-day and five-day returns. It is clear that our
conclusion that the conditional U.S. expected excess returns are positively
related to the conditional covariance of the U.S. excess returns with foreign
market returns is robust to an increase in the length of the observation interval. Importantly, as the returns are computed over longer periods of time,
the apparent predictability of foreign returns from U.S. returns due to the
overlapping of the measurement intervals disappears, as expected.'3
The lack of synchroneity in trading times leads to lower estimates of
conditional covariances since the same information can be incorporated in
different indices on different calendar days. Whereas we attempt to estimate
conditional covariances that proxy for the conditional covariances that would
prevail if trading were synchronous across countries, our approach is imperfect since it ignores part of the covariance because of the unobservability of
foreign returns from the close of the foreign market to the close of the U.S.
When returns are measured over longer horizons, the non-overlapping part of
the returns becomes a smaller fraction of the measurement interval, so that
the conditional covariance should jncrease.14 This difference between long13As the measurement interval is extended, however, one would expect the estimates
to become less precise because the number of independent observations falls. Further,
our regression framework becomes less appropriate since longer horizon returns may have
different time-series properties than shorter horizon returns. Nevertheless, in a regression

not reproduced here, we extended the measurement interval to ten day. and found that
the /3.e coefficient estimate is also statistically significant with a value of 142.8
Bailey and Stulz (1990) for evidence on how covariance estimates between U.S. and
Japanese returns depend on the measurement interval because of the lack of synchroneity

14

17

run and short-run conditional covariances does not affect our conclusion that
there is an international effect on the U.S. risk premium since that effect is
robust to increases in the measurement interval. Although the coefficient fiat

falls when returns are measured over longer intervals, this decrease is not
significant.
Another way to reduce the effects of the lack of synchroneity in trading
hours between the two countries is to employ open-to-open U.S. returns with
close-to-close Japanese returns. Transactions data of intraday quotes on the
S&P 500 from the Chicago Mercantile Exchange were available to us for the
1984 to 1989 subperiod. In Table 4, we provide estimates of our model where

U.S. returns are computed from prices one hour after the market opening.
We use returns one hour after the opening because opening returns have
different properties from other returns since an opening price included in the
index could be a price from the previous day.'5 These estimates fully support
the conclusions drawn from the estimates that use the close-to-close returns.
Interestingly, these estimates correspond to a aubperiod that is approximately

the second half of our sample of Nikkei data. Yet, for this second half, the
coefficient for the international effect is essentially the same as for the whole
sample when we use close-to-close returns.

4.2.2 Condiiioning Information
The model estimated in Table 2 includes lagged disturbances to take into
account the effects of non-synchronous trading of component stocks in the
index on the measurement of stock index returns. The significant positive
effect of the first lagged disturbance is consistent with our infrequent trading
motivation for the inclusion of these lagged disturbance terms.16 Ignoring this
lag structure may have the effect of spuriously increasing the importance of
the international effect. This is shown in Table 4 where we provide estimates
of a version of our model that excludes these lagged disturbances. We also
in trading hours.
15See Lin, Engle and Ito (1991) for evidence of the importance of this distinction for the
measurement of spillover effects across markets.
160ne would expect the foreign indices to have more infrequent trading. It is therefore
expected that the first lagged disturbance should have a greater effect on the foreign returns
equations. It is puzzling, however, that the first lagged disturbance should have a greater
effect in the foreign equation using the value-weighted Morgan Stanley index than it does
on the foreign equations using the price-weighted Nikkei 225.

18

estimated the model with j set equal to zero. These estimates, though not
reproduced here, show that the international effect appears to be stronger
when j is not included. Another alternative we examined (but do not
report) was one where we rolled back the investors' conditioning information
by one day, so that c....1 replaced c in equations (5) and (6); this approach
still produced similar results. Rolling back the conditioning information set

has three purposes. First, it is an attempt to see how the results change
with changes in the information set.17 Second, it shows how the results are
affected when the spurious predictability of foreign returns due to the lack of
synchroneity in trading hours is explicitly removed. Finally, it shows that the
covariance effect found for the U.S. expected excess returns is unlikely to be
due to asynchronous trading in the S&P 500 stock index. When rolling back
the conditioning information by one calendar day, the conditional covariance
estimate does not incorporate information from the previous day and is not
likely to be affected by information that may not have been fully incorporated
into stock prices because of asynchronous trading. In summary, our results
on the existence of an international effect are not sensitive to the lag structure
included in the estimated models.
4.2.3 Day-of-the-Week Effects

The estimates in Table 2 use trading time as unit of measurement of
returns - i.e., all returns are computed from the end of a trading period
to the end of the next trading period. In Table 4, we provide estimates of
the model where we allow different intercepts in the expected excess returns
and the variance-covariance equations for multiple calendar days because of
weekends or holidays. The results are similar - although the robust t-statistic
on the international effect falls to 1.59. However, in this case, the coefficient
on the first lagged disturbance becomes strongly significant for both countries
and the coefficient in the Nikkei equation for the lagged U.S. return increases
in value.
4.2.4 Alternative Specifications
Multivariate GARCH is a full information maximum likelihood (FIML)
Note that our econometric models attempt to approximate (1). These models are
approximations because we condition on an observed information set that is necessarily
coarser than fl, the true information set.

19

estimation method. Although it is more efficient than conventional instrumental variables methods, its parameter estimates can suffer from instability
if misspecified. To investigate whether our inference about the foreign effect
is sensitive to these estimation methods, we also employ an alternative twopass procedure. We first estimate the model assuming constant conditional
means to generate the conditional variance and covariance series and then
regress the excess returns on the conditional variances and covariances using a seemingly unrelated regression (SUR) model. This approach leads to
similar conclusions as the GARCH-in-mean approach. In particular, for the
model with dollar-denominated Nikkei returns, using this two-pass approach,
the coefficient /3a. is 54.02 with a heteroscedasticity-consistent t-statistic of

Since equation (6) for the dynamics of the variance-covariance matrix is
a projection equation without theoretical foundation, we also estimated our
model using alternative specifications for these dynamics. We re-estimated

the model using equation (6) without imposing the BEKK constraints on
the coefficient matrices. This unrestricted version does not ensure that the
variance-covariance matrix is positive semi-definite. With this version, the
point estimates for the variance and covariance effects on the mean returns
were similar to those from the BEKK process but less precise. This was
likely due to the larger number of parameters required for implementation.
We also estimated our model using the constant correlation model of Schwert
and Seguin (1990) and the Bollerslev, Eugle and Wooldridge (1988) process.
The coefficients are again similar to those reported in Table 2 except for the
coefficient on the conditional covariance in the U.S. returns equation which
is 174 (with standard (robust) i-statistic of 1.81 (1.40)) for the Bollerslev,
Engle and Wooldridge process and 284 (with standard (robust) t-statistic of
1.44 (1.40)) for the Schwert and Seguin model. Though these additional formulations impose strong restrictions on the covariance dynamics — constant
correlation in Schwert-Seguin and no cross-market spillover effects in BEW
— the covariance effect is still shown to be important.
The market weights used in the estimation are constructed dynamically
from quarterly observations provided by Morgan Stanley's Capital Iniernational Perspectives. We investigated the sensitivity of our results to the esti20

mates for the market weights by re-estimating the model assuming constant
weights of 0.5. These estimates are reproduced in Table 3 and show that the
international effect holds strongly with constant market weights.
4.2.5 Residval Diagnostics
Table 5 reports some residual diagnostic tests for the bivariate and univariate models estimated in this paper. Panel A presents the cross-sectional
and time-series statistics for the scaled residuals of the bivariate models for
the U.S. and foreign excess returns. The residuals are scaled by the square

indicate that the average atandardized residuals are small compared to their standard deviation (using

root of the conditional variance, —•

Tests

conventional t-statistics, they would not be significantly different from zero),
suggesting that we should not be overly concerned that overfitting might lead
to a bias in our estimates of the conditional means. The significant positive
excess kurtosis and negative skewness observed for the raw returns in Table 1
are reduced considerably. However, the Kolmogorov D and Bera-Jarque test
statistics for normality still indicate significant deviations from normality,
suggesting that our focus on t-statistics robust to deviations from normality is warranted.'8 Panel C demonstrates that the cross-correlation patterns

noted in the raw returns of Table 1 are mostly absorbed by the bivariate
model. In general, only contemporaneous correlations between the foreign
and U.S. returns appear to be significantly different from zero.

4.3 Additional Asset Pricing Tests
In Table 3, we are unable to reject the ICAPM at the 0.05 level, but can

do so at the 0.10 level for the Nikkei indices. A better way to understand
our results is to compare them to tests of simple two-factor models. One can
think of two possible such models in the context of this paper. First, it could

be that there are barriers to international investment that limit the ability
of investors to take advantage of the benefits of international diversification.
We refer to this version as the "segmented" model. Second, investors might
not use a mean-variance framework, but rather hold securities also for the
'8Nelson (1992) and Ndson and Foster (1991a,b) provide some conditions under whidi
ARCH models may perform reasonably in estimMing and even in forecasting conditional
covariances even when some evidence of model misspecification (e.g., nonnormality in
standardized residuals) remains.

21

purpose of hedging against unanticipated changes in various state variables,

which we call here the "hedging" model. In the latter case, we posit the
domestic and foreign market excess returns as factor-mimicking portfolios.
With segmented markets, the price of risk can differ across countries. In
Table 3, we report estimates of a model that allows the price of risk to differ
across countries. In this model, the coefficients on the weighted conditional
variances and covariances are constrained to be the same within countries,

but not across countries. This model does not appear to perform better
than the ICAPM. Hence, it does not seem to be the case that the weak
performance of the ICAPM can be attributed to the existence of barriers to
international investment.
In contrast, the hedging model's performance seems to be better than
the performance of the ICAPM. With this model, the coefficients on the
weighted domestic conditional variance (covariance) and the foreign weighted
conditional covariance (variance) are constrained to be the same. At the 0.10
level, the hedging model is rejected only when we use the Morgan Stanley
Japan index. These results suggest that more work on a multifactor hedging
model could lead to a better understanding of how risky assets are priced in
an international setting. Evidence by Cumby (1990) and Wheatley (1988) on
the Stulz (1981) international consumption asset pricing model is supportive
of this conjecture. Additional evidence is provided by Campbell and Hamao
(1992) and Bekaert and Hodrick (1992) in their work showing that changes
in expected returns can be captured by models with more than one latent
variable.
So far, we have interpreted our tests of the international CAPM in terms
of alternatives that posit that the risk of an asset is not measured simply by
the conditional beta of the asset's returns relative to the world market portfolio. Since all our tests assume that the world relative risk aversion is constant,
an alternative to the models studied in this section is one where the world relative risk aversion parameter changes over time.'9 Harvey (1991) pursues this
approach using instrumental variables in a generalized method-of-moments
19McCurdy and Morgan (1991) employ a multivaria*e GARCH framework that allows
a CAPM-type specification with time variation in the conditional betas. They examine
the risk premia in deviations from uncovered interest rate parity in weekly spot currency
prices.

22

framework. With daily data, an approach that models the dynamics for the
price of risk explicitly will be difficult to implement because the instruments
used in Harvey (1991) and related analyses are typically not observed daily.
Nevertheless, in the spirit of Harvey (1991) we investigated the hypothesis
that the price of risk changes during our sample period by allowing the price
of risk to differ in the second half of our sample from the first half when
the index uses dollar-denominated returns on the Nikkej 225. We find that
the price of risk is indeed significantly higher in the second half of the sample, suggesting that further research should extend our approach to model
explicitly the time-variation of the price of risk.

5. Concluding Remarks
In this paper, we investigate the relation between the conditional expected excess returns on the S&P 500 portfolio and its conditional risk as
measured by its conditional volatility and its conditional covariance with
the returns on some index of foreign stocks. We find that the conditional
covariance of the S&P 500 returns with the returns of foreign stocks is significantly positively related to the conditional expected excess returns of the
S&P 500 over 1978 to 1989 when the returns to foreign stocks are proxied by

the returns of the Nikkei 225 index, Japan's Morgan Stanley index or, but
less so, by the EAFE index. This result holds whether the model is tested
using dollar-denominated excess returns or the yen-denominated excess returns for the Nikkei 225. In contrast, there is no significant relation between
the conditional expected excess returns on the S&P 500 and its conditional
variance. We show that the international effect is economically significant since an increase in the daily conditional covariance between U.S. and foreign
returns that corresponds to half its sample standard deviation increases the
daily U.S. risk premium by about 0.035% or slightly less than one-half of its
standard deviation.

Our result on the existence of an international effect on the U.S. risk
premium is shown to be robust to alternative measurement intervals of the
returns and to alternative econometric specifications. In particular, this effect
holds even if we use two-, three- and five-day returns rather than daily returns

23

and if we use open-to-open returns for the S&P 500 rather than close-toclose returns. Further, our results hold if the elements of the conditional
variance-covariance matrix obtained from the GARCH approach are used
as explanatory variables in a two-pass approach using seemingly unrelated
regression models.
We are unable to reject the international CAPM at the 0.05 level of significance, but can reject it at the 0.10 level when the Nikkei 225 index is used
as the foreign index. It is generally the case that a two-factor model where
the domestic and foreign indices proxy for unspecified factors performs better than the international CAPM. In particular, this two-factor model cannot

be rejected at the 0.10 level for the Nikkei indices. Our tests are therefore
supportive of the hypothesis that markets are internationally integrated over
the sample period we consider.

24

References
Adler, Michael and Bernard Dumas, 1983, International portfolio selection and corporation finance: A synthesis, Journal of Finance 46, 925-984.

Baba, Y., Robert F. Engle, D. F. Kraft and K. F. Kroner, 1989, Multivariate simultaneous generalized ARCH, working paper, University of California, San Diego.
Bailey, Warren, Edward Ng and René Stulz, 1992, Portfolio management

and exchange rate risk: New theoretical and empirical perspectives on the
hedging controversy, S. Khoury, (ed.), Recent Developments in Banking and
Finance, Basil Blackwell, Oxford, UK.

Bailey, Warren, and René M. Stulz, 1990, Benefits of international diversification: The case of Pacific Basin stock markets, Journal of Portfolio
Management, (Summer), 57-62.

Bekaert, Geert, and Robert Hodrick, 1992, Characterizing predictable
components in excess returns on equity and foreign exchange markets, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Bera, Anil and C.M. Jarque, 1982, Model specification tests: a simultaneous approach, Journal of Econometrics 20, 59-82.
Bollerslev, Tim, 1986, Generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity, Journal of Econometrics 31. 307-327.

Bollerslev, Tim, Robert F. Engle, and Jeffrey M. Wooldridge, 1988, A
capital asset pricing model with time-varying covariances, Journal of Political
Economy 96, 116-131.

Bollerslev, Tim, and Jeffrey M. Wooldridge, 1990, Quasi-maximum likelihood estimation and inference in dynamic models with time-varying covari-

ances, unpublished working paper, Northwestern University.

Campbell, John Y. and Yasushi Hamao, 1992, Predictable stock returns
in the United States and Japan: A study of long-term capital market inte-

gration, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Chan, K.C. and G. Andrew Karolyi, 1991, The volatility of the Japanese

25

stock market: Evidence from 1977-90, in W. Bailey, Y. Haxnao and W. Ziemba, (eds.), Japanese Financial Market R.esearch, North Holland Publishers.

Chang, E.C., J.M. Pmegar and R. Ravichandran, 1991, Latent variables
tests of the integration of European equity markets, unpublished working
paper, University of Maryland.
Cho, Chinhyung D., Cheol S. Eun, and Lemma W. Seubet, 1986, International arbitrage pricing theory: An empirical investigation, Journal of
Finance 41, 313-330.
Cumby, Robert E., 1990, Consumption risk and international equity returns: Some empirical evidence, Journal of International Money and Finance
9, 182-192.

D'Agostino, Ralph, Albert Belanger and Ralph D'Agostino Jr., 1990, A
suggestion for using powerful and informative tests of normality, The American Statistician 44, 316-321.
Engel, Charles, and Anthony P. Rodriguez, 1989, Tests of international
CAPM with time-varying covariances, Journal of Applied Econometrics 4,
119-138.

Engle, Robert, 1982, Autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity with
estimates of the variance of United Kingdom, Econometrica 50, 987- 1007.

French, Kenneth R., and James M. Poterba, 1991, Were Japanese stock
prices too high?, Journal of Financial Economics 29, 337-364.

French, Kenneth R., G. William Schwert, and Robert F. Stambaugh,
1987, Expected stock returns and volatility, Journal of Financial Economics
19, 3-30.

Friend, Irwin, and Marshall Blume, 1975, The demand for risky assets,
American Economic Review 65, 900-922.

Giovannini, Alberto, and Philippe Jorion, 1989, The time variation of
risk and return in the foreign exchange and stock markets, Journal of Finance
44, 307-326.

Glosten, Lawrence, Ravi Jagannathan and David Runkle, 1989, The
relationship between the expected value and the volatility of the nominal
26

excess return on stocks, unpublished working paper, Northwestern University.

Gultekm, N. Bulent, Mustafa N. Gultekin, and Alessandro Penati, 1989,
Capital controls and international market segmentation: The evidence from
the Japanese and American stock markets, Journal of Finance 44, 849-869.

Hamao, Yasushi, Ronald Masulis and Victor Ng, 1990, Correlations in
price changes and volatility across international stock markets, Review of
Financial Studies 3, 281-308.

Hansen, Lars and Kenneth Singleton, 1983, Stochastic consumption,
risk aversion and the temporal behavior of asset returns, Journal of Political
Economy 91, 249-266.

Harvey, Campbell R., 1991, The world price of covariance risk, Journal
of Finance 46, 111-157.
Korajczyk, Robert and Claude Viallet, 1989, An empirical investigation
of international asset pricing, Review of Financial Studies 2, 553-585.
Lin, Wen-ling, Robert Engle and Takatoshi Ito, 1991, Do bulls and bears
move across borders?, unpublished working paper, University of Wisconsin.
McCurdy, Thomas H. and Ieuan G. Morgan, 1991, Tests for a systematic
risk component in deviations from uncovered interest rate parity, The Review
of Economic Studies 58, 587-602.

McDonald, Jack, 1989, The Mochiai effect: Japanese corporate crossholdings, Journal of Portfolio Management (Fall), 90-94.

Merton, Robert C., 1980, On estimating the expected return on the
market: an exploratory investigation, Journal of Financial Economics 8, 323361.

Merton, Robert C., 1973, An intertemporal capital asset pricing model,
Econometrica 31, 867-887.
Morgan Stanley, Capital International Perspectives, selected issues.

Muthuawamy, Jayaram, 1990, Non-synchronous trading and the index
autocorrelation problem, Ph.D. Dissertation, Graduate School of Business,
University of Chicago.

27

Nelson, Daniel, 1992, Filtering and forecasting with misspecifled ARCH
models I: getting the right variance with the wrong model, Journal of Econo-

metrics, forthcoming.
Nelson, Daniel and Dean Foster, 1991a, Estimating conditional variances
with misapecified ARCH models: asymptotic theory, unpublished working

paper, University of Chicago.

Nelson, Daniel and Dean Foster, 1991b, Filtering and forecasting with
misapecified ARCH models II: making the right forecast with the wrong
model, unpublished working paper, University of Chicago.

Schwert, William and Paul Seguin, 1990, Heteroskedasticity in stock
returns, Journal of Finance 45, 1129-1155.
Sercu, P., 1980, A generalization of the international asset pricing model,
Revue de l'Association Francaise de Finance 1, 91-135.

Solnik, Bruno, 1974, Equilibrium in international asset markets under
uncertainty, Journal of Economic Theory 8, 500-524.
Stoll, Hans and Robert Whaley, 1990, The dynamics of stock index and
stock index futures returns, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis
25, 441-468.

Stulz, René M., 1981, A model of international asset pricing, Journal of
Financial Economics 9, 383-406.

Stulz, René M., 1983, Pricing capital assets in an international setting:
An introduction, Journal of International Business Studies (Winter), 55-73.
Wheatley, Simon, 1988, Some tests of international equity integration,
Journal of Financial Economics 21, 177-212.

28

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors thank participants in seminars at Concordia University, Queen's
University, Vanderbilt University, University of Western Ontario, Indiana
University, University of Chicago, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
University of Minnesota, Ohio State University, Noire Dame University, the
NBER Conference on International Asset Pricing in Philadelphia, the Western
Economics Association meetings in Seattle, the European Finance Association
meetings in Rotterdam, the Johnson Symposium at the University of Wisconsin
and the Pacific-Basin Capital Markets Research Conference in Seoul for useful
comments. We am grateful to Warren Bailey, Tim Bollerslev, Stephen Brown,
George Constantinides, Robert Cumby, Wayne Ferson, Steve Foerster, Pat

Hendershott, Robert Hodrick, John Huizinga, Ravi Jagannathan, Bob
Korajczyk, Craig Lewis, Andy Lo, Thomas McCurdy, Richard Roll, Paul
Seguin, Lemma Senbet, Henri Servaes, Rob Stambaugh, Simon Wheatley and
especially the referee, Cam Harvey, and editor, Bill Schwert. James Tompkins
and Darrell Lee provided helpful researrh assistance. K.C. Chan and Andrew
Karolyi thank the Dice Center for Financial Economics at Ohio State
University for partial funding.

fir'

70

60

a)
I.a)

0

°- 40
30
20

11T1 CIII IllICIlIPIP CI?!
III It
Dec 84

Dec 78

Dec 80

Dec 82

IIIf TIll!
Mar 89

Dec 86

Fig. 1. Market Capitalization of the U.S. and Japanese Equity Markets from
1978 to 1989 as proportion of Total World Equity Market Capitalization. The
market values for the U.S. and Japanese stocke are drawn from various quarterly

issues of Morgan Stanley's Capia1 InernaionaI Perspeciives.

-(1 1.5
-D

1

0
ci)

Q

i

U)

4-I
ci)

0.5

Jan-1978

Jar,-1980

Jan-1982

Jan-1984

Jan-1986

Jan-1988

Jan-1990

Date
Fig. 2. Conditional Expected Risk Premium on U.S. Equity from 1978 to

1989. The fitted values for the expected risk premium of S&P 500 index stocks
are computed from estimates of the bivariate GARCH model using the dollardenominated Nikkei 225 index returns as the foreign market (Table 2, Panel A).
Note that the figure excludes the four days around the October 1987 market
crash (October 16, 19, 20 and 21).

>'
(0

0)

C)

C

Variance

(0
(0

0)

0C
(0

(0

>

00

990

Date
Fig. 3. Conditional Variance and Covariance of the Risk Premium on U.S. Equity from 1978 to 1989. The fitted values for the conditional variance (line) and
covariance (solid bar) of the risk premium of S&P 500 index stocks are computed
from estimates of the bivariate GARCH model using the dollar-denominated
Nikkei 225 index returns as the foreign market (Table 2, Panel B). Note that
the figure excludes the four days around the October 1987 market crash (October 16, 19, 20 and 21).

Table 1
Summkry Statistics for Daily U.S. and Foreign Equity Market Excess Returns (in per-

cent) from January 1978 to December 1989. The U.S. equity index is the Standard
and Poor's 500 stod index and the foreign market index is the U.S. dollar- and yendenominated Nikkei 225 index, the Morgan Stanley Japan index (yen-denominated)
or the Morgan Stanley EAFE (dollar-denominated) index. All dollar-denominated index returns are computed net of the three-month U.S. Treasury bill yield and the yendenominated index returns are computed net of the three-month Gensàki interest rate.
The returns associated with the four days October 16 to October 22 of 1987 are omitted.
The Kolmogorov-Smirnoff "D-Statistic" tests null hypothesis of normality with critical
values of 0.0256 (0.0307), 0.0281 (0.0337) and 0.0271 (0.0325) at 5% (1%) significance for
2819, 2338 and 2522 degrees of freedom, respectively. The Bera-Jarque "B-Statistic" for
normality is based on the excess skewness and kurtosis coefficients and is asymptotically
distributed x2 with two degrees of freedom with critical values at 5% (1%) significance

of 5.99 (9.21). The tests for deviations from normality for the skewness and kurtosis
statistics are based on D'Agostino, Belanger and D'Agostino (1990). Cross-correlations
are given between the S&P 500 index daily excess returns, rt, (and squared returns, r)
and those of the index shown in the table. • flags coefficients significant at the 1% level.

Statistic

Panel A: Distributional Statistics
Nikkei
MSCI
Nikkei

MSCI

Japan

EAFE

2338

2522
0.0495
0.8917
0.0327
3.0575*
0.0357*
19.570*

S&P500

Mean
Std.Dev.

2819
0.0254
0.9760

Skewness

0.4409*

Kurtosis
D-Statistic
B-Statistic

5.6594 *
0.0525*
72.576*

NOBS

($)

(yen)

2819
0.0693
1.0648
0.0535
2.2764*
0.0469*
11.489*

2819
0.0619
0.7658

0.2912*

5.8208
0.0759*
75706w

0.0688
0.9414
0.1323
8.8262*
0.0858*
157.09*

Panel B: Autocorrelations of Daily Excess Returns

Statistic

Series: r
Pi
P2
/33

94

p

p

S&P500 Nikkei

Nikkei

MSCI MSCI

($)

(yen)

Japan__EAFE

.0975*
.0027
.0246
.0345
-.0295
-.0004

.0934*

.0552
.0077
-.0234
-.0042
-.0086
-.0047

Series: r
P1
/32
/33

O4
/35

P6

.0675*

.0792
.1641*
.1227*
.0824*
.1463*

.1492*
.1025*
.0600*
.0451*
.0749*

.0206

.1229 .1059*
0604* .0646* .0258

-.0024
.0134

.0051
.0167

.0191
.0300
.0079

-.0379

-.0296

-.0100

.2617'

.1156*
.2121*
.2134*
.0466
.1413*
.0711*

.1493*
.0619*
.1009*
.1123*
.0866*
.0219

.0507* .0695*

.1826*
.1853*
.1003*
.1211*
.0966*

Table 1 (continued)
Panel C: Cro.a-correlation. of Daily S&P 500 and Foreign Market Excai R.eturna
MSCI EAFE
MSCI Japan
Nikkei (yen)
Nikkei ($)
rt
Lag
r?

r

-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1

-0.0167
0.0188
-0.0051
0.0029

0.0377
0.0567*
0.0487*

0

0.0571*
0.1916*
0.0838*

1
2

0.0137
0.0015

3
4

0.0536

0.0770
0.1516*
0.1522*
0.1021*
0.0754*
0.0356
0.0675*
0.0444*
0.0441*

5

6

-0.0356
-0.0206
-0.0044

0.0609

r

r

r

r

0.0394*
0.0177

-0.0263
0.0255

0.0363
0.0418*

-0.0319
-0.0171

00783*

0.0689*

0.0689*
0.0786*
0.0929*
0.1268*
0.1451*

0.2707
0.1201
-0.0033
-0.0164
0.0411*
-0.0471
-0.0284
-0.0198

0.2139*
0.2003*
0.2194*
0.1906*
0.0747
0.1129*
0.1274*
0.0647*

-0.0153
-0.0144

0.1004*
0.2531*
0.1095*
-0.0041
-0.0342

0.0422*
-0.0281

0.0483*
-0.0044

0.0782*
0.1061*
0.1642*
0.1269*
0.1999*
0.1806*
0.1556
O.0889
0.1036*
0.0336

0.0034
0.0061
-0.0022
0.0390
0.0456*
0.3305
0.1629*
0.0062
0.0099
0.0195
-0.0353
-0.0288
-0.0001

r

0.0404*
0.0630*
0.1539
0.0746*
0.0545*
0.1854*
0.2190*
0.0954*
0.0504
0.0749*
0.0555*
0.0202
0.0464

(i.91)

(3.2o)

72.93

4.(Nikkei yen) -0.0060 0.0508
-0.0047 2.044
1979-1989
(-0.12) (2.65)** (-0.24) (0.24)
(.1.651* (2.56) (-0.24) (0.59]

(2.74]

(2.63)* (0.09)
[1.60]

57.30
(2.57)

[1.761*

[0.16]

1980-1989

3.(EAFE)

J

(1.12)
(1.05]

0.0196

(0.73)
(0.76]

0.0329

[1.37]

[0.49]

012

(8.95]

[2.36)

(1.24]

[1s.32)

[1.55)

0.0252 0.2871
18.95
(1.08) (18.59) (1.52)

[-0.30]

-10.91
(.0.31)
0.0026 0.1694
26.16
35.33
(0.14) (14.s8) (2.55) (1.86)
(3.39)5* (0.11)
(12.43]* [2.12) [1.44]

(4.03)*

0.0801

[3.32]

(3.23)

0.0735

(1.791*

(2.32)

53.44

(0.28]

ctj
(3j,
(3g.
0.0104 0.2028
27.57
5.730
(0.53) (10.92) (2.38) (0.25)

Foreign Excess Returns

0.1453
0.0232 0.1692
9.289
(6.29)** (1.11) (10.98)5* (1.08)
[5.61)5* [0.88]
[9.68] [0.77)

(3.82)
[3.42]

[-0.47]

0.0769

(-0.49)

8j

-0.0205

aj

56.01
0.0335
(2.40)** (1.28)

[0.21]

0.0526

[-0.29]

[1.811*
[0.49]

-0.0057 2.791
(-0.27) (0.32)

0.0387
(1.85)*

U.S. Excess Returns
Oai
On
(3a.
Psc
0.0516
-0.0062 -3.555 87.38
(2.62) (-0.31) (-0.41) (3.07)
[2.55]** [-0.32) [-0.58] [2.34]**

1.722
(0.13)

0.0230
(0.47)
[0.57]

-0.0035
(-0.07)
[-0.13]

+i

Panel A: Conditional Expected Excess Returns

0.0018

1980-1989

2.(MSJP)

0.0362
(0.76)

1.(Nikkei $)
1979-1989

(1.16]

n

Model

-

d

R

= + d..'dt+1Vat + P&h+i(l — Wa,) + Odicd, + O,f2edt_i + Cdt+i
=
r.,t+1 aj +/3jh,+i(l — wj,)+ P,.h,t+iw, + O;iCjt + Oj2ej,_1 + #/Cdt + Cfg+i
= [hUI h,+i 1 and H
1
F'H E+ =
=*+1 ) where H
G',c,'G
== + =t—
=
1ei,+i j N(o,H
=t+i P'P
iht+'
j

f

R = 6.13%

19397.461

R2 = 0.56%

R = 11.1%

16855.220
R? = 0.67%

R == 0.95%
R 7.27%

15559.932

= 4.52%

Log
Likelihood
18198.926
R2 = 1.16%

Table 2
Estimates from the Bivariate Model of Daily Expected Excess Returns for U.S. and Foreign Equity Markets. U.S. equity
returns,
(rdt+), are given by the Standard and Poor's 500 stock index and the foreign equity market returns, (rfc+i), by the U.S. dollarand yen-denominated Nikkei 225 index (Model 1 and 4), the Morgan Stanley Japan yen-denominated index
(MSJP) (Model 2) or the
Morgan Stanley EAFE index (Model 3). All dollar-denominated indices are computed net of the three-monthU.S. Treasury bill yield;
yen-denominated indices are computed net of the three-month Gensaid interest rate. The market value weights, W,t, for each stock
market j on day t with j = d for U.S. equity and j = for foreign equity markets, are daily
interpolations from quarterly estimates
published by Morgan Stanley's Cspiial Inlernaiional Per,pecvea. The market weights sum to unity in each regression. The number
of observations for each model correspondto those shown in Table 1. and
denote the ratio of the explained to total variation in
the excess returns associatedwith the S&P 500 and foreign index markets. Standard i-statistics are presented
in parentheses and robust
i-statistics computed with quasi-maximum likelihood methods are in brackets. Significance at the 5% and 10% levels
are denoted by..
and , respectively. The model parameters are givenby the following systemof equations:

[..()96]

(10.6)

[503]**

G11

G21

[9.17]

[_6.57)**

[0.90]

0.4334
-0.1842 0.0136
(14.4)** (-15.9) (0.82)

P22

G

(..7.49)**
[_3.87J**

-U.14U

[357]**

(7.91)

0.1043

(7.29) (..2.57) (8.59) (1S.5) (.3.92)
[4.35)5* [-6.86J [4.44]**
[4.o9] [-1.46]

-0.1627

-0.0671

0.1619

-0.0885

0.0134
(0.774)

[8.45] [-4.23] [0.u5]

-0.1575

(10.5) (-17.4)

0.0080
(0.178)
[0.104]

0.2451

[1.971*

(4.22)**

0.0445

[-1.42]

(-4.o2)

-0.0496

-0.1594 -0.0342 0.0664
0.1184
-0.1182
0.1609
(6.19)**
(_16.6)** (.2.36) (6.21)
(7.53)** (_3.09)**
[4571*5 [-1.64]
[2.29]** [_5.67] [_3.25]** [1.63]

-0.0629
(-0.87)

0.1359

P

P12

P11

4.(Nikkei yen) 0.1143

3.(EAFE)

2.(MSJP)

L(Nikkei $)

Model
0.9707

F11

0.0217

F21

-0.0204

F12

-0.8332

F23

0.8966

[-0.763]

0.0170

[1.25]

-0.0139

[132.]

0.9786

-0.0095
0.9792 0.0177
(413.)** (2.15) (_1.83)

0.8812

(49.8]

(64.8)

0.9060

(-27.1) (281.) (-1.57) (3.30) (119.)
[49.5)5*
[-12.7] [163.] [-4.63] [1.95]

-0.4050

[_8.76]

-0.3006
(_15.6)**

[-11

(292.) (-0.142) (437)5* (107.)
[59.4)5*
[169.] [-16.5) [1.61]

(.237)5*

0.0219

0.9791

-0.3869

-0.0009

(-16.2) (291.) (1.96) (-1.97) (41.2)
[-1.41]
[27.1]
[_10.6]** [138.] [3.29)**

-0.3344

Table 2 (continued)
Panel B: Conditional Covanance Dynamics

Table 3
Tests of the International CAPM and Alternative Specifications using the Bivariate Model
of Daily Expected Excess Returns for U.S. and Foreign Equity Markets. U.S. equity returns
are given by the Standard and Poor's 500 stock index and the foreign equity market returns,
by the US. dollar- and yen-denominated Nikkei 225 index (Model 1 and 4), the Morgan

Stanley Japan index (MSJP) (Model 2) or the Morgan Stanley EAFE index (Model 3).
The restrictions associated with the ICAPM model are (3dt = Pdc = I3j = f3jc, for
"Alternative 1 - Segmented" that assumes that the prices of risk in the U.S and foreign
market differ, f3d = fl and Pjv = 1/ c, and for "Alternative 2- Hedging" that assumes a
two factor model with U.S and foreign market risk as the respective loadings, 13d,, = 13/c and
= /3,. Only the coefficient estimates for the conditional variance and covariance terms

in the S&P 500 and foreign market excess returns equations are reported with associated
robust t-statistim computed with quasi-maximum likelihood methods in brackets and x2
values of the likelihood ratio test of the restrictions. Significance at the 5% and 10% levels

ase denoted by e and .
Model

1.(Nilckei $)
1979-1989

Specification

Unrestricted
ICAPM

U.S. Returns

Foreign Returns

13dc

-3.555

87.38
27.57
5.730
[2.34]** [2.36]** [0.28]
9.647
9.647
9.647

[-0.58]

9.647

13/i,

[1.90]**
Alternative 1 - Segmented 7.912
7.912
12.54
[2.23]**
[1.29]
2.492
28.35
28.35
Alternative 2 - Hedging
[0.06]
[2.50)1*

2.(MSJP)

Unrestricted

1980-1989

ICAPM

2.791
[0.49]

56.01
[1.76]*
11.96

11.96
[2.01]**
Alternative 1 - Segmented 8.853
8.853

Alternative 2 - Hedging

3.(EAFE)

Unrestricted

1980-1989

ICAPM

[1.15]

1979-1989

ICAPM

9.289

53.44

[0.77]
11.96

[1.791*

14.33

14.33

[1.21]
15.91

8.164

11.96

15.91
[1.53]

1.722

57.30

18.95

-10.91

[0.16]

[1.60]

[1.55]

[-0.30]

6.820

6.820

2.044
[0.59]

12.86
17.87

[1.58]

12.86

12.86

[0.68]

20.56
20.56
5.585
[l.73]*
72.93
26.16
35.33
[1.9111* [2.1211* [1.44]
18.06
18.06
18.06

18.06
[2.91]**
Alternative 1 - Segmented 12.09
12.09

Alternative 2 - Hedging

2.492

[0.86]

[0.45]

4.(Nilckei yen) Unrestricted

12.54

8.164

12.86
[1.75)1
Alternative 1 - Segmented 17.87
[1.73)1
Alternative 2 - Hedging
5.585

7.582

32.53

[1.41]

[2.9211*

x
(p-value)

(3dv

23.02
23.02
[2.87]**
32.53
7.582

7.428
(0.0594)
7.202
(0.0273)
3.752
(0.1532)

5.714
(0.1264)
5.294
(0.0709)
5.436
(0.0660)

4.994
(0.1722)
3.904
(0.1420)
4.324
(0.1151)
6.675

(0.0830)
4.984
(0.0827)
3.844
(0.1463)

[-1.11]

[-0.90]

No market weights

No MA Coefficients

[-0.87) [-0.42]

[o.09]

[-0.45]

[1.64]
[0.19]

(0.54]

[1.59)

[-1.18]

10.721

[2.52)"

0.0512
(2.59)

[1.96] [1.62]

[2.96] [1.67] [3M]55

[-0.41]

[3.48J'

[2.o9]

[-0.381 [-0.131

[2.22]

[-0.53)

-0.0075 -0.908 66.99 -0.0351 0.0781
(-0.37) (-0.08) (2.87) (-0.51) (3.85)

[3.04]

[0.12]

[-0.29]

[0.32]

[3.73)5*

0.556 91.61 -0.0222
(0.07) (4.29) (-0.63)

0.0181
(0.38)

[1.32]

[0.23]

2.436
(0.21)

[1.171

[9.86]

[0.53]

[9.o1]

[3.13]

[2.04]

[1.52]

[0.59]

19.94
(0.65)

[-0.10]

28.46
-1.694
(3.49)5* (.0.08)

[-0.12]

0.0111 0.2036 20.84
(0.56) (11.0) (1.47)

[-0.24]

8115.645

1335.953

2671.088

4820.689

18197.939

18037.485

38.17
18150.384
(4.54)5*

[1.34]

12.03
(0.58)

[0.28]

4.438
(0.30)

[-0.52]

49.78
(1.52)

[1.42]

(1.71) (1.74)

[0.65]

0.0198 0.1013 0.0555 0.1339 16.22
0.0103 -12.61 87.49
(0.35) (-1.03) (2.13) (0.27) (3.34)5* (1.95) (4.88) (1.04)

[I.85]

[3.13]

0.0796 0.0819

[0.52]

-11.88
(-0.58)

[0.85]

[0.49]

[1.16]

[5.51] (2.14]

0.0176 0.1259 6.450
(0.47) (3.i2) (0.55)

[1.41)

-0.0233 15.68 100.12 0.3663 0.1365 0.1278 -0.0459 -14.65
(-0.35) (1.69) (1.55) (0.64) (1.71) (1.94) (-0.51) (-0.34)
[-0.37] [0.41] [1.671* [0.44] [232] [2.01] [-0.61] [-0.39]

[-1.18)

[0.11]

0.3786 0.0567
(1.42) (1.17)

[0.98)

0.0129
(0.29)

[1.00]

(0.56)

Holiday/WeekendDummy 0.0267

[1.93]

-0.0496 10.26 50.72
(-1.18) (1.46) (1.86)

[-0.45]

[2.14]

[2.22]

-0.0165 11.87 70.27
0.2231 0.0044
(-0.52) (1.39) (1.99) (0.88) (0.12)

[0.45]

0.0708 -0.0058 3.014 58.51 -0.0535 0.0498 -0.0071 0.2214 -2.875
(3.59)5* (-0.31) (0.36) (2.58) (-1.71) (2.32) (-0.31) (12.6) (-0.17)

[-0.41]

(1264 observations)

[0.77)

-0.0212
(-0.76)

(-1.65) (_2.12)
[-0.30]
[-2.3a]

-0.4372 -0.1501

[-1.13]

-0.3023 -0.0347
(-1.55) (-0.81)

[-3.23]

-0.3307 -0.0358
(_1.69) (-0.96)

Open-Open U.S. Returns 0.0793
(1984/08 - 1989/12)
(1.29)

Ten-Day Returns
(282 observations)

Five-Day Returns
(564 observations)

Three-DayReturns
(941 observations)

[-0.95)

[-1.31]

[0.51]

9

d

Table4.
Tests of Estimates of the Bivanate Model of Daily Expected Excess Returns for U.S. and Foreign Equity Markets. U.S. equity
returns are given by the Standard and Poor's 500 stock index and the foreign equity market returns by the U.S. dollar-denominated Nikkei
225 index. Covariance dynamics are not reported. Standard t-statistics are presented in parentheses and robust i-statistics computed with
quasi-maximum likelihood methods are in brackets. Significanceat the 5% and 10% levels are denoted by• and , respectively. The model
parameters are the same as the systemof equations in Table 2.
________
U.S. Return Equation
Log
Foreign Return Equation
Likelihood
Pjc
Model
9d1
13a
P,k
0j
Oji
9f2
Sj
f3.
20.03
7886.333
.0.1309 -0.0156 0.0460 0.176 26.24
-0.0765 0.0129
-0.0271 2.464 80.59
Two-Day Returns
(1.52)
(5.87)
(2.68)
(0.99)
observations)
(-0.71)
(0.42)
(-1.02)
(0.29)
(3.04)5*
(-1.21)
(-0.52)
(1411

Robustness

Table 5
Residual Diagnostics for Bivariate GARCH Models for Daily U.S. and Foreign Equity
Market Excess Returns from January 1978 to December 1989. The corresponding model
estimates are from Tables 2. The U.S. equity index is the Standard and Poor's 500 stock
index and the foreign market index is the U.S. dollar- or yen-denominated Nikkei 225 index,

the Morgan Stanley Japan index or the Morgan Stanley EAFE index. The KolmogorovSmirnoff "D- statistic" tests null hypothesis of normality with aitical values of 0.0256
(0.0307), 0.0281 (0.0337) and 0.0271 (0.0325) at 5% (1%) significance for 2819, 2338 and

2522 degrees of freedom, respectively. The Bera-Jarque "B- statistic" for normality is
based on the excess skewness and kurtosis coefficients and is asymptotically distributed x2
with two degrees of freedom with critical values at 5% (1%) significance of 5.99 (9.21). The

tests for deviations from normality for the skewness and kurtosis statistics are based on
D'Agoetino, Belanger and D'Agostino (1990). p denotes the autocorrelation coefficients
of order j for both the raw and squared standardized residuals. Cross-correlations are
given between the residuals from the S&P 500 index daily excess returns, €, (and squared
returns, ) and those of the index shown in the table. * flags coefficients for which tests
indicate significance at the 1% level.
Panel A: Bivariate Model Standardized Residuals

Statistic

Modci 1
S&P500 Nikkei

Modci 2
S&P500 MSCI

S&P500 MSCI

Japan

EAFE

($)
NOBS
Mean

2819

2819

-0.0148
0.9915
.0.4119*
4.1108*

-0.0124
Std.Dev.
0.9936
Skewness
0.1256
Kurtosis
2.0331*
D-Statistic 0.0378 0.0379*
B-Statistic 38.886* 9.2839

Modci 3

Modci 4
S&P500 Nikkei
(yen)

-0.0327
0.9905
-0.4523 0.0479
4.2673* 3.8949*
0.0411* 0.0547k
38.336* 30.582

2522
-0.0154
0.9956
.0.4529*
4.1796*
0.0368*
38.270*

-0.0233
0.9948
0.0608
1.8164*
0.0393*
6.9354

2819
-0.0044
0.9886
.0.4274*
4.2162*
0.0408*
40.940*

2819
-0.0335
0.9904
.0.3898*
2.5917*
0.0461*
16.204*

.0326
.0179
-.0257
-.0109
.0021
.0022

.0199
.0191
-.0145
-.0268
-.0123
-.0013

.0086
.0099
.0084
.0351
.0252
.0108

.0292
.0136
-.0112
-.0091
.0066
.0018

.0003
.0056
.0088
.0053

.0079
.0028
.0195

.0157
.0198
.0132
.0201
-.0086
.0307

2338
-0.0082
0.9916

2338

2522

Series: f
P1
P2
j03

4

)5
P6

.0327
.0153
-.0094
-.0085
.0082
-.0003

.0091
.0109
.0209
.0309

-.0042
.0146

.0051

-.0002
.0071

.0019
-.0242
-.0009

-.0129
-.0077

Series:
P1
P2

P3

P6

.0015
.0125
.0015
.0099

-.0039
-.0215

-.0134

.0064

.0282

-.0342

.0201
.0020

.0111
.0259
.0201
.0258

-.0041
.0336

-.0029

.0136
.0237
.0131
..0413* .0326
-.0185 .0084
-.0175 .0019
.0191
.0509w

-.0094
.0065

-.0292

.0308
.0252
.0145
.Q434*
-.0269

.0442*

Table 5 (continued)
Panel B: Cross-correlations of Standardized Residuals of Bivariate Models of S&P 500
and Foreign Market Returns

Lag

-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3

t

Model 1
Nikkei ($)

-0.0009 0.0018
0.0254 -0.0091
-0.0083 -0.0139
-0.0013 0.0005
0.0457* 0.0136
-0.0003 0.0166
0.0579* 0.0959
0.0072 0.0559*

Model 2

MSCI Japan

Model 4
Nikkei (yen)

-0.0018 -0.0085 0.0209 -0.0147 -0.0123 0.0005
0.0421* 0.0088

0.0169 0.0053 0.0227 -0.0084

-0.0073 -0.0089
-0.0078 0.0257
0.0879* 0.0370 0.0356 0.0199 0.0571* 0.0449*
0.0366 0.0478* 0.0103 0.0523 0.0263 0.0410*
0.0762* 0.0379 0.1349* 0.1315* 0.0747* 0.0686*
0.0099 0.1350* -0.0047 0.0346 0.0035 0.0687*

-0.0144 -0.0116 0.0200 0.0186
-0.0102 0.0067 0.0223 0.0287

5

0.0086 0.0183 0.0060 0.0266
0.0549* -0.0054 0.0371 -0.0160
-0.0174 0.0323 0.0052 0.0125
-0.0143 0.0274 -0.0261 0.0611

6

-0.0109 -0.0082 -0.0093 0.0151

4

Model 3
MSCI EAFE

0.0285 0.0223 0.0157 0.0298
0.0318 0.0281 0.0420k -0.0195
-0.0278 -0.0065 -0.0155 0.0158
-0.0008 0.0078 -0.0205 0.0255
0.0151 0.0172 -0.0264 0.0116

