                    NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES




              LABOR MARKET SEGMENTATION THEORY:
                  RECONSIDERING THE EVIDENCE




                             William T. Dickens

                                 Kevin Lang




                          Working Paper No. 4087




           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                           June 1992




We would like to thank the usual group of little people without whose help this
would have been done much sooner. We would also like to acknowledge the
generous research support of the Institute of Industrial Relations at U.C.
Berkeley. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Labor Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                              NBER Working Paper #4087
                                              June 1992


              LABOR MARKET SEGMENTATION THEORY:
                  RECONSIDERING THE EVIDENCE


                                  ABSTRACT


         We argue that Labor Market Segmentation theory is a good alternative
to standard views of the labor market. Since it is sometimes argued that labor
market segmentation theory is untestable, we first consider the uses of theory
and the attributes of a good theory. We then argue that labor market
segmentation has these attributes. It is internally consistent and is based on
plausible assumptions about behavior and technology. More significantly,
many of the predictions of the theory have been tested and confiied. Further,
from a dynamic view the theory has done quite well. When the theory has
suggested new tests, far more often tban not the predictions have been
validated. Labor market segmentation theory has had to make little recourse
to post-hoc explanations for unexpected empirical results. In contrast, human
capital theory has required a series of post-hoc rationalizations to explain a
large and growing body of empirical work motivated by the labor market
segmentation perspective. Finally, we consider the implications of labor
market segmentation theory for the practice of labor economics. We argue that
further exploration of the implications of the theory for unemployment, trade.
industiial policy and income distiibution will provide useful insights and fuither
tests of tbe theory.


William T. Dickens                            Kevin Lang
Department of Economics                       Department of Economics
University of California                      Boston University
Berkeley, CA 94720                            Boston, MA 02215
and NBER                                      and NBER
        When asking questions about the labor market, particularly

earnings determination, human capital theory is the most important tool

in the economist's toolbox. However, there is an alternative -- labor

market segmentation theory. Labor market segmentation was

advanced as an alternative to human capital theory by several authors

in the early 1 970s. Following a brief period of popularity, it faded after

influential critiques suggested that existing evidence did not differentiate

between labor market segmentation and standard human capital theory

(Wachter 1974, Cain 1976). In the last decade several important

theoretical and empirical developments have 'generated a resurgence

of interest in the theory.

        We review these developments and conclude that labor market

segmentation theory provides a good alternative to human capital

theory and deserves an equivalent position in the economist's toolbox.

When analyzing policy questions or when designing new explorations,

economists should consider the implications of labor market
segmentation theory. This opens a broad area of work --the
application of labor market segmentation theory to several problems

previously only analyzed from the standard perspective. We briefly
consider some of these applications below.
        Since labor market segmentation has often been accused of

beinguntestable we begin with a discussion of epistemology. In the

second section we describe the essential elements and common

attributes of labor market segmentation theories. The third section

briefly describes the theoretical foundations of labor market

segmentation theory -- efficiency wage theory or the closely related

literatures on rent sharing or rent extraction, The fourth and fifth

sections present the evidence on labor market segmentation theory.

In the fourth section we discuss the evidence on the extent and origin

of inter-employer wage differences. In the fifth section we discuss

explicit tests of dual market theory. The sixth section is an explicit reply

to criticisms of some of our early work on dual market theory. In

particular we return to the question of what makes a good theory and

discuss our work in light of these criteria. The final section summarizes

our arguments and briefly considers the implications of labor market

segmentation theory for future work.



What Is a Good Theory?

        Economists are frequently hostile to discussions of
epistemology. TjaIIing Koopmans is almost apologetic in the
introduction to his famous essay on methodology (1957) as were two

                                     2
of his eminent predecessors in the field (Roy Harrod, 1938; Dennis

Robertson, 1940). This hostility is unfortunate, because it significantly

undermines our ability to assess the significance of hypothesis tests in

economics.

        Economists are frequently naive falsificationists, holding the

view that a bad theory is one that has been proved wrong. Similarly,

a good theory is one which could be proved false, has been subjected

to testing and has not yet been demonstrated to be false. This view is

often associated with Karl Popper but represents an oversimplification

of his position. Naive falsificationism leadseconomists to look for

'definitive' tests of a theory. A 1goJ' test is one which could

definitively falsify a theory. To be 'definitive,' a test must generate a

result which is not explicable by the theory being tested. By the same

logic, a 'good' theory is one for which a 'definitive' test can be

developed.
        This position would be laughable if it did not inform seminar

discussions and presumably influence research and publication

decisions. It is also the position which has allowed many economists

to dismiss labor market segmentation theory as untestable. While

economists are apt to envy the scientist's ability to generate crucial




                                   3
experiments, the truth is that experiments are deemed crucial only with

the hindsight of history. Lakatos (1978, pp. 86-87) reports that



        There were many experiments in the eighteenth century
        which were, as a matter of historico-sociological fact,
        widely accepted as 'crucial' evidence against Galileo's
        law of free fall, and Newton's theory of gravitation. In
        the nineteenth century there were several 'crucial
        experiments' based on measurements of light velocity
        which 'disproved' the corpuscular theory and which
        turned out later to be erroneous in the light of relativii
        theory. These 'crucial experiments' were later deleted
        from justificationist textbooks as manifestations of
        shameful short-sightedness or even of envy. (Recently
        they reappeared in some new textbooks, this time to
        il lustratethe inescapable irrationality of scientific
        fashions.) However, in those cases in which ostensibly
        'crucial experiments' were indeed later borne out by
        the defeat of the programme, historians charged those
        who resisted them with stupidity, jealousy, or unjustified
        adulation of the father of the research programme in
        question.


        Experiments or hypothesis tests cannot be crucial, because

there is no theory which remains free of anomalies for long. Similarly,

there is no result which cannot be explained by some modification of

the theory which its proponents will claim is minor.'


               1The   flat earth theory still has
        proponents who are adept at explaining why
        apparently contradictory evidence really
        conforms with the theory.  As recently as
        fifteen years ago an organization calling
        itself the "Defenders of the Geocentric

                                    4
        If we can not expect to reject theories with decisive tests, how

then should we decide between theories? One plausible answer is that

we should ask which theory is compatible with a wider range of 'known

facts' about the world. While attractive, this gives too much weight to

theories which have been around for a long time. We can ask the

question if you wanted to go to San Francisco would you prefer to be

on a train 1000 miles or 1500 miles away. Everything else equal we

would probably prefer the train which was closer. However, if the train

which is farther away is moving twice as fast, we may get to San

Francisco sooner on that train. In short, as in many topics economists

discuss, we care not only about levels but also about derivatives.

        Indeed, since we expect to do economic research for a long

time, the rate at which a research program is progressing and not its

abilii to explain known 'facts is of primary importance. Thus, the true

test of a theory or research program is dynamic. A good theory

generates excess empirical content which tends to be corroborated and

expands the range it can explain without large adjustments. A




        Universe" published their own Newspaper
        The Bravhian Debater, which offered
        rationalizations of their view.

                                   5
regressive program is one which is continually being altered in the face

of contradictory evidence.2

        In our assessment, we, of course, do not ignore the importance

of other criteria for assessing economic theories such as their simplicity

(Occam's razor) or their mathematical elegance. These aspects of

theories influence their treatment in other disciplines, and affect our

judgment of economic theories as well.

        We will argue that in recent years labor market segmentation

theory has been a very progressive research program. In contrast,

human capital theory has required frequent modification to account for

the empirical regularities generated by the labor market segmentation

research program.




             2Even this criteria (most often
        identified with Imre Lakatos) has its
        critics. Paul Feyerabend, for example,
        argues that many research programs now
        viewed as progressive have had regressive
        periods and that it is inappropriate to
        prefer one over another on the basis of
        its past performance. We accept the point
        that second and higher derivatives matter
        in determining who will get where they are
        going first.  However, in the absence of
        information on higher order derivatives we
        still prefer the train that it appears
        will arrive first projecting current
        rates.

                                    6
What Is Labor Market Segmentation Theory?

        We identify two cruciai eiements of segmented iabor market

theory. First, the iabor market can be usefuiiy thought of as being

made up severai distinct segments with difterent ruies for wage

determination and empioyment poiicies. Second, access to jobs in at

ieast some sectors at some times is iimited in the sense that more

peopie want jobs than there are jobs oftered. Thus there may be

queuing for these jobs either in the form of unempioyment or job

queues among empioyed workers or both.

        Whiie it is easy to state that iabor market segmentation theory

impiies distinct segments, just what is meant by 'distinct segments' is

more difficuit. Minimaiiy, a number of important characteristics of the

wage determination mechanism and the empioyment reiation must be

correiated so that segments can be characterized as regions in a space

with dimension significantiy smaiier than the space of characteristics.

in the extreme, duai market theory has been interpreted by some as

impiying that a wide range of job characteristics are au highiy correiated

so that jobs can be arrayed aiong one dimension and described

adequateiy by their position aiong that dimension.

        Many tests of duai market theory have operationaiized the

concept of segment with particular reference to the wage determination

                                    7
mechanism. Most of these studies find that there is a difference

between the wage determination mechanisms in the primary and

secondary sector. Further, the difterences are in accord with the

descriptive literature on labor market segmentation. We will discuss

these findings in greater detail below.

        This aspect of the research helps to establish that labor market

segmentation theory provides a good description of the income
distribution and is therefore of heuristic importance. Although

summarizing many characteristics of a job by its location in some

classification system may be useful, it does not challengethe

application of human capital theory to labor market problems. The

reasons for segmentation may be important for understanding the form

of the income distribution, but segmentation, as such, does not imply

any market failure. Thus, Heckman and Sedlacek (1986) estimated a

model of a segmented labor market consistent with a human capital

view, and Heckman and Hotz (1986) propose such an interpretation for

their finding that two equations fii the Panamanian income distribution

better than one. The more fundamental criticism of human capital

theory implied by labor market segmentation theory is that labor
markets do not clear — that access to some sectors is subject to non-

price rationing.

                                   8
        All the early writers on labor market segmentation theory

identified limited mobility among sectors as an important aspect of the

theory, More significantly, they argued that there is a hierarchy of

sectors with access to the highest paying being the most difficult.

Critics of labor market segmentation theory used the fact that during

the economic expansion of the 1960s blacks were more likely to move

into high wage jobs than whites as evidence against reduced mobility

(SchiUer 1977). Smith (1989) revives this argument by showing that

earnings rise more rapidly with experience among blacks than among

whites. Leigh (1976) finds substantial and comparable earnings growth

for blacks and whites and suggests that this refutes the dual market

hypothesis. On the other hand, Rosenberg (1976) and Carnoy and

Rumberger (1980) find that minority workers are more likely to begin

their career in the secondary sector and, having started there, are less

likely to leave than are whites. These authors argue that this differential

mobility supports dual market theory.

        Thus authors on both sides confounded lack of mobility with

barriers to entry. However, in the extreme no mobility between sectors

could be consistent with complete barriers to entry or no barriers at all.

If workers always enter the sector they prefer on their first job, there is

no need for mobHity among sectors. On the other hand, if whiies can

                                     9
enter whichever sector they prefer, but blacks must queue for good

jobs, blacks will be more likely than whites to move into good jobs.

        indeed segmented labor market theory can explain an anomaly

that has been largely neglected in the literature on race discrimination.

The evidence is fairly strong that within cohorts, wages have risen more

rapidly for blacks than for whites (Smith, 1989). On the other hand,

Lazear (1979) shows that within a job, wages rise less rapidly for blacks

than for whites. This is precisely what would be expected if blacks

were more likely to be employed in low-wage jobs with little return to

seniority while queuing for good lobs.3

        By shifting the emphasis from mobility to evidence for queues

the question becomes much clearer. Evidence of excess supply in high

wage jobs, wage differences unrelated to ability or job quality (and
perhaps related to other characteristics not suggested by human




             3While waiting in secondary jobs,
        blacks experience few wage increases.
        Since more blacks are in secondary jobs
        their within job growth rate is smaller
        than for whites.  However,  since fewer
        whites start out in the secondary sector
        few experience the large wage growth as
        they move from the secondary to the
        primary sector. Coneequently overall
        black wage growth is higher.

                                    10
capital theory), and that workers in low wage jobs would prefer high

wage jobs for which they would qualify, all provide evidence of queues.

        Since queues imply excess supply to high wage jobs, they also

imply some degree of wage rigidity at least in high wage jobs. Thus

theories of labor market segmentation require some form of wage

rigidity. In contrast with macroeconomic'disequilibrium' models, wages

may be somewhat flexible in the short-run. Thus segmentation is

consistent with cyclical fluctuations in the short-run as long as wage

difterentials are maintained in the long run. Exactly the opposite is

required for macroeconomic models which must explain temporary

deviations from market clearing. Fortunately for labor market

segmentation theory, models of long-run rigidity have proven far easier

to develop than models of short-run rigidity.

        We view the existence of segments with diierent wage-setting

mechanisms and queues for high-wage jobs as essential elements of

labor market segmentation theory. However, there are several other

attributes common to many versions of labor market segmentation

theory. The first of these is that the labor market can be usefully

modelled as having two major segments — secondary and primary. The

latter is often divided into a lower and upper-tier.



                                    11
        The primary sector consists of high- wage jobs with good

working conditions, considerable opportunity for advancement within

the firm and substantial rewards for obtaining education and training.

Labor relations are generally formalized either by a union contract or in

an employment relations handbook. Company policy sharply
circumscribes supervisors' authority. Because of the high wages,

employees tend to stay on the job for a long time. Because of firms'

investment in screening and training, firms tend to hold onto workers.

Also, primary firms may insulate themselves from demand swings by

contracting out the more volatile portion of demand.4

        The sociological literature on segmentation builds on Averitt's

(1968) work on the dual economy. Since tests of the dual economy

model often rely on labor market data, it is natural to interpret them as

tests of the dual labor market model. It is therefore important to

understand the relation between the dual economy and the dual labor

market.5 The dual economy literature holds that firms (and in some




             4Rebitzer and Taylor (1991) provide a
        formal model of such behavior.

             5Our presentation follows our
        recollections of lectures given by Piore
        to his graduate labor class at M.I.T. in
        the mid 1970s.

                                   12
cases entire industries) can be usefully thought of as being part of

either the Core or the Periphery. Core firms are large successful firms

with substantial monopoly power. They tend to have a high return on

capital, high labor productivii, pay high wages, have high capital/labor

ratios and larger, employment, value of output and market share than

other firms.

        Core firms mainly offer primary employment. Security, janitorial

or other very low skilled occupations may be organized as either

primary or secondary jobs or may be contracted out. In peripheral

firms there is a very small layer of technical, skilled or managerial labor

with most employees being unskilled production workers. The

canonical example is a small job shop in some durable goods industry.

The owner/manager is likely a skilled machinist who owns some older

machine tools. He hires unskilled workers at low wages to tend the

machines and clean the shop. The typical fast-food franchise also fits

the description with an owner/manager overseeing the work of a many

unskilled minimum wage employees.

        Some industries are dominated by core firms. Others have few

such firms. Industries typically viewed as being core include

construction, mining, durable goods manufacturing and some non-

durable manufacturing, transportation, utilities and FIRE. Agriculture,

                                    13
textiles and apparel, retail trade, and most services contain a higher

concentration of peripheral firms.

        Thus certain industries will tend to employ primary workers

disproportionately and others secondary workers. However industry

is not a perfect proxy for segment. Neither is occupation since very few

occupations are exclusively made up of secondary workers. This

caveat must be kept in mind when reviewing research which relies on

these proxies. Before turning to a review of this literature, we discuss

theories of labor market segmentation.



Labor Market Segmentation and Economic Theory

        As noted above, the notion that technology may create sectors

of the labor market with distinctly difterent characteristics is not

particularly controversial. The biggest problem for labor market

segmentation theory is explaining why high-wage employers would not

lower their wages in the face of excess labor supply. This is related to

but slightly simpler than trying to explain unemployment, because labor

market segmentation theory need not explain why those who fail to find

high wage employment spurn low wage employment.




                                     14
        Recent theories of involuntary unemployment fall under the

rubric of efficiency wage, rent-extraction or rent-sharing theories, verbal

descriptions of many, if not all, of these theories date back as far as

Adam Smith. However, their recent formalization has generated

widespread interest and increased our understanding of their policy

and welfare implications. More complete descriptions of these theories

and their merits can be found elsewhere (YeHen 1984, Katz 1986, Weiss

1991). We will briefly review their implications for labor market

segmentation.

        What distinguishes efficiency wage theory from more standard

models is that labor productivity depends not only on workers'

observable skills and the numbers of different types of workers

employed but also on the wage those workers are paid. There are

several explanations for why wages might directly affect productivii.

In developing countries where the wage is close to the subsistence

level, raising wages may improve workers' nutrition and make them

more productive (Stiglitz 1976, Bliss and Stern 1978). This model is

clearly irrelevant for labor market segmentation in developed

economies.

        Alternatively higher wages may facilitate worker discipline (Calvo

1979). Raising the wage makes being fired more costly. Shapiro and

                                    15
StigIitz's (1984) presentation of this model has been highly influential.

Similarly, raising wages deters quits (Salop 1979, Beaudry 1990). If the

firm invests in screening, hiring or training new workers, it may want to

pay a premium wage to protect this investment. Both the discipline and

the worker-retention efficiency wage models are subject to the criticism

that firms can deter shirking or quits more profiibly by having newly

hired workers post a bond (Carmichael 1990). Dickens, Katz, Lang and

Summers (1989) and Lang and Kahn (1990) suggest several

considerations which complicate the bonding solution and suggest why

it may not be used in practice.6

        The adverse-selection efficiency wage model assumes that firms

can not observe worker quality perfectly both before and after hiring,

but that better workers have better paying alternatives elsewhere




               6Carmichael (1990) has         also
        criticized these models for not being able
        to predict the correlates of high wages.
        While this is true of the original models,
        simple intuitive elaborations eliminate
        this problem.  For example, if in the
        shirking model firms face a continuum of
        workers with different unobservable costs
        of effort and the cost of shirking to the
        firm is proportional to the cost of the
        machines people work with then the
        efficiency wage will depend on the cost of
        the machines. This could explain the
        correlation of wages with capital/labor
        ratios discussed below.

                                   16
(perhaps in self-employment). Therefore the unobserved qualii of a

firm's workforce will be an increasing function of the wage it ofters

(Weiss 1980). It can be shown that in equilibrium, difterent firms will

pay different wages (Weiss 1990), but it has not yet been determined

whether wages and firm characteristics should be related.

        Recruiting models emphasize that it is costly for firms to have

vacancies. Raising wages reduces the expected length of a vacancy

(Weitzman 1989, Lang 1991, Montgomery 1991). It is possible that

firms will specialize in making offers at different wages. Where

particular firms choose to specialize may be determined by their

technology. Unemployment arises because some workers may

(randomly) receive no job offers.

        Finally, workers' eftort and productivity may depend on how

fairly they believe they are being treated (Solow 1979, Akerlof 1984).

In particular, workers may have expectations about what constitutes a

fair wage and may expect to be paid according to that norm. Norms

may differ across industries and across firms depending on the history,

market structure and technology of the firm or industry.

        It has long been acknowledged that unions may raise workers'

wages and that the union wage will be related to technology and

market structure. It seems reasonable that firms wishing to avoid

                                    17
unionization may pay high wages to prevent unionization. Even without

a formal union, worker collective action or the threat of worker collective

action may raise wages. This is the theme of the rent-
extraction/collective action/insider-outsider models (Dickens 1986,

Lindbeck and Snower 1986).

        In the expense preference or rent-sharing model (Heywood

1990), managers find their jobs are made easier by paying higher
wages. Stockholders are unable to audit the true needs of the firm

perfectly. Therefore managers hire over-qualified workers and pay them

high wages to make their own jobs more pleasant.

        Our review of the empirical literature will demonstrate that these

theories do not explain the empirical evidence equally well. However,

labor market segmentation theory has come a long way in the last

decade. It is no longer a set of observations in search of a formal

theory. Instead its partisans have the problem of sorting through a host

of promising explanations.



The Evidence Part I: Inter-Employer Wage Differences

        In this section we consider evidence that there are large

difterences among employers in the wages paid apparently similar

workers. This finding is obviously consistent with labor market

                                    18
segmentation but can be made consistent with human capital theory.

We argue that examining additional predictions of the labor market

segmentation and human capital models and considering the dynamic

of their interaction strongly suggests that the market segmentation view

should be preferred.

        Economists have known for a long time that large wage

differences may exist for workers doing similar work at different firms

within the same city. Attention to these difterences, their distribution

across industries, similarity across occupations, and their persistence

over time led a previous generation of labor economists and industrial

relations specialists to conclude that worker bargaining power

determined wages which were then greater than the opportunity cost

of workers' time. However, that work left much to be desired. Since

micro-data were unavailable at the time the studies were done, they

relied on aggregate data allowing few controls for worker quality,

geography or differences in job characteristics.

        The work was sufficiently flawed that labor economists trained

in the 60s and 70s felt free to ignore it despite a brief revival of labor

market segmentation theory in the early 70s. New evidence of inter-

industry and inter-employer wage differentials generated using micro

data in the early 1970s was easily dismissed by the critics of labor

                                    19
market segmentation theory as being due to unobserved compensating

differences (Cain 1976). Others suggested that such difterences might

be due to transitory demand for industry specific skills so that such

industry differences would disappear over time.

        Spurred by the theoretical developments described in the last

section, in the last decade several papers have revived the study of

industry and employer wage differentials. By using micro-data they go

beyond the work of the 40s and 50s. By responding directly to the

critics of labor market segmentation theory they go beyond the work of

the 70s. The best known papers on inter-industry wage differences

(Dickens and Katz 1987a&b, Krueger'and Summers 1987 & 1988, Katz

and Summers 1989) and intra-industry wagevariation (Groshen

1987,1 988a&b) overlap considerably. This presentation follows Dickens

and Katz's (1987b) analysis of the 1983 Current Population Survey

except where more recent evidence is available,

        Among 1 -digit occupations, the standard deviation of log

Wages' across 3-digit SIC industries ranges from .13 (clerical workers)




               'Standard deviations of the natural
        log of wagee can be roughly interpreted as
        percentages.

                                  20
to .37 (sales workers). Controlling for a wide range of worker attributes,

state of residence and residence in an SMSA, has little effect on the

dispersion of clerical workers' wages. However, it reduces the standard

deviation of industry effects to .29 for sales workers. Thus controlling

for nearly everything available in the CPS leaves substantial

unexplained inter-industry variation in wages. Even for clerical workers,

an industry two standard deviations above the average would pay over

fifty percent more than one two standard deviations below the average.



        Not only are these differences large, they are persistent across

time. Dickens and Katz (1986b) review a number of studies using

aggregate data which show remarkable persistence in the inter-industry

wage structure going back to the late 1800s. Helwege (1987) uses

census data going back to 1940 and controls for individual
characteristics and geographic location. She finds that the correlation

of the inter-industry wage structure across time is even stronger when

these controls are added.                                   In addition to

being correlated across time, inter-industry wage difterences are also

correlated across space. Many studies have shown that average

industry wages are correlated across countries (see Dickens and Katz

1987b). Lang, Marquez and Romaguera (1989) found that Venezuelan

                                    21
wage differentials were more highly correlated with U.S. and Chilean

differentials after human capital controls. Lucifora (1991) replicates

many of the results of Dickens and Katz (1 987b) using Italian data

         Slichter (1950) found that the average wages of skilled and

unskilled workers were highly correlated across industries. However,

he could not control for geography and worker characteristics. Also,

the categories of skilled and unskilled are relative and may. not be

consistent across industries. Dickens and Katz (1986b) estimate the

correlation of industry wages for different one digit census occupations

controlling for the same wide range of variables described above and

find a median correlation of .79. Widely different occupations all show

the same effect of being in a high wage industry. For example, clerical

workers and transportation equipment operatives have a correlation

exactly equal to the median.

        Given the similarity of industry wage patterns in so many

dimensions, it becomes interesting to examine the correlates of industry

wage differentials. Our inferences about the source of differentials

might differ if they were associated with average worker quality and

research and development rather than industry concentration,

capital/labor ratios and profitability.



                                     22
         In fact, industry wage differentials are associated with all these

and other factors. Dickens and Katz (1987a) show that there are large

simple correlations between measures of industry wage surplus and the

industry quit rate, labor productivity, average years of education,

average job tenure, average age, percent of the workforce which is

female, the layoff rate, the injury rate, hours worked per week, the ratio

of the dollar value of total compensation to wages and salary, union

coverage, firm size, concentration ratios, R&D expenditures, capital

labor ratios, percent production workers, profits as a percent of sales,

profits per worker, and the rate of return on fixed capital. This is a long

list which supports many interpretations.

         As dual labor market theory and dual economy theory suggest,

many job characteristics are highly correlated. Consequently, attempts

to establish which relations are most important have been largely

fruitless.     The literature on the relation between industry wages and

industry characteristics reveals little consistency (Dickens and Katz

1987a). Different data sets and specifications yield widely difterent

results as to which variables are primary in explaining the diierences.

When Dickens and Katz perform their own analysis they find the same

inconsistency. Only average education and profitability are consistently

related to industry wages in all specifications. The high level of

                                    23
collinearity in the data makes it impossible to sort out the individual

contribution of specific variables.8

        Going below inter-industry differences, Groshen (1987) finds

large differences in wages across employers within industries which

explain a substantial amount of individual wage variation. Her (1988b)

paper demonstrates that these differences are quite persistent.9

Groshen (1988a) reviews nearly two dozen studies finding similar

results. Among these, Hodson (1988) matched individual and firm data

and was able to control for many individual characteristics, while Evans

(1989) and Conant (1988) found that standardized tests of clerical skills

do not explain the inter-employer variation in clerical wages.

        Could these inter-industry and inter-employer diierentials arise

in markets which clear? Broadly, there are three possible market

clearing-explanations for inter-employer wage differences — transitory




                 course this is exactly the sort
        of "reduction in the dimensionality of job
        characterj6tjcs" that labor market
        segmentation theory requireB. We discuss
        this evidence at greater length below.

             'Leonard (1989) shows that this is
        not true of the electronics industry in
        California's Silicon Valley.  In this new
        industry firm relative wages are quite
        volatile.

                                   24
returns to industry specific skills, compensating differences for working

conditions, or returns to unmeasured ability.

        The first of these interpretations can be easily ruled out by the

evidence showing strong correlations of industry and employer wage

patterns over several decades. The second is not as easily dismissed,

The similarity of industry wage patterns across countries suggests a

technological explanation which would fit with compensating

differences. However, a number of other aspects call this explanation

into question.         First, several studies have controlled for a wide

range of job characteristics (see for example Krueger and Summers

1988). These studies find little or no effect on industry wage

differences. If anything, industry wage differences are exacerbated by

consideration of job characteristics. This would be consistent with

industry wage differences giving workers larger incomes and job quality

being a normal good. Second, since wage difterentials are highly

correlated across occupations, the compensating differentials

explanation requires that job characteristics also be highly correlated.

It is difficult to claim that industry-specific job characteristics are shared

by secretaries and truck drivers.

        The possibility that workers in high wage industries receive a

return on some unobservable skill is subject to the problem of

                                     25
explaining the similar wage difterentials across occupations. Why

would an industry that required highly-skilled truck drivers also require

highly-skilled secretaries? Recall also that previous studies found that

standardized tests of clerical ability can not explain inter-employer

difterences in clerical wages (Evans (1960) and Conant (1963)). There

are additional problems this explanation must address. Suppose that

high wage industries are industries which disproportionately employ

high quality workers. If this ability is useful in any industry, then when

workers change industry, their wages should not change significantly.

Several studies have examined this question. Except for Murphy and

Topel (1987), all find that industry changers'wages increase or

decrease by nearly the full amount of the difference between the

average wages of the two industries (Krueger and Summers 1988,

Blackburn and Neumark 1988, Gibbons and Katz 1989). Murphy and

Topel find that industry switchers receive only about thirty percent of

the difterence between industries. However, their study has been

replicated on a different data set by Gibbons and Katz (1989) who find

that changers receive seventy-five percent of the average industry
difference.    These results rule out a universally valued skill as the

explanation for inter-industry difterences. However, it is possible that

inter-industry differences reflect a return to skills which are more valued

                                    26
in the high wage industries. Indeed, it is hard to explain why high skill

workers would be concentrated in high wage industries if their skills

were not valued more highly there although one might still expect more

skill transferability than the results discussed above suggest. Again, the

high correlation of the wage patterns across occupations limits the

types of industry specific skills that can be considered. The skill (or

skills) must be valuable to both truck drivers and managers in the high

wage industry, but not to those in low wage industries. It is not obvious

what these skills would be, but perhaps the question can be finessed

by assuming significant complementarities among difterent types of

workers in a firm. Further, such job matching would be consistent with

low quit rates in high wage jobs. However, the existence of sorting

does not mean that wages are market clearing. An employer forced to

pay high wages by a union would at least partially offset the effect by

using the higher wage to hire more able workers.

        How much of the observed inter-industry difterences can be

explained by unobserved ability? Murphy and Topet (1990) argue that

if there is sorting on observed ability there should be at least as much

sorting on unobserved ability since so much is unobserved to the

econometrician. R is plausible that much of what is not observed by the

econometrician is also not observed by the employer so that the

                                   27
Murphyfropel assumption is not self-evident. Nevertheless, we will

accept it for the purpose of discussion. They then examine the extent

of sorting on observed ability and conclude that about 30 percent of the

wage premium can be explained by matching and unobserved ability

if   marital status is treated as a measure of ability. A much smaller

fraction is explained when sorting on education is examined.10 T h e

argument that marital status is a better measure of ability than

education is rather strange. Marital status has not traditionally been

treated as a human capital variable. Moreover, marital status may be

determined by job status rather than vice versa People may wait until

they are established in a good paying job before they decide to marry

and have a family.

          One piece of evidence suggests that inter-industry wage

differences may be due, at least in part, to unobserved ability. Kletzer

(1989) and Gibbons and Katz (1989) find that the wage difterential in

one's previous industry helps predict the wage on a new job after job



                '°They   conclude that all of the
          inter—industry difference can be explained
          by the combination of sorting and
          unobserved ability. This is because by
          their estimates only about thirty percent
          of inter—industry differences can not be
          attributed to common unobserved ability
           (see the di8cuBsjon of this evidence
          above).

                                   28
displacement. That finding is predicted by the unobserved ability
explanation and might not be anticipated from other perspectives.

However, if one assumes that networks of connections or employer

discrimination on the basis of non-pecuniary characteristics are

important in access to good paying jobs as some have argued (for

example Bowles and Gintis 1976) then this result is understandable.

        In sum, the best remaining modification of human capital theory

is one in which there are differential returns to unobserved skill across

industries. It is consistent with or plausibly modifiab'e to be consistent

with many of the facts about inter-employer differences. It has

generated one new finding but faces two major anomalies --the

inter-occupation correlations and the inability to explain the lack of

sorting on the basis of observable human capital characteristics.

Further, this version of human capital was reached after a series of

modifications. Until recently, human capital theory ignored the
possibility of inter-industry wage differentials or dismissed them as

being due to transitory skill premiums or compensating difterences

received 'by some workers in the industry. When documentation of

these wage differentials became the focus of the revived labor market

segmentation research program of the 1980s, and the cross-occupation

correlations were demonstrated, researchers first searched for a

                                   29
common source of compensating wage difterentials (employment

fluctuations) (Topel and Murphy (1987)). When this failed to explain the

evidence they then tried to explain the differentials by the existence of

unobserved abilities which were equally useful in all industries. The

next step involved differentially-valued unobserved ability and a job

mobility model based on life-cycle considerations. Finally, we have

reached the present modified human capital model. It remains to be

seen whether the latest human capital model will prove to be a fruiiul

and progressive approach to industry wage differentials.

        On the other hand, the labor market segmentation approach,

while also suftering setbacks, has been much more progressive. If

wage differences represent worker rents, we would expect differences

in quit rates and application rates across industries with different

wages." Several studies have found a negative association between

quit rates and wage premiums. Holtzer, Katz and Krueger (forthcoming)

find that application rates are higher in high wage industries. While the

market-clearing models can be made consistent with this result and the




               1It    is   possible to create
        compensating  difference models with both
        these properties.   Our argument is not
        that these findings are incompatible with
        BUCI1 models, only that one would not
        expect them a priori.

                                   30
difterentially-valued ability model predicts it, it was the labor market

segmentation models which generated the initial prediction.

        The labor market segmentation model also predicts that

individuals getting high-wage jobs should consider themselves lucky.

The Boston working class men interviewed by Howard Wial (1988)

clearly distinguished between good and bad jobs. Further, most did

not think that the good jobs went to the more able. Even those who

held high paying jobs generally attributed their having them to luck or

to connections. To get a good job, even a non-union one, workers felt

they needed someone who would let them know when jobs were

available so that would know when to apply. A friend or relative might

also intercede with the person making the employment decision.

Otherwise one needed to be phenomenally lucky to show up at the

right time when jobs were being filled.

        Similarly, the labor market segmentation model predicts that

employers will give reasons other than ability for wage difterentials.

Fred Foulkes's (1980) managers did not see themselves as getting what

they paid for in worker ability. He interviewed personnel directors at

several large non-union U.S. firms and concluded that paying enough

to avoid unionization was the major consideration in determining pay.

These managers relied heavily on industry wage surveys, even for

                                  31
workers for whom local wage surveys would have given more relevant

information from a competitive labor market perspective.

        While labor market segmentation theory is successful in making

these predictions, without an explanation of why differentials arise the

power of the theory would be limited. The last decade has seen the

development of a number of competing (efficiency wage) models which

we discussed above. Some of these models do not fare much better

than the market-clearing ones. The simple labor discipline and quits

models have as much trouble explaining the high correlation of inter-

employer wage differences across different occupations as a market-

clearing model. The adverse selection model and the employer search

model are somewhat easier to fit with these findings. Wage norm

models and rent-sharing or rent-extraction models predict these

correlations. In fact, it was to test such models that Dickens and Katz

undertook their study. But, the wage norm theory has particular

difficutty explaining the cross-national evidence. Why would the same

wage norms prevail in such distinct countries as the Soviet Union,

Germany, Chile, Korea, Japan and the U.S.? The rent-sharing and rent-

extraction models are also challenged by this evidence. Why should

the pattern of rent-sharing be so similar in such different economic

systems? To believe that rent-extraction is the explanation for the inter-

                                   32
industry differences, one must believe that workers have substantial

power even in very repressive systems.

        This may not be that far-fetched. Marshall Goldman (1983)

reports on a number of large organized labor actions in the Soviet

Union aimed at securing higher wages or better working conditions.

These are overt actions. Doubtless, covert actions are even more

plentiful in repressive societies. Mars (Cheats at Work 1982) and

Mathewson (Restriction of Outrut Among Uriorciaruzed Workers, 1989)

describe numerous examples of such behavior in the United States.

        Thus the labor market segmentation program has been very

progressive. Plausible theories have been put forward and evidence on

inter-industry wage differences has provided considerable support for

those theories. Very little back-tracking has been necessary to explain

the facts. Further evidence of the progressivity of the program follows.



Evidence Part II: Tests for Labor Market Segmentation

        Many researchers (Gordon 1971, Buchelel976a&b, Oster 1979)

have chosen to test labor market segmentation theory by factor-

analyzing data on industries, occupations or individuals. These studies

find that the majority of the systematic variance can be explained by

one or two factors, and nearly all by four or five. Further, in all the

                                    33
studies one of the two factors which 'explain' the most standardized

variation fiis with the descriptive literature on, dual labor markets, Job

and worker characteristics associated with the primary sector load

positively on the factor while characteristics associated with the

secondary sector load negatively. Thus while the dual market

distinction may not be the only relevant distinction, it is clearly an

important one. There does seem to be a high degree of association

between different job and worker characteristics so that the

dimensionality of these characteristics can be usefully reduced as labor

market segmentation theory suggests.

        Two other approaches are to look for differences in the wage

determination mechanism between different labor market segments and

to look for barriers to mobility between the sectors. Most studies have

used a priori classtfication systems, often derived from factor analysis

of industry or occupation data Studies taking this approach have

usually been supportive of the view that there are different wage

determination mechanisms in the diierent sectors. Examples of such

studies include Osterman (1975), Carnoy and Rumberger (1980),

Buchele (1976ab), Rosenberg (1976). Wright (1979), Beck, Horan and

Tolbert (1978), (-Ieckman and Sedlacek (1985), and l-leckman and Hotz




                                   34
(1 986).12 However, Zucker and Rosenstein (1981), Bibb and Form

(1977), 1-ladson (1977), and Tolbert, Horan and Beck (1980) find little

support for the dual market typology, and even the supportive studies

are not free of anomalies.

        Further, all these studies, except the two by Heckman and his

co-authors, fail to account for the endogeneity of an individual's labor

market segment. This is Cain's (1976) main criticism of this work.

Figure 1 illustrates the problem. If we arbitrarily divide a single market

into high and low wage sectors, with most workers in the high wage

sector, the estimated equations will tend to fit the dual market typology.

Returns to education (or other measures of ability) will be lower in the

low wage 'secondary' sector and that wage equation will lie generally

below the 'primary' sector equation. One solution is to use a priori

classification systems but to correct for the sample selectivity bias in

estimating separate equations. This is the approach taken by I-Leckman

and Sedlacek and Heckman and Hotz. However, dual market theory



             12Most of these studies use specially
        created a priori classification systems
        based on industry and/or occupation codes.
        Heckman at Sedlacek contrast the wage
        determination mechanism in manufacturing
        vs. the rest of the economy and Heckmafl
        and Hotz divide workers into primary and
        secondary sectors on the basis of their
        earnings.

                                   35
suggests that it is difficult to determine a ørion who is in which sector.

Recall from our discussion above that even within the same firm (let

alone industry), there may be both primary and secondaryworkers.

Further, since some job titles such as operative are broad and many

'secondary' occupations are treated like lower-tier primary jobs in some

firms, occupational classification systems are suspect. Thus it is

appropriate to treat sector as unknown.

        In a series of papers we have implemented a technique which

allows us to estimate the wage equations for unobserved sectors simply

by postulating the number of sectors and the determinants of sector

attachment. Dickens and Lang (1985a) is the first paper to present this

approach. We turn to a description of that procedure now.

        Consider how we might proceed if people's earnings potential

could be summarized by a single observable trait--for example,

education--and an unobserved trait which was uncorrelated with

education. In that case we could plot a scatter diagram of log wages

and education. The standard view of the labor market holds that such

a scatter diagram should resemble Figure 1. From dual market theory

We would expect a scatter diagram similar to Figure 2. A
straightforward test of the theories would therefore entail plotting the




                                   36
Scatter diagram and assessing whether it corresponds to either the

human capital model or the dual market model.

        Two problems complicate such an approach. First, wages are

determined by many observable characteristics other than education.

To control for all variables simultaneously, we would have to plot a

scatter diagram for each subgroup in the sample. As the number of

other variables increased, the number of observations on each diagram

would decrease considerably. With a reasonable number of controls,

the number of diagrams and the sparseness of observations would

certainly make it impossible to discern any pattern. Second, even if we

were able to plot all the scatter diagrams, we would still lack a formal

mechanism for testing the hypotheses. Each researcher could decide

for him/herself whether the diagrams correspond more nearly to the

predictions of human capital or dual market theory. These problems

can be resolved by the use of the formal methods described in the

following paragraphs..

        The question of whether a plot looks more like Figure 1 or 2

can be rephrased: do two wage equations fit the data significantly

better than one, and do the best-fitting equations fii the predictions of

the dual market hypothesis? We can imagine fifing first one, and then

two lines by hand to Figure 2. To compare the explanatory Power we

                                   37
might, for example, compute the distance from each point to the closest

fine. The reduction in the sum of squares going from one line to two

would be much larger for Figure 2 than for Figure 1.

        Of course, two equations having more explanatory power than

one is not, by itself, a test of the dual market hypothesis. For example,

two equations might have significantly more explanatory power than

one for a scatter diagram such as Figure 3. However, there is no

identifiable secondary market. Thus, in addition to requiring two

equations to have significantly more explanatory power than one, we

also require the best-fiiing lines to have characteristics consistent with

the dual market hypothesis. To correspond to the predictions of dual

market theory, one wage equation should be upward sloping in

schooling and experience. The other equation should be nearly flat

with respect to human capital variables and below the other at most

points. Since we are dealing with a sample of adult males, we also

expect that there will be fewer observations associated with the low-

wage line.

        Formally, we may fit two wage equations using maximum
likelihood techniques. Since we do not know a priori with which wage

equation to compare an individual, we estimate a switching model with




                                   38
unknown regimes. To do this we must specify two wage equations and

a third equation that predicts sector attachment, and estimate all three

equations simultaneously. Since the single-equation model is nested

in the switching model, we may test the hypothesis that the two-

equation model fiis significantly better than the single-equation model

by comparing the log-likelihood values for the two models. If we reject

the single-equation hypothesis, we may examine the coefficients of the

two wage equations to see if they fit the dual market hypothesis.

        The results of our I 985a study were remarkably consistent with

the dual market typology. Two wage equations fit the data
considerably better than one with a chi-squared statistic of 177. A

conservatively constructed 1% critical value is 29.1 413 Further, the

estimated parameters of the two wage equations and the switching

equation fii perfectly with the predictions of the dual market typology.

One equation shows large and significant returns to education and



             13since some of the parameters of the
        dual market model are not identified when
        the single equation model is imposed as a
        constraint the distribution of the test
        statistic is unknown.  However the Monte
        Carlo tests of Goldfeld and Quandt (1976)
        suggest that setting the degreee of
        freedom equal to the number of constraints
        plus the number of unidentified parameters
        yields a conservative test using the chi—
        squared distribution.

                                  39
experience. The other shows absolutely no returns. The switching

equation showed, consistent with the dual market typology, that those

who lived in cities, were married and were white were more likely to be

found in the primary sector.

        Given the remarkable consistency of these findings with the

dual market typology it is interesting to ask what the problem was with

earlier studies which used â priorisclassifiaation systenhs. e        d

above, it seems likely that all these systems misclassify many workers.

Prima facie evidence of this is presented by Zucker and Rosenstein

(1981). Correlations among classification schemes thatdivide

industries into core and periphery sectors are relatively weak, ranging

from 57% to 85% agreement for the four taxonomies they studied. The

degree of disagreement is striking when one considers that if each

study had assigned people to the sectors randomly but in the same

proportions as in the actual studies, the level of agreement would have

ranged from 40% to 50%. Obviously systems based solely on industry

will disagree considerably with those based solely on occupation since

many occupations are common to many if not all industries. Do any of

these systems come close to correctly identifying the sectors?

        To answer this question we need to apply the switching

equation technique to a very large data set so that we can accurately

                                  40
estimate the fraction of primary and secondary sector workers in the

detailed industries and occupations used in the a priori classification

systems.
        The data used for this study are drawn from the 1963 Current

Population Survey. All male heads-of-households between 20 and 65

years of age who were employed, reported that they normally worked

more than twenty hours a week, earned more than the minimum wage,

and for whom data on wages14 and all independent variables were

available were included in the sample. We limited ourselves to

individuals who were in their fourth or eighth interview month.

Screening on this basis left us with 46,411 observations. The sample

was restricted to men because of the substantially different nature of

many women's jobs and the difficulty of fitting them into the dual market

typology. In particular, pink collar jobs have many characteristics of

both primary and secondary jobs. The other restrictions ensure that if

a secondary sector is identified by the analysis, it consists of more than

part-time earners or those with transient labor market attachment.




               '4For salaried workers, wage8 are
        computed by dividing weekly earned income
        by normal hours of work.

                                   41
        We begin by estimating our original model with the
modifications that experience squared is included in the wage

equations and that experience and its square are included in the

switching equation.15 As can be seen in Table 1, this does not

significantly alter the results. The first column of the table gives OLS

estimates while the second through fourth columns give the primary

sector, secondary sector and switching equation estimates. As in our

previous work, the primary sector equation is similar to that obtained

using OLS estimation. The returns to education and experience are

somewhat higher in the primary sector than in the OLS equation and

the black-white wage difterential somewhat lower. In contrast to our

previous work, we can reject the hypothesis of no black-white wage

differential in the primary sector. In the secondary sector there is no

return to schooling and a perverse effect of experience. There are also

somewhat surprisingly large eftects of living in an SMSA and never

having been married on secondary sector wages. The chi-squared

statistic for the test of the hypothesis that only one wage equation is




               '5Experience     is measured a Age -
         (Years of schooling + 5)
                                  42
needed to describe the data is 2,369. The hypothesis can be rejected

at any conventional level16

        These results continue to be strongly supportive of the dual

market view, Therefore we now turn to misclassification error in

previous studies. Our estimation technique entails calculating a

probabilii of being in each sector for each worker. These estimates

are in some sense ex ante. Having estimated the wage equations, we

can recompute the probability that each individual is attached to the

primary sector. The two probabilities have very different interpretations.

The probability calculated in the course of the estimation technique s

the ex ante probability that the worker will end up in the primary or

secondary sector. However, ex post. each worker is either in the

primary sector with probability one or in the secondary sector with

probability one. The ex post probability we calculate is therefore a

measure of our ignorance — how certain we are that this individual is in

the primary sector. Thus, if we estimate that an individual has a 99%

probability of being in the primary sector, we are reasonably certain that

he is in the primary sector. If we estimate that he has a 59% probability

of being in the primary sector, we have no information about sector ot


            16See footnote 13 for a qualification
        concerning the nature of the test.
                                    43
attachment. Therefore, to describe the composition of an industry or

occupation we calculate the proportions of workers in that industry or

occupation whom we can accurately classify as being in the primary

sector or as being in the secondary sector and the proportion for whom

sector of employment cannot be accurately ascertained.

       Tables 2 and 3 show the breakdown of sector attachment for

several industries and occupations. The three columns next to each

category show the percent of people in that category who had a 030%

probability of being in the secondary sector (secondary workers), a 30-

70% probability (?s) and 70-100% probability (primary workers). The

results are substantially in accord with descriptive work on the dual

market. Agricultural workers, retail sales workers, and service workers

are more likely to be associated with the secondary market. Most

manufacturing workers are very likely to be in the primary sector, but

textile and apparel workers are not Also, more secondary workers can

be found among operatives in manufacturing than among the skilled

crafts. One notable attribute of these tables suggests why past studies

have often produced anomalous and inconsistent results. None of the

industries or occupations examined is identifiable. as being entirely

secondary. R seems that even in those industries or occupations which

are substantially secondary, there are many people who are probably

                                  44
primary workers. This finding is not an artifact of our choice of

industries or occupations for this table. It was true of all occupations

and industries for which there were enough people in our sample to be

confident of the composition estimates. With over 48,000 people this

was nearly all two digit categories and very many three digit categories.

        A large number of classification schemes have been used in

previous research. The large degree of misclassification which is

inherent in a priori schemes suggests that one reason for the

inconsistency of results across studies may be varying degrees of

inaccuracy. To cast light on this possibilii, we review four industrial

classification schemes (Beck, Horan and Tolbert, 1978; Tolbert, I-loran

and Beck, 1980; Bibb and Form, 1977; Hodson, 1977) and one

occupational classification scheme (Osterman, 1975). We chose these

studies because Zucker and Rosenstein (1981) have reanalyzed the

industrial schemes, permitting a direct comparison of their results and

because the analysis in Osterman is comparable to that used by Zucker

and Rosenstein.

        Zucker and Rosenstein compare the classification schemes first

by examining the average characteristics of workers in each sector. Of

the seventeen characteristics examined, Beck, Horan and Tolbert's

classification system produced the anticipated differences in means for

                                   45
twelve, Tolbert, Horan and Beck's for nine, Bibb and Form's for seven

and Hodsons for six. In addition, Zucker and Rosenstein estimated

separate earnings equations for each sector for the four classification

schemes. Beck, Horan and Tolbert's (1978) system was the only one

which produced significantly diierent results in the two sectors. Thus

among the industrial classification schemes, Beck, Horan and Tolbert's

performed somewhat better than the others, followed by Tolbert, Horan

and Beck, Bibb and Form and Hodson.

          Studies which have used occupational classifications have

generally been more supportive of dual market theory (Rosenberg,

1976; Osterman, 1975). In particular, Osterman estimates sharply

diftering wage equations for the primary and secondary sectors, and

the difterences correspond to the predictions of dual labor market

theory.

          Table 4 presents our estimates of the true distribution of

workers in each of the five studies' 'sectors.' Our results suggest that

all four schemes are broadly consistent with the data. Sectors

classified as periphery or secondary contain a higher fraction of

secondary workers and fewer primary workers. However, all four

schemes also misspecify many workers. Thus it is not surprising that



                                  46
the evidence generated by using these classification systems is so

mixed.

         Osterman's occupationally based classification scheme does a

much better job than the industrial schemes of dividing workers

between sectors although there is substantial misspecification. it

nevertheless appears that his results are strongly supportive of the dual

labor market hypothesis because his classification scheme is more

accurate than those used by other researchers, Further, the two

schemes used by Beck, Horan and Tolbert,, which performed marginally

better in Zucker and Rosenstein's comparison, perform slightly better

than the other two systems here. Both have fewer primary workers

misclassified as being in the periphery, and more secondary workers

who are correctly classified.

         Is it surprising that two equations fit the wage distribution

significantly better than one? Several critics of our approach have

suggested that it is not. They argue that the standard OLS wage

equation is too simple to be taken too seriously. In particular, the error

term is known to be heteroskedastic. These critics suggest that if we

tested our dual market specification against a more general Single

equation model with heteroskedastic errors, we would no longer reject

the single market model.

                                   47
          We have now done this (Dickens and Lang 1987). In that paper

we estimated a 22 parameter single equation model (our dual labor

market model had 21 parameters). Eleven of the parameters were

coefficients of the wage equation including terms for a constant,

dummies for residing in an SMSA, never having been married, and race

and measures of years of schooling, years of schooling squared, years

of labor market experience, experience squared, and interactions

between schooling and experience, race and schooling, and race and

schooling squared. The same eleven terms were also allowed to

describe the heteroskedasticty a very general model. Several other

specffications were tried. This fii best. The predicted distribution

based on the general heteroskedastic single equation model was then

compared with the true wage distribution. The model is rejected at any

conventional   level of significance. Even this very general model fails to

track the true distribution of wages. It predicts fewer low wage workers

and many more middle wage workers than are observed. It also tracks

the upper tail poorly.

          How well does the dual market model do in the same test?

With one less degree of freedom, the dual market model fits the

empirical distribution sufficiently well that one can not reject it at the 5%

level.   It is possible to reject the model at the 10% level, but Only

                                     48
because the dual market model is unable to predict the bunching of

wages at values of $7.50 and $10.00 an hour. Other than that, the

theoretcaI distribution implied by the dual market model conforms to

the empirical distribution quite closely.

        All of the studies described above are restricted to studying the

labor market experience of men. A failing of the dual market approach

has been our inability to extend it to women. We anticipated this, and

consequently our early work excluded women. The 'pink collar sector

fits neither the description of the primary or the secondary sector. Like

the secondary sector such jobs are typically 'dead end.' Therefore one

would expect little return to experience. On the other hand, such jobs

tend to be concentrated in large primary firms, and education may help

women obtain better jobs within the pink collar sector. This is close to

what Friedberg, Lang and Dickens (1988) find. Nearly all women are

located in a women's sector with little return to potential experience but

with substantial returns to education.

        So what does it mean if two equations fit better than one? The

existence of two sectors with different wage-setting mechanisms is

fundamental to dual market theory, but it is not incompatible with

human capital theory. Neoclassical economics tends to emphasize

models which are continuous and therefore tractable in calculus.

                                    49
However, if the technology were sharply discontinuous in the way

suggested by Piore (1980b) no fundamental assumptions of
mainstream economics would be violated. In this case, individuals

would choose the sector of employment that maximized the expected

present value of their lifetime utilii.

        The second tenet of dual market theory, that primary sector

jobs are rationed, is less compatible with human capital theory. Dual

market theory maintains that individuals cannot always choose the

sector which they prefer. Some workers who would prefer to be

employed in the primary sector cannot find jobs there. On the face this

seems likely. Who would prefer to work in the secondary sector when

his wages would be substantially lower than in the primary sector

throughout his work-life? For example, given the results in table 1, an

average white married city-dweller with a high school education would

start out earning $4.61 an hour more in the primary sector and continue

to earn at least that much more throughout his career. Even an

average unmarried non-white who lived outside a SMSA -for whom the

primary/secondary difference is minimized --would earn more in the

primary sector for his entire career if he had more than a high school

education. The same person with a ninth grade education would be

earning more in the primary sector in less than five years. A similar

                                     50
person living in an SMSA would always be paid more in the primary

sector.

          Some people might prefer the nonwage characteristics of the

secondary market. However, descriptions of the secondary sector are

unanimous in maintaining that the noripecuniary aspects of secondary

employment are inferior to those in primary employment making this

unlikely. Nonetheless, secondary employers may be less concerned

with lateness and absenteeism and the work pace may be slower in

secondary jobs. Therefore it is worthwhile to consider another test.

          To implement this test we need to postulate a mechanism for

allocating workers between the sectors in the absence of rationing. In

our 1985a paper we assumed that experience in one sector raises

wages in the sector more than it raises wages in the other sector. We

also assumed that workers will behave so as to maximize utility over

their lifetime. Utility was assumed to be increasing with the net present

value (NP'!) of lifetime income. Assuming further that workers are

perfectly informed about job characteristics and that preferences about

the, nonpecuniary aspects of jobs do not change over their lifetime,

workers will choose one sector and stay there permanently.

          If the nonpecuniary characteristics of the two sectors were

similar, workers would pick the sector that yields the highest lifetime

                                   51
income. To allow for differences in how workers perceive the non-

pecuniary value of secondary employment, we assume that workers will

choose primary sector employment if the log of the NPV of their income

stream in the primary employment exceeds the log of the NPV of

secondary employment by more than an amount C --the additive

inverse of the compensating diierential for secondary employment. We

may write the probability that a worker is employed in the primary

sector (denoted P) as



(1)           P = Pr{In(NPVd tn(NPV5)> C}



where the subscripts p and s denote primary and secondary. To

model the NPV in the two sectors, we write the two wage equations:



(2)           In(t) = XE + Ya +


(3)           In(W) = XB, + Y_a +



whereX is a vector of individual characteristics, V Is years of job

experience, W is the wage received in the primary sector, e is a



                                  52
normally distributed error representing unobserved characteristics

affecting the primary sector wage, and       and a are parameters. The

terms W, e, B1 and 8 are similarly defined for the secondary sector.
Approximating the length of the individual's working life by infinity, and

using (2) and (3) equation (1) becomes



(4)
               P= Pr{X(BRB)        +-e+C'>O},

where



(5)            C'=In((d-a)l(d.a))-C,

and d is the discount rate.

        If we assume that C' is equal to a constant (C') plus a normally

distributed error term which is independent of X and d (i.e., people's

preferences with respect to the nonpecuniary aspects of employment

and their discount rates do not vary with observable characteristics CX)),

we may test the hypothesis that people choose their sector of

employment to maximize their utility. We do this by estimating an




                                   53
equation to determine sector membership and testing the hypothesis

that the coefficients on the X's are equal to B2 -   or that the By's in



(6)            X(BRB5 + B,) + C +                +


are equal to zero.

        Alternatively, we might assume that experience is equally

valuable in both sectors independent of the sector in which the person

worked. In that case people with free choice will, at each point in time,

choose the sector which maximizes their utilii. In that case equation

(6) becomes



(6')           X(BliBs + B,) + C + Y(a-a + a,,) +                  +



where Y may be either experience or a vector of experience and

experience squared, and the a's are conformable vectors of

parameters.

        It may be reasonable to assume that preferences for the

nonpecuniary aspects of primary or secondary employment are related

to some observed worker characteristics. If so, at least some of the



                                    64
Bs would be different from zero even if workers can choose the sector

in which they are employed. In this case we may be able to find some

X's that should not be related to tastes, or to suggest the direction of

their eftects. We propose specific tests of this type below.

        An intuitive explanation of this approach uses the example of

race. Suppose that the lines frtting the scatter diagram in Figure 3 were

the same for blacks and whites. Suppose further that the distribution

of education was the same for the two groups, but that a higher

proportion of blacks than of whites were scattered around the lower

line. Under these circumstances, we would conclude that either blacks

are less averse to secondary employment than are whites, or that

blacks face discrimination in obtaining primary jobs. Supplementary

evidence would support the latter explanation.

      We have no strong expectations regarding the effect of living

in an SMSA, experience, or never having been married on tastes for

secondary sector employment. However, there is no reason to believe

that blacks will be less averse than whites to the working conditions in

the secondary sector. Indeed, auxiliary evidence discussed in Dickens

and Lang (1985a) suggests the opposite may be true. Also we expect

more educated workers will be indiierent or more averse to secondary




                                   55
employment than other workers. Therefore we limit ourselves to testing

the relation between the wage and the switching coefficients for

education and race. In our 1 985a paper we test this hypothesis

excluding experience from the switching equation and reject it at the .01

level. Here we include experience and experience squared in switching

equation to allow for mobility between the sectors. Again we reject the

hypothesis of free choice between the sectors at the .01 level."

        A potential problem with our test for queuing is that we include

union members in our sample. Not surprisingly nearly all are found in

primary sector jobs (see Dickens and Lang 1985b). One might argue

that it is no surprise that there are queues for union jobs and that may

be all we are seeing. To answer this objection we estimated a three

equation switching model with one known regime (union) and two

unknown regimes (non-union primary and secondary) (Dickens and

Lang 1988 and 1986). We found that even with the union sector

treated separately there were distinct non-union primary and secondary

sectors with similar characteristics to those found in previous studies.



             '7We have also estimated a version of
        the model using these data where
        experience and experience squared were not
        included in the switching equation. There
        too the hypothesis of free choice was
        rejected (See Dickens and Lang 1985b).

                                   56
Further, nearly all workers would earn more in the primary sector than

in the secondary sector. The test for barriers between the non-union

primary and secondary sector confirms their existence — particularly for

blacks. Thus the existence of queues for primary jobs in our previous

work is not solely the result of our including union members in our

sample.

          Finally, these tests are only as good as our distributional

assumptions. If there are substantial departures from normality in the

distribution of the.unobservables, then the tests are invalid. In this

regard the goodness of fit test described above is quite encouraging.

That the implied distribution of wages from the model, assuming

normality for the errors, fits the true distribution so well suggests that

the nonnaiky assumption may be a good one.



A Reply to Some Critics

          I-teckman and Hotz (1986), while presenting findings consistent

with the dual market view for Panamanian males, have criticized our

work as being uninformative. They make four specific points: 1) that

there may be more than two sectors so the test for free choice may be

invalid because the model is misspecified, 2) that we do not
adequately account for nonpecuniary differences between the sectors,

                                    57
3) that because of costs to mobility between the sectors, the decision

rule for sector choice is misspecified, and 4) our assumption of joint

normality of the unobservables in the model may be incorrect. They

also note 'in passing' that the likelihood ratio statistic we use to test the

null hypothesis of only one sector is not theoretically valid. As noted in

footnote 3 of our 1985a paper and in footnote 7 above, despite the

theoretical problem defining the disttibutfon of the test statistic, Monte

Carlo evidence cited in Goldfeld and Quandt(1976) suggests our

approach provides a conservative test of the null hypothesis. Given the

size of the test statistic relative to this apparently conservative critical

value (well over fifty times the .01 significance level), the data

overwhelmingly reject the restrictions of the single market model. The

exact distribution of the test statistic simply is not an issue here.

        As Heckman and Hotz note, points 1 , 2 and 4 were all

discussed in the 1985a paper. Point 3 is wrong. The version of the

model we tested in our 1985a paper assumed that there were sector

specific skills and thus costs to mobility. Above we have replicated that

test as well as one which assumes no costs to mobility. Nonetheless,

the more general criticism that the choice model may be misspecified

is valid. The estimation of a more complicated model which allowed for

limited transferability of skills between sectors proved intractable.

                                     58
         Points 1 and 2 have no bearing on our first concern — whether

the dual market model provides a better description of the wage

distribution than the standard single market model. Point 4 does, and

as described above, we (Dickens and Lang, 1987) subjected our

original model to a goodness of fit test and showed that not only do we

fail to reject the distributional assumptions at the .05 level, but also that

the dual market model significantly outperforms a complex single sector

model with a very general error distribution and one more parameter.

        All four points are of more concern to the interpretation of the

test of free choice. Heckman and Hotz, in their second point, claim that

our tests require us to assume that race and schooling have no effect

on tastes for secondary employment.         In fact, we argue on the basis

of auxiliary evidence that more educated workers and blacks are likely

to have a greater preference for primary employment. This expectation

is not confirmed. In any case, our 1 985a paper notes that an

alternative interpretation of our test is that blacks, more educated

workers, or both prefer secondary jobs. More generally, their
arguments can be interpreted as saying that the null hypothesis of free

choice may be rejected either because it is false or because of errors

in the empirical specification or the auxiliary hypothesis used to derive

the theoretical prediction. We accept this criticism, but point out that

                                     59
it   is applicable to any empirical hypothesis test.    It   is therefore possible

to reject all empirical tests as uninformative. Indeed Heckman and Hotz

come close to this position when they accept that human capital theory

is also untestable.

              We believe that the way to view the question is not to reject the

testability     of   theories. Instead we must recognize that no test can ever

be viewed as definitive except with the hindsight of history. As we

discussed above this problem is not unique to dual market theory,

economics, or even the social sciences. It is always possible to

reinterpret the results of any test to make them consistent with another

theory. However, when a theory motivates a long string of tests and

comes through them with as little need for revision as labor market

segmentation theory has, the theory deserves attention. It has proved

itself to be a fruitful path for research. It is not any one test,but the

weight of the evidence, particularly the dynamic context of the evidence,

which suggest that labor market segmentation theory deserves serious

attention.



Conclusion

              labor market segmentation theory has been very progressive.

In the early 70s factor analytical tests of the descriptive power of the

                                         60
segmentation perspective were remarkably successful. Most of the

eaiiy studies of differences in wage determination mechanisms were

successful. Problems with inconsistency in the resutts of these studies

have been shown to be due to inadequate a priori classification

schemes. When the early studies were challenged for their problems

with sample selectivity bias, later studies showed that even after

corrections for this problem the differences in the wage determination

mechanisms persist. Early empirical work showed patterns of mobilii

between the sectors consistent with descriptive work. Further, in our

work on dual markets we have developed considerable evidence

suggesting the existing of barriers to mobility between the sectors. In

response to critics we have shown that the dual market model provides

a much better description of the income distribution than does a highly

augmented human capital model. The examination of inter-industry

wage differences in the last decade has also provided a long string of

successes for the labor market segmentation perspective.

        In comparison the human capital perspective has not fared Well.

Although highly progressive for much of the 60s and 70s the human

capital program has become quite regressive in recent years. The

challenges of the evidence generated by the labor market segmentation

perspective have left advocates of human capital theory stretching to

                                  61
explain anomalous results. Attempts to empirically verify patched
versions of the theory have generally not been successful. Sample

selection bias did not explain the differences in the wage determination

mechanisms between the primary and secondary sectors. Helwege

found that failure to control for human capital did not explain the inter-

temporal correlation of inter-industry wage differences. Several

attempts to find evidence that inter-industry wage differences are due

to unobserved ability have been unsuccessful.

        The success of labor market segmentation theory both in the

theoretical and empirical domain, particularly its relative success in

predicting the outcome of studies undertaken in response to criticism

of previous work, deserves recognition. Labor market segmentation

theory should be taken seriously by economists.

        What does this mean? Labor market segmentation theory

should be given at least equal consideration with human capital theory

when economists are analyzing policies or planning tests of economic

hypothesis. What are the effects of increasing school quality on worker

productivity or the effects of job training? What the welfare costs and

benefits of unemployment insurance? What are the benefiis of trade

and industrial policies? These questions may have markedly different

answers from the two perspectives.

                                    62
        The application of labor market segmentation theory to new

problems will not be easy. labor market segmentation theory is still in

its infancy. Much work remains to build and expand the theory. If

economists are to take labor market segmentation theory seriously, they

will need to develop the theory further. In particular, the nature of the

wage determination mechanism in different sectors needs to be

establiihed. We still face a wide range of theories which can explain

inter-employer wage differences and queuing. Since they have widely

diierent policy implications, it is important to sort them out.

        The relation of labor market segmentation to race discrimination

is another area which deserves study. Our examinations give

inconsistent results on the relative importance of wage and employment

discrimination in the two sectors. It would be interesting and important

to understand these results. Further, extensions of the labor market

segmentation model to capture the nature of women's labor markets

would allow us to address more convincingly how much progress

woman have made in the last two decades.

        Finally, models of labor market segmentation are closely related

to models of unemployment. These models are natural vehicles for

examining questions about the composition and distribution of

unemployment and its likely response to active labor market policies.

                                   63
However, first we need to answer some basic questions about

unemployment. How much unemployment is caused by workers

queuing for primary sector jobs? How much is the result of jobs

churning in the secondary sector? What are the roles of layoffs and

recall   in the unemployment process? The development and application

of labor market segmentation theory poses an exciting challenge to

economists wishing to understand how the labor market works.




                                  64
References

Akerlot, George A., 'Gift Exchange and Efficiency Wage Theory: Four
Views,' American Economic Review, 74 (May 1984): 79-83.

Averitt, Robert T., The Dual Economy, New York: Norton, 1968.

Beaudry, Paul, 'Entry Wages Signalling Future Wages: A Foundation to
Turnover Models of Unemployment,' Boston University, mirneo, 1990.

Beck, E.M., Horan, Patrick M., and Tolbert, Charles M. 1978.
'Strati! ication in a Dual Economy: A Sectoral Model of Earnings
Determination,' American Sociological Review, 43:704-720.

Bibb, Robert, and Form, William H. 1977. 'The Effects of Industrial,
Occupational and Sex Stratification on Wages in Blue-Collar Markets,'
Social Forces, 55:974-996.

Bliss, Christopher J. and Stem, Nicholas H., 'Productivity, Wages and
Nutrition, 1: The Theory,' Journal of DevelonmentEconomics, 5 (1978):
331-62.

Bowles, S. and Gintis H. 1976. Schoolinci in Capitalist America, Basic
Books.

Buchele, Robert, 1976. 'Jobs and Workers: A Labor Market
Segmentation Perspective on the Work Experience of Young M e n,'
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Harvard University.

Cain, Glenn. 1976. 'The Challenge of Segmented Labor Market Theories
to Orthodox Theory,' Journal of Economic Literature, Dec., 14:121 5-
1257.

Calvo, Guillermo, 'Quasi-Walrasian Theories of Unemployment,'
American Economic Review! 69 (May 1979): 102-7.

Carmichael1 H. Lorne, 'Efficiency Wage Models of Unemployment: An
Overview,' Economic Inquiry, 28 (April 1990).




                                 65
Camoy, M. and Rumberger, R. 1980. 'Segmentation in the U.S. Labor
Market: Its Effects on the Mobility and Earnings of Whiies and Blacks,'
Cambridge Journal of Economics, 4 (June):1 17-132.

Conant, Eaton H. 1963. 'Worker Efficiency and Wage Differentials in a
Clerical Labor Market,' Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 16 (April):
428-433

Dickens, William 1., 'Wages, Employment and the Threat of Collective
Action by Workers,' NBER working paper, 1986.

Dickens, William T., and Katz, Lawrence F. 1987a. 'Industry Wage
Differences and Industry Characteristics,' in Kevin Lang and Jonathan
S Leonard, eds., Unemployment and the Structure of Labor Markets,
Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1987.

Dickens, William T., and Katz, Lawrence F. 1987b. 'Industry Wage
Differences and Theories of Wage Determination,' NBER Wcx1ci P
2271.

Dickens, William T. and Lang, Kevin. 1985a. 'A Test of Dual Labor
Market Theory,' American Economic Review, Sept., 75:792-805.

Dickens, William T., and Lang, Kevin. 1985b. Testing Dual Labor Market
Theory: A Reconsideration of the Evidence,' NBER          Wai1kig Pçier
#1670.

Dickens, William 1., and Lang, Kevin. 1986. 'Labor Market Segmentation
and the Union Wage Premium, NBER Working Paper, no. 1883.


Dickens, William T., and Lang, Kevin. 1987. 'A Goodness of Fii Test of
Dual Labor Market Theory,' NBER Working Paper 2350.

Dickens, William T., and Lang, Kevin. 1988. 'Labor Market Segmentation
and the Union Wage Premium, The Review of Economics and Statistics.


Dickens, William T., Katz, Lawrence, Lang, Kevin, and Summers,
Lawrence. 1989. 'Employee Crime, Monitoring, and the Efticiency
Wage Hypothesis,' Journal of Labor Economics,JuIy.

                                   66
Edwards, Richard C. 1975. The Social Relations of Production in the
Firm and Labor Market Structure,' in Labor Market $qmentation. ed.
by Richard Edwards, Michael Reich, and David M. Gordon, Lexington,
MA: D.C. Heath.

Evans, Robert Jr. 1960. 'Worker Quality and Wage Dispersion: An
Analysis of a Clerical Labor Market in Boston,' Industrial Relations
Research Association Proceedings.

Foulkes, Fred, Personnel Policies in Laroe Nonunion Comoanies,
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

Friedberg, Rachel, Lang, Kevin, and Dickens, William 1. 1988. 'The
Changing Structure of the Female Labor Market, 1976-I 984,' IRAA 418
Annual Proceedings.

Gibbons, Robert, and Katz, Lawrence F. 1989. 'Learning, Mobilii, and
Inter-Industry Wage Differences,' NBER Working Paper 3182

Goldfeld, Steven M., and Quandt, Richard E. 1976. 'Techniques for
Estimating Switching Regressions,' in their Studies in Non-Linear
Estimation, Cambridge: Ballinger.

Goldman; M.l. 1983. U.S.S.R. in Crisis, W.W. Norton, New York, 1983.

Gordon, David M. 1971. 'Class, Productivity and the Ghetto,'
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Harvard University.

Groshen, Erica L 1987. 1Sources of Wage Dispersion: The Contribution
of Inter-Employer Differentials Within                 Industry,'
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, mimeo.

Groshen, Erica L 1988a. Why Do Wages Vary Among Employers?
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Review, 1938.

Groshen, Erica L. 1988b. 'Do Wage Differences Among Employers
Last?' Cleveland Fed. mimeo, April.

Harrod, Roy F., 'The Scope and Method of Economics,' Ennnmk
Journal, 48 (September 1938): 383412


                                    67
Heckman, James J. and Sedlacek, Guilherme. 1985. 'Heterogeneity,
Aggregation and Market Wage Functions: An Empirical Model of Self
Selection in the Labor Market,' Journal of Political Economy, Dec.,
93:1 077-I 125.

Heckman, James J., and Hotz, Joseph V., 1988. 'An Investigation dt
Labor Market Earnings of Panamanian Males: Evaluating theSoucs d
Inequality, Journal of Human Resources, Fall, 21:507-542.

Helwege, J. 1987. 'Interindustry wage Diierentials,' UCLA mimeo, Oct.

Heywood, John S., 'Imports and Domestic Wages: Is the Relationship
Consistent with Expense Preference Behavior?' University of Wisconsin-
Milwaukee, mimeo, 1990.

1-lodson, Randy D. 1977. 'Labor Force Participation and Earnings in the
Core, Peripheral and State Sectors of Production,' unpublished M.A.
thesis, Dep. of Sociology, University of Wisconsin-Madison.

Hodson1 Randy D. 1983 Workers' Eamings and Corporate Economic
Structure. New York: Academic Press.

Holzer, Harry J., Katz, Lawrence F., and Kreuger, Alan B. 1988. 'Job
Queues and Wages: New Evidence on the Minimum Wage and Inter-
Industry Wage Structure,' Princeton University         I n d u St r i a I
Relations Section Working Paper 230.

Katz, Lawrence F., 1986. 'Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial
Evaluation,' NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1986, Cambridge, MA:
236-276.

Kletzer, L. 1989. 'Returns to Seniority After Permanent Job LOSS,'
American Economic Review, 79536543.

Koopmans, Tjalling, Three Essays on the State of Economic Science,
New York: McGraw-Hill, 1957.

Kreuger, Alan, and Summers, Lawrence. 1987. 'Reflections on the Inter-
Industry Wage Structure,' in Kevin Lang and Jonathan S Leonard, &*
UnemIovment and the Structure of Labor Markets, Oxford: B a s i         I
Blackwell, 1987.

                                   68
Kreuger, Alan, and Summers, Lawrence. 1988. "Efficiency Wages and
the Inter-Industry Wage Structure,' Econometrica,     56:259-293.

Lakatos, Imre, The Methodoloov of Scientific Research Proorammes,
Vol. 1, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978.

Lang, Kevin, 'Persistent Wage Dispersion and Involuntary
Unemployment,' Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106 (February 1991).

Lang, Kevin, and Dickens, William T. 1988. 'Sociological and
Neoclassical Perspectives on Segmented Labor Markets,' in Industries,
Firms, and Jobs, George Farkas and Paula England, eds., Plenum
Press: New York.

Lang, Kevin, and Kahn, Shulamit. 1990. 'Efficiency Wage Models of
Unemployment: A Second View,' Economic Inquiry, April, 28: 296806.

Lang, Kevin, Marquez, Gustavo, and Romaguera, Pilar, 'Theories of
Wage Determination: Lessons from Chile and Venezuela,' Boston
University, mimeo, 1988.

Lazear, Edward, 'The Narrowing of Black-White Wage Difterentials Is
Illusory,' American Economic Review, 69 (September 1979): 558-64.

Leigh, Duane E. 1976. "Occupational Advancement in the Late 1960s:
An Indirect Test of the Dual Market Hypothesis,' Journal of Human
Resources. 11 (Spring):1 55-171.

Leonard, Jonathan. 1989. 'Wage Structure and Dynamics in the
Electronics Industry,' Industrial Relations, 28:2 (Spring): 251-275.

Lindbeck, Assar, and Snower, Dennis J., 'Wage Setting, Unemployment,
and Insider-Outsider Relations,' American Economic Review, 76 (May
1986): 235-9.

Lucifora, Claudio, 1991. 'Inter-industry and Occupational Wage
Differentials,' Universita' Cattolica di Milano mimeo, May.

Mars, Gerald, 1982. Cheats at Work: An Anthropoloav of Workplace
Crime London; Boston: Allen & Unwin.


                                   69
Murphy, Kevin M., and Topel, Robert. 1987. 'Unemployment, Risk, and
Earnings: Testing for Equalizing Wage Differences in the Labor Market,'
in Kevin Lang and Jonathan S Leonard, eds., Unemployment and the
Structure of Labor Markets, Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1987.

Murphy, Kevin M., and Topel, Robert. 1990. 'Efficiency Wages
 Reconsidered: Theory and Evidence,' in Y. Weiss, ed., Advances in
the Theory and Measurement of Unemployment, London: Macmillan.

Oster, Gerry. 1979. 'A Factor Analytic Test of the Theory of the Dual
Economy,' Review of Economics and Statistics, 61 :33-51.

Osterman, Paul. 1975. 'An Empirical Study of Labor Market
Segmentation,' Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 28:508-523.

Piore1 Michael J. 1980a. 'Dualism as a Response to Flux and
Uncertainity, in Dualism and Discontinuity in Industrial Societies, ed. by
Suzanne Berger and Michael J. Piore, New York: Cambridge University
Press.

Piore, Michael J. 1980b. 'The Technological Foundations of Dualism,'
in Dualism and Discontinuity in Industrial Societies, ed. by Suzanne
Berger and Michael J. Piore, New York: Cambridge University Press.

Rebitzer, James B. and Taylor, Lowell J. 1991. 'A Model of Dual Labor
Markets When Product Demand is Uncertain,' Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 106 (November).

Robertson, Dennis, Essays in Monetary Theojy London: King, 1940.

Rosenberg, Samuel. 1976. 'An Empirical Test of the Dual Labor Market
Hypothesis,' unpublished manuscript, Williams College.

Rosenberg, Samuel. 1980. 'Male Occupational Standing and the Dual
Labor Market,' Industrial Relations, 193449.

Salop, Steven C., 'A Model of the Natural Rate of Unemployment,'
American Economic Review, 69 (March 1979): 117-25.

Schiller, Bradley R. 1977. 'Relative Earnings Mobility in the United
States,' American Economic Review, 74: 433-444.

                                   70
Shapiro, Carl and Stiglitz, Joseph E., 'Equilibrium Unemployment as a
Worker Discipline Device,' American Economic Review, 75 (June 1984):
43344.

Slichter, 5., 1950. 'Notes on the Structure of Wages,' Review of
Economics and Statistics, Feb., 80-91.

Smith, James P., 'Career Wage Mobility,' in Steven Shulman and
William Darity, Jr., eds., The Question of Discrimination, Middletown, CT:
Wesleyan University Press, 1989.

Solow, Robert, 'Another Possible Source of Wage Stickiness,' Journal
of Macroeconomics, 1 (1979): 79-82.

Stiglitz, Joseph E., 'The Efficiency Wage Hypothesis, Surplus Labor,
and the Distribution of Income in LD.C.s, Oxford Economic Papers, 28
(1976): 185-207.

Tolbert, Charles M., I-loran, Patrick M., and Beck, E.M. 1980. 'The
Structure of American Economic Segmentation: A Dual Economy
Approach,' American Journal of Sociology, 85:1095-I 116.

Wachter, Michael L 1974. 'Primary and Secondary Labor Markets: A
Critique of the Dual Approach,' Brookings Papers    on Economic
Activii 3: 637680.

Weiss, Andrew. 1980. 'Job Queues and Layoffs in Labor Markets with
Flexible Wage Expectations,' Journal of Political     Economics,
June, 88: 526538.

Weiss, Andrew, Models of UnemIoyment. Layoffs, and Waae
Dispersion,   Princeton:   Princeton   University Press, 1990.

Weitzman, Martin, 'A Theory of Wage Dispersion and Job Market
Segmentation,' Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104 (February 1989):
12138.

Wial, Howard J. 1988. 'The Transition from Seconadary to Primary
Employment: Jobs and Workers in Ethnic Neighborhood Labor
Markets,' unpublished MIT doctoral dissertation.


                                        71
Yellen, Janet L. 1984. 'Efficiency Wage Models of Unemployment,'
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 74: 200-205.

Zucker, Lynne G., and Rosenstein, Carolyn. 1981. 'Taxonomies of
Institutional Structure: Dual Economy Reconsidered,' American
Sociological Review, 46:669-884.




                                   72
                        TABLE 1
        PARAMETER ESTIMATES FOR SINGLE AND DUAL
                     LABOR MARKET MODELS


                                   SWITCHING MODEL
VARIABLE OLS COEF.         PRIMARY   SECONDARY   SWITCHING

CONSTANT          0.730      0.720          1.146          -0.315
                 (0.014)    (0.086)        (0.107)         (0.137)

SMSA             0.109       0.078         -0.330           0.445
                 (0.004)    (0.018)        (0.030)         (0.035)

NEVER           -0.106      -0.057          0.397          -0.577
MARRIED          (0.007)    (0.027)        (0.048)         (0.006)

SCHOOL           0.069       0.077         0.005            0.018
                (0.001)     (0.001)        (0.006)         (0.007)

WHITE             0.158      0.127         -0.321           0.515
                 (0.007)    (0.023)        (0.045)         (0.054)

EXPERIENCE        0.030      0.030         -0.025           0.048
                 (0.001)    (0.002)        (0.005)         (0.006)

EXPERIENCE -0.046           -0.041         0.066           -0.107
SQUARED/100 (0.001)         (0.005)        (0.010)         (0.012)

STANDARD         0.418       0.347         0.772            *
ERROR

COVARIANCE                  -0.028         0.775
Win-I SWITCH-
ING ERROR

LOG UKE-        -26467                      25283
UHOOD

*The standard error of the switching equation is normalized to one.
Figures in parentheses are standard errors.

                                 73
                               TABLE 2
            COMPOSITION OF INDUSTRY EMPLOYMENT

INDUSTRY                                    Secondary ?        Primary

Agriculture, forestry and fisheries           25.29    36.39     38.32

Mining                                         207      8.64     89.29

Construction                                   3.75    13.12     83.13

Nondurable Manufacturing
 Food and Kindred Products                     5.60    16.50 77.90
 Tobacco                                       8.52    13.80     77.90
 Textile Mill Products and Apparel             6.97    26.11     66.92
 Paper and Allied Products                     227      7.11     90.62
 Printing, Publishing and Allied Ind.          7.83    11.12     81.05
 Chem., Petrol., Coal, Rub., and Plastic       2.78    10.33     86.91
 Leather and Leather Products                 12.35    30.70     56.95

Durable Manufacturing
 Lumber, Wood and Furniture                    9.33    26.14 64.53
 Stone, Clay, Glass and Concrete Prod.         3.59    14.92     81.49
 Primary Metals                                2.26     7.20 90.54
 Machinery and Equipment                       242      7.74 89.84

Transportation                                 6.27    10.53     83.20

Communications (except telephone)              9.69    15.52     74.79

Utilities and Telephone                        1 .40    5.01     93.59

Wholesale                                      6.94    14.50     78.56

Retail (except eating, drinking and liq.)     13.35    21.60     65.06
 Eating & drinking places, liquor stores      29.29    3211      38.60

Finance, Insurance and Real Estate             7.06    11.73     81.20

                                                               (continued)



                                      74
                         TABLE 2 (cont.)



INDUSTRY                               Secondary ?        Primary

Business and Repair Services
Advertising, Research and Computers      275       6.05   91.21
Services to Bldgs and Personnel Supply 24.21      24.12   51.67
Detectives and Protective Services      48.66     17.83   33.51
Repair and Services in N.E.C.            8.35     20.31   71.34

Personal Services                        23.94 26.88 49.1 8
Entertainment and Recreational Services 18.75     22.91   58.34

Professional and Related Services
Offices of Health Professionals           9.69     7.05   83.26
Hospitals and Health Services N.E.C.     11.33    18.04   70.63
Nursing, Child and Residential Care      26.61    2209    51.30
Education and Related Institutions       15.51    15.29   69.19
Other Professional Services                2.79    5.78   91.43




                               75
                              TABLE 3
           COMPOSITION OF EMPLOYMENT BY OCCUPATION

OCCUPATION                              Secondary ?          Primary

Managers and Professionals (except
those below)                                 3.44    5.63     99.73
 Therapists and Physicians' Assistants      11.61   16.34     71.65
 Post-Secondary Teachers and Librarians 9.73         7.53     62.74
   Economists*                               0.00    4.71     95.29
 Other Teachers                             19.15   16.11     64.74
 Social, Recreational and
   Religious Workers                        36.41   29.16 43.43
 Wriiers, Artists, Entertainers and Athletes 7.54   11.06     61.37

Technical, Sales and Administrative
Support Occupations
 Health Technologists and Technicians       5.69    15.67     76.44
Technologists and Technicians Except
  Health Sales                              2.10     6.95     90.95
  Retail                                   22.66    23.61     53.72
 Other Than Retail                          6.66    11.67     61.65
Administrative Support
 Super., Comp. Op. and Secretaries      4.23        11.65     64.13
 Information Clerks                    19.24        17.99     63.76
 Messengers, Office Machine Operators,
  Mail, Rate, Personnel, Library and
  Bookkeeping Clerks                   16.36        22.09     59.53
 Bank Clerks                           26.99        29.19     44.72
 Other                                  5.97        16.64     77.39

Service Occupations
 Protective Services (except guards)       16.94     0.99     63.96
 Guards                                    39.05 22.67        36.06
 Food Preparation and Service              34.29    34.07     31.64
 Health Service Occupations                23.94 44.93        31.13
 Cleaning, Household and Personal
 Services                                  24.61    26.09     47.31

*Based on small number people in occupation.
                                                            (continued)

                                  76
                             TABLE 3 (cont.)


OCCUPATION                              Secondary ?           Primary

Farm, Forestry and Fishing Occupations 27.42          37.57    35.01

Precision Production, Craft and
Repair Occupations
Mechanics and Repairers                        3.72   13.05    83.23
Construction   Supervisors                     2.10   6.22     91.68
Construction Trades (except supervisors) 3.26         13.45    83.29
Extractors, Plant and System Operators,
 Craft Supervision and Inspection and
Metal Crafts                                   2.07    7.38    90.55
Other Precision Production                     5.14   19.15    75.70

Operatives (except textile, apparel
and furnishings)                               4.33   15.09    80.58

Operatives (textile, apparel and
furnishings)                                   9.60   36.98    53.42

Transportation and Material Moving
Occupations
 Motor Vehicle Operators                   10.08      19.68    70.24
 Rail and Water Transportation                 5.46    8.45    86.09
 Material Moving Equipment Operators           3.99   15.74    80.27

Handlers, Equipment Cleaners, Helpers,
and Laborers
Garage Workers, Vehicle Washers
and Packers                                20.07      39.39    40.55
Others                                     10.56      21.82    67.62




                                   77
                                TABLE 4

            COMPARISON OF DUAL LABOR MARKET
                CLASSIFICATION SYSTEMS


BECK, HORAN AND TOLBERT (1978) INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION

                      SECONDARY ?             PRIMARY
Core                    4.97       10.63       84.39
Periphery               14.19      22.66       63.14


B1BB AND FORM (1977) INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION

                      SECONDARY ?             PRIMARY
Core                    3.38        10.04     88.58
Periphery               iI.29       17.37     71.32


HODSON (1977) INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION

                      SECONDARY ?             PRIMARY
Core                    3.05         9.68     87.27
Periphery               1202        18.42     69.56
State                    1.33          6.01   92.66


TOLBERT, HORAN AND BECK (1980) INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION

                      SECONDARY ?             PRIMARY
Core                     3.52       9.69       86.80
Periphery               14.98      21.97       63.03


OSTERMAN (1975) OCCUPATIONAL CODING SYSTEM

                      SECONDARY ?             PRIMARY
Upper Tier, Primary      8.81          8.32   82.87
Lower Tier, Primary      5.48       12.31     82.21
Secondary               20.42      27.77      51.81


                                  78
             Figure 1. Hypothetical Scatter Plot--
                       Standard Human Capital Theoiy
Log Wage




                —1---'




                                                                 Education
             Figure 2. Hypothetical Scatter Plot--
                      Dual Market Theory
Log   Wage




                                                                             I




                                           d
                                                ,    j   I   I      I




                                                                 Education


                                           79
                   Figure 3.   Hypothetical Scatter Plot——
                               Human Capital Theory with
                               Non-Linear Wage-Educati.
                               Relation.
    Log Wage
                                                                         'p
                                                                  p
                                                             p           F
                                                                  S



                                                                         S
                                   p                              S
                               a                             S           S
                               9                   F
                                                       I          I
                        1,                     I       C
                                   C
                                           I   S
0                              I           9
                                   S
                               I
                        S

                        S
                   S

                   S


               I


                                                             Education
