NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES

THE MEANING OF COLLEGE IN ThE UVES OF AMERICAN WOMEN:
THE PAST ONE-HUNDRED YEARS

Claudia Goldin

Working Paper No. 4099

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1992

I thank Boris Simkovich for providing extraordinary research assistance. Kathy Snead collected
the Women's Bureau data relating to Bulletin No. 292 under the auspices of PARSS at the
University of Pennsylvania. The comments and suggestions of Lawrence F. Katz and Ceci Rouse
are appreciated. The students of Economics 1356 (Spring 1991) provided the stimulus for this
study, and I thank them for their candor and insights. This paper has benefited from comments
provided by participants during public lectures at Wellesley College, Bates College, Simmons
College, Tufts University, and the University of Iowa. This paper was written for the Conference
on Women's Human Capital and Development, May 18-22, 1992, Bellagio, Italy, and I thank the

discussants, John Strauss and Barbara Torrey, as well as the other participants for their
suggestions. This paper is part of NBER's research programs in Development of the American
Economy and Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4099
June 1992

THE MEANING OF COLLEGE IN THE LIVES OF AMERICAN WOMEN:
THE PAST ONE-HUNDRED YEARS

ABSTRACT
Three cohorts of college women are considered here. The first, graduating from 1900 to
1920, was faced with a choice of "family or career," while the second, graduating from 1945 to
the early 1960s, opted for family and employment serially — that is, "family then job." The third,

graduating since 1980 in a climate of greater gender equality, is attempting both "family and
career," with mixed results and considerable frustration. This paper assesses the reasons for the
changing set of tradeoffs each generation of college women faced and why the college education

of women expanded in the post-World War II era. The first cohort attended college when the
numbers of men and women in college were about equal, while the second attended college when

the proportion of all undergraduates who were male was at an all-time high. Only half of the
return to college for the second cohort came in the form of their B.A. degrees, while the other
half came from their Mrs. degrees. Ironically, because the total return to college --from the B.A.
and Mrs. degrees -- was quite high, enrollments of women expanded rapidly and eventually gave

rise to a demand for greater gender equality in the labor market and society.

Claudia Goldin
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER

Women's education enhances gender equality and the higher education of womenshould

enhance it even more. Yet women's experience with higher education in theUnited States has

been a rather complex affair across the past century. Gender differences among the college
educated In demographic life-course events — such as marriage and family — actually widened

and then narrowed as women struggled to find the meaning of college in their lives. Gender
differences In marriage rates among the college educated may be widening once again, but we

have incomplete demographic histories on the most recent cohorts.1
More so than any preceding generation, college women today appear to want both family

and career. The experiences of all previous cohorts serve as their guides, but none providesthe

example they want to follow. College women today express frustration. They have succeeded
in achieving parity in numbers with their male counterparts, they are receiving educationsof about

equal quality, and they are continuing in professional and graduate schools In greaternumbers
than ever before.2 Yet full equality is still not within their reach.
I describe here the demographic and economic fates of several cohorts of college women,

each a possible model for today's college woman. Tradeoffs of substantial consequence were

made by each of these past generations of college women, and they are tradeoffs that the
present generation seems unwilling to make. Despite the shifting tradeoffs and changing gender
inequality in demographic and economic outcomes, each generation of college graduatesset the

stage for the next. Thus to comprehend how we arrived at the choices faced by the current
generation, we must understand the full process of change from the earliest tothe most recent.

1 Among college graduates 35 to 44 years old in 1989, 79.4 percent of the men but 74.9
percent of the women were currently married, spouse present. But among college graduates 25
to 34 years old In 1989, 58.3 percent of the men had already married while 68.7 percent of the
women had (U.S. Bureau of the Census 1991 a). Thus the 35 to 44 year old experiences speak
to a widening gulf between male and female marriage rates, although the data forthe younger
group Indicate that both men and women are marrying at very slow rates.
2

ratio of men to women in professional schools was 23.4 In 1960 but 1.66 in 1988. The

ratio In graduate schools was 2.48 In 1960 but 0.90 In 1988 (U.S. Department of Health,
Education, and Welfare, Digest 1988, OFE 1960).
1

Because a century of experience is covered here, the focus will be on particular junctures

and cohorts that span the period. I consider three generations of college graduates each about

10 to 20 years in duration, separated one from the next by 20 years. The first attended or
graduated college between 1900 and 1920, the second between 1940 and 1960, and the third
from about 1980 to the present.
•

Put starkly, the differences among them and the progression of tradeoffs have been the

following. In the first -- a group graduating around 1910 and born around 1890 -- college more
often than not presented a clear set of alternatives between family and career. For most women

in this group it was one or the other, and when the selection was a career, it almost always
involved teaching. Although college men in this generation married and had families at about the
same rate as men without higher education, college women in this generation were rather different

from their non-college counterparts. Approximately 50 percent of all college women either did not

marry or, if they did marry, did not have children.3 College women were a small fraction of the
entire college-aged population, but college men were almost as small a fraction. Although both

were drawn from the upper echelons of American wealth and standing, there is evidence that

differences in the demographic experiences between college women and their non-college
counterparts were largely due to the "treatment effect" of college, rather than to selection bias.
In the second group — graduating around 1950 and born around 1930 — college offered

women the opportunity to have both family and paid employment. But the two were serially
scheduled — family came first, in terms of timing and priority, and only after came employment.

The employment of choice was, once again, teaching, for it allowed such serial timing without a

large penalty. It was a profession one could "fall back on," because teaching would always be
in demand and teaching credentials would remain valid. But college also afforded women in this

cohort the opportunity to marry a college.educated man.

The 50 percent figure is: 31.1 percent (never married) + [27.6 percent (having no children)
* 68.9 percent (ever married)].

2

One might ask of many of the women from the second cohort whether the direct,
pecuniary returns to college justified the tuition and opportunity costs of their four, or so, years
of higher education. The answer would generally be that it did not, but that college allowed them
to tap into the market for college-educated men. Not only did women who attended collegestand

a considerably higher chance of marrying a college-educated man, they also marriedthe higher
income-generating man from among the college-educated group as well as from the high-school

educated group. This was also a generation that, for various reasons, became part of the
American mainstream. As college became more accessible to the masses and as America
became swept away by the resurgence of family, college women married and had children at

almost the same rates as their non-college contemporaries. Despite all appearances to the
contrary, however, the college woman of the 1 950s set the stage for the events of the 1970s -the resurgence of feminism.
In the third group — graduating after 1980 and born since 1960 -- college appears to be

offering women the opportunity for true equality with their male counterparts. College women
have rejected the choice of "family or career," the options of the first cohort, and "family then
job," that of the second cohort. Further, they are uncomfortable with the choice of career then
family," that of some in an intermediate cohort that just preceded them. Substantial, but not yet

conclusive, evidence concerning the demographic experience of women who graduated from
1970 to 1980, now in their thirties and early forties, indicates that they tried the route of career

then family" but did not entirely succeeded at both. Many are back with the first cohort in their
ex post ability to combine both successfully.4 But the third cohort considered here wants both

Data from U.S. Bureau of the Census (1991) indicate that 33.3 percent of 35 to 44 year old
women with > 4 years of college have not yet had a birth while 23.4 percent of those with exactly
4 years of college have not yet had at least one. Therefore women who graduated college and
continued their higher education in search of a career have a much higher percentage childless

than those who stopped at college graduation. The career trajectories of the group who
continued after college is not known, although an In-depth study of one profession — that of
economics doctorates — shows that women are not being promoted very rapidly (Committee on
the Status of Women in the Economics Profession data).

3

family and career. These women are unwilling to schedule the events serially and thereby risk
not having one of them. Thus, they can find no previous cohort that provides a suitable model
and only a small fraction of women within any of the cohorts that have. Many of the doors that
were closed to previous generations of college women are now open. Yet the graduates of the

past decade seem a discontent group.5 I have very little to say about the third cohort because
it is still too young to have completed much of its demographic and employment histories.
Before considering the basis for the characterizations just offered, it is instructive to detail

the percentages of males and females who attended and graduated from college across this
century. The fewer women who attend college, the more they could be a highly self-selected
sample from among the entire population of young women. Because I would like to isolate the
0treatment effecr of college, it is imperative to understand the process of selection into college.
Prior to 1940, the proportions of men and women who attended college were low, but the

percentages were remarkably similar by sex.6 Among those born from 1886 to 1895, for
example, 9.5 percent of the men attended college for at least one year while 8.9 percent of the
women did, and attendance figures are approximately equal for cohorts born from 1895 to 1900

(see Figure 1). Graduation rates are somewhat further apart, where the definition of graduating
college is attending for four or more years (see Figure 2). Of the cohort born from 1886 to 1895,

5.0 percent of men graduated college while 3.4 percent ot women did. Attendance rates were
far higher for women relative to their graduation rates but only in part because two-year colleges

This conclusion is based, admittedly, on a small sample of students •- those in my
Economics 1356 class in 1991.

6 It should be noted at the very outset that in all of the empirical work that follows only white
men and women are considered because of the considerably smaller number of nonwhites who
attended college in the past.

' Both the graduation rates and the attendance rates are as of ages 45 to 54 or 55 to 64
years. See Figures 1 and 2 for sources and notes.

4

are included in the data.8 Until recently far fewer women than men who attended college actually

graduated. By the cohort born In 1905, even graduation rates between the sexeshad narrowed,
and the ratio of graduating males to females was 1.24. ThIs trend, however, was not tocontinue.

The two lines In Figures 1 and 2 diverge with the cohort born around 1910, and they
remain apart until the recent period. Some of the men in the cohorts born around 1920 delayed
their college education dunng World War II, and many others would not have received a college

education were It not for the war. The 31 Bill of Rights provided the first large dose offederal
subsidization of college tuition and enticed a substantial fraction of men In their twenties and early

thirties to return to school.
Large differences between men and women in college graduation rates persisteduntil the

cohorts born in the 1 950s. By the cohort born in 1930 the ratio of male to female graduateshad

Increased to 1.79; by the cohort born in 1940 It had declined somewhat to 1.62, but was still
much higher than its level earlier In the century. Attendance rates differed less, in part because
men, whose tuition was subsidized after World War II, completed college at greaterrates than did

women and in part because women attended two-year schools in somewhat greaternumbers.
The gap in both graduation and attendance eventually disappeared by the cohorts born in the
early 1 960s and by 1980 more women than men were receiving B.A.s per year.

Thus the first cohort being examined attended college when few men and women went

to college, but at a time when they attended in roughly simIlar proportions to their populations.
The second cohort attended college when the ratio of males to females In attendance was greater

In 1962, for example, two-year colleges accounted for 14 percent of all college enrolleesfor
both males and females. Yet the ratio of graduation rates to attendance rates was 61 percent for
males but 48 percent for females in the birth cohort of 1940 (see Appendix Table Al). Thus the
differences in graduation rates between males and females must be accounted for by a differential
graduation rate from four-year colleges. The same Is probably not the case for earlier cohorts.
Graduation rates were much lower for women in the cohorts born before 1905, thus graduating
before about 1927. A large fraction of the women In these cohorts who attended college were
in teachers' colleges and normal schools, but It Is difficult to separate the two-year normal schools
from the four-year teachers' colleges for those years. Normal schools are of little Importanceafter
the 1 940s.

5

than at any time in the past hundred years. Finally, the third cohort attended college in an era
of the greatest gender equality in both attendance and graduation rates.

What accounted for changing male and female college attendance rates and for the

shifting tradeoffs that have faced college women? The large increase of women in college

beginning in the early 1 950s was due to a set of factors that increased male enrollments.
decreased the age at first marriage, and enabled women to work for pay even when married. The

GI Bill of Rights enabled many men to attend college who would otherwise not have been able

to do so. With the influx of men in college came an influx of women, for college became a far
thicker marriage market as the age at first marriage decreased and the ratio of men to women in

college soared. Changes in the labor market, particularly the almost universal rescinding of the

marriage bar — the pohcles of firms and school boards not to hire married women — were
crucial factors. The young woman who now wanted family could go to college, prepare for a
future occupation, and find a mate. Curriculum changes within colleges had been brewing for

some time but were now given greater impetus as schools strengthened programs in home
ecoriomics, education, and social work, among others. Later changes were fueled, in large

measure, by the women's movement, which transformed the increase in women's college
attendance into a crusade for true equality. A host of factors beyond the scope of this paper led

to increases in married women's employment, and as more women were spending a greater
fraction of their adult lives employed, the direct returns to college increased and their college
enrollments soared (see 301dm, 1990 on increased female labor force participation). Thus the
rise in female college enrollment beginning in the early 1 950$ was due to increases in both the
direct pecuniary benefits from college as well as the indirect benefits through the marriage market.

1. The First Cohort: Family or Career
The first cohort studied here completed their higher education between 1900 and 1920.
Although there are prior cohorts of female college graduates that might be examined, these are

6

the earliest that can be studied with the data on education, occupation, fertility history, marriage
age, and husband's income, among other variables, included In the 1940 Public Use Micro-Data
Sample (PUMS) of the federal population census.
The first college to open its doors to women was Oberlin in 1837, but not until the 1 850s

did opportunities for women in higher education expand, particularly with the establishment of
female colleges. At that time, however, many of the institutions of higher learning open to women

were not true colleges but were seminaries often no more Intellectually demanding than high

schools and without rigorous entrance requirements. Only In the 1 870s and 1 880s with the
establishment of the finer women's colleges, such as Vassar and Smith, and with the opening of
various state universities to women, did the era of women's higher education truly begin. By 1910

73 percent of all colleges were open to women, almost 80 percent of which were coeducational

institutions (Newcomer 1959, p. 37). Most of the women's colleges that had minimum age
requirements of sixteen years were upstanding Institutions that endeavored to provide to women

what other colleges were gMng to men; that Is they strove for equality of curriculum (Woody
1929). Most colleges and universities taught a liberal arts curriculum in which there were basically

two courses of study — classical and scientific. Thus, women and men took very similar classes,

even when they were not at the same Institution.

In the late nineteenth century, higher education for women was justified in a variety of

ways. A more educated woman would be a better wife, mother, and homemaker because a
liberal arts education endowed the student with the ability to solve problems, use good judgment,

and reason properly in all of life's circumstances. Further, before marriage or in its absence, the

educated woman could have a career, particularly as a teacher. Finally, education promoted

morality and was often combined with religious training. The wealthy and well-positioned in

America often sent their sons to college, although It is not at all clear that such education
enhanced their income. Thus they may have had no reluctance to send their daughters as well.

But higher education for women had what Thomas Woody, a historian of education,

7

viewed as an unanticipated consequence. By the 1 890s it was clear that college women were
marrying at decidedly lower rates than were those who did not attend college, and that, even if

they married, they were having considerably fewer children than their lesser-educated
counterparts. The finding spawned an extensive literature for It was alarming to many (see
Cookingham, 1984, for references). They, and current researchers, have faced the same problem

in trying to ascertain how much of the difference in demographic experiences was due to sample

selection and how much was due to the treatment effect of college. Although definitive evidence

on the subject has not yet been uncovered, information will be presented that is consistent with
the interpretation that the differences were more a function of what college did for and to women

than which women went to college.
That said, it should be noted that many of the previous studies of the nuptiality rates of
college women were not based on nation-wide samples, but rather on alumni surveys. Most, but

not all, of these surveys were of women in the elite colleges of the northeast, often women's
colleges like Smith, Vassar, Radcliffe, Wellesley, and Bryn Mawr (see, for example, Van Kleek

1918). Not only were the studies biased in their selection of schools, often known for their low
marriage rates, but marriage rates for relatively recent graduates were given with no adjustment
for time since graduation. For all of these reasons the estimates in those studies were biased by

virtue of composition and in terms of Incompleteness of spell.
The 1940 PUMS affords a more universal view of the nuptiality of college women, although

the bias here is probably in the opposite direction. By taking the recollections of older women

and using the percentage who listed themselves as wnever married, it is likely that the
percentage who actually did marry Is overstated. Among those in the cohort that would have
graduated between 1898 and 1917, that is born between 1876 and 1895, more than 30 percent

never married by age 459 For those who would have graduated between 1918 and 1937, that

I focus on college graduates to get around the problem that college attendance includes
those at two-year colleges and normal schools.
8

is born between 1896 and 1915, about 25 percent never married by age 45 (see Table 1).

The woman who attended college but did not graduate (or who graduated from a twoyear college) stood a somewhat higher probability of marrying by age 45, butboth sets of college

numbers are considerably greater than are those for women who never attended college (see
Appendix Table A2). The female college graduate during 1908 and 1917 was 4 times more likely

to remain single than was her non-college counterpart (31.1 percent against 7.8 percent). The
same statistic for the graduation classes of 1898 to 1907 is 3.7 (computed for women aged 55

to 64). College graduate women in the years from 1900 to 1927 had lifetime marriage
probabilities that were fully 20 percentage points lower than their non-college counterparts.

As high as the statistics are for the percentage of college women who never married,

those that aroused concern around 1900 were higher still A survey of the members of the
Association Collegiate Alumnae around 1895 revealed that only half of those In the North Atlantic

region had married by age forty and slightly more, 57 percent, of those in the Middle West region

had (Shlnn 1895, p. 947). Just over half the graduates from the (circa) 1900 class of Mount
Holyoke, Wellesley, Vassar, Radcliffe and even the University of Michigan married, although a
survey of land-grant colleges revealed that about 65 percent of the graduating class of 1900 had

married.10 On average, then, the data suggest that the percentage marrying In the class
graduating around 1900 may have been between 50 and 60 percent. The percentage ever
married began to rise In many of the schools with the graduating classes of the 191 Os, consistent

with the census data presented above. Thus while the overall trends in the two data sets —those

of particular schools and those in the federal population census — are similar, their levels differ.
The data from the 1940 PUMS reveal a higher proportion ever married, a likely consequence of

the national scope of the census and the longer period of time to marriage allowed.

10 Solomon (1985, p. 120) contains data on marriage rates for a large number of schools;
Woodhouse (1932, p. 53) is the source for the land-grant college number. Woodhouse states that

the measure is married at the time of the survey,' but the data are more consistent with 'evermarried at the time of the survey.'

9

The general conclusion of the turn-of-the-century studies on nuptiality and college was

that the college experience both caused and enabled women to have a lower marriage rate.
College permitted women to be more discerning in their choice of lifestyle and husband. Further,

the typical occupation for college graduate women, particularly in the East, was as a teacher in
a private girls' school, and "there is no station in life (save that of a nun) so inimical to marriage
as that of resident teacher in a girls' school' (Shinn 1895, p. 948). Finally, men, it was said, often
disliked the intellectual woman. The possibility of sample selection or bias was raised at the time,

and it was pointed out that women who considered going to college formed a biased sample

because they had not married young (Newcomer 1959, pp. 212-13). But the notion that the
college woman would not have married anyhow was generally, though not entirely, dismissed.
Not only did the college woman of the early twentieth century have a lower probability of
marrying at some point in her life, she also stood a much higher probability of not having children

even if she married. Just under 30 percent of all female college graduates who were 45 to 54
years old in 1940 recorded no lifetime births, and because their most fertile years were already
past by the time of the Great Depression, their low fertility cannot be attributed to poor economic
conditions. The percentage was 1.8 times that of women who had no college education and was

12.5 percentage points higher (see Table 1). Figure 3 graphs the percentage having no births

by age 35 to 44 — an age group determined by the demands of the most recent data — for
college graduates, those with no college, and high-school only graduates. The percentage with

no births among college graduates relative to that for women with no college was the greatest
for the cohort born around 1900, yet another Indication that college graduate women at that time

were more dissimilar from the general population of women than any time after. Integrating the
data on marriage with that on children indicates that 50 percent of all female college graduates
during the years 1908 to 1917 either never married or had no children by the time they reached
age 45 (see Table 1).

The female college graduate around the turn of this century made a distinct choice

10

beM'een family and career. About 50 percent did not opt for husband and children,while only
22 percent of those who did not attend college took that route. The college woman of that era
was 2.3 times more likely than the woman who did not attend college to take this atypical route
in life. One is, therefore, led to ask what type of employment and occupations theyhad. Among

female college graduates 45 to 54 years old in 1940 about 46 percent were in the laborforce in

1940, when the rate for those with no college was about 20 percent. Yet among college
graduates who married, the rate was only about 20 percent and was 16 percentfor those who
married and had at least one child.11 Labor force participation for the college graduate, aswell
as for the woman with no college, In 1940 was determined tO a considerable extent by marital

status rather than by whether she ever had children (see Appendix Table A2).12 Yet it should
be noted that the married college graduate had twice the probability of being in the labor force
at 45 to 54 years than the married woman with no college. Thus even though the participation
rates for college graduate women were depressed due to marriage, they were still considerably

greater than were those for women with no college.
The vast majority of college-educated women of this cohort who were In the labor force

were teachers and another substantial group were librarians, nurses, and social workers (see
Table 2). Even to commentators at the time their choice of occupation was viewed as peculiar.
In the words of one: if it be asked why college women marry less than others, it may very safely

be answered.. . that it Is not because they crave a more exciting and public life; for the majority
of them are school-teachers (Shinn 1895, p. 947, emphasis in original). The professions of the
first cohort were to become typical occupations In the 1 950s for educated married women with
children, although In 1910 they were the occupations of the highly educated single woman. In

large measure it was the presence of marriage bars that determined why single women

' Among those who married but had no children the figure Is 28.4 percent (although the
number of observations is only 91).
12 See Goldin (1990) on norms early in this century regarding married women's work.
11

dominated in these fields in 1910 and it was the overthrow of the bars in the 1 940s that
determined why married women dominated in the 1950s.

Thus the women in the first cohort who did not marry generally had lifetime careers as
teachers, and they earned considerably more than had they not received college training. Indeed
Cookingham (1984) has claimed that women in the first cohort married at far lower rates than did

women in yet earlier graduating classes because career opportunities for college women
expanded after 1900. The proliferation of high schools In the first few decades of this century
increased the demand for college educated women just when the Progressive Era enhanced the

position of the female social worker. Although we do not have a separate time series for high
school teachers, the series for female public school teachers is relevant because a heightened
demand for those at the secondary level is likely to raise salaries throughout the system.
The monthly salary of female public school teachers Increased by 28 percent from 1900

to 1909 and by 25 percent from 1910 to 1916, while that for postal employees increased by 10

percent during the first period and 12 percent for the second. Compared with manufacturing
workers, female school teachers earned 71 percent of their monthly wage in 1900 but 89 percent

in 1916. Thus the salary of female public school teachers increased relative to other white-collar
workers and advanced considerably on all manufacturing workers during the period when the first

cohort was graduating from college.'3 It Is possible, therefore, that women could go to college
and become self-supporting during the early twentieth century when, by and large, they could not

before. This factor adds more credibility to the notion that college had a treatment effect on the
women belonging to the first cohort considered here.
Given that college women around the turn of this century had very different marriage and

fertility histories from women who did not attend college and given that college men were likely

to have been drawn from the same families as college women, It is instructive to examine the
13

earnings of postal workers and all manufacturing workers are from U.S. Bureau of the
Census (1975) series D791 and D765-66 respectively. Monthly earnings of female public school
teachers are from U.S. Bureau of Education (various years, I 900 to 1916).

12

men's demographic fates. In 194010.2 percent of all college graduate white males 45 to 54 years

old were never married or one-third the rate for women, while 11.4 percent of men in this age
group with no college were never married, that Is higher than the rate for college graduates. In
1950 just under 7 percent of all college graduate men, 45 to 54 years old, had never married, or

almost one-quarter the rate for women. In 1960 the percentage for men was also 7 percent or
one-third that for women, and In 1970 it was just under 6 percent or one-half that for women.14

The percentage of college graduate men who married by the time they reached age 45 was

virtually identical to, indeed somewhat higher than, that of men with no college. Thus the
marriage rate of men was virtually unaffected by college, while that for women was reduced, at
times significantly.
What accounts for the fact that 50 percent of female college graduates in the first cohort

either did not marry or did not have children while the figure Is 22 percent for women without
college? Particularly since the percentage graduating from college was very low at the time, one
cannot rule out the possibility that college women were a self-selected group who would have had

the same demographic fate even had they not attended college. Colleges, like Bryn Mawr, were
known to have attracted young women who did not want to marry and to have provided them with

a higher calling. But the percentage from the land-grant institutions who did not marry was also

high. Thus the differences do not rest entirely on the type of college or the social backgrounds
of the women.

The best evidence in support of the notion that college actually provided a "treatment
effecr is that the percentage of female college graduates who never married fell substantially for
birth cohorts that did not experience an increase in the percentage who were college graduates.

If attending college involved self-selection, the underlying process would have to have changed

drastically to produce this result. Figure 4 provides more complete evidence than does Table I
on the percentage never married among college graduate women by birth cohort. A comparison

' U.S. Bureau of the Census (1953, 1966, 1972) and the 1940 PUMS.
13

between Figures 2 and 4 will demonstrate the point that college graduate women beganto marry

in more substantial numbers before the expansion of college enrollments. As Figures 4 and 5
show, the trend in marriage rates among college women looks very similar to that among noncollege women, even though the levels differ markedly.

The percentage of women who attended or who graduated college, as can be seen in
Figures 1 and 2, remained constant between the birth cohorts of about 1900 and 1920.15 But
the percentage who never married began to fall sometime after the cohort born in 1890. Despite
the stability in the percentage graduating from college, the percentage never marrying plummeted

from around 25 percent to 10 percent for cohorts born from 1900 to 1920. Thus there is prima
facie evidence that the demographic experiences of female college graduates changed by birth
cohort before the increase in attendance and graduation rates.
Why, then, did the first cohort of college women marty at low rates and why did the rates
begin to increase with subsequent cohorts? An important clue is found in what educated women,

in particular educated married women, were allowed to do at the time. Educated women were,

by and large, teachers, and, beginning sometime around the end of the nineteenth century,
school districts adopted policies restricting the hiring of married women and firing single women

who married in service. These marriage bars increased slowly to the 1 920s and then, with the

necessity to ration jobs during the Great Depression, they escalated in the 1930$ in teaching,

office work, government jobs, and various other positions (Goldln 1990,1991). Many of the
college women who taught when married were employed by private schools or found public
school positions in some of the nation's large cities that reversed their marriage bars earlier in the

century or never had such policies.

Thus for many of these college-educated women, their era left them little choice. They
could marry or they could have a career in teaching, but they could not easily do both. Marriage

15 I do not yet know what accounts for the sharp increase In college graduation rates, and to
a lesser extent college attendance rates, with cohorts born around 1897 and whether the World
War I military draft could account for the rise.

14

bars In teaching were largely removed after 1941 when both the exigencies of the war and the,

possibly related, spate of state supreme court rulings declared marriage bars to be caprIcious
and unjust (see Goldin 1990, p. 170).
Note that even though the percentage of college women who never married by age 45
to 54 decreased to 22.9 percent by the cohort born around 1910, It was 5.6 percent for those who

were not college educated. Although it plummeted to 7.7 percent by the cohort born around
1940, ft decreased to just 3.3 percent for those with no college education (see Appendix Table

A2). College women were following a trend In marriage rates that was sweeping the nation, a
trend apparent in Figure 5 for non-college women. The second factor, then, to have increased
the marriage rates of college women was the general Increase In marriage and in family after the
Great Depression. Thus college women were enabled to have both family and job and they were

enticed to do so by a new norm that had, for some time, universal appeal.

2. The Second Cohort: Family then Job
College women In the second cohort had, therefore, joined a bandwagon. All Americans,

independent of educational attainment, were marrying at their highest rates In the twentieth
century (see Figure 5). But college women were not just Increasing their marriage rates, they
were also Increasing their numbers In proportion to the female population. During the twenty-year

expanse of this cohort, the graduation rate of women tripled and their attendance rate doubled.
Women had followed the lead of men Into college, but the Increase of men was so rapid that by

the end of the 1940$ men substantially outnumbered women.'° In 1925 there were as many
female undergraduates as male undergraduates, and for the ten years preceding there had been

16 It should be noted that World War Il also affected women's presence in the academy
because they were allowed to enroll In far greater numbers during the shortage of male students.
Many universities, such as Harvard, even changed their rules during World War Il, allowing women
to take classes previously reserved for men only.

15

more women than men undergraduates (see Figure 6).17 But by 1950 there were 2 menfor

every woman in college. Even after the peak in post-war enrollments, say in 1960, male
undergraduates outnumbered female undergraduates by 1.5 to 1. Because the statistics in Figure

6 are contemporaneous data, while those in Figures 1 and 2 are for birth cohorts, they more
accurately reflect the proportions of males and females in college during a particular year.
Family, not just marriage, had taken the country by storm in the post-World War II era,

and college women were not left out of this trend either. Among the college women who did
marry, a far smaller percentage were not having children. About 10 percent, or a third the level
for the first cohort, did not have a baby by ages 35 to 44 in the cohort born from 1926 to 1935.

Thus for the second cohort, just over 18 percent were either not marrying, not having children,
or both, compared with 50 percent for the previous cohort.18 College women had become part

of the American mainstream in various ways. College was considerably more open to the
masses, college women were marrying at a greater rate, and they were bearing far more children

when married. But I emphasize that the timing of these changes is important to the argument,
and that the change in marriage and fertility rates preceded the Increase in college attendance
and graduation rates.

As the age at first marriage declines and as the age at leaving school increases, the
probability of meeting one's spouse in school increases. Among the female college graduates

'7Attendance at both junior colleges and normal schools could inflate the statistics for women
more than for men since both were Intended for less than a four-year period. As a percentage
of total undergraduate enrollment by sex, junior (or two-year) colleges have been attended by
men to the same degree as women. The same was not the case for normal schools, a teachertraining program that did not culminate in a degree. Women, to a far greater extent than men,

attended normal schools and state teachers' colleges, although the latter were four-year
institutions. The education statistics for the pre-1940s period, however, do not conveniently
separate out individuals who attended normal schools from those who attended state teachers'
colleges. Data for 1929/30 Indicate that among all female undergraduates In state teachers'
college and normal schools only 20 percent were In normal schools. The same data also Indicate
that about 30 percent of all female undergraduates who began in teachers' colleges finished the
four-year program and graduated (Office of Education, Biennial Survey of Education 1928/30).

18 Only 8.4 percent of the ochort born from 1926-35 had nevermarried by age 55-64. The
18.2 percent figure is: 8.4% (never married) + [91.6% x 10.7% (no children)].
16

in this cohort who eventually marrIed, 57.2 percent married before or during their year of college

graduation (see Table 1). College women by virtue of their age had always been.in a better
position than others to meet their mate at school, but the percentage who did so was probably
rever higher than ft was for the group graduating from around 1945 to the early 1 960s. Marrying
a college man — and thpre were large financial gains from doing so — was made far more likely

through the route of college attendance.
The members of this cohort, like those In the cohort that preceded it, prepared themselves

to be teachers. The peróentage who were teachers In 1960 decreased slightly from that of the

previous group, but was still between 50 and 60 percent. And the percentage who taught at
some time in their lives must have been consideably greater. The employment rates of married
women In the second cohort were not much higher than those of the previous cohort when they
were young (29.6 percent versus 25.3 percent) and thus did not greatly exceed those of women

who did not attend college (29.6 percent versus 26.7 percent).1° But their employment rates
greatly exceeded those of women who did not attend college when both groups were older. That
is, college women who married and had children were now having family and employment serially

first family and then, when their children were teenagers, employment.

The second cohort of college women was considerably more homogeneous in its
demographic experience than was the first. The vast majority of the second cohort eventually
mérried and had children, and many married quite young. Whether the direct, pecuniary returns

to college were positive, and greater than some appropriate alternative rate, is a relevant issue
for both cohorts. But various factors make it of overwhelming importance for the second cohort
and not for the first.

The families of both the men and women who went to college around 1900 were
considerably wealthier, relative to the national average, than were the families of those who went

19The 25.3 percent figure is not really for the previous cohort but for those graduating around
1928 to 1937, while the 29.6 percent figure Is for those graduating around 1948 to 1957.

17

to college a half century later. College for many men and women at the turn of this century. must

have had a larger consumption component than anytime since. The fact that few of the usual
guides to getting-ahead, aimed at young men, mentioned college suggests that, for men at least,

college had social and consumption value but little direct economic return. Thus It may not be
too surprising that women and men attended and graduated from college in those years at rather

similar rates. Indeed the return for women who remained in the labor force may have exceeded

that for men. But we will probably never know because there are no data on income and
education for that time period and certainly no data that enable a test of what incomes would
have been in the absence of college.

The world of work changed considerably between the first and second cohorts of this

study, and the demand for college-educated personnel surged with the proliferation of
bureaucracy and more complicated technologies. Even in the absence of the Gl Bill of Rights
more men would have attended and graduated from college. But the GI Bill of Rights quickened
the pace and served to send large numbers of men to college from older cohorts as well as from

the most recent ones. Women, too, increased their attendance and graduation rates, although,

for them, the 31 Bill of Rights had little affect on the previous cohorts. Note In Figures 1 and 2

that the point at which the curves turn up sharply for male cohorts precedes that for female
cohorts. The difference is largely due to the fact that male cohorts born between around 1910

and 1925 were enabled to go back to school through the 31 Bill of Rights and thus attended

school when they were older.2° The changes In the post-1925 data more accurately reflect
ongoing changes in the demand for college among Americans.
In the post-World War II era college became considerably more accessible to and desired

by Americans from most walks of life. The enrollment of men In college soared in the 1 950s and

they outnumbered women about two to one, as can be seen in Figure 6. With the decline in the

20 In 1940, for example, only 14.7 percent of white men 30 to 34 years old had attended
college. But by 1970, when this cohort was 60 to 64 years old, the figure was more like 20
percent.
18

age at first marriage for all Americans, college became, de facto, an active marriage market in
which the supply of husbands greatly outstripped the demand. Women eventually Increased their
numbers in college, but during the period of the 1950$ and early I 960s we must question whether

the direct pecuniary returns to a college education justified their attendance. The direct pecuniary

returns for the median female graduate probably fell short of the alternative rate of return. But

the indirect pecuniary returns through the marriage market could have more than made up for
the short-fall and may have been the initial impetus for the subsequent Increase in the college
attendance of women.

One can compute a simple, back-of-the-envelope calculation of the returns to women's

college education under a number of reasonable assumptions. The median female college
graduate in the mid-i 950s married in her year of graduation and, If she married, she worked for

4 years and then exited the labor force for about 8 years.2' She reentered the labor force,
therefore, at about age 35. A high school graduate, it will be assumed, also exited from the labor

force after 4 years but remained out for 10 years or two more than the college graduate. The
ratio of the earnings of a college graduate woman to those of a hIgh school graduate was about
1.3 when the college woman entered the labor market and increased to about 1.4 by mid-life for

both of them. In nominal amounts the college woman at the moment of her graduation in
21 In a sample of about 700 female graduates of the class of 1957, to be discussed in the text,
the majority married before or In their year of graduation. Of those who were married by 1964,
or seven years after graduation, the median woman worked until 1961 or for four years after
graduation. In 1964 the median graduate had one 3 year old and an infant (or was probably
expecting one). Among those without children more than 80 percent were In the labor force The
addition of a child under 3 years old reduced participation to 26 percent and a 3 to 5 year old
reduced it to 35 percent. There were too few women with 6 year olds and over to observe when
women, in this sample, began to reenter the labor market. I assume here that most reentered
when their children began first grade. Thus they exited after 4 years and remained out for 8
years, or long enough for the youngest of the two to be 5 to 6 years old. My sense is that, for
various reasons, this is an underestimate of the median time spent out and will, therefore, result
in too high a rate of return.

The annual starting income for college graduates in the class of 1957 was about $3800
(1957 dollars). This is very close to the figure from the 1960 PUMS for college graduate women,
given an annual Increase of about 2.5 percent. The ratio of a college to a high school graduate's
annual Income was 1.3, in the 1960 PUMS, for 25 to 29 year olds, but 1.4 for 44 to 49 year olds.
19

about 1960 earned around $4000 and the high school graduate of 1956 earned around $3000.

The direct expenses for each of the four years of college was $837 for public universities and
$1552 for private universities. Both the high school and college graduate women are assumed
to work continuously after they reenter the work force until age 60, and their reentry earnings are

taken to be those atthe time of exit.24 Under these assumptions the rate of return to the four

years of college investment was between 4 and 6 percent. The rate of return to college for
men at that time exceeded 10 percent or more than double the rate for women. Even though

the return to college for men and women -. given by the ratio of wages earned, by a college
graduate to those of a high school graduate — was comparable, the internal rate of return for
women was half that for men because of briefer employment.

But this simple calculation does not consider that college affected a woman's future
resources through the man she married, what I will term the lndirecr return to college. In 1960
the probability a woman 30 to 39 years old had married a college graduate was vastly increased

by her graduating from college. Almost two-thirds of all college-graduate women, who were

23 Tuition, room, and board for public and private universities in 1960 was:

Public
Tuition
Room

241

Total

837

174
Board (7 day) 422

Private
853
220
479
1552

Source: U.S. Department of Health Education and Welfare, Office of Education (1960).
24 One can also build in some degree of human capital depreciation.
25 The calculation is simply solving for r in the standard equation:
E C,I(1 +r)t + E VV(1 +r)t = E ybS/(l +r)'
= income of
where C = direct costs of college, Y = Income of a college educated woman,
a high-school educated woman. A woman is assumed to graduate from high school at age 18,
work until she exits from the labor force at age 22 (presumably to raise a family), reenter the labor
force at age 32, and retire at age 60. If she, instead, graduates from college, she works from 22

to 26, exits at 26, reenters at 34, and retires at 60. Wages for both high school and college
graduate women rise with job experience so that the ratio begins at 1.3 but rises to 1.4 by midlife.

See Freeman (1977).

20

between 30 and 39 years and married, had a college graduate husband and more than a third

of those who attended college, but did not graduate from a four-year school, had. Only 10
percent of the high school graduate women married a college graduate. Because so many more
men than women attended and graduated from college in the late 1 940$ and 1 950s, the data for

the husbands are quite different. Husbands who graduated college stood about an equal chance

of marrying a high school graduate, a woman who had attended college but did not graduate,

or a woman who had graduated college. For the group of women 50 to 59 years old in 1960,

college did not increase the probability of marrying a college man as much as it did for the
younger group — 47.5 percent as opposed to 63.7 percent college graduate women married a

college graduate man. The matrices showing "who married whom" In Table 3 suggest, again,

that college was far more of a marriage market In the 19505 than ft had been In the 19205 or
1930s. Women who were 50 to 59 years In 1960 were 30 1039 years in 1940, and the data for

them in 1940 (also in Table 3) indicate somewhat more of a marriage market existed -- 54.3

percent of women who graduated from college married men who did. But ft should be
remembered that less than 70 percent of the 30 to 39 year-old college graduate women had
married by 1940 while 85 percent of women In the 30 to 39 year-old age group in 1960 had.
Later marriages Involved less positive ássortative mating by education and also divorce was
somewhat more important for the higher educated.

Not only did college-educated women stand a much higher probabuity of marrying a
college man, they also married men with higher incomes within each educational level, it will be

seen. Further, among the women who attended college and married college men, those who
married during college or immediately following graduation bought Into husbands with higher
earnings. That is, the early birdi got the bigger worms. On the negative side, however, was that

college women still had a somewhat lower probability of ever getting married, although ft was
considerably higher than for the previous cohort studied. For women 30 to 39 years old In 1960,

6 percent of those who graduated high school but did not attend college had never married. Of

21

those who attended college, but did not complete four years, 7.1 percent had not married. Of
those who graduated college 15.1 percent were still In the never-married group in 1960, although

by the 1 980s only 8 percent of this group had never married.
Both portions of the return to college — the direct or income enhancement effect and the
indirect or marriage market component — are likely to be overstated because the college educated

tend to be more capable and better connected. In terms of the direct return, however, that for
women is probably a better estimate of the true effect of college than that for men because much
of it owes to a college woman's greater probability of being a teacher and. being employed in the

public sector.27 Women without a college diploma would have been excluded, from many of
these positions independent of their inherent abilities.

Estimating the indirect return raises the Issue of whom a college woman would have

married had she not attended college. To do so would require information on a woman's
background to understand how women who went to college differed, prior to their college
experiences, from those who did not. Although the assumptions employed here might overstate
the returns to college through marriage, they probably do not for a large segment of the college-

educated population who had quite ordinary backgrounds. The appropriateness of the indirect

return estimate can also be bolstered in another manner. Not only did college women have a

higher probability of marrying college men and not only did they marry the better incomegenerators among them, but those who married earlier in or after college married the better
providers.

College, in the late 1 940s and 1 950s, became a very active marriage market, in addition

to its being an arena for training young minds from various segments of American society. The

'between effect might be biased — the better able self-select and would succeed even in the
absence of the treatment — but the "within and dearly bird effects should not be biased in the

2775 percent of the return to women's college education in the 1940 and 1960 PUMS
was due to their employment In the public sector.

22

usual manner.

The indirect computation is quite simple and uses the 1960 RUMS; a complementasy

analysis is performed with a similar extract from the 1940 PUMS. Two age groups are
analyzed that correspond as closely as possible to the first and second cohorts: women 30 to 39

years and women 50 to 59 years. The estimate yields what might be termed the Mrs. effect
to add to the original, direct estimate of the returns to college to produce a total return to college,

including the direct and indirect pecuniary returns.

To compute the indirect return to college a standard log earnings equation has been
estimated for the husbands, to which are added variables concerning wife's education and the
timing of their marriage in relation to her education (see Table 4). The findings will point to three

aspects of the indirect return to the wife's education mentioned previously: (1) the enhanced
probability of marrying a more educated man; (2) marrying the better income-producer within an
educational group; and (3) marryIng the higher earner among all college educated men when one

marries in college or in the year of graduation, that is the nearly bird effect. These effects, It will
be seen, were stronger for the cohort born from 1921 to 1930 and graduating from 1943 to 1952

than for a cohort somewhat Intermediate between the first and the second, born from 1901 to
1910 and graduating from 1923 to 1932.°
The experiment performed in Table 5 Involves taking a high school graduate woman in

the 1950s, gMng her four years of college, and then observing her husband's income in 1960

All white women were selected from the 1110001960 RUMS and husband's Information was
recorded for those who were currently married. The 1960 PUMS contains information on wage
and salazy Income as well as that from self-employment The 1940 RUMS does not contain
information on self-employment income and is, therefore, somewhat less useful in a study of the
college educated. In 1940 only sample-line women and their husbands can be used because
only sample-line indMduals (one in each household) answered questions on the age at first
marriage and parity. Because of the reduction in sample size, the 1/100 RUMS Is used for 1940.
The 1950 PUMS cannot be used for this study because only the sample-line indMdual from each
household was selected.

The 50 to 59 year old group is somewhat younger than the first cohort.
° The cohort and graduation years assume that a woman graduates at 22 years.

23

when she was between 30 and 39 years. The total impact is to increase her husband's income

by almoSt 40 percent.3' The largest component (66.5 percent) comes from altering the
probability she will many a man at each level of his education, as given in Table 3 (see 1960
data). The likelihood that she will marry a man who attended or graduated from college increases

while the likelihood that she will marry at all other levels decreases. This change, then, increases

a husband's income by 27 percent.
But increasing her education results in another effect apparent in the coefficients on wife's

education in the husband's earnings equation. Within husband's educational levels the college
graduate woman married the higher income-earning man. This factor accounts for 22.5 percent

of the total or a 9 percent gain in husband's income for the college graduate woman over that
of the high school graduate. Because almost 80 percent of all college graduate women married

a man who attended some college, the effect can be thought of as part of the gains from the
college marriage market. Another possible interpretation is that women with more education are

better able to assist their husbands and thereby directly enhance their income. Because the
factor is not of Importance for the 50 to 59 year old group (see Table 4), the marriage market
hypothesis seems more compelling. Finally, a third effect Involves the fact that marrying early,
either in college or upon graduation, also increases one's earnings — notice the coefficient of

0.0757 on 1married in college. The dearly bird effect adds the remaining 11 percent of the

31 The total change in (the log of) income from Table 5 is 0.334 and exp(0.334) = 1.3965 or
about 40 percent. The total change of 0.334 Is almost identical tothe difference in the coefficients

on wife's education (college minus high school graduate = 0.324) in a regression on their
husband's income, not including any other covariates.
The effect, however, Is important for the 30 to 39 year old group in 1940, who become the
50 to 59 year old group in 1960. One possible problem is that the composition of the group
changes as women who were married in 1940 divorce and those who were not married in 1940
become married for the first time after. By restricting the estimation in 1960 to those who married
before age 40, one can hold constant at least some of these factors the change the composition
of the sample. The results are still not significant In 1960 suggesting that the within effect may
decline over time. Another possibility is that the 50 to 59 year old group in 1960 is anomalous
for some other reason. The same age group in 1940 does reveal a within effect comparable in
magnitude to that in 1960.

24

total or about a 4 percent gain in income for the college graduate woman.
Overall, therefore, the experiment of giving a high school graduate woman a college
education in the 1950$ Increases her income through the marriage market by 40 percent. How

one treats this income depends on various assumptions concerning, how long she remains
married and whether, should she divorce, she receives alimony In proportion to her husband's

income. It also depends on whether we treat the gain to be full or whether we split It between
the parties. A further justification for Including the entire amount Is to consider the objective of

those who invest in her education — her parents.

If they value the well-being of their

grandchildren, they would consider the entire increment In income that their grandchildren would

receive If their daughter went to college. Thus, they would value both the direct returns in terms

of their daughter's income and the indirect returns in terms of her husband's income.

The indirect return from husband's income would be somewhat less if ex post divorce

rates for this cohort were considered. But the cohorts marrying In the I 950s could not have
known these rates and would have considered the ex ante divorce rates for previous cohorts.

These were substantially lower than theirs was to be and occurred only after many years of

marriage (Preston and McDonald 1979). Because the period to divorce decreased with
successive cohorts, the indirect return calculation is probably Inapplicable for them. That is,
subsequent generations divorced earlier into their marriages and had better information from
previous cohorts about their probabilities of divorce.
Following the logic of treating the indirect gain as we do the direct gains from education

and assuming the woman marries and does not divorce, the total returns to her education are
now greatly augmented and, under reasonable assumptions, double. The total return to college
for the second cohort, rather than being in the range of 4 to 6 percent, is now closer to 10 or 11
percent. Thus the full return to women's college education in the 19508 is increased from a value

The 4 percent figure is derived by multiplying the total effect of 0.0757 by the percentage
of all married college graduate women (whose husbands are college men) who married before
or during their year of graduation.
-

25

that is somewhat less than the real return to assets at that time to one that is more in line with
the returns to college education for men. Families, therefore, should have been willing to send

a daughter to college if they viewed her marriage prospects as being enhanced by the
experience. Thus it would not be surprising if many families refused to pay for their daughter's
education if they thought she would simply marry the 1boy next door.
In sum, women graduating in the 1 950s attended college at a time when the ratio of men

to women undergraduates was at an all-time peak in the United States, and they married at the

highest rate of any college group in the century. Not surprisingly, the vast majority met their
mates in college and married before or soon after graduation. College was far more of a marriage

market at that time than during any period before or after. Contemporary commentary lamented

the fact that college women were not staying in school long enough to graduate and were
marrying as soon as they could.
Although the direct return to their college degree was not high, the direct and indirect

returns were substantial enough to justify women's college education on purely pecuniary

grounds. They bought Into comfortable lives, but not necessarily ones that were always
satisfying. We can peer further into their lives using a survey of the Women's Bureau of the
Department of Labor that interviewed 7 percent of the women graduating in the class of 1957 and

resurveyed them seven years later in. 1964 (U.S. Department of Labor 1966). These surveys
reveal much about their aspirations, their husbands' attitudes toward their working, their own work

and fertility histories, and their treatment in the labor market of the late 1 950s and early 1 960s.
Of the almost 6,000 college graduate women surveyed in 1957 by the Women's Bureau,
about 700 were retrieved from the National Archives and linked to the resurvey in 1964, to which

The data In Table P2 indicate that the college drop-out rate peaked during the second
cOhort. The drop-out rate is related to the ratio of the percentage in a cohort who graduated
college to the percentage who attended college. The difference is also due to the percentage
in two-year degree-granting colleges and normal schools. A smaller fraction of women were in
normal schools in the 1 950s than before and a smaller fraction were in two-year degree-granting

colleges In the 1 950s than later. For both these reasons, it seems reasonable that the actual
drop-out rate was considerably higher in the 1950$ than before or after.
26

85 percent of the original women responded. The returns Include, among other information,
college major, work histories, earnings, ages of children, and husband's occupation. The first
survey was taken in February .1958, or about eight months after most graduated, and even by
then more than 40 percent had married. The survey did not ask husband's income, although it
did ask the wage or salary of the respondent and both of their occupations. By using information

on husband's occupation and income by occupation from the 1970 census, I compute an
estimate of husband's income. Early birds did get bigger worms, in this survey as well, and the
husbands of these women earned about 8 percent more than did those who married after the first

survey but before the second, taken In 1964 — a figure that is almost identical to the coefficient

of 0.0757 In Table 4.
An interesting feature of this sample is that it contains information on the wife's perception

of her husband's chauvinism. Because, in this sample, the fathers of infants almost uniformly
disapproved of their wife's working, I restrict the analysis to those couples without infants In 1964.

One-half of the husbands in the group marrying early favored their wives working (among those

having no infants in 1964), while three-quarters of those in the group marrying later did, that is

50 percent more. The woman who married earlier, and therefore the woman who probably
married the guy she met in college, bought Into a richer husband, a larger family, far more time
as a housewife, more part-time work and less full-time work, less investment in her occupation,
and a husband who was far less favorably disposed to her working for pay. The vast majority of
the women in the class of 1957 responded to a question in the survey that they planned to work

before marriage, exit from the labor force when they had children, and reenter In the future but

not with the Intention of having a career. When I termed their choice "family then job," it

The independent variables in a log (husband's) earnings regression are just whether the
couple married by the first survey in 1957, that is a mere eight months after graduation, and
whether they reside in an urban area in 1964. Earnings are those that corresponJ to the
husband's 1964 occupation from the 1970 census on a national basis. The estimation is
restricted to women under 30 years old in 1964, thus those who probably went to college directly
following high school. The coefficient on whether they were married In 1957 Is 0.079 (t-statistic
2.41; number of observations = 514).
27

reflected their own plans and was not a subjective characterization of their Intentions thirty-five
years later.
The cohort I have been discussing — that graduating between 1940 and 1960— includes

a pivotal generation in the feminist movement. These were the womenof Betty Friedans ]]
Feminine Mystique (1963) In which Friedan described the experiences of her own generation of
women who graduated college in the I 940s. Feminism sprung from this generation, it has been

said, because they knew that they were as able as their male friends In college, but when they
left college they encountered a world that was not ready for them (see also J. Freeman 1975).

Many of the comments in the 1957 and 1964 Women's Bureau surveys echo the voices in

Friedan's work. 'it Is a source of great frustration to be unable to use one's education or
training,' said one graduate. Many reported that In fields other than teaching, social work, and
nursing, college women were required to have typing skills and little else. Surveys of personnel
managers in the late 1950$ concluded similarly: there were few jobs for college women except
In teaching, nursIng, and allied professions (see Goldin 1990, p. 176). In part the paucity of jobs

for college women resulted because they had never been numerically important. But In large
measure It was also because college women were taking long spells out from the labor market.
They were having family and Job serially, and devoting themselves to husband and children with

the same time commitment as were women with less education.
To recap, the second cohort had substantially higher marriage and fertility rates than the

first cohort, were in the labor force considerably more when older but not much more when
younger, and were teachers to almost the same degree. Three major factors account for the

change In the demographic and economic experiences of college women. Although I have
emphasized many of the constraints that college women of the second generation faced, their
lives were altered by the substantial decrease in barriers to their employment during and after
World War II. Before the 1940s the vast majority of school districts and many employers of office

workers had 'marriage bars' — stated policies that married women would not be hired and that

28

single women would be fired upon marriage (see Goldin 1990, 1991). Added to the marriage bars

were reinforcing and pervasive norms restricting the ability of married women to work for pay.
Prior to the removal of the marriage bars, most college women faced a difficult choice: they could

marry or they could get employment.

The second generation faced far fewer bars of this nature. Of additional importance Is
that the number of men entering college Increased substantially in the 1 940s and 1 950s and the

initial increase preceded that In the college attendance and graduation of women. Finally, all

Americans were marrying earlier and having more children, and these changes affected the
college educated as well. The three changes were reinforcing. College women no longer had
to treat marriage and employment as alternatives in life, and college was no longer just a place

to learn for it was, de facto, transformed into a place to meet one's spouse. College opened
doors to a restricted number of professions and enabled women to meet college men. Thus the
returns to college for women were twofold. But as this generation aged It became less pleased
with Its small victories, and successive generations of college women launched a.campalgn for
more equality and finally for true equality.

3. The Third Cohort: Family and Career
Jumping ahead another twenty years brings me to the third cohort — college women who

graduated since 1980. We do not have measures of economic and demographic outcomes for
them comparable to those for the previous cohorts, because this cohort is still too young to have

completed much of its history.

We do know the following. Labor force participation rates, even among those who are
married, are more than twice those of the cohort just discussed. That is certainly not surprising
since the labor force participation rates of all women have climbed. The difference In participation

rates between those without college and those who graduated college has widened for the lower

age groups and narrowed for the upper age groups. The proportion who are opting for the

29

traditional profession of the college woman of the past — teaching — is about one-half the level

of the preceding cohort (see Appendix Table A2). In terms of both employmentand occupation,
there is a narrowing gap between male and female college attendees and graduates. But the gap

in terms of demographic outcomes, particularly for women with more than four years of college,

may be widening.
The proportion never married among female college graduates 25 to 34 years old in 1988

was 30.7 percent. substantially higher than for the preceding cohort (21.4 percent),although all

Americans are marrying later now. College graduates are also moving back to the first cohort
in terms of the percentage who have never had children. For those 25 to 34 years old in1990
and who ever married, 40.6 percent had no children, and the difference between this figure and
that for ever-married women without college Is 23.9 percentage points— higher than for the cohort

born around 1910 (see Table 1). But the fertility histories of the third cohort are still quite
incomplete, and the percentage who plan to have children at some time In theirlives is about 12
percent across all marital statuses and 5.8 percent among those currentlymarried.37 These are,

by extrapolation using the experiences of other cohorts, rather unattainable expectations.

Also like the first cohort, educated from 1900 to 1920, the most recent one Is taking an

academically serious set of studies. TheIr college majors resemble those of the men in their

graduating classes to a remarkable degree. I have said little about the content of education
across the three cohorts. The first cohort entered college before students majoredIn particular
subjects, and colleges for women aimed to give to them what other schools offered men. Some

time In the 1920s, particularly with the realization that college women were not marrying atthe
same rate as their non-college counterparts, a movement began to offer college women courses

Indeed, the figure for male college graduates in the same age group is 41.7 percent (U.S.
Bureau of the Census 1991 a).

U.S. Bureau of the Census (1991). The percentage expecting no lifetime births refers to
white women, 18 to 34 years old with 4 years of college, It Is, therefore, comparable to the 25
to 34 year old group in the same year.
30

that would serve them at home and in their employments of choice. By the 1950s education,
nursing, and home economics were among the dominant majors for women. The majors of the

second cohort were vastty different from those of their male counterparts, and were probably
more dissimilar than for any other cohort. In 1957, for example, 33 percent of women majored
in education, 8 percent in English, 8 percent In home economics, and 6 percent in nursing. Thus

fully 55 percent were in fields in which very few men obtained degrees. By the graduating class
of 1990, however, men's and women's majors were more similar than anytime since the inception

of the major concept. One quarter of all graduates majored in business and management, and
women were 47 percent of the majors In this field. Only 28 percent of women majored in the four

more traditionally female majors listed above (U.S. Department of Education 1991).

4. Summary and Conclusions

Two related Issues have been addressed in this paper — why women went to college

across the past century and how college affected their lives. College-educated women today
have employment and occupational outcomes more like those of comparably-educated men than

do women with lower levels of education. It seems clear why women today, like men, invest in
higher education. But this study has revealed that this was not always the case.
Around the turn of this century a rather small fraction of men and women attended and
graduated from college. The fraction for men climbed considerably after World War II, although

it began to increase for women at about the same time. Although college men outnumbered

women by about 2 to 1 in the early 1950s, there is now virtual parity In their numbers. Why
women's college attendance rose after World War Ills relevant to both questions posed here.
Sometime during the 1 940$ women realized that they could have family and job — albeit

serially timed, and that college could enable and enhance both. Although the direct returns to
college for women probably did not justify their increased enrollments, the heightened indirect
returns through the marriage market probably did. Thus some portion of the Increase in college

31

attendance and graduation rates of women in the post-World War II era was due tothe simple
fact that women followed men Into college. But sometime after women exited college theyset In

motion a process that led to an increase In the direct returns to college, primarily through their
more extensive life-cycle labor force participation and their more remunerative occupations. This

brings me to the second issue -- how did college affect the lives of American women?
All cohorts of college-educated women have had a decreased probability of marriage and
fewer children ever-born than lesser-educated women. The differences in these life-course events

were greatest for the first cohort considered, after which they narrowed considerably with the

second cohort before widening again for the most recent cohorts. Life-cycle -employment
conditional on marital status, however, increased secularly across all cohorts of college women.
College did open certain doors — to teaching, for example. But the constraintsin the labor market

facing most generations of college women — such as marriage bars in teaching — were
overwhelming. College women, possibly because they were few in number, had little chance to
effect change on a larger scale until the 1950s. Ironically, perhaps, a process of more profound

social change was set In motion with the second cohort of college women who, by and large,

entered colIege with the least motivation for academically serious studies and whose Mrs.'
degrees were worth nearly half of the total returns from their B.A.s.

In developing countries today, the education of women has an extremely high return
through better infant and child health, sharply lessened infant mortality, and decreased fertility.

The returns to post-primary school education of women are different but no less grand. In the

United States it was the rise of high school education that initially changed work, labor force
participation, and earnings for the vast majority of women. It was college education that led to
the more or less complete Integration of women Into the economy and society, a transformation

that occurred over the course of a century.

32

Figure 1

Percentage of White Males and Females

Attending College, by Birth Cohort
Percent
60

50

40
30

20
10

0

1930

1940
Cohort Birth Year

Sources: U.S. Bureau of the Census, Current Population Reports. P.20 series, Educational
Attainment In the United States, various dates. See also Appendix Table Al.
Notes: In virtually all cases only the responses of individuals 45 to 54 or 55 to 64 years old were

used. For cohorts born since I 945 projections were made to 1995 or 1997 on the basis of
changes for the preceding cohort that was 35-39 (30-34) years In 1977 and 45-49 (40-44) years
in 1987.

Figure 2
Percentage of White Males and Females
Graduating from College, by Birth Cohort

Percent
35
30
25

20
15

10

5
0

1880

1890

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

Cohort Birth Year

Sources: U.S. Bureau of the Census, Current Population ReoQits, P.20 serIes, 'Educational
Attainment In the United States various dates. See also Appendix Table Al.
Notes: In virtually all cases only the responses of IndMduals

45 to 54 or 55 to 64 years old were

used. For cohorts born sInce 1945 projectIons were made to 1995 or 1997 on the basis of
changes for the preceding cohort that was 35-39 (30-34) years In 1977 and 45-49 (40-44) years
In 1987.

Figure 3
Percentage of White Women
with No Births by Age 35-44

% with No Births by Age 3544
35

30
25
20
15
10

5
0

1940

1950

Cohort Birth Year

Sources: 1940: Table A2; 1950-1970: U.S. Bureau of the Census (1955, 1964, 1973); post-I 970:

U.S. Bureau of the Census, Current PoQulatlon Reøorts. P.20 serIes. Fertility of American
Women' various dates.
Notes: All data are for white women only. The 1960 data in Table A2 are derived from the 1960
PUMS while the data in the figure are from the published census returns. The differences are
slight.

Figure 4
Percentage Never Married,
College Graduate White Women

% Never Married

40
35
30
25
20
15
10

5

1880

1890

1900

1960
1950
Cohort Birth Year

Sources: U.S. Bureau of the Census (1953, 1966, 1 97Z 1985) and Table 1 for 1940 and 1988/90.

Notes: The published data for 1960 have been used Instead of the data from the 1960 PUMS
given In Table 1. The differences between the two sets of numbers are slight. I do not know why
the 55-64 year old figure for the cohort born in 1900 Is greater than that for those 45-54 years old.
The same reversal appears in the data for those having no coifege.

Figure 5
Percentage Never Married.
White Women with No College
% Never Married
18

16
14
12
10
8

6
4
2
1880

1890

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1960
1950
Cohort Birth Year

Sources: U.S. Bureau of the Census (1953, 1966, 1972. 1985) and Table 1 for 1940 and 1988/90.

Notes: The published data for 1960 have been used Instead of the data from the 1960 PUMS
given in Table 1. The differences between the two sets of numbers are slight. I do not know why
the 55-64 year old figure for the cohort born in I 900 is greater than that for those 45-54 years old.
The same reversal appears In the data for those attending college.

Figure 6
Ratio of Male to Female Undergraduates
Ratio

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.7
1890

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990
Year

Sources: 1889 to 1953: Bureau of Education or Office of Education or U.S. Department of Health,
Education and Weare, Biennial Survey of Education. 1960 to1965: U.S. Department, of Health.

Education, and Welfare, Opening (Fall Enrollment in Higher Education. 1970 to 1988: U.S.
Department of Health, Education, arid Welfare, Digest of Education Statistics.

Notes: Undergraduate enrollments Include colleges, universities, junior colleges or two-year
colleges, normal schools. and teachers' colleges. They do not Include summer sessions. Parttime and full-time students are treated equally, and some of the rise of female attendance in the
most recent period is due to the large enrollment of women who attend college on a part-time
basis. Enrollment in graduate school and for professional degrees has been subtracted. Various
assumptions have been employed and interpolations used In several years. All underlying data
are available upon request from the author.

35-44

25-34

25-34
1876-85
1886-95
1896-1905
1906-15 37.9%
1916-25
1926-35 57.2

406b

1876-85
1886-95
1896-1905
1906-15 38.9%
1916-25
1926-35 17.8
1936-45
1946-55
1956-65 39.7"

116b

38.7

40.6%

35-44

191b

16.5

27.9%

10.7"

13.8

28.7%

35-44

8.4"

27.8

55-64
30.3%

Never Manied

16.4

11.4

21.8

25-34

35-44

5.8

8.4

19.9

35-44

31.8

55-64
25.4%

23.9"

8.3

15.2

25-34

4.5

11.6
10.4

12.5

45-54

31.1

42.8%
23.7

35.3%

Married Before or In Year of School Completion, Among Those Who Ever Many
55-64
45-54

28.2

27.6%

45-54

4.4

17.3

23.3

45-54

13.5

55-64
8.4

5.1

21.1

55-64
22.2

Percentage Point Difference (College Graduate No College)

No Children Ever Born, Among Those Who Ever Many

7.7"

22.9

31.1%

45-54

Percentage

1876-85
1886-95
1896-1905
1906-15 38.7%
1916-25
1926-35 18.2
1936-45
1946-55
1956-65 30.7"

1898-1907
1908-17
1918-27
1928-37
1938-47
1948-57

1898-1907
1908-17
1918-27
1928-37
1938-47
1948-57
1958-67
1968-77
1978-87

1898-1907
1908-17
1918-27
1928-37
1938-47
1948-57
1958-67
1968-77
1978-87

25-34

Approx.
Year of Cohort born
Graduation

Table 1: Marital Status and Children Ever Born by Cohort for College Graduate Women

Sources: 1940 PUllS. 11100.

ci

aid the Current Population Report P-20 series.

rvsrter ci own children < 18 years in the primary family, the data on children ever born

U.S. Bureau of the Census (1991).
only; 1960 PUMS 1/1000; 1988 March Current Population Survey;

oci completed;marrying in the year of or before school completion Is definedas: years of school attended

w1e-&ie women

Notes: College graduate mean 16
+ 6 Age at first marriage.

b From U.S. Bureau of the Census (1991).

y

the

From March 1988 Current PopulationSurvey.
kcsn
in the CPS are not exactly comparable to

1926-35 52.7
1936-45
1946-55
1956-65 26.9

191 6-25

1876-85
1886-95
1896-1905
1906-15 57.7%

25-34

1876-85
1886-95
1896-1905
1906-15 25.3%
1916-25
1926-35 29.6
1936-45
1946-55
1956-65 77.2

39.8

59.4

62.6%

35-44

77.7

40.6

20.0%

35-44

50.1

45.2

1.21

1.11

1.62

25-34

1.14

1.05

1.55

35-44

43.2

67.1

60.0%

39.4

69.7

61.4%

Teacher, Ubrarian, Nurse, or Social Worker, Among Those in Labor Force
45-54
55-64

79.2

58.7

15.9%

55-64

1.28

1.61

2.04

45-54

Ratio (College Graduate/NoCollege)
in the Labor Force, Among Those Currently Married

19.8%

45-54

Percentage

1.36

1.94

274

55-64

Sources: 1940 PUMS, 1/100, sample-line women only; 1960 PUMS 1/1000; 1988 March Current Population Survey.

Notes: College graduate means 16 years of school completed; marrying in the year of or before schooling completion is defined as: years of school
attended + 6 Age at first marriage.

1898-1907
1908-17
1918-27
1928-37
1938-47
1948-57
1958-67
1968-77
1978-67

1898-1907
1908-17
1918-27
1928-37
1938-47
1948-57
1958-67
1968-77
1978-87

25-34

Approx.
Year of Cohort born
Graduation

Table 2: Labor Force Participation and Occupationby Cohort for College Graduate Women

Table 3: Who Marries Whom by Education of Wife and Husband, 1960 and 1940
1960

Wives, 30 to 39 Years

Percentage of Wives, by Years of Schooling, Marrying Men In Each Schooling Group
Wife's Years
of Schooling
0-7

8
9-11

12
13-15
16

Husband's Years of Schooling
0-7
57.9
22.5
13.2
7.9
1.6
2.0

8

9-11
16.8

12
7.7

31.3 25.2
19.0 33.6

17.1

14.6

8.3
3.3
1.7

13-15

2.0

25.8

2.8
6.3

21.0

42.1

13.0

8.6
4.6

12.9

24.9 25.7
15.1

16 Total
1.0 100%
1.1 100%
2.2 100%
10.6 100%
35.9 100%
63.7 100%

Percentage of Husbands, by Years of Schooling, Marrying Women In Each Schooling Group
Wife's Years
of Schooling
0-7
8
9-11

12
13-15
16

Total

Husband's Years of Schooling

0-7
36.3
17.6
24.2

8
8.7

9-11
5.7

23.3 10.7
33.0 33.2
30.9 44.3

12
1.8
5.1
18.0
62.6

13-15
1.2
2.2
11.5
50.5

16
1.0
1.0

3.3

33.8
9.4 25.2 29.0
4.6
3.0
1.6
32.8
9.4
3.1
1.6
1.0
1.3
100.0% 100.0%100.0% 100.0%100.0% 100.0%
19.2

Wives, 50 to 59 Years
Percentage of Wives, by Years of Schooling, Marrying Men in Each Schooling Group
Wife's Years
of Schooling
0-7
8
9-11

12
13-15
16

Husband's Years of Schooling

0-7
70.5
25.7
19.0
8.3

7.5
2.5

8
17.5

9-11

8.3

12 13-15
a7 0.7

44.3 17.4
25.2 34.8
19.9 18.3

32.7

15.8
10.4

16.1

12.2
9.3

8.7
12.1

2.7
5.2
11.0

19.4 22.7
14.3

16
0.4
1.3

3.7
9.8
22.4
47.5

Percentage of Husbands, by Years of Schooling, Marrying Women In Each Schooling Group
Wife's Years
of Schooling
0-7

8
9-11

12
13-15

16

Husband's Years of Schooling

0-7

8

53.1

14.1

23.7
13.3
6.3
3.0
0.5

43.6 23.2
18.9

9-11
9.1

35.3

16.2 20.3
5.2
2.1

9.1
3.1

12
3.7
14.6
15.6

13-15
1.9
9.1
13.5

45.8 31.1
14.1

33.3

6.2 11.0

16
1.0
3.9
8.6
24.8
29.2
32.6

1940

Wives, 30 to 39 Years
Percentage of Wives, by Years of Schooling, Marrying Men In Each Schooling Group
Wife's Years
of Schooling
0-7

8
9-11

12
13-15
16

0-7
67.8
22.4
15.7
6.5
4.4
3.5

Husband's Years of Schooling
13-15 ?16
12
8
9-11
0.5
0.7
2.9
20.0
8.1
2.1
1.2
6.0
14.4
53.9
2.5
5.4
12.5
28.5 35.5
33.3 10.4 10.5
19.8
19.5
20.9 22.5 24.0
14.5
13.9
12.5 15.6 54.3
8.4
5.8

Percentage of Husbands, by Years of Schooling, Marrying Women in Each Schooling Group
Wife's Years
of Schooling
0-7
8
9-11

12
13-15
16

Husband's Years of Schooling

0-7

8

9-11

55.0
23.8

13.5

8.7

13.5

5.6
1.5
0.6

47.5 20.2
20.4 40.3
13.9 22.5
3.9
0.9

12 13-15 16

4.1
11.1

2.2
8.4

18.8

1.4

17.2

4.3
6.9

79.9 33.4

29.2
25.8
32.5

6.3

12.1

28.0

2.1

4.0

10.8

Wives, 50 to 59 Years
Percentage of Wives, by Years of Schooling, Marrying Men in Each Schooling Group
Wife's Years
of Schooling
0-7

8
9-11
12
13-15

16

0-7
77.5
20.5
18.0
8.0
7.8
7.7

Husband's Years of Schooling
13-15
16
8
9-11
12
0.7
0.4
3.2
1.4
17.2
8.3
4.9
1.5
62.6
5.7
3.3
30.1
31.5
11.4
13.1
34.6 10.2
21.2 12.9
22.6
20.3 15.0
14.3 20.1
11.4
49.6
9.6
13.5
8.3

ai

Percentage of Husbands, by Years of Schooling, Marrying Women In Each Schooling Group
Wife's Years
of Schooling
0-7

8
9-11

12
13-15
16

0-7
70.1
19.6
6.9
2.5
0.9
0.5

Husband's Years of Schooling
13-15
16
8
9-11
12
6.1
2.8
16.3
10.3
5.6
11.1
20.0 18.6
62.7 28.1
18.0
8.7
11.0 38.8
16.9
46.6 29.2 31.4
7.0 14.4
19.9
6.1
7.0 21.0
2.5
7.2
26.2
0.6
2.4
4.0

Sources: 1960 PUMS, 1/1000, and 1940 PUMS, 1/100, sample-line women only

Notes: The sample includes white women, currently married for the first time, whose husbands were
present in the household. Years of schooling Is completed years.

Table 4: Husband's Income as a Function of His Education and His Wife's
Dependent variable: Log of husband's annual wage, salary, and self-employment income
Wives, 50 to 59 Years
Wives, 30 to 39 Years
Husband's characteristics
0.0202
0.0336
Potential experience
Potential exp. squared

10

Years of schooling
8

9toll
12

13 to 15
16

Wife's characteristics
Years of schooling

8

9toll
12

13 to 15
16

Children ever born
Married in college

Constant

R2

Number of observations

(7.14)
-0.692
(-6.90)
0.0811

(2.92)
0.209
(7.89)
0.276
(10.3)
0.426
(13.1)
0.627
(18.1)
0.137
(4.13)
0.222
(7.45)
0.234
(7.98)
0.254
(7.21)
0.309
(7.70)
0.0123
(3.24)
0.0757
(2.36)
6.294
(83.8)

0.34
7733

(1.67)

.0.412
(-2.83)

0.0541
(1.58)
0.116
(3.00)
0.149
(3.37)
0.216
(3.87)
0.490
(8.53)

0.0851
(2.32)
0.150
(3.81)
0.159
(3.82)
0.260
(5.28)
0.138
(2.17)
-0.00780
(-1.44)
0.0281
(0.34)

6.718
(25.7)

0.35
4202

Source: 1960 PUMS

Notes: The sample includes white women, currently married for the first time, whose husbands were
present in the household and who were also married for the first time. The sample is further restricted
to husbands whose implicit wage exceeds one-half the minimum wage in 1960 (e.g., annual earnings>
for which the
$1000 for those employed 50 weeks), unless they reported income from self-employment
restriction is that husband's Income > 0. Other variables included: urban, metro, city, region, and weeks
worked using census groupings. The omitted dummy variable for education is 0 to 7 years. Years of
schooling includes completed grades only. Married in collegv equals 1 if the woman married while
attending college or In the year of her graduation or leaving college and her husband attended college.
t-statistics are in parentheses.

Table 5: Computing the Indirect Return to College through the Marriage Market
(for white women, 30 to 39 years In 1960, currently married for the first time)

Change in the cog) annual Income of a woman's husband from her four years of college rather than her
high school graduation:

(1) Due to a change in the probability of
her marrying a husband of education level i:

0.222

66.5%

(2) Due to a change In husband's Income
within his educational level:

0.075

22.5

(3) Due to the early bird effect, that is a change In
husband's income from marrying In or just after college:

0.037

11.0

0.334

100.0

Total Change: In Y =

Notes: The regression in Table 4 contaIns husband's characteristics Xh, wife's characteristics ç, and
educational levels for each, Sh and S. It Is gIven by:

LnYh = aXh ++y1S1+zp1S +1,

where both Sh and S are dummy variables for the 6 educational attainment groups. Thus, the income
of a husband of educational level I who Is married to a woman who is a high school graduate (group 4)
Is given by:

LnY'h={yI+.}+p4,

and that for a woman who Is a college graduate (group 6) Is given by:

tfl °h = { y + } + p6.

where p4 is the coefficient for a woman who Is a high school graduate and p6 Is that for a college
graduate. The probability that a woman of schooling level j marries a husband of schooling level I is:

Pr(Sh = I S = D.
which is given in part of Table 3. Thus the mean Income for the husband of a high school graduate is:

en Y = en

• Pr(S, = I W = 4),

and that for a college graduate Is:

tnY =;tnY •Pr(Sh =lS= 6).

The change in en v hi with an Increase in wife's education from high school graduate to college graduate
is given by:

Aen Y,1 = en 'h - en

The difference can be decomposed into:
(1)

and
(2)

;(enY'hI •{Pr(Sh= IISW=6)-Pr(Sh=IISW=4)}J =

yl .{Pr(S =IIS= 6)-Pr(Sh= ilS=4)}
; (Pr(S, = I I SW = 6) . (en Y - en YJJ =

(p,-p4).

A further source of change can added by considering the early blrda effect, that is the impact on the
earnings of a woman who attended college from marrying during college or In the year she graduated.
Let s be the coefficient on marry In collegv in Table 4. The nearly bird effect is, then, the value of
i times the probability a college graduate woman marries In (or Just after) college. Pr(M = 1 S = 6):
(3)

.Pr(M1IS6)

Sources: Tables 3 and 4. The parameter a Is 0.49.

Table Al: College Attendance and Graduation Rates by Sex, for Cohorts Born 1875 to 1957

Females

Males

Birth
Year
1875
1880.5
1887.5
1890.5
1897.5
1902.5
1904.5
1906.5
1908.5
1912.5
1914.5
1916.5
1918.5
1920.5
1924.5
1927
1930
1933
1935
1938
1940
1943
1945
1948k
195Dm

1954
1955

(1)

(2)

Percent

Percent

(3)
Percent

(4)
Percent

(6)

(3)1(1)

(4)/(2)

(4)/(3)

.86

.59

.91
.91

.64
.72
.68
.74
.67
.69

16.8
15.7
10.0
14.4
14.4
18.0
14.8

.80
.78
.74

10.3
7.4
8.3

.70
.66
.56

9.1
11.0
11.8

.55

11.0

.51

14.1

.55
.56

13.9
13.3
14.4
17.9

(2)1(1)-

Attending Graduating Attending Graduating
College

College

College

College

6.4
7.9

3.4
4.2

9.6
9.5

4.6

5.5
7.2
8.7

2.0
2.7
3.3
3.4
4.3
6.2
7.2
7.8
7.9
7.3

11.4
15.8
17.4
17.1

18.2
19.7
20.7
20.0
23.3

25.4
29.1

31.9

5.0
5.8
9.2

8.9
11.8

10.5
9.7
9.8
9.9
11.0
11.0
12.6
13.9
17.0
19.2

15.8
16.8
17.0
17.4
17.5

15.4

16.6
16.8

7.3

17.4
19.4

7.6
8.6

22.9

10.6

33.1
37.9
38.4

20.1

23.6

24.2
24.2

39.7
43.8
47.9

24.1

50.7
59.2
59.7
52.5

31.6
36.9
34.4
29.7

50.3

30.4

28.3
28.6
30.3
34.4
37.5
41.4
55.0
55.7
53.3
54.0

26.6
29.6

7.7
7.1

11.2
14.0
12.9
15.0
16.4
18.4

22.3

30.7
28.8
28.1

28.6

(7)

(5)

.94
.97
.97
.91

.98
.93
.88
.85
.83

.72
.69
.67
.72
.71

.75

.74
.76
.79
.78
.82

.58
.53

.62
.62
.62

11.2

.93
.93

.83
.84

13.0
12.7
8.5
6.5
5.9

1.02
1.07

.95
.94

3.9
7.5

.71

'Projections to 1995 or 1997 based on the experiences of the previous cohorts.
Educational Attainment in
Sources: U.S. Bureau of the Census, Current Pooulation Reoorts. Series P-20.
Office,
various dates).
the United States various numbers, (Washington, DC: Government Printing

Notes: In virtually all cases only the responses of IndivIduals 45 to 54 or 55 to 64 years old were used.
For cohorts born since 1945 projections were made to 1995 or 1997 on the basis of changes for the
preceding cohort that was 35-39 (30-34) years in 1977 and 45-49 (40.44) years In 1987.

16.9
8.8
7.8
8.1

No

College

V

Percentage No Children Ever Born
Some
No
College
Graduate
Age College
College
14.5
17.8
9.5
35-44
14.5
16.5
12.0
45-54
22.5
28.2
17.8
55-64
25.3
31.8
18.3

Of Those Who Ever Many

No
College
6.8
5.4
5.6
6.7

Percentage No Children Ever Born
Some
No
College
Graduate
College
College
36.6
38.9
23.7
22.8
27.9
16.3
24.2
27.6
15.1
23.5
25.4
17.0

Of Those Who Ever Many

Percentage Never Married
Some
College
Graduate
College
30.6
38.7
19.9
28.7
23.0
31.1
24.3
30.3

Percentage Never Married
Some
College
Graduate
Age College
14.9
18.2
35-44
10.0
13.8
13.4
45-54
22.9
55-64
15.9
27.8

1960

25-34
35-44
45-54
55-64

Age

25-34
35-44
45-54
55-64

Age

1940

2.1

35.3

45.6
39.8

37.2
31.1

23.7

Percentage in Labor Force
Some
College
Graduate
College
37.4
42.1
46.2
489
56.5
70.6
47.6
64.0

31.1

18.1

57.2
38.7

31.9
22.3

49.1

23.4
13.8
7.5
5.2

No
College
31.9
40.6
43.0
32.4

V

(I
Graduate
College
26.7 (17.9)
29.6 (18.8)
38.6 (33.1)
40.6 (33.1)
46.9 (45.2)
58.7 (54.4)
34.6 (34.9)
45.2 (43.4)

Of Those Currently Married
Percentage in Labor Force
Some
College

No
College
26.7 (20.1)
38.6 (31.7)
36.4 (34.8)
23.3 (22.8)

child)

15.6 (9.5)
12.9 (10.4)
9.7 (8.8)
5.8 (5.1)

College

No

( I child)

Percentage in Labor Force
Some
College
Graduate
College
22.0 (13.1)
25.3 (16.8)
16.0 (12.1)
20.0 (15.0)
15.4 (12.9)
19.8 (16.3)
11.6 (9.2)
15.9 (12.9)

Of Those Currently Married

Of Those Who Ever Many, Percentage Manying
Before or In Year of School Completion
Some
- College
No
Graduate
College
College

43.4

34.2

No
College
29.3
23.0
19.9
14.4

7.1

4.3
2.7

No
College

College
Graduate
37.9
40.6
42.8

Percentage In Labor Force
Some
College
Graduate
College
45.3
52.3

Some
College
28.8
30.3
29.3
28.5

Of Those Who Ever Many, Percentage Marrying
Before or In Year of School Completion

Appendix Table P2: Marriage, Children, and Labor Force Participation by Age and College Status in 1940, 1960, and 1988/90: White Females

No
College

40.9

67.4
70.4
65.1

College

19.1

16.1

32.7

College
Graduate
40.6

Some
College

74.9
47.8

Some
College
73.6
76.7

work during the week precedingthe census.
Notes: Labor force participationis defined as being employedor seeking

of the Census(1991).

68.2
62.1
36.9

77.7
79.2
50.1

77.2

College
63.8

No

Graduate

College

Percentage In Labor Force

a mose Currently Married

U.S. Bureau
Sources: 1940 and 1960 PUMS, 1988 March Current Population Survey;

15.8
8.5

Percentage No Children Ever Born'

Of Those Who Ever Italy

80.4
79.1
53.5

Graduate
83.6
81.7
83.0
56.5

College

No

3.3

4.9
3.3

14.3

No
College

'From U.S. Bureau of the Census (1991).

25-34
35-44

Age

35-44
45-54
55-64

30.7
10.7
7.7
8.4

College
Graduate

Percentage in Labor Force

23.9
8.1
5.4
5.6

Some
College
Age
79.7
25-34

55-64

45-54

25-34
35-44

Age

Some
College

Percentage Never Married

198W1990

References

Cookingham, Mary E. (1984) 'Bluestockings, Spinsters and Pedagogues: Women College
Graduates, 1865-1910.' Population Studies 38: 349-64.

Freeman, Jo. (1975) The Politics of Women's Liberation: A Case Study of anEmerging Social
Movement and Its Relation to the Policy Process. New York: Longman.
Freeman, Richard B. (1977) The Overeducated American. New York: Academic Press.
Friedan Betty. (1963) The Feminine Mystique. New York: Norton.

Goldin, ClaudIa. (1990) Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History ofAmerican
Women. New York: Oxford University Press.

(1991) Marriage Bars: Discrimination Against Married Women Workers, 1920 toI 95C.
In H. Rosovsky, D. Landes, P. Higgonet, eds., Favorites of Fortune: Technolociv. Growth. and
Economic Development since the Industrial Revolution. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Newcomer, Mabel. (1959) A Centurv of Higher Education for American Women. New York: Harper
and Brothers Publishers.

Preston, Samuel and John McDonald. (1979) incidence of Divorce within Cohorts of American
Marriages Contracted since the Civil War, Demography 16 (February): 1-25.

Shinn, Millicent Washburn. (1895) 'The Marriage Rate of College Women.' The Centurv
Magazine 50 (October): 946-48.

Solomon, Barbara Miller. (1985) In the Company of Educated Women. New Haven: Yale
University Press.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. (1953) U.S. Census of Population: 1950. VoL IV, Special Reports,
Part 5, Chapter B, Education. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

(1955) U.S. Census of Population: 1950. VoL IV, Special Reports, Part 5, Chapter C,
Fertility. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

—-------. (1964) U.S. Census of Population: 1960. Subject Reports. Women by Number of
Children Ever Born. Final Report PC(2)-3A. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

(1966) U.S. Census of Population: 1960. Subject Reports. Age at First Marriage. Final
Report PC(2)-4. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
(1972) Census of Population: 1970. Marital Status. Final Report PC(2)-4C. Washington,
DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

(1973) Census of Population: 1970. Women by Number of Children Ever Born. Final
Report PC(2)-3A. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

(1975) Historical Statistics of the United States from Colonial Times to the Present.
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

(1985) Census of Population: 1980. Subject Reports. Marital Characteristics. Final

Report PC8O-2-4C. Washington. DC: u.s. Government Printing Office.

No. 454, Fertility of American Worflfl

(1991) Current Population Reports, Series P.20,
June 1990. WashingtOn. DC: u.s. Government Printing Office.

Series P.20, No. 451, Educational Attainment in the
(1991 a) Current Population Reports,
United States: March 1989 and 1988. WashingtOn. DC: u.s. Government Printing Office.
Series P.20, variouS numbers, Educational
(various years) Current Population Reports,
u.s.
Government Printing Office.
Attainment in the United State. Washington, DC:

SerIes P.20, various numbers, Fertility of
(various years) Current Population Reports,
American Women. Washington, DC: u.s. Government Printing Office.

U.S. Bureau of Education. (various years. 1900 to 1916)
Educatipfl. Washington, DC: u.s. Government Printing Office.

port of the Commissioner of

(various years) Biennial Survey of Education. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing

Office.

U.S. Department of EducatiOn. (1991) Digest of Educational Statistics. 1990. February.
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

(various years) Biennial Survey of Education. Washington, DC: u.s. Government Printing
Office.

u.s. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, Office of Education. (1960) Higher Education
Planning and Management Data. 1959.60, by W. R. Bokelman. Circular No. 614. Washington,
DC: Government Printing Office.

(various years, OFE) Opening (FatU Enrollment in Higher Education. Washington, DC:
U.S. Government Printing Office.

(various years, Digest) gest of Education
Printing Office.

Statistics. Washington, DC: U.S. Government

Years after Graduation: Class of 1957.
U.S. Department of Labor. (1966) Colleoe Women Seven
DC:
Government Printing Office.
Bulletin of the Women's Bureau, No. 292. WashingtOn,

Van Kleeck, Mary. (1918) A Census of College

Women. Journal of the Association of

Collegiate Alumn Xl (May): 557.91.
What? A Study of 6665 Land.Grant CoIleq
Woodhouse, Chase Going. (1932) After College.
Women. Their Occupations. Earnings. Families, and Some Undergraduate and Vocational
Problems. Bulletin of the Institute of Women's Professional Relations.
Woody, Thomas. (1929) A History of Women's Education in the United States. Vol. 2. New York:
The Science Press.

