NIBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES

RACE AND SCHOOL QUALITY SINCE
BROWN VS. BOARD OF EDUCATION

Michael A. Boozer

Alan B. Krueger
Shari Wolkon

Working Paper No. 4109

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1992

We are grateful to Kainan Tang for excellent research assistance. We have
also benefitted from helpful comments by Orley Ashenfelter, David Card, John

Haltiwanger, Jennifer Hochschild, Glenn Loury, and the editors. Financial
support from the Princeton Industrial Relations Section, National Science
Foundation, and Alfred P. Sloan Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. Some
of the data utilized in this research were made available by the Interuniversity
Consortium for Political and Social Research. This paper is part of NBER's
research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Woiking Paper #4 109
June 1992

RACE AND SCHOOL QUALITY SINCE
BROWN VS. BOARD OF EDUCATION

ABSTRACT

This paper presents evidence on the quality of schooling by race and

ethnic origin in the United States. Although substantial racial segregation
across schools exists, the average pupil-teacher ratio is approximately the same

for black and white students. Hispanic students, however, on average have 10
peitent more students per teacher. Relative to whites, blacks and Hispanics are

less likely to use computers at school and at work. The implications of these

differences in school quality for labor market outcomes are examined. We
conclude by examining reasons for the increase in the black-white earnings gap

since the mid-1970s.

Michael A. Boozer
Industrial Relations Section
Firestone Libraiy
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544

Shari Wolkon
Johnson School of Business
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14851

Alan B. Krueger
InduxialRelalions Section
Firestone Library
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER

The history of race and school quality in the U.S. in the last century

has not been one of constant, unyielding progress for black students relative
to white students.

Broadly speaking, between 1890 and 1910 there was a

decline in the quality of schools attended by black students relative to those

attended by white students, as judged by expenditures per student, average
class-size, and the length of the school term. Between 1915 and 1925 there
was moderate progress for black students relative to white students, but the
progress stalled between 1925 and the Great Depression. From the mid-1930s

to the 1950s the racial gap in school quality declined dramatically.
Unfortunately, recent trends in racial differences in school quality are not
nearly as well documented or well understood as those in the period from 1880

to 1950.

Ironically, the landmark Brown vs. Board of Education of Topeka.
Kansas decision in 1954 greatly curtailed the states' dissemination of data on

school quality based on race. Although evidence that we present below
suggests that school integration did not begin on a wide scale until after 1964,

the Brown ruling, which declared segregation in schools unconstitutional,
provided the states with a powerful incentive to suppress information that

might hasten legal action against them.

After 1954, only a few states

continued to collect and publish data on the quantity of resources devoted to
schools attended primarily by black students and those attended primarily by

white students. For a short time, this void was filled by a privately funded
organization known as the Southern Education Reporting Service (SERS). But

the SERS stopped collecting data in 1966. Moreover, in the 1980s the
Department of Education reduced its production of data on school quality by

'See Smith (1984), Margo (1990), and Card and Krueger (1992a). This

view was also shared by contemporary observers; see Jones (1917), Bond
(1934), and DuBois and Diii (1911).

2
race. As a consequence, we lack basic information on school quality measures

such as the average pupil-teacher ratio by students' race in recent years.

The gap in our knowledge of race and school quality is distressing
because evidence suggests that disparities in school quality that historically
existed between black and white students are responsible for a portion of the
gap in earnings between black and white workers.2 Furthermore, as several
authors have documented, the relative earnings of black workers have declined

since the mid-1970s. Our estimates indicate that the "regression-adjusted" gap

in the hourly wage rate between black and white workers increased from 6.8

percent to 12.4 percent between 1976 and 1990 (see Figure 7).

This

expansion in the black-white wage gap comes on the heels of a period (19401970) in which the wage gap narrowed substantially.

Smith and Welch and Juhn, Murphy, and Pierce argue that the
slowdown of black-white wage convergence may be due to an increase in the

price of skills.3

Their argument is that, on average, minority workers

acquired lower skills from having attended inferior schools. The dramatic
upturn in the price of human capital in the 1980s would then contribute to the

decline in the relative economic position of black workers.4 Juhn, Murphy,
and Pierce provide some indirect evidence for this view by documenting that

the earnings of black workers have tracked the earnings of low-wage white
workers rather closely in the 1970s and 1980s. This evidence is only indirect,

2See Smith and Welch (1989), Smith (1984), Card and Krueger (1992a),

and Nechyba (1990). For a critical analysis of this literature, see Donohue
and Heckman (1991).

3see Smith and Welch (1989) and Juhn, Murphy, and Pierce (1991).

41t should be stressed that it is not important for this argument that the
relative quality of education of minorities be declining.

3

however, and the authors conclude with the plea: "What is needed is further

direct evidence on the size of the schooling quality gap" between black and
white workers.5
In this paper we provide systematic evidence on racial differences in

the pupil-teacher ratio, extent of computer use, and other measures of school
quality since the Brown vs. Board of Education decision. We concentrate our

analysis mainly on tracking resources available to schools as a measure of
school quality, instead of students' achievement on standardized tests. We take
this approach because public policy has a direct influence on school resources,

and because standardized tests scores are typically found to have, at best, a

weak relationship with labor market outcomes, such as income. We use
several data sets to investigate racial disparities in school quality since the
1950s. In the next section we present a variety of summary measures of the
quality of schools attended by the average black student and the average white
student.

Because the distribution of school resources among members of

different racial groups is affected by the degree to which schools are racially

segregated, we begin by presenting evidence on the extent of school
segregation over the period 1924-1989. We next examine racial trends in a
traditional measure of school quality, namely the pupil-teacher ratio. Finally,
we focus on the prevalence of computer training in schools, which is a modem

indicator of school quality. Most of our analysis focuses on quantifying these

characteristics of schools for black and white students, but we also present
estimates for Hispanic students.
Perhaps surprisingly, our exploration suggests that, on average, black

and white students currently attend schools with roughly equal pupil-teacher

ratios. On the other hand, the pupil-teacher ratio is about 10 percent higher
for the average Hispanic student than for the average white student. This gap

5SeeJuhn, Murphy, and Pierce (1991, p.143).

4

is primarily a result of the high representation of Hispanic students in
California, which has large class sizes compared to the rest of the nation.

In the 1980s, schools have undergone a revolution in terms of the
importance attached to computers. Computers typically serve a dual function

in schools: first, they are used as a teaching tool for traditional subjects such

as reading and arithmetic; second, they are used to instruct students on
computer literacy and computer programming. We find that black students are

much less likely to use computers in school than white students, even after

accounting for family income and other factors.

Moreover, the gap in

computer usage between black and white students has not tended to narrow in

the 1980s. If computers facilitate learning, our fmdings suggest that minority

students are disadvantaged by their lower use of computers.
What implications do these differences in school quality have for the

wage gap between black and white workers? In Section II we examine
evidence on the implications of differences in school quality for the labor
market performance of various racial groups. We find that black students who

attended racially isolated high schools tend to obtain lower paying jobs, and

jobs that are more racially isolated. We also find that students who use
computers in school are more likely to obtain jobs that require the use of
computers. Also, some evidence is presented suggesting that employees who

possess computer skills are more highly paid. These results suggest that the
shortage of computer training in schools attended by black students may put
black workers at a disadvantage in the labor market.

In Section HI we review evidence on trends in the black-white
earnings gap since the early 1970s. In light of our analysis of trends in school
quality, we doubt that school quality is the main explanation for the decline in

the relative economic position of black Americans since the mid-1970s. The
reason for this conclusion is that the black-white wage gap has expanded most

dramatically for cohorts of workers that were educated in the post-Brown era.

5

For example, between 1980 and 1990, the black-white wage gap expanded
from 20 percent to 37 percent for men born 1950-59, but hardly changed for

men born 1930-39. Because the racial gap in school quality and educational
attainment was much smaller for the 1950-59 birth cohort than for the 1930-39

birth cohort, it is unlikely that an increase in the return to school quality is
responsible for the expansion in the earnings gap. Structural factors, such as
the decline in the real minimum wage and decline in unions, which Bound and

Freeman emphasize, are alternative explanations for the widening gap.6

I. School Quality and Race Since 1954: Fragmentary Evidence
In this section we present historical and recent evidence on the quality

of schools attended by black and white students. We measure school quality

by the resources available in the schools. Although some researchers have
argued that there is only a tenuous relationship between a school's resources,

such as the number of students per teacher, and students' scores on
standardized tests, much evidence has established a link between school
resources and students' subsequent performance in the labor market.7 In
Section II we present some further evidence on the consequences of school
quality for labor market outcomes.

A. Extent of Racial Segregation in Schools. 1924-1989
If schools were perfectly integrated, so every school's enrollment was

in proportion to the share of each racial group in the population, there would

6See Bound and Freeman (1992).

7See Hanushek (1986) for a survey of school resources and test scores.

See Card and Krueger (1992b) for evidence on school resources and labor
market success.

6

be little concern over the allocation of resources in schools along racial lines.

This is not the case. We have used the Department of Education's survey of

schools,, known as the Common Core, to examine the extent of racial
segregation in public schools.8 A high degree of segregation exists in public
schools. For example, according to our estimates, in school year 1989-90 the

average black student attended a school in .which 65 percent of the students
were nonwhite, while the avenge white student attended a school in which 17
percent of the students were nonwhite. The average Hispanic student attended

a school in which 68 percent of the students were either black or Hispanic.

Figure la presents a graph of the cumulative proportion of black
students who attend a school with less than the specified proportion of minority

students.9 Figure lb presents the same information for white students, and
Figure Ic presents the same information for Hispanic students. Notice the
sharp increase in these cumulative distribution functions around 95 percent for

black and Hispanic students. By contrast, there is a sharp increase between

0 and 5 percent for white students. Roughly 30 percent of black students
attend schools that have over 95 percent nonwhite enrollment, while over 30
percent of white students attend schools that have less than 5 percent nonwhite

students. At all levels, the cumulative distributions are very similar for black
and Hispanic students.

8This data set contains information on the racial composition of students

in 81,368 schools in 43 states and D.C. Given this large sample size, our
estimates are extremely precise and we do not bother to present standard
errors.

9For the purposes of this paper, black refers to black, non-Hispanic origin,

and white refers to white, non-Hispanic origin. We use the term minority to
mean all groups other than white non-Hispanic.

7

The extent of segregation is far greater in public schools in large
center cities (i.e., cities with a population of over 400,000). Figures 2a and
2b present graphs of the cumulative percent of white and black students who
attend schools with less than the specified percent of nonwhite students, broken

down by whether or not the school is in a large center city. Nearly two-thirds
(64 percent) of black students in public schools in large cities attend a school
in which 90 to 100 percent of the enrolled students are nonwhite, whereas less

than 15 percent of black students outside of large center cities attend a school

that has 90 to 100 percent nonwhite enrollmentJ° In contrast, only 3
percent of white students in large center cities attend a school with 90 to 100

percent minority enrollment. Furthermore, over 34 percent of black students

live in large center cities, compared to 6 percent of white students. We are

unaware of comparable data to assess trends in racial segregation in large
cities. However, Welch and Light find that the percentage of white students
attending selected central city school districts has declined sharply in every
region of the country between 1968 and 1980.11

The most widely cited historical evidence on the extent of public

school desegregation in the United States is based on the work of Gary
Orfield, who analyzed school-level data on students' race supplied by the U.S.

Department of Education.'2 These data only cover the period 1968-

10The level of segregation is even greater in large cities in the Northeast
and Border states. In the Northeast, 70 percent of black students are enrolled

in schools that have 90 to 100 percent minority enrollment. The comparable

figure for the border states is 77 percent.
Welch and Light (1987).
125ee Gary Orfield (1983).

8

1980.13 Further, 1968 is considered a key year in terms of mandatory
school desegregation because in that year the Supreme Court held in Green vs.
County Board of Education of New Kent County that "freedom of choice" was

no longer a viable means of desegregating noncompliant school districts.14
Unfortunately, little is known about the efficacy of school desegregation before
1968, so it is not clear whether Green instigated a change in racial segregation.

Here we provide some new evidence on the trend in segregation during this

crucial period, as well as update Orfield's original estimates of racial
segregation through 1989.

We use the Common Core data for school year 19 89-90 to update

Orfield's estimates of the percentage of black students enrolled in
predominantly minority schools (i.e., over 50 percent minority enrollment) and

in schools with 90 to 100 percent minority enrollment.15 Tables la and lb
present Orfield's estimates of the extent of segregation for 1968-80, and our

estimate for 1989.16

It is clear from these tables that the degree of

13Earlier work by Coleman, Kelly and Moore (1975) uses school district

level data from 1968-73 to analyze the extent of racial school segregation.
These data suffer from missing any within-district segregation.
14See Hochschild (1984, p.27).

15See Orfield (1983, p.4). Although many other indices of school
segregation are possible, we use these measures for historical comparison.
'6Although we lack data for 7 states, if we re-compute Orfield's estimates

for 1980 using just the subset of states included in our data set, none of our
conclusions is meaningfully altered. For example, in 1980 the estimate of the

percent of black students in 90 to 100 percent minority schools for the South

using our subset of states is 24.6 percent, which is close to Orfield's original
estimate of 23.0 percent. The estimates for the other regions areeven closer.

9

segregation in the nation as a whole dropped precipitously between 1968 and

1972, and then remained roughly constant over the 1970s. Our extension of

these data through the 1989-90 school year reveals that racial isolation for
black students increased slightly in the 1980s.

The trends in school desegregation differ across regions of the
country. The decline in segregation between 1968 and 1972 was primarily
concentrated in the Southern and Border states. In 1968, 77.8 percent of black

students in the South attended schools that had over 90 percent minority
students; this figure dropped to 24.7 percent just four years later. School
segregation appears to have increased in the South since the mid 1970s.
Observing the high rate of segregation in Orfield's data for the South in 1968,
some scholars have concluded that desegregation did not occur on a wide scale

before 1968.

Between 1968 and 1989, there has been a gradual decline in school

segregation for black children in the Border, Midwest, and West regions. In

the Northeast, however, black students are now substantially more racially
isolated than they were in 1968. While school segregation rapidly declined in

the South between 1968 and 1972, the Northeast experienced a rise in school

segregation. Moreover, in spite of the upward drift in school segregation in
the South, the South is now the region of the country with the highest level of

racial integration in schools, and the Northeast is now the region of the
country where minority students are most racially isolated.

Hispanic Students
The pattern of segregation for Hispanic students is presented in Tables

2a and 2b. In contrast to the experience of black students, there was not a
dramatic decline in segregation for Hispanic students between 1968 and 1972.

Moreover, in almost every region and every time period for which we have
data, Hispanic students have become increasingly more racially isolated, by

10

both measures.17 The greatest increase in the number of Hispanic students

has occurred in the West and Midwestern regions, and these regions have
experienced the greatest increases in segregation. As a consequence, Hispanic
students now face roughly the same level of racial isolation in schools as black

students. Moreover, to the extent that bilingual education is a great concern
for Hispanic students, this trend toward increasing segregation may have great

consequences.'8
New Historical Evidence: National Survey of Black Americans

Attempts to interpret historical trends in school desegregation have
been hamstmng by the lack of comparable data before the Green decision in
1968. In particular, the Civil Rights Act of 1964 may have reduced the extent
of school segregation by prohibiting federal aid to segregated institutions. The

incentive for districts to desegregate was further strengthened by the passage
of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, which increased the
amount of federal spending on public schools to compliant school districts. In
short, beginning in 1964 the Federal government provided financial incentives
for school districts to desegregate, and the Civil Rights Act enabled the Justice

Department to join in suits against non-compliant school districts.'9
To measure the extent to which the move toward desegregation was

already afoot in the South and Border regions prior to 1968, we analyze data

17The extent of segregation is also greater in urban areas for Hispanic
students. Considering cities with over 400,000 people, 55 percent of Hispanic

students are enrolled in schools with 90 to 100 percent minority enrollment.
'85ee Hochschild (1984, p.45).
19See Hochschild (1984, p.27).

11

from the National Survey of Black Americans (NSBA).2° In 1980, the

NSBA asked black Americans age 18 or older retrospective questions
concerning school segregation: whether they attended an "all black" or 'mostly

black" grammar school, junior high, or high school. The survey also identifies

the state the individuals grew up in and their age. We use this information to

construct a time series of data on school segregation. Specifically, we infer
the calendar year in which each individual would have attended grade school,

junior high, or high school, and then pool the data together based on calendar

year to derive an estimate of the extent of segregation each year.21 This
procedure is likely to smooth the actual series and make it difficult to

determine precisely the year of breaks in the series.22 On the other hand,
we are able to examine the extent of school segregation with comparable data

over a broad sweep of history (1924-1971).

20The data for the National Survey of Black Americans 1979-80, were

originally collected by James S. Jackson and Gerald Gurin. We limit the
sample to individuals who grew up in the South and Border states.

21Sifically we assume that individuals' response to the grammar school
question corresponds to the year in which they turned 9, their response to the
junior high question corresponds to the year in which they turned 14, and their

response to the high school question corresponds to the year they turned 16.
22However, our results are almost numerically equivalent when we limit

the sample to the high school and junior high questions, which are a much
more narrow time interval. This finding suggests that smoothing may not be
a serious problem. We retain the grammar sdhool data in the graphs presented

to increase the sample size. The total sample size used to created Figure 4 is

4,152.

12

The results of this exercise are summarized in Figures 3a and 3b, and
the underlying data are reported in Appendix Table 1. For each calendar year,

the figure presents an estimate of the proportion of students who attended an
all black school (Figure 3a) or a mostly black (Figure 3b) school, and places

a one standard error bound around the estimate. In the years in which there
is overlap (1968-1971), there is broad agreement between our estimates and

Orfield's. It is also clear from these figures that virtually all black students

attended completely segregated schools in the Southern and Border states
before the Brown decision in 1954. Our estimates document that there was no

decline in segregation circa 1954.

But surprisingly, the figures indicate that 1964, not 1968, was a
watershed year in the history of school desegregation in the Southern and
Border states. In spite of the smoothing due to the use of retrospective data,
it is clear that the trend toward school integration began before 1968. These
results suggest that, contrary to widespread belief, federal legislation that took

effect prior to 1968 was a catalyst for the reduction in school segregation in
the South.

B. Pupil-Teacher Ratio
Throughout the first half of the twentieth-century, the typical black

student attended a school with far more students per class than the typical

white student. There are two principal reasons for this disparity. First,

compared to white students, a disproportionately large number of black
students lived in the South, and the quality of schools in the South lagged well

behind the rest of the nation in the beginning of the century. Second, within
the South black students were confined to racially segregated schools that were

understaffed and overcrowded relative to schools attended by white students.
However, throughout most of the century the pupil-teacher ratios for white and

black students have tended toward equality because: (1) the gap in class size

13

for black and white students within regions has narrowed substantially; (2) the

South has caught up to the rest of the nation in terms of school resources; and

(3) the share of blacks living in the South has declined.23

Figure 4a presents a graph of the relative white-black pupil-teacher
ratio in the 17 states with de lure segregated schools and D.C. from 1915 to

1989, and Figure 4b presents a graph of the gap in the pupil-teacher ratio

between black schools and white schools.24 In 1915, the average pupilteacher ratio in black schools in these state was 60.8, far greater than the
average of 37.6 in white schools. In 1953-54, on the eve of the Brown v.
Board of Education ruling, the pupil-teacher ratio was 31.6 for black students

and 27.6 for white students. Although government records are limited after
this period, data from the Southern Educational Reporting Service indicates

that in 1966 the avenge pupil-teacher ratio was 26.1 for black students and
24.0 for white students. Notice that there is no apparent break in the series
around 1954; if anything, relative progress for black students was slower in
the decade following Brown than in the decade preceding it.25

23Note that we shall use the terms class size and pupil-teacher ratio
interchangeably.
2tThese figures are based on data from the Biennial Surveys of Education,

state education reports, and the authors' calculations using the Common Core

data set. The pre-1966 data are described in more detail in Card and Krueger

(1991). The term length and average teacher salary show similar trends

through 1966. Also see Smith and Welch (1989, Table 17) for related
evidence. Henceforth, we refer to D.C. as a state. Comparable data do not
exist for nonsouthern states.
25Some states even show a decline in relative school quality just after the

Brown decision. These observations reinforce Donohue and ecman' s (1991)

14

Little is known about the pupil-teacher ratio for the average black
student and average white student since 1966. Until recently, the Department

of Education has not included the number of students enrolled in a school by

race in the public-use extract of its basic data set, the Common Core. The
19 87-90 Common Core public-use data sets contain the number of students in

a school, the race of the students, and the number of teachers in the school,
for every public elementary and secondary school in 40 states. We have used

these data to tabulate the average pupil-teacher ratio in schools attended by
black students and white students. Specifically, we calculate the pupil-teacher

ratio for an average member of each race by the following weighted avenge:

-r =EnNIf(ENI)
where PTr is the average pupil-teacher ratio for a member of race r, PT is the

ratio of pupils to teachers in school i, and NI is the number of students in

school i who belong to race r.26 The summation runs over all schools.
This procedure is equivalent to assigning to every student in the school the
pupil-teacher ratio for his or her school, and then calculating the mean pupilteacher ratio for members of each race separately.
This approach has some obvious shortcomings. First, by using school

level data we miss any possible differences in class size by race within
schools. Second, in 1980 11.4 percent of white students and 5.4 percent of
black students attended private and parochial schools.27 The Common Core

contention that there was not a discrete improvement in school quality for
black students around 1954.

is the same approach used in Coleman et al. (1979).
27These figures are based on Welch and Light (1987), Table 3.

15

files do not have data on the racial composition of students attending private

schools, so any difference in class size between public schools and private

schools is not reflected in our estimates.28 Third, 11 states do not report
complete data on students' race or on the number of teachers in the Common
Core survey. These states must be omitted from our estimates. Nevertheless,

we suspect that our weighted averages of pupil-teacher ratios at the school

level provide at least a partial picture of the quantity of school resources
available to students of different races.
Table 3 reports estimates of the average pupil-teacher ratio for black

students, Hispanic students, and white students during school year 1989-90.

The table also reports the proportion of students of each race who attend
schools that have over 25 students per teacher. In panel A we report estimates

for all grade levels and for each region of the country; panels B and C contain

the corresponding estimates for grammar schools and high schools,
respectively. (Appendix Table 2 reports estimates for each state.) Our
estimates are based on a total sample of 69,610 schools.
Perhaps surprisingly, Table 3A indicates that the pupil-teacher ratio

is slightly higher for white students (18.3) than for black students (18.1). The
long period of a higher pupil-teacher ratio for black students has finally come

to an end. On the other hand, the pupil-teacher ratio of the average Hispanic
student (20.3) is 11 percent higher than that of the average white student.

Inspection of Table 3 reveals some interesting regional patterns.
First, the pupil-teacher ratio is significantly higher in the Western states than

in the rest of the country.

Because Hispanic students are vastly over-

represented in the West, the relatively high pupil-teacher ratio for Hispanic
students is mainly due to their regional distribution. Second, black students

28Estimates that we present below for high school students based on the
High School and Beyond Survey do include private schools, however.

16

currently have a higher pupil-teacher ratio than white students in all regions

of the country but the South. In the Northeast, for instance, there are an
average of .6 more students per teacher in the average school attended by
black students than that attended by white students, and the difference is 1.7
students per teacher for high schools.
It is also worth noting that at higher grade levels Hispanic students are

at a greater relative disadvantage as far as class size is concerned. The
average pupil-teacher ratio for Hispanic high school students exceeds the
average for white high school students by 16 percent. Moreover, the high

school drop out rate for Hispanic students is 35.8 percent, which greatly
exceeds the drop out rate of 12.7 percent for white students and 14.9 percent

for black students.29 Any decline in the drop out rate for Hispanic students

is likely to increase the gap in the pupil-teacher ratio between Hispanic
students and other students. On the other hand, the relatively high pupilteacher ratio for Hispanic high school students may contribute to their higher

drop out rate.
Within-State

Several scholars, including W.E.B. Dubois and Horace Maim Bond,
have noted that across regions of the country expenditures per student in black

relative to white schools were inversely related to the fraction of blacks in the

population. This pattern was careftilly documented with county-level data by

Bond and later by Margo.30 As Bond summarizes:

29These figures are "status" drop out rates, and pertain to 16-24 year olds.

The data are based on the Bureau of the Census, Current Population Survey,
October 1988, and are reported in Schick and Schick (1991).
30See Bond (1934) and Margo (1990).

17

Negro schools are financed from the fragments which fall from the

budget made up for white children. Where there are many Negro
children, the available funds are given principally to the small
white minority. Besides depressing expenditures for Negro children,

expenditures for white children in these heavily populated Negro

counties are far above the median for the entire state.3'

Bond argued this pattern developed because state funds were allocated on a per

student basis, which enabled school superintendents to divert more funds to

white schools in areas that were heavily populated by blacks. Since black
voters were effectively disenfranchised, they did not have the means to stop
this process.
Figure 5 illustrates that the relationship documented by Bond across

counties also exists at the state level, using data for the 18 Southern and
Border states each decade from l9201990.32 Until 1960, the plots show
a strong, persistent negative relationship between the percent of the population

in a state that is black and the ratio of the pupil-teacher ratio in white schools

to that in black schools. However, the relationship has become weaker with
time, and is totally eliminated by school year 1989-90. In fact, there is a weak

positive relationship if all states (not just the Southern and Border States) are

used. This turnaround is likely a result of increased voting rights for black
citizens over the years.

31See Bond (1934, pp. 244-245).

320ur data on the fraction of the population that is black is from decadal

Censuses of Population, as reported in various issues of Statistical Abstract.
The figure for 1990 uses data for 15 states.

18

School-level Analysis

We have used the Common Core micro data to estimate some
descriptive regressions of the relationship between the pupil-teacher ratio,
school location, and race. These regressions are summarized in Table 4. The
first column reports estimates weighted by the number of black students in the

school, the second column weighted by the number of white students in the
school, and the third column weighted by the number of Hispanic students in

the school. Columns 4-6 present the weighted means of the variables.
The regressions reveal several patterns. First, schools located in the
center of large cities tend to have more students per teacher than those located

in suburbs. Second, grammar schools tend to have a higher number of
students per teacher than junior high schools or high schools. Finally, the
regional patterns in the pupil-teacher ratio noted before are even stronger after

holding city size and grade level constant.
The bottom part of Table 4 reports the weighted mean pupil-teacher

ratio for each racial group. In the second to last row we compute the pupil-

teacher ratio for each group using the coefficient estimates based on white

students and the means of the independent variables for black or Hispanic
students. In the last row of the table we compute the pupil-teacher ratio for

each group using the group's own coefficient estimates, but the mean
characteristics of white students. Interestingly, the last set of results indicates

that if Hispanic students had the same regional distribution and other mean
characteristics of white students, their pupil-teacher ratio would be about the

same level (18.16) as white students, on average. As mentioned previously,
the higher pupil-teacher ratio for Hispanic students is mainly a result of their
high representation in Western states.
State-level Analysis

The broader regional trends in school quality in recent years tend to
favor black students because black Americans are relatively over-represented

19

in the South, which now has a lower pupil-teacher ratio than the national
average. Furthermore, black Americans are relatively under-represented in the

West, which now has a pupil-teacher ratio that is well above the national

average. One way of documenting this fact is to calculate the weighted
average pupil-teacher ratio for blacks and whites between 1976 and 1986,
using the number of black students in a state and the number of white students

in a state as weights (see table below). The pupil-teacher ratio used in these
calculations is the overall level for the state, which combines black and white

students.33 In 1976, black students were relatively more numerous in states

with high pupil-teacher ratios. This would have led to a 6 percent higher
pupil-teacher ratio for black students if the within-state distribution of class

size was equal. In 1986, however, black and white students were in states
with roughly comparable pupil-teacher ratios, on average.

Weighted Pupil-Teacher Ratio, Using State-wide Pupil-Teacher Ratio
1976 Weights

Current Weights
Year

White Black
(1)

(2)

White Black
(3)

(4)

21.87 23.18

1976

21.87 23.18

1980

18.88

19.02

18.84

18.99

1984

18.23

18.32

18.18

18.27

1986

17.82

17.97

17.73

17.75

Is the convergence in pupil-teacher ratio (at the state level) between

blacks and whites due to migration of black students from states with large

class sizes to states with small class sizes, or is it due to a relative
improvement in class size in states where black students are over-represented?

33These data are taken from the Digest of Education Statistics.

20

To answer this question, in columns (3) and (4) we hold the distribution of
students across states constant at their 1976 level, and re-compute the weighted

averages. The answer is quite clearly that this convergence occurred because
avenge class size declined in states where black students were relatively more
numerous.

Wealth and the Pupil-Teacher Ratio: District-level Analysis
Although race does not seem to be a major factor in determining class

size, we note that evidence suggests that schools• that are boated in districts

with lower property values tend to have larger pupil-teacher ratios. For
example, Figure 6 presents a scatter diagram of the ratio of pupils to teachers

in 274 school districts in Massachusetts in 1990 against the log of the

equalized property value for the districts in 1988. Notice the wide
variation in the pupil-teacher ratio across districts --

the

top percentile of

school districts has an average of 10 students per teacher, whereas the bottom

percentile of districts has an average of 22 students per teacher. The figure
also shows a strong inverse relationship between the pupil-teacher ratio and

property value. The OLS regression of the pupil-teacher ratio on the log of
equalized property value is:

Pupils/Teachers = 35.17 - 3.56 ln(Land Value)
(2.56) (0.47)

R2 = .17.

The relationship between the pupil-teacher ratio and land value is highly

statistically significant (t-ratio=7.57). A 20 percent increase in land value is
associated with about .70 fewer students per teacher.

34The property value data are from unpublished tables prepared by the
Massachusetts Department of Education.

21

We have also analyzed the relationship between the median salary of
teachers in a school district in Massachusetts and the log of equalizedproperty

value. The estimated regression equation is given below:

Median Salary. = 7227.9 + 5130.4 ln(Land Value)
(4956.1)

R2 = .11.

(917.1)

There is a highly statistically significant (t-ratio=5.59) relationship between

median teacher salary and the property wealth of a school district. For
example, a 20 percent increase in property value is associated with over
$1,000 higher annual pay for the median teacher.

We prefer not to put a structural interpretation on either of these
estimated relationships because the direction of causality is not clear. Higher

quality schools may increase the land value of a school district, but it is also
plausible that higher income individuals choose to provide their children with

higher quality schools. Nevertheless, these results indicate that more school

resources are available to children who grow up in wealthier areas. Since
black families are more likely than white families to live in low-income areas
and in cities, it is noteworthy that the unconditional estimates in Table 3 do not

show much of a gap in class size between white and black students.35
Perhaps the reason schools attended by minority students have been
able to maintain roughly comparable levels of class size as schools attended by

35For example, Blau and Graham (1989) estimate that in the late 1970s,

the average black married couple had about one-third as much equity in
housing as the average white married couple ($4,222 vs. $13,864). The black-

white income ratio for this sample was .75. Based on the relationship for
Massachusetts, a property wealth differential of 66 percent would be expected

to increase the pupil-teacher ratio by about 2.3 pupils.

22

white students is by forgoing other resources that are provided to students in
wealthier areas. Next we present evidence suggesting that race does have an

effect on a more modem measure of school quality, namely the extent of
computer use by students.

C. Computer Utilization
The computer revolution of the 1980s has had a profound impact on

the operation and organization of elementary and secondary schools. The
number of computers in use by elementary and secondary schools increased by

over 17 times between 1981 and 1988. In 1988, 1.52 million micro computers

were used for instructional purposes in public school grades K-12 -- one
computer for every 26.9 students.36 Computer labs are common in public

and private schools, and many private schools compete for students by
advertising their computer resources. In 1989, nearly half of all students
reported that they directly use computers in school. Computers are primarily
used for two purposes in schools: (1) computer-aided instruction; (2) providing
students with computer skills that are of use in the labor market and elsewhere.

To date, there have been only two studies of the extent of students'

computer use by race.37 Both of these studies analyzed data from the
earlier l980s, just before the widespread adoption of computers in schools.
To explore racial differences in computer use in schools more recently, we

analyze data from the 1984 and 1989 October Current Population Survey

(CPS) School Enrollment Supplement microdata files.

In these two

361n private schools there was one computer for every 23.5 students.
These figures are drawn from Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1990,

Tables 238 and 1340.

'See McPhail (1985).

23

supplements, respondents were asked: "Does

directly use a computer at

school'?"38 In addition to being more recent than the data analyzed by the

previous researchers, the CPS data files have the advantages of providing
large, nationally representative samples, and of providing detailed demographic

information on students and their families. We limit our sample to students
age 6-18 who are enrolled in grades 1-12.
Table S reports our estimates of the proportion of students who use

a computer in school by grade level and race in 1984 and 1989. Between
1984 and 1989 there was tremendous growth in the proportion of students
using computers in schools. Black students, however, are substantially less
likely to use a computer in school than white students. Across all grade levels

in 1984, 36 percent of white pupils used computers in school and only 18
percent of black pupils — black students were half as likely as white students

to be trained on computers in school in 1984. Furthermore, computer
utilization is no greater among Hispanic students than among black students.

By 1989, the black-white gap in computer use for all grade levels

declined slightly, from 18.0 percentage points to 17.1 percentage points.
However, the racial gap in computer use at the high school level has declined

greatly, while the gap has remained roughly constant at the grammar school
level.

Thus, white school children are exposed to computers, and are

instructed with the aid of computers, at a much earlier stage of their
educational career than black or Hispanic children.

38According to the questionnaire, computer use means: "'Direct' or 'hands

on use' of computers. These computers may be personal computers, mini
computers, or mainframe computers." Excluded are "hand-held calculators or
games, electronic video games, or systems which do not use a typewriter-like

keyboard."

24

We have also explored the black-white gap in computer use across

regions. Appendix Table 3 presents estimates of the extent of students'
computer use by state and race for 1989. Our results indicate that the gulf in
computer use between black and white students is greater in the Midwest (20

points) and Northeast (18 pOints) than in the South (13 points) and West (9

points). On the other hand, computer use by students is least common in
schools in the South, where slightly over half of all black Americans live.
How much of the gap in computer use can be accounted for by family

characteristics such as income and region of residence? To answer this
question we have estimated a set of linear probability models with the 1989

data, including various sets of explanatory variables.39 These results are
summarized in Table 6. In the first column we only include two race/ethnic

group dummies; the omitted group is white non-Hispanic students. In the
second column we include dummy variables indicating the student'sgender and

whether the student attends a public school, as well as linear variables
measuring the grade and age of the student.4° In column 3 we include the
same explanatory variables plus region of residence, 3 dummy variables for

the type of city/town the student lives in (e.g., central city), and 7 dummy

variables indicating the size of the city the student lives in.

39Logit models yield similar conclusions.

Finally, in

We present the linear

probability models for simplicity.
40Notice that, holding grade constant, older students are less likely to use

computers in school. This finding would be expected if students who progress

more slowly are less likely to be trained on computers.

25

column 4 we include the same explanatory variables as in column 3 plus 14
dummy variables for family income class.41

Controlling for student characteristics, such as grade and age, does

not reduce the magnitude of the racial gap in computer use. Including city
size, city type, and region, however, reduces the black-white gap in computer

use by about S percentage points, and the Hispanic-white gap by 4 points.
Computer use at school is strongly related to family income. For example,

children from families with over $75,000 in annual income are 50 percent
more likely to use computers in school than children from families with under

$10,000 in annual income. Accounting for differences in family income
reduces the gap in computer use relative to white students to 9.3 points for
black students and 7.7 points for Hispanic students. In sum, accounting for
all of these variables cuts the racial gap in school-related computer use roughly

in half. Nevertheless, the gap is still large and statistically significant.
For students age 15-18, the CPS also contains information on whether

the students' families have computers at home. In 1989, 35.8 percent of white

students were in families that owned a home computer, whereas only 15.3
percent of black students and 14.3 percent of Hispanic students had such a

luxury. Furthermore, 29.7 percent of all white students used computers at
home, whereas only 10 percent of black and Hispanic students used computers

at home. In results not reported in the table, we find that students who come

from families with computers available at home are 6.0 percentage points
(t=3.8) more likely to use a computer in school, after controlling for all the

41Family income is reported in 14 intervals: less than $5,000, $5,000$7,499, 57,500-59,999, $10,000-$12,499, $l2,500-$14,999, 515,000-519,999,

$20,000-$24,999, $25,000-$29,999, $30,000-$34,999, $35,000-$39,999,
$40,000-$49,999, 550,000-59,999, 560,000-574,999, $75,000 or more. We
also include a dummy for family income not reported (5.8% of cases).

26

variables in column 4. Thus, lower access to computers at home may further

compound differences in computer use between minority and nonminority
children.
A question of policy concern is: Why does the racial gap in computer

• use exist? There are four plausible explanations that should be investigated.

First, schools attended by minority students may lack sufficient resources to

obtain computer equipment and maintain adequate levels of other school

resources, such as the student-teacher ratio. Second, teachers in schools
attended by minority students may not know how to use computers effectively

as teaching tools. Third, relatively many minority students may not come to

school prepared to use computers. Fourth, computer distributors may have
discriminated against inner-city schools in the provision of free computers or
in computer prices.

Although we cannot address all of these potential explanations here,

we can provide some information on the likely sources of the racial gap in
computer use. First, we should stress that even if the avenge minority child

comes to school less prepared to learn complex computer programming
because of having a lower socio-economic status, computers are widely used
by schools for remedial education. It is more common for schools to employ

computers as a learning device for a subject area than as a tool for teaching
computer literacy. In this sense, computer use is not like taking a course in

an advanced subject. On the other hand, if minority children are less likely

to be exposed to computers at home, they may not see computers as a
worthwhile tool to use in school.

Computer Use and Other Characteristics of High Schools; 1982
We have used the High School and Beyond Survey to further explore

racial differences in computer training and school resources. This data set
consists of several files, some containing information on school characteristics

27

in 1980 and 1982, and others containing longitudinal information on students'

experiences and academic achievements. Here, we present evidence based on

the Schools File.42

The baseline HSBS Schools file contains information on the racial
composition of students, number of students, number of teachers, qualifications

of teachers, and other characteristics for nearly 1,000 high schools in 1980.

In addition, a follow-up survey conducted in 1982 contains information on
whether the school offered computer courses. The high schools in the sample

include both public and private schools. We use the HSBS to calculate
weighted averages of several school characteristics, where the weights are the

number of black students and number of white students attending each high
school.43

Table 7 presents means of a variety of variables by race. In 1982, 60
percent of white students attended a high school that offered a computer class,

but only 50 percent of black students attended a high school that offered a
computer class. Although the number of computer courses that schools offered

per student was low in 1982, white students attended schools that, on average,

offered 50 percent more computer courses per enrollee than the average school

attended by black students. These results suggest that, at least in part, black
students are less likely than white students to use computers in school because

their schools are less likely to offer computer classes.

Section II we use information based on the students file to examine
the implications of computer training for job placement.
43Because the HSBS did not use a random sample design, we weight the

data by the product of the sample weights and the number of black or white
students attending the school.

28

The HSBS also enables us to estimate racial differences the pupilteacher ratio, teacher training, teacher pay, and other school characteristicè in
1982. The HSBS estimates indicate that the average black high school student
attends a school with about .6 more students per teacher than the average white

student. Recall that our tabulations with the 1989-90 Common Core data
indicated a .2 higher pupil teacher ratio for the avenge black stUdent at the
high school level.

Although these data pertain to the beginning of the computer
revolution in schools, the tabulations based on HSBS data do not provide much

evidence that black students are less likely to use computes because their
teachers are incapable of using computers. The educational attainment or
experience of teachers in schools attended predominantly by black students

does not differ tremendously from that of teachers in schools attended
predominantly by white students. Of course, crude measures such as the
teachers' mean level of education or experience do not indicate whether the

teachers themselves are capable of instructing students with the aid of
computers. But these results do not suggest that teachers in the schools that

black students attend in large numbers are incapable of being trained to
effectively use a computer for teaching purposes.

In sum, our findings are poignantly described by Kozol's interview

of a junior high school teacher in Camden, N.Jfr Over 98 percent of
students in the school are black or Hispanic, and each term the teacher says
she must explain to her students: "We are in the age of the computer.... We

cannot afford to give you a computer. If you learn on these typewriters, you
will find it easier to move on to computers if you ever have one." Below we

explore whether minority workers' chances of obtaining a job that requires

44See Kozol (1991, p.139).

29

computer skills are diminished by their lower probability of having used
computers in school.

D. Test Scores
We briefly note that evidence suggests that minority students' performance

on standardized tests, such as the Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) and the
National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP), have improved relative

to white students at least since the early 1970s. However, on average,
minority students still perform below white students on these exams. For
example, in 1975 the average black student taking the SAT scored 354 on the

math portion of the exam, compared to 493 for the average white student. By

1988 the avenge black student's score had risen to 384, while the average

white student's score declined to 49O. Likewise, at all age groups, the
average black student has shown greater improvement on the NAEP than the
average white student since 1969.46
The implications for labor market success of these trends in test scores are

difficult to interpret for two reasons. First, changes in the proportion of
students who take these exams are likely to significantly affect the mean

scores. This is especially likely to be a problem with the SATs because
students self-select to take the exam.47 But changes in the proportion of
students taking the exams may also be a problem for exams in which students
are randomly selected to take the exam because school enrollment rates differ

45The verbal scores show a similar pattern. These figures are from Digest

of Education Statistics (1989, p. 120). Earlier data are not available.
46See Jaynes and Williams (1989, pp. 348-352) for a detailed review of

time-series trends in test scores for black and white students.
47See Dynarski (1987).

30

among different racial groups, and have changed over time. Second, and
perhaps more important, most empirical studies have found little relationship

between achievement test scores and measures of labor market success.48
Standardized test results are not a good indicator of individuals' success in the

For these reasons, we prefer to focus directly on the
relationship between schooling inputs and labor market outcomes.
labor market.

Nevertheless, it is worth noting that available evidence on time-series trends
in test score performance by racial group does not indicate a deterioration in
the quality of minority students' education.

Although there are many aspects of schools that we have not
considered, such as teacher quality and possible neighborhood effects, our
results provide at least a partial evaluation of the quality of schooling by racial

group. Moreover, the broad evidence on test scores are not inconsistent with
our findings for traditional measures of school quality, such as class size.

II. Economic and Scholastic Implications of School Quality Differences

Our exploration of school resources suggests that, on average,
Hispanic students attend schools that have more pupils per teacher than white

students and black students, and that the average pupil-teacher• ratio is about

the same for white and black students. We also find that white students are

far more likely to use computers in the classroom than black or Hispanic
students. Finally, our results indicate that racial segregation in schools has
been rising gradually for black students in some regions of the country, and
has been rising steadily for Hispanic students. In this section we explore the
labor market implications of these findings, concentrating mainly on the likely

48For examples, see (Jriliches and Mason (1972), Blackburn and Neumark
(1991), and Conlisk (1971).

31

implications of racial isolation in schools and lower computer training among

minority students.

A. Implications of School Segregation
Although over 100 studies have examined the relationship between

students' achievement on standardized tests and the extent of school
segregation, only a few studies have examined the effect of school segregation

on labor market outcomes.49

Because school segregation may limit

minority students' opportunities to develop contacts that are later used to find

jobs, and may affect individuals' attitudes towards different racial groups, the
extent of school segregation might influence labor market outcomes such as the

probability of working in an integrated work environment. Ideally, to measure
the effect of racial isolation in schools on various outcomes, one would like to

be able to study an experiment in which students are randomly assigned to
attend schools with different proportions of minority students.

Probably the most compelling evidence on the effect of school
desegregation on labor market outcomes is from Cram and Strauss's follow-up

study of the experience of black elementary students from Hartford,
Connecticut, who were randomly given a choice to be bused to an integrated
suburban school based on a court-mandated lottery in 1966.50 Students who

participated in this lottery were re-interviewed in 1983. Not every student

49see Braddock, Cram and McPartland (1984) for a survey of the
literature on impact of school desegregation on long-term outcomes. The past

literature has found that minority students who attend schools with a higher
proportion of white students tend to obtain jobs in more integrated firms and
to complete more years of schooling.
Cram and Strauss (1985).

32

who was given the option to be bused chose to be bused. Cram and Strauss

find that students who were given the option to be bused to an integrated
school are more likely to work in white-collar and professional jobs in the
private sector.
Cram and Strauss also find that the occupational differences between

the treatment and control groups are larger for the subset of the treatment
group that accepted busing than for the subset that was selected for busing but

declined. This result could reflect self-selection in which more ambitious
students accept busing, or an effect of having attended an integrated school.
Moreover, from this analysis it is not clear whether the effects of attending an

integrated school stem from greater contact with white students, or from
different resources in the suburban schools. And it is not clear whether the
effects of school desegregation found in this study are specific to busing in

Hartford, or hold more generally. Nevertheless, analysis of this natural
experiment suggests that school segregation may have long-term consequences

for labor market outcomes.

We provide some further evidence on the impact of attending an
integrated school based on data from the National Survey of Black Americans.

In particular, we examine the effect of school segregation on four long-term

outcome variables for black students: years of schooling completed; the
proportion of students who are black in the college in which the individual

attends (for individuals who attended college); hourly earnings; and the
proportion of individuals' co-workers who are black. We limit our sample to
individuals age 25-65 who have at least 10 years of schooling. The extent of

33

school segregation is measured by the proportion of students who were black

in the high school the individual attended.51

OLS and two stage least squares (2SLS) estimates are presented in
Table 8. The first 4 columns present the OLS estimates. We include several
explanatory variables, including a set of dummy variables indicating the state

the individual grew up in, a quartic in age, a dummy indicating gender, and

in some models 8 region of residence dummies. The results indicate that a
higher proportion of students in a high school who are black is associated with

fewer years of schooling, a less integrated work environment and college for

those who attend college, and lower wages. Each of these effects is
statistically significant at the 10 percent level.
An important issue in interpreting these results is that black students

who attended integrated schools may differ along relevant, unobserved
dimensions that are spuriously picked up by the proportion of black students

in the high school. For example, middle class black families may be more

likely to live in suburbs and send their children to integrated schools. If,

because of differences in family background, these children would have
obtained more schooling regardless of the fraction of black students in their
school, our estimates would be biased. To adjust for possible selection bias
we have estimated 2SLS models.
The identification strategy in our 2SLS model is based on our earlier

finding that school desegregation did not begin in the South until after 1964.

511n the NSBA, individuals were asked whether they attended a school in

which students were: all blacks, mostly blacks, about half blacks, mostly
whites, or almost all whites. We convert this to a proportion by assuming

values of 1, .75, .5, .25, and .1, respectively. We similarly coded the
questions on the racial composition of students in their college and of their co-

workers.

34

The 2SLS estimates are identified by temporal variation in the proportion of

students in the high school who are black resulting from post-1964 school
desegregation. Since the trend toward school desegregation after 1964 was
exogenous to students, this provides a potentially valid instrument. Moreover,

the pace of desegregation varied among the states, so we allow for a different
post-1964 effect by state. Specifically, we create a dummy variable that equals

one if the individual attended high school after 1964, and zero otherwise. This
dummy is interacted with dummies indicating the state in which the individual

grew up to allow for a different relationship across states. Individuals in the
sample grew up in 29 different states, providing 29 excluded instruments.52
Unfortunately, the 2SLS estimates are not very precise. Nevertheless,

except for the equation for the race of co-workers, the coefficients on the
school segregation variable have roughly the same magnitude and sign as in

the OLS models. Although issues of nonrandom selection still need to be
addressed, these results suggest that school segregation has had a lasting effect
on some labor market and educational outcomes. Whether these findings result

directly from racial isolation, from lower school resources in predominantly
black schools, or from some combination of these factors, should be a subject
of further research.

B. Implications of Computer Use
Compared to white students, black and Hispanic students are much

less likely to use computers at school. Here we explore whether minority

52Notice that to control for other possible secular trends that may be
correlated with the period in which an individual attended high school, we
have included a fairly flexible specification for age, and to control for effects
of differences in school resources across states, we have included unrestricted

dummies for the state where the individual grew up.

35

workers

are less likely to be employed in jobs that require the use of

computers, and whether there is any link between computer use in school and

on the job. It should be stressed that our analysis is indirect. Ideally we
would like to measure the effect of students computer use in school on their
subsequent incomes.

Table 9 reports the percentage of workers in various educational

categories who directly used a computer at work in 1984 and 1989. The
estimates are tabulated from the October 1984 and 1989 CPS, and pertain to

employed men and women age 18-65.

According the questionnaire,

individuals are considered to use a computer if they have "direct or hands on

use of computers" at work. For example, based on the CPS questionnaire, a

manager who does not directly use a computer at work would not be
considered to use a computer at work, whereas a secretary who uses a
computer for word processing would be considered to use a computer at work.

The results indicate that minority workers are less likely to use
computers on their jobs. In 1984, for example, 28 percent of white workers

used a computer at work, while only 20 percent of black workers and 17
percent of Hispanic workers used a computer at work. The share of workers
using a computer at work grew substantially for all groups between 1984 and
1989, but the growth was greater for white workers. Thus, in 1989 42 percent
of white workers reported using a computer on the job, while only 29 percent

of black workers and 24 percent of Hispanic workers used computers on the

job. Moreover, the racial gap in computer use at work is evident across all
levels of education.
Some evidence suggests that students who have not been instructed on

computers in school are less likely to use them on the job. In particular, we
have used the HSBS data to examine the relationship between education-related

computer use and work-related computer use.

Our sample consists of

individuals who have exactly a high school degree and are working in 1984.

36

Table 10 presents estimates of linear probability models to explain whether a

worker uses a computer at work. Workers who have used computers in their

educational training are 7.6 percentagepoints more likely to use a computer
at work, other things being equal. Since only 18.4 percent of workers in this
sample used a computer at work, having taken a course that involved using a
computer in the past greatly increases the odds of obtaining ajob that involves

working with a computer.
Of course, one could easily argue that individuals who are interested
in computers as students are more likely to use them when they enter the work

force -- i.e., the relationship in Table 10 is due to an omitted facton
However, computers were relatively new to schools in 1980, when these

individuals were in high school. Roughly half of the high schools in our
sample did not offer any computer courses at this time. Thus, in many cases
the students could not take a computer course even if they wanted to. We also

note that ideally one would like to measure the impact of school-related
computer training on students' subsequent earnings in the labor market.
Although we have not been able to perform such an analysis, the evidence
does suggest that school-related computer training is linked to obtaining ajob
that utilizes computer technology.
In any event, We should emphasize that the vast majority of workers
who use computers at work were not trained on computers in school. In 1989,

for example, 39 percent of white workers age 45-54 used computers on the

job, and 23 percent of black workers in the same age group used computers
on thejob. These workers were surely not trained on computers in elementary

and secondary school. Thus, differential use of computers in school can
directly account for only a small portion of the racial gap in computer use at
work. Nevertheless, if computer skills are valuable in the labor market, black

students may be disadvantaged by their lower use of computers.

37

We find that black workers were less likely to be employed in
occupations that experienced above average growth in computer use between

1984 and 1989. In particular, we calculate the proportion of workers in each
of 487 three-digit occupations that used a computer at work in 1984 and 1980.

A regression of the change in computer use on the proportion of workers in
the occupation who are black yields a coefficient of -.60, with a t-ratio of If we also include average education in the industry, the coefficient

on the proportion of workers who are black declines to -.25, but remains

statistically significant (t-ratio = -3.63).

Thus, occupations in which

computers have proliferated are occupations in which the share of workers who

were black was relatively low, even after adjusting for average education.

Wages and Computer Use at Work
If operating a computer is a skill that is costly or difficult to acquire,

one would expect workers who use computers at work to earn a wage
premium. What is the premium for being able to use a computer at work?
This is a very difficult question to answer because workers who are observed
to use computers on the job may possess high levels of other skills that are not

observed or held constant. Furthermore, skilled workers who do not use
computers at work may still profit from the computer revolution because the
likely increase in demand for skilled workers brought about by the computer

revolution is likely to have shifted out the demand for their services.

Krueger contains an empirical analysis of the premium workers
receive for knowing how to use a computer at work based on CPS and other

53This regression was weighted by the avenge number of employees in
the occupation in 1984 and 1989.

38

data.54 Those findings are summarized and extended here. First, we try

to measure the direct reward for using a computer at work by simply
estimating a set of log wage equations that include a dummy variable that

equals one if workers use a computer on the job, and zero otherwise. Our
estimates are based on data from the October CPS for 1984 and 1989, and are

reported in Table 11. The wage equations indicate that workers who use a
computer on the job earn roughly 20 percent higher wages than those who do

not directly use a computer on the job, holding experience, education, and
other factors constant.

An obvious concern with these results is that the estimated premium

for computer use may overstate the extra value workers derive from learning
how to use a computer because workers with more ability may be more likely

to use a computer at work. One way to address this concern is to add more
explanatory variables to absorb the effect of omitted ability. Krueger fmds the

computer premium falls to roughly 10-15 percent if variables measuring a

worker's industry and occupation, high school grade point average,
achievement test scores, or parents' education are included in a wage
equation.55 Additionally, he finds that birth cohorts that experienced great
growth in computers also experienced faster wage growth, after adjusting for

the age-earnings profile. Because the ability of a given cohort is fixed over

time, this finding weighs against attributing much importance to omitted
variables.

To add to this research, we find that occupations that have experienced
above average growth in computers use have experienced above average wage
growth. For example, using data for 487 three-digit occupations, we regressed

54See Krueger (1991).
55See Krueger (1991).

39

the change in the mean log wage in an occupation on the change in the
proportion of workers in the occupation using a computer at work. The

coefficient on the change in computer use is .122 (t-ratio=4.39). If we
include the change in the mean education in the occupation, the coefficient on
computer use increases to . 134 (t-ratio = 4.88). A similar result is found across

industries. Since the innate ability of workers in an occupation or industry is
not likely to change very much over five years, it is likely that the growth in
demand for workers who know how to use a computer has increased wages in

occupations in which computer use has expanded.

Nevertheless, the computer differential may still reflect workers'
unobserved qualities. As a final way to address this issue, we analyze a new

data set on twins.56 Twins provide a natural experiment to hold constant
unobserved family effects. Moreover, in principal, identical twins provide a
means to difference out unobserved genetic factors. We use a survey of twins

collected by Ashenfelter and Krueger in August, l991. Unfortunately, the
survey did not ask individuals whether they use a computer at work; instead,

we assign to each individual the proportion of workers' in the individual's
three-digit occupation who use a computer at work, based on the October 1989

CPS. This introduces additional measurement error to our estimates, and thus

might be expected to bias our estimated computer differential downward.
Nevertheless, this approach enables us to net out family and other components

56This technique has been used in the literature assessing the importance

of ability bias for estimates of the return to schooling (for example, see
Behrman, Hrubec, Taubman, and Wales (1980)).

survey was conducted at the Twinsburg Twins Festival in
Twinsburg, Ohio. The questionnaire that was used was a modified version of

the CPS. The survey is described in Ashenfelter and Krueger (1992).

40

that might be correlated with the probability that workers in a particular
occupation use computers.

Our results are presented in Table 12. The first column reports
generalized least squares (OLS) estimates of an earnings equation using data
for identical and fraternal twins, and the second column presents within-family

estimates (i.e., first-differenced estimates) for the same sample.58 The third

and fourth columns present GLS and within-family estimates based on the

subset of identical twins. When we look within-families, we find little
evidence of attenuation of the premium associated with the propensity to use
a computer in an occupation.

Although

the

reader should have

reservations about omitted variable bias, taken together these findings suggest

that computer skills are highly valued by employers. If, for the sake of
argument, we assume that workers who learn how to use a computer can earn

15 percent higher income, we can calculate the impact of the growth in
computer use at work on the black-white wage gap. Tn 1989, white workers
were 13.4 percentage points more likely to use computers at work than black

workers. Fifteen years ago, when computers were a rarity, it was likely that
the percentage gap in the use of computers between black and white workers

was trivial. Thus, the direct effect of the lower use of computers by black
workers may have led to an expansion of the black-white wage gap of roughly

2 points (= 15% x .134). Since the black-white earnings gap expanded by 5.6

points between 1976 and 1990, lower utilization of computers by black
workers may be responsible for as much as one-third of the increase in the

gap. Of course, this would be an overestimate if obtaining computer skills
does not result in 15 percent higher income.

58GL5 was performed to allow for a within family correlation in residuals.

41

Computer-Aided Instruction and Student Achievement

In addition to preparing students for work, computer training in
schools is intended to facilitate learning. Are computers effective teachers?

Do students tend to learn more if they have undergone computer-aided
instruction?

Between 1976 and 1979, Educational Testing Service

implemented an experimental evaluation of this question in the Los Angeles

Unified School District.59 The study used a complex randomized block
design. In brief, students in grades 2-6 were randomly assigned to different

amounts of time for computer-aided instruction, and to different CM
programs. Students who were assigned to no computer-aided instruction were

taught with traditional teaching methods. The experiment ran for 3 years.
The results supported a conclusion that student achievement on standardized

tests increased if students were exposed to computer-aided instruction.
Students who were assigned to CM courses experienced statistically significant

increases on math, computation, reading, and language tests compared to the

control groups.6°

Because minority students are less likely to use

computers in school, they are less likely to receive the academic benefits of
computer-aided instruction.

ifi. Evidence on the Black-White Earnings Gap: 1973-90
We have estimated a series of human capital earnings equations to
examine trends in earnings between black and white workers since the early

1970s. Specifically, we regress the log of the hourly wage rate on two race

See Ragosta, Holland and Jamison, 1982.
60A battery of tests were used for the evaluation, including the Iowa Tests

of Basic Skills, Comprehensive Tests of Basic Skills, and curriculum specific
tests.

42

dummies, years of education, experience and its square, a dummy variable
indicating gender, veteran status, a part-time hours dummy, 8 region dummies,

and an SMSA dummy. The regressions were estimated using CPS data from

May 1973-1978, and the full-year outgoing rotation group files from 1979-

io.61
Figure 7 presents a graph of the black-white log hourly wage
differential for workers age 16-65 after adjusting for the factors mentioned

previously. The year to year fluctuations are large, even relative to the
standard error of the estimates, which range from .003 to .007. Nevertheless,

it is clear that there has been an upward trend in the magnitude of the black-

white wage gap since the mid-1970s.62 The black-white hourly wage gap
for all workers has nearly doubled between 1976 and 1990, from -6.8 percent

to -12.4 percent. Moreover, recent CPS data for 1991 indicate that the black-

white earnings gap has continued to rise.63 The expansion of the blackwhite wage gap contrasts with the declining wage gap observed between 1940

and 1970 with Census data.64 Also, the annual March CPS files, which

61The 1975 and 1976 May CPS's do not indicate residence in an SMSA.

Consequently, we must exclude this variable in these years. In 1974, the
black-white wage gap was .016 greater if the SMSA dummy was omitted, so
we adjust the estimated black-white wage gaps for 1975-76 by this amount.
62This trend has been documented by other researchers. For example, see

Bound and Freeman (1992) and Juhn, Murphy, and Pierce (1991).

63See Daily Labor Report, October 28, 1991, p. B-I.
64See Smith and Welch (1989).

43

provide a yearly picture, suggest that the black-white wage gap narrowed
precipitously around the time the Civil Rights Act of 1964 took effect.65

Why has the black-white wage gap expanded? Bound and Freeman
rule out as an explanation a decline in the enforcement of Federal Affirmative

Action and equal employment policy because the gap began to expand in the

carter years.66 Juhn, Murphy, and Pierce and others have argued that the
black-white wage gap expanded because the price of skills increased, and
because minority workers possess lower levels of skills on avenge as a result

of having historically attended inferior schools.67 In other words, their
argument is that in the 1980s the wages of highly skilled workers have
expanded relative to the wages of less skilled workers. If minority workers
are disproportionately represented in the lower end of the skill distribution

because of lower school quality, then the expansion in the wage gap may
reflect an increase in the price of skills.
To explore these issues further, Figure 8 presents separate estimates

for men, women, and young workers (age 25-34). The results show that the
black-white wage gap increased by roughly the same magnitude for men and

women. On the other hand, the gap increased substantially more for young
workers than for all workers. This finding suggests that different cohorts of
black workers were affected differently by whatever forces have caused the
wage gap to expand.

Trends in the black-white earnings gap across cohorts have been
studied extensively with census data, which provide large samples. To extend

this analysis, we compare the 1960, 1970, and 1980 Census results to the

Freeman (1973).
Bound and Freeman (1992).

Juhn, Murphy; and Pierce (1991).

44

March 1990 and 1991 CPS files.68 The results are contained in Table 13.
The table reports the mean of the log of weekly earnings by race for various

birth cohorts, and the change in mean log earnings for each cohort each
decade. A few findings should be noted. First, between 1980 and 1990 the
black-white wage gap for 21-60 year old men expanded by about 4 log points.
This is a sharp contrast with the narrowing of the gap in the preceding decades

(e.g., from -.388 to -.293 between 1970 and 1980).

Second, if we follow a given cohort over time, the black-white
earnings gap tends to increase as the cohort ages for young cohorts, but tends

to decrease as the cohort ages for older cohorts. Also, if we look across birth
cohorts in a given year, the black-white wage gap tends to be larger for older
cohorts.

Third, between 1980 and 1990 the increase in the black-white
earnings gap has not been uniform across birth cohorts. The earnings gap
expanded by 17 log points for the 1950-59 birth cohort, but hardly changed for

the 1930-39 cohort. Because the school quality of a given cohort does not
change over time, the increase in the black-white gap is not due to an erosion

of school quality. Moreover, it is unlikely that a change in the return to skills
is responsible for the increase in the earnings gap because, as documented in
Section 1, the school quality gap is smaller for the 1950-59 cohort than for the

1930-39 cohort. The 1930-39 cohort attended elementary and secondary
school between 1936 and 1955, when black schools tended to have 10 to 20

68The results for 1960-1980 are taken from Card and Krueger (1992a),

Table 1. We pool together the 1990 and 1991 March CPS's to increase the
sample size. The earnings variable is annual earnings in the preceding year
divided by weeks worked. We used the CPI to convert earnings in 1989 into

1990 dollars. To the extent possible, we have defined the samples and
variables to be comparable between the Census and March CPS's.

45
percent more students per teacher than white schools (see Figure 4); the 1950-

59 cohort was educated in the post-Brown era.69 Thus, a change in the
price of skills would be expected to increase the black-white wage gap more
forthe older cohorts. Furthermore, Figure 8 indicates that the decline in black
workers' relative earnings was greatest for young workers, so differential age-

earnings profiles are not likely to be responsible for the cohort patterns.
On the other hand, the "active" labor market hypothesis suggests that

wage structure changes occur more rapidly for young workers, who are more
mobile and therefore more affected by market shocks. But even in this view,
it is surprising that the black-white wage gap did not expand at all for the older

cohorts of workers if the widening gap is due to an increase in the value of
skills. Older workers, who may be relatively insulated from the market, still

have been affected by the increase in the return to education. For example,
Katz and Revenga find that the high school-college wage differential expanded

for men with 25 years of experience in the 1980s.7°
Finally, we have examined the economic return to education by race

over time. In the past, many researchers have used estimates of the payoff to
education as an alternative indicator of the quality of schooling for black and

white workers.7' Specifically, we used the CPS full-year outgoing rotation
group files for 1979-1990 to estimate separate log-wage regressions by race

691n terms of years of schooling, the gap between blacks and whites is

much greater for the 1930-39 cohort than the 1950-59 cohort: on average,
whites in the 1930-39 cohort have over 2 more years of schooling than blacks,

whereas the gap in years of schooling is under one year for the 1950-59
cohort.

70See Katz and Revenga (1989).
71See for example Welch (1973).

46

and gender each year. The regressions controlled for years of education,
marital status, experience and its square, part-time status, residence in an
SMSA, and region of residence. Figure 9 plots the return to a year of

education for men and women by race. The return to education follows
roughly the same path over time for black and white women in the 1980s. For
men, there is some weak evidence that the return to education. increased by
more for white workers than for black workers in the 1980s. Nevertheless,
the time-series pattern of the estimated returns to education for black and white

workers are roughly the same in the 1980s, suggesting that differences in
education are not the primary cause of the expansion in the black-white wage
gap.

In sum, the cohort patterns in Table 13 and the returns to schooling

presented in Figure 9 provide little evidence that a change in the price of
skills, or an erosion in the relative quality of schools for black workers, is
responsible for the increase of the black-white earnings gap. More promising
explanations for the increase in the gap are likely to involve structural factors

examined by Bound and Freeman, such as the decline in unionization, the
decline in the real minimum wage, and industrial shifts.

IV. Conclusion
This paper has assembled and analyzed a great deal of information
regarding the quality of public schooling provided to black and white students

since 1954. We draw six main lessons from our analysis.
(1) Wealth, not race, now seems to be the main determinant of the studentteacher ratio. Moreover, in spite of having lower family wealth, on average,

black students and white students attend schools with roughly comparable
pupil-teacher ratios, nationwide. In the Northeast, however, class sizes are

larger for the average black student than for the average white student.

47

Hispanic students, on the other hand, attend schools with a higher pupilteacher ratio than black or white students, on average. The larger class size
for Hispanic students results mainly from their high representation in the West.

(2) Minority children are much less likely to be exposed to computers in
school than white children, even after adjusting for family income. Minority

children are also less likely to use computers at home than white children.
Children from low-income families are less likely to use computers in school
than children from high-income families1

(3) The decline in school segregation for black students in the South began on

a wide scale around 1964, about 10 years after the Supreme Court's landmark

decision in Brown vs. Board of Education. Significantly, the movement
toward integration began about 4 years before the Green decision, which
required mandatory desegregation plans. The federal government's refusal to
give funds to segregated school districts may have precipitated the movement

toward integration.

(4) Racial segregation in schools has been rising steadily for Hispanic students

at least since 1968. Racial segregation in schools for black students has crept

up in some regions and declined in others. Between 1968 and 1989, the
Northeast has gone from being the least racially segregated region in the
country to the most racially segregated region for black students, and the South

has gone from being the most racially segregated region to the least.
Moreover, black and Hispanic students in large, urban areas face extremely
high levels of racial isolation.

(5) Although far from conclusive, evidence suggests that students who use

computers in the classroom are more likely to obtain jobs that require

48

computer skills. Moreover, jobs that require the use of computers tend to pay

a higher wage than jobs that do not require workers to use a cOmputer. The
widening gap in computer use between black and white workers can account

for at most one-third, and probably much less, of the increase in the blackwhite earnings gap between 1976 and 1990.

(6) Between 1980 and 1990, the earnings gap between white and black
workers expanded most for the 1950-59 cohort of workers, and least for the

1930-39 cohort. This finding is difficult to explain by either an erosion in
school quality, or by an increase in the price of skilled labor.

49
References

Ashenfelter, Orley, and Alan Krueger. 1992. 'Estimates of the Economic
Return to Schooling from a New Sample of Twins.

Unpublished

paper, Princeton University (February).

Blackburn, McKinley L., and David Neumark. 1991. "Omitted-Ability Bias
and the Increase in the Return to Schooling." Working Paper 3693.
Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research (May).

Behrman, Jere, Zdenek Hrubec, Paul Taubman, and Terrence Wales. 1980.

Socioeconomic Success: A Study of the Effects of Genetic
Endowments, Family Environment and Schooling. Amsterdam:
North Holland.
Blau, Francine D., and John W. Graham. 1989. "Black/White Differences in

Wealth and Asset Composition." Working Paper 2898. Cambridge
Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research (March).

Bond, Horace Mann. 1934. The Education of the Negro in the American
Social Order. New York: Prentice Hall.
Bound, John and Richard Freeman. 1992. "%\nat Went Wrong? The Erosion

of the Economic Position of Young Black Men in the 1980s"
Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (February): 201-232.

Braddock, Jornills, Robert Cram, James McPartland. 1984. "A Long-term
View of School Desegregation: Some Recent Studies of Graduates as

Adults." Phi Delta Kappan, pp. 259-264.

Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 1992a. "School Quality
and Black-White Relative Earnings: A Direct Assessment." Quarterly

Journal of Economics 107 (February): 151-200.

Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 1992b. "Does School Quality Matter?
Returns to Education and the Characteristics of Public Schools in the

United States." Journal of Political Economy 100 (January): 1-40.

50

Coleman, James, Sara Kelly, and John Moore. 1975. Trends in School

Washington, DC: The Urban Institute.

Segregation, 1968-73.

Coleman, James, et al. 1979. Equality of Educational Opportunity.
New York: Arno Press.

Conlisk, John. 1971. "A Bit of Evidence on the Income-Education-Ability
Interrelation." Journal of Human Resources 6, pp. 358-62.

Cram, Robert, and Jack Strauss. 1985. "School Desegregation and Black
Occupational Attainments: Results from a Long-term Experiment.

Baltimore, MD: Center for Social Organization of Schools, Johns
Hopkins University.

Donohue, John, and James J. Heckman. 1991. "Continuous Versus Episodic
Change: The Impact of Affirmative Action and Civil Rights Policy on

the Economic Status of Blacks." Journal of Economic Literature 29
(December): 1603-1643.

Dynarski, Mark. 1987. "The Scholastic Aptitude Test: Participation and
Performance." Economics of Education Review 6: 263-273.

Dubois, W.E.B., and Augustus Diii. 1911. The Common School and the
Negro American. Atlanta, GA: Atlanta University Press.

Freeman, Richard.

1973.

"Changes in the Labor Market for Black

Americans. "Brookings Payers on Economic Activity 20: 67-120.

Griliches, Zvi, and William Mason. 1972. "Education, Income, and
Ability." Journal of Political Economy, pp. 574-S 103.

Hanushek, Eric. 1986. "The Economics of Schooling: Production and
Efficiency in Public Schools." Journal of Economic Literature 23:
1141-77.

Hochschild, Jennifer L.

1984. The New American Dilemma: Liberal

Democracy and School Desegregation. New Haven: Yale University
Press.

51

Jaynes, Gerald, and Robin Williams, Jr.

1989. A Common Destiny.

Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.

Jones, Thomas Jesse. 1917. Negro Education: A Study of the Private and
Higher Schools for Colored People in the United States. US Office

of Education, Bulletin 1916. Washington, DC: USGPO.
Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin Murphy, and Brooks Pierce. 1991. 'Accounting for the
Slowdown in Black-White Wage Convergence." In Workers and Their

Wages: Chan2in Patterns in the United States, edited by Marvin H.

Kosters. Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute.

Katz, Lawrence, and Ana Revenga. 1989. "Changes in the Structure of
Wages: The United States vs. Japan." Journal of the Japanese and
International Economies 3, pp. 522-553.

Kozol, Jonathan. 1991. Savage Ineaualities. New York: Crown Publishers.
Krueger, Alan B. 1991. "How Computers Have Changed the Wage Structure:

Evidence from Microdata, 1984-1989." Working Paper 3858.
Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research (October).

Margo, Robert. 1990. Race and Schooling in the South, 1880-1950: An
Economic History. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

McPhail, Irving P.

1985.

'Computer Inequities in School Uses of

Microcomputers: Policy Implications." Journal of Negro Education

54: 3-13.

Nechyba, Thomas J. 1990. "The Southern Wage Gap, Human Capital and
the Quality of Education." Southern Economic Journal 57: 308-322.

Orfield, Gary. 1983. Public School Desegregation in the United States,

1968-1980. Washington, D.C.: Joint Center for Political Studies.

Quality Education For Minorities Project. 1990. "Education That
Works: An Action Plan for the Education of Minorities." Cambridge,

MA: MIT.

Ragosta, Marjorie, Paul Holland, and Dean T. Jamison. 1982. Computer-

52
Assisted Instruction and Compensatory Education: The ETS/LAUSD

Study. The Final Report. Princeton: Educational Testing Service.

Schick, Frank, and Renee Schick.

1991.

Statistical Handbook on U.S.

Hispanics. Phoenix, AZ: Oryx Press.

Smith, James P. 1984. "Race and Human Capital." American Economic
Review 74: 685-698.

Smith, James P. and Finis Welch. 1989. 'Black Economic Progress After
Myrda." Journal of Economic Literature 27: 5 19-564.

Welch, Finis. 1973.

"Education and Racial Discrimination."

In

Discrimination in Labor Markets, ed. by Orley Ashenfelter and
Albert Rees. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1973: 4381.

Welch, Finis, and Audrey Light.

1987. New Evidence on School

Desegregation. Los Angeles: Unicon Research Corporation.

Table 1A: Percentage of Black Students in Predominantly Minority Schools

Area

1968

1972

1976

1980

South
Border
Northeast
Midwest
West

80.9
71.6
66.8
77,3
72.2

55.3
67.2
69.9
75.3
68.1

54.9
60.1
72.5
70.3
67,4

57.1
59.2
79.9
69.5
66.8

76,6

63.6

62,4

62.9

U.S average

I

1989

I

595

I

58.5
75.4
69.7
68.5

I

65.1

I

I

I

Table 13: Percentage of Black Students in 90%-100% Minority Schools

Area

1968

1972

1976

1980

1989

South
border

77,8

Northeast
Midwest
West

42.7
58.0
50.8

24.7
54.7
46.9
57.4
42.7

22.4
42.5
51.4
51.1
36.3

23.0
37.0
48.7

26.0
33.6
49.9
40.1
27.1

64.3

38.7

35.9

33.2

U.S average

(,Q.2

43.6
33.7
I

33.8

Sources: Data for 1968-1980 are from Orfield (1983), p. 4, and are based
on U.S. Department of Education data; data for 1989 are tabulated fro'i' the
Public School Universe File, Department of Education. Data are unavailable
for: Georgia, Idaho, Maine, Missouri, South Dakota, Virginia, and Wyoming
Predominantly minority means that over half of the students in the school
are nonwhite.

Table 2A: Percentage of Hispanic Students in Predominantly Minority
Schools

Area

1968

1972

1976

1980

South
Border
Northeast
Midwest
West

69.6

69.9

70.9

--

76.0

--

-.

74.9
39.3
52.7

76.3

46.6

42.4

74.4
34.4
44.7

54.8

56.6

60.8

68.1

U.S. average

--

74.8
31.8

1989

76.1
I

I

63.5
I

-75.9
53.1
71.6
72.0

Table 23: Percentage of Hispanics Students in 90%-1Q0% Minority Schools

Area

1968

1972

1976

1980

South
Border
Northeast
Midwest
West

33.7

31.4

32.2

37.3

--

--

--

U.S average

--

1989

I

I

44.0

38.5

--

44.1
9.5
11.5

45.8
14.1
13.3

45.8

6.8
11.7

19.6
18.5

43.0
22.1
27.9

23.1

23.3

24.8

28.8

32.7

Sources: Data for 1968-1980 are from Orfield (1983), p. 14, and are based
on U.S. Department of Education data; data for 1989 are tabulated from the
Public School Universe File, Department of Education. Data are unavailable
for: Georgia, Idaho, MAine, Missouri, South Dakota. Virginia, and Wyoming.
Results are not reported for Border states because the number of hispanic
students is small. Predominantly minority means that over half of the
students in the school are nonwhite.

Table 3: Pupil-Teacher Ratio for Black, Hispanic, arid White Students
in 1989

A. All grade levels

Averaze P-I Ratio
Area

South
Border
Northeast
Midwest
West
U.S average

Black

Hispanic

Percent P-T Ratio

White

Black

Hispanic

> 25
tlhite

17.8
18.4
16.4
18.1
22.9

17.9
17.6
16.2
18.5
23.2

17.9
17.7
15.8
17.7
22.3

1.4
1.5
1.1
2.6
29.4

5.6
32.6

1.8
1.0
1.0
2.7
23.4

18.1

20.3

18.3

4.2

17.1

6.2

2.7
1.1

0.8

B. Grammar schools only

Aveypze P-I Ratio

Area

South
Border
Northeast
Midwest
West

U.S average

Percent P-I Ratio > 25

Black

Hispanic

18.3
19.6
17.8
18.9
23.9

18.1
18.7
17.5
18.9
24.1

18.5
18.6
17.6
18.9
23.4

1.8
1.7
1.9
3.7
38.1

63,0

4.3
23.4

19.0

21.1

19.6

5.9

22.6

9.5

White

continued -

Black

Hispanic

2.2
1.6

1.0
5.0

White

2.0
1.7
1.7

Table 3: Pupil-Teacher Ratio for Black, Hispanic. and White Students
in 1989.

(Continued)

C. High schools only

Averaze P-T Ratio
Area

Black

South
Border
Northeast
Midwest
West
U.S average

Hispanic

Percent P-T Ratio

White

17.0
16.9
15.6
16.8
22.0

17.7
16.0
15.3
16.9
22.5

17.0
16.8
13.9
16.3
21.2

17,2

19.7

17.0

Black

0.7
0.3

Hispanic

> 25
White

0.9
0.2
0.1

0.2
20.5

3.6
0.0
0.0
0.4
23.7

0.5
12.7

2.2

12.7

2.7

0.0

Source: Tabulated from the Common Core Data, Public School Universe File,
Department of Education. Data are unavailable for Georgia, Idaho,
Maine, Massachusetts, Missouri, Montana. Rhode Island, South
Dakota, Virginia, and Wyoming.

Regions are defined as follows:

South:

Alabama, Arkansas, Georgia, Florida, Louisiana, Mississippi,
North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, and Virginia.

Border:

Delaware, DC, Kentucky, Maryland, Missouri, Oklahoma, and West
Virginia.

Northeast: Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey,
New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island and Vermont.
Midwest:

Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, Nebraska,
North Dakota, Ohio, South Dakota, and Wisconsin.

West:

Arizona, California, Colorado1 Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New
Mexico, Oregon. Utah, Washington, and Wyoming.

table 4: Regressions of PupiL-Teacher Ratio on City Characteristics, by Race

Coefficients (SE)
VariabLe

BLack

Intercept

17.101

Gramnar SchooL

High SchooL

(.131)

1.356

1.704

1.352

(.034)

(.033)

(.038)

-0.423

(.055)
-1.866

(.043)
Midiest

West

Large City

15.566

(.086)

0.177

Northeast

17.193

Hispanic

(.103)

(.039)

Border

White

Means

-0006

0.475

0.521

0.267

0.298

0.238

0.079

0.075

0.009

-2.072
(.040)

-2.224
<.053)

0.168

0.175

0.125

0.563

0.203

0.301

0.071

0.094

0.202

0.483

0.341

0.056

0.337

0.205

0.154

0.187

0.125

0.173

0.190

0.099

0.141

0.076

0.211

0.45

0.195

-0.161

C.168)

(.035)

(.065)

4.751

4.292

5.133

(.052)

(.039)

(.037)

1.109

0.923

2.675

(.103)

(.095)

(.128)

(.130)

Fringe of

0.348

0.131

2.684

Large City

<.108)

(.084)

(.130)

Fringe of

0.002

0.525

1.882

(.108)

(.086)

(.137)

R-Square

0.488

-0.591

1.222

RuraL Area

1.000

-0.119
(.053)

(.085)

City

1.000

(.045)

0.298

Meditsn

1.000

0.018

(.040)

-0.343

White

-0.679
(.035)

(.104)

Mediisn City

BLack

-0.128
(.104)

-0.175

(.081)

(.130)

0.262

0.350

0.444

0.225

.

PupiL-Teacher

18.16

18.36

20.33

PupiL-Teacher Ratio
using Whites Coeffs
arC Crocps Means

18.26

18.36

20.12

PupiL-Teacher Ratio

18.31

18.36

18.16

Ratio

Using Oroups Coeffs
and

Whites Means

Table 5: Percentage of Students who use Goputers in School,
by Race

1984

1989

White

36.3%

56.4%

Black

18.3

39.3

Hispanic

19.9

41.9

White

38.5

60.9

Black

16.8

38.4

Hispanic

19.4

42.7

White

31.8

45.5

Black

21.6

41.5

Hispanic

21.3

39.6

All Grades

Grades 1-8

Grades 9-12

Source: Authors tabulations based on the October CPS,

1984 and 1989. total sample size is 23,295 in 1989
and 25,067 in 1984. White is defined as white, nonhispanic,
and black is defined as black, nonhispanic.

Determinants of Computer Use in Schools; Linear Probability Models
(Dependent variable Equals 1 if Student Uses Computer in School)
Independent
Variable

Model
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.564

0.749

0.768

0.663

(0.004)

(0.030)

(0.031)

(0.034)

(1—Yes)

-0.171
(0.009)

-0.167
(0.009)

-0.122
(0.010)

-0.093
(0.011)

Hispanic
(1—Yes)

-0.144
(0.012)

-0.144
(0.012)

-0.105
(0.012)

-0.077
(0.013)

-0.010

-0.010
(0.006)

-0.009
(0.006)

-0,017
(0.012)

-0.005
(0.012)

Intercept

Black

Female

-

--

(1—Yes)

Public School

(0.007)
-

--

(1—Yes)

Grade

Age

-0.010
(0.012)

---

--

-

0.018

0.018

0.011

(0.005)

(0.005)

(0.005)

-0.026

-0.026
(0.005)

-0.020
(0.005)

(0.005)
-- -

Northeast
(1—Yes)

Midwest

---

(1—Yes)

South

---

(1—Yes)

0.034

0.038

(0.010)

(0.010)

0.018

0.024

(0.010)

(0.010)

-0,053
(0.010)

-0.046
(0.010)

3 Urban Area Type
Dummies Included

No

No

Yes

Yes

7 SMSA Size
Dummies Included

No

No

Yes

Yes

14 Income Category
Dummies Included

No

No

No

Yes

0.030

0.036

R-Squared

0.018

0.025

Notes: Standard errors are shown in parentheses. Sample size is 23,295.
The data set used is the October, 1989 Current Population Survey.

Table 7: Mean High School Characteristics By Race. 1980
(Standard Errors in Parentheses)

Characteristic

Wei2hted by Number of:
Black Students
White Students

.50

Proportion offering
Computer Courses

(.02)

.60
(.02)

No. of Computer
Courses per 100 Students

.08
(.004)

.12
(.007)

Pupil-Teacher Ratio

19.41
(.14)

Starting Teacher
Salary (BA Degree)
Proportion of Teachers
With MA/Ph.D.

$10,645
(41)

.52
(.01)

18.83

(tM)
$10,485
(42)
.47

(.01)

Percent of Teachers who
ive within 5 miles

33.43

Percent of Teachers with
10 or more years exper.

36.89
(.78)

(.78)

Percent of Teachers who
are white

67,21
(.89)

94.63
(.32)

Term Length

(.84)

180.80
(.18)

Number of Library
Books

5,890

43.56
(.91)
40.36

180.06
(.17)

(174)

6,159
(162)

School has Student
Exchange Program

.38
(.02)

(.02)

School is Under Court
Desegregation Order

.47

.14

(.02)

(.01)

School in Urban Area

Number of Security
Cuards

.58

.49

.14

(.02)

(.01)

2.28
(.10)

(.05)

.66

Notes: The two questions on computers pertain to 1982. The sample
consists of 975 high schools, containing 207,301 black students and
771,291 white students. Teacher salaries are in 1980 dollars. Data
set: High School and Beyond Survey, Schools File.

Table B

Effects of Attending a Segregeted Bigh School on
Educational and Labor Market Outcomes

OLS
(1)

Indep.ndent
Varseble

Proportion
Black Sn Eigh

(3)

Prop.

Prop.

Black
Yr. of
in
Education College
—0.503
(0.232)

251.3

(2)

(4)

(5)

Co

Workers

Yrs of
Education

(6)

(7)

Prop.
Black

Prop.

in
College

Black

Log
Wage

0274

0.116

—0.115

0.448

0.3*3

(0.053)

(0.049)

(0.066)

(0609)

(0.142)

Co—
Workers
Black
—0.037

(5)

Log

We,.

0058

(0.123)

(0.165)

School

0.332

0.019

0.013

0.31*

0.019

0.013

-0.313

(1.Yea)

(0.121)

(0.030)

(0.025)

(0.033)

(0.121)

(0.030)

(0.025)

(0.033)

Quartic

Ye.

Yes

Yes

Yes

Ye.

Yes

Yes

Yee

Ye.

Ye.

Ye.

Ye.

Yes

Ye.

Yes

Ye.

No

Yea

Yes

Yes

No

Yea

Yea

Yes

Female

—0.332

in Age

State where
grew up dummies
8 Region of
residence dummies

saspt. Size
R—Squsred
p—velue for
teat of over—
identifying

1102

396

575

606

1102

396

575

696

0.082

0.357

0.157

0.299

.0.079

0.332

0.147

0.297

0.973

0.995

0.996

0.980

—

.

restric tiona

Note: Standard errors are shown in paremtheee.. The data set is the National Survey of Black
Aerscans. Sample is limited to individuels age 25 to 65 who have completed a Least 10 years
of schooling. Columns 2 and 6 onLy include individuals who have completed at Least one year of
Excluded instruments for column 5 throuh 8 are state where grew up dummies interected
collage.
with a dummy indicating eheUser the individual attended high school efter 1964.

Table 9: Percent of ewployees who use a computer at work, by race
and education, 1984-89

Group

Black

Hispanic

White

Year: 1984

All

20.4%

16.8%

28.0%

Less than
high school

3.2

1.5

7.5

High school

15.7

16.0

22.7

Some college

29.6

37.4

32.0

College

43.2

37.2

43.6

Post-college

49.3

45.8

45.8

Year; 1989
All

28.7%

24.1%

42.1%

Less than
high school

3.5

5.7

9.8

High school

21.9

27.2

32.5

Some college

43.0

43.5

49.1

College

51.5

53.8

62.0

Post-college

54.9

72.4

63.6

Source: Tabulated from the October Current Population Survey.
1984 and 1989. Total sample size for 1984 is 25,067, and for
1989 is 23,295.

Table 10

Determinants of Computer Use at Work; Linear Probability Models
(Dependent variable Equals 1 if Computer used at Work)
Model

Independent
Variable

Intercept

(1)

(2>

0120

0.035

(0.009)

(1.545)

0.076

Used Computer
in School

(0.012)

-0.029
(0.013)

-0.014
(0.015)

0.021

0.019

(0.011)

(0.012)

Female

0.095

(1—Yes)

(0.009)

0.079
(0.011)

Black
(1—Yes)

Other
(I—Yes)

Senior in 1980
(1—Yes)

0.035

0.040

(0.009)

(0.017)

0.201

Crade Point
Average /100

(0.072)

Achievement
Test Score /100

(0,071)

0.170

-0.013
(0.135)

Age

0.000

Age-Squared

(0.003)

8 Region Dummies
Included

No

Yes

10 Dummies for
Parents' Educ.

No

Yes

0.017

0.042

R-Squared

Notes: Standard errors are shown in parentheses. Column 2
also includes marital status dummy, married*female. union status,
2 dummies for type of high school, urban dummy, and a foreign born
dummy. Sample size is 7,016. Data set is the High School and
Beyond Survey, 1984 wave.

Table 11: OLS Regression Estimates of the Effect of Computer Use on Wages
Dependent variable: in (hourly wage)

Independent
Variable

Intercept

October 1989

October 1984
(1)

(2)

(3)

0.669
(0.025)

0.741
(0.024)

0.812

0.913

(0.025)

(0025)
0.221
(0.008)

0.213
(0.009)

Uses computer
at work (1—yes)

(4)

Black (1—yes)

-0.086
(0.013)

-0.078
(0.013)

-0.110
(0.013)

-0.089
(0.013)

Hispanic

-0.052
(0.017)

-0.047
(0.017)

-0.016
(0.017)

-0.009
(0.016)

0.076
(0.002)

(i—yes)

Years of
education

0.078

0.070

0.089

(0.002)

(0.002)

(0.002)

0.032

0.031

0.032

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

0.031
(0.001)

Experience-Squared
/ 100

-0.053
(0.002)

-0.050
(0.002)

-0.055
(0.003)

-0.050
(0.002)

Female
(1—yes)

-0.165
(0.013)

-0.1.91

-0.167
(0.012)

-0.198

(0.013)

Married

0.188

0.177

0.184

0.168

(1—yes)

(0.011)

(0.012)

(0.012)

(0.012)

Married*Female

-0.236
(0.016)

-0.222

-0.197
(0.016)

-0.183
(0.015)

Experience

Union member
(1—yes)

3 Region Dummies
R2

(0016)

(0.012)

0.194

0.208

0.184

(0.010)

(0.010)

(0.011)

0.202
(0.010)

Yes

Yes

0.385

0.417

Yes

Yes

0.384

0.411

Notes: Standard errors are shown in parentheses. Sample size is 12,945 for
1984 and 12,988 for 1989. Samples only include black, white, and hispanic
workers.

Table 12: Effects of Computer Use in an Occupation on Earnings;
Evidence from Twins

All Twins
Independent
Variable

CLS
(1)

Computer use
in occupation

Tenure

Covered by
Union

Married

Sample size

R-Squared

First
Difference
(2)

Identical Twins
First
CLS
Difference
(3)

(4)

0.263

0.300

0.165

0.203

(0.083)

(0.112).

(0.099)

(0.134)

0.021

0.027

0.024

(0.003)

(0.005)

(0.004)

0.029
(0.006)

0.127
(0.071)

0.075
(0.090)
0.145
(0.082)

0.110

0.057

(0.056)

(0.072)

0.044
(0.050)

0.054

0.095

(0.064)

(0.063)

406

0.25

203

398

0.24

0.33

149

0.27

Notes: Standard errors are shown in parentheses. Columns 1 and 3 also
include education, age and age-squared, nonwhite dummy, gender dummy, and an
intercept. Columns 2 and 4 also include education and an intercept. Computer
use in occupation is the proportion of workers in the individuals three-digit
occupation who use a computer at work.

loll

itt..

4.132
3.123

(.013

0.070

0.720

1.)')

0.340

0.143
10,000)

0.433

.l...kty ..t.Iflj. .4...

I.LtooL. of

tOo OSlO. 0010. sod 1110

1o0s4eo 4.4,1.40 ,u..

•oiio

0.171

0.020

113.3

0.1!. .1 Lttib..ito
(sn. .1 0t.fl.WkI I..

00.3

121.0

3.040

III.!

Non W.jo

itt.,

(0.00))

£11

1.121

3.340

3.430

3,303

0.700

270.4

0.410

0.073

3.003

3.025

(0.0)4)

3.001

003.7

0.715

435.3

(0.003) (0.000)

0.000

(0.003) (0.003)

3.404

4.242
(0.003)

(0,000) 00.0003

4.00 In LI. 00 ..loIood utoto. So 7.01
.00
o Lb. N.s.b CII '00 040005.

300.0

3.133
3.030
00.00)) (0.002)

(0.000) (0.0037

3.000

3.310

(0.003)

Stool.

0.022
(0.037)

1100

0000

4t10

s.d

0.310
(0.0000

lOll.

3.030
3.013
(0.003) (0.004)

(0.000) (0,000) 10.001)

0,730

(0.001)

0.340

0.003

3.1)1
(0.000)

3.300

0000

0070.

kM LII 510010

0000.

(0.001) (0.003) (0.002) (0.004)

(0.001) 00.003) 00.001)

4.300
00.002)

(0.001) (0.000)

4.04?

((.002) (0.007) (0.002) (0.000)

(.000

4Q13
(0.004)

tt..lOlllL••bo

I; Coboti to

gig

It.,'

4.007

(0.001)

lt..l.

0Itt.tntl.1.

03

Ia. 11—00
N4l Log Wn.

lid

Non 1.. 1os•

1100—1101

00... Lou U.1o
'La igg.o

1130—1110

lid

H... 1..
Wogo

itt,;

1141-1141

lid

00... Lol 0.40

113)_Il,,

lid ii...

Hon Lo los.

I1201121

'ii Itt.,

(ga Los U...

lulO—Ilil

Ii' ito.,

1i1s

1100

Los k.'om .ad Woo.

Non Los U.,.

1100

Canto

H...

lob!.

Log
0000

'(000

(.)00

0.013
•03?3
(0.005) (0,043)

(0.000)

•0.310

—

00(Ot..iI.I

007)

'look

W.go

0.000

(0.003)

-0.203
(0.0(3)

(0.010)

—0.210

-(.300
(0.0)1)

'0,201
(.300
(0,003) ((.010)

(0.0203

'0.300

3000

0.344
0.20) -0,330
(0.003) (0.002) (0.000)

((.003)

020l

(0,00') (0.003) (0.000)

.0.370

0401
(0.000)

(0.00))

0.320

-0,332
(0.00))

1)40

Appendix Table 1
School Segregation in the South and Border States, 1924-71
Proportion of Black Students who Attended All Black or Majority Black Schools

Year

1924
1925
1926
1927
1928
1929
1930
1931
1932
1933
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965

1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971

Sample
Size

70
48
66
57
46
65
39
73

40
54
52
56

67
60
62
61
62

70
75
74
66
57
54

65
68
68
71
58

75
55

74
72
76

74
79
80
81
83
90

86
102
86
97
78
79
95
88
85

All Black

0.953
0.960
1.000
0.971
0.897
0.921
0.955
0.958
0.880
0.971
0.974
0.925
0.922
0.976
0.947
0.974
0.930
0.926
0.903
0.915
0.944
0.957
1.000
0.926
0.981
0.881
0.930
0.887
0.903
0.938
0.883
0.928
0.910
0.955
0.880
0.849
0.924
0.866
0.869
0.864
0.796
0.753
0.656
0.618
0.500
0.484
0.329
0.150

Majority Black
1.000
0.960
1.000
0.971
0.931
0.947
0.955
0.979
0.920
0.971
1.000
0.950
0.961
1.000
0.974
1.000
0.977
1.000
0.952
0.983
0.963
1.000
1.000
0.981
1.000
0.932
1.000
0.962
0.952
0.979
0.950
0.986
0.955
0.985
0.960
0.945
0.962
0.927
0.976
0.938
0.888
0.840
0.823
0.737
0.711
0.615
0.588
0.463

Appendix TabLe 2
PupiL-Teacher Ratios by State in 1989 from the Common Core
of Data Surveys, PubLic Schoot Universe FILe

Number of
SchooLs

State

1287
1095
953

AL
AR

ND

19.3894
15.8520
20.1055
23.8511
17.6717
15.0755
18.0986
17.9164
17.8716
17.1897
18.7467
18.3088
17.8955
17.7413
17.3846
18.7940
17.1696
18.4731
19.1361
16.9398
22.3619

NE

17.4660

NH

182
164

AZ
CA
CO
CT
DC
DE

2217

FL

1606

IA

4134

IL

7293
1301

966

1855
1455

1487
873
1935
627
1475
443

Average 18.1295

20.3037

18.3459

NC

1499
5780
708
335

UT
VT

1632

WA

17.5397
15.1145
19.0342
21.5741
16.6486
18.1587
18.3513
18.9808
17.1393
17.2737
19.9792
17.0565
23.4357
18.3373
20.2846

2008
975

Wi
WV

2237
654
323
3936
3683

NJ

NM
NV
NY
ON
Ok
OR
PA
SC

1831

1188
3165
1045

69,610

TN
TX

US

.18.7698
14.7765
18.5524
17.7218
18.1882

17.5071
15.9024

LA

MD
MI
MN
MS

3266

19.7255
16.0131
20.7494
23.9680

18.1471
20.0756
17.7840
23.4461
17.3376
20.4039
17.4744
16.8722

IN

1178

19.2522
16.3082
20.1686
24.3286
17.8696
15.4574
16.9703
17.3726
18.7650
16.7259
19.4142
19.1723
16.9984
18.3033
17.5099
17.6544
15.9421
17.9207
19.0542
17.8275
19.9759
16.5916
18.2992
15.1307
18.7171
21.2390
16.6518
18.9292
17.6333
19.3807

16.1367
18.2635
18.6283
16.1701
18.1012
17.3882
18.3017
15.6980
18.3243
19.1297
17.2231
19.1452
15.7266
16.9796
15.1251
19.2739
21.6187
15.0767
19.6431
17.4738
19.3816
16.7979
18.0679
20.0556
16.9726
24.7833
18.0864
21.2567
16.6285
16.4946

KS
KY

1359
1460

Average Puoi L-teacher Ratio
BLacks
Whites
Hispanics

16.8294.

Appendix Table 3

Estimates of Students Computer Use by State and Race

State

Sample Size
for All Races

Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
D.C.

Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa

Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana

Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
North Carolina
North Dakota
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Mexico
New Jersey
New York
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Dakota
South Carolina

Percent of Students Using Computers
at School by Race
All Races
Black
Jhite

274
340
257
322
1687
276
210
138
234
1018
340
95
389
1024
327
320
317
292
301

38.7
65.9
54.5
44.7

212
790

983
285
375

241
342

949
326
327

249
203
335
778
1362
1161
288
249
925
208
397
396

-

Continued

39.].

--

66.5
58.1

--

44.1
65.6
51.9
48.6
61.9
52.0
51.5
57.9
44.7
52.8
49.9
62.2
66.3
61.0
35.0
68.1
47.2
58.5
51.2
71.6
30.9
56.0
57.3
54.4
62.3
62.4
57.0
58.1
55.2
53.7
52.7
50.2
52.8
53.0
56.9
49.0
36.9
41,8

257

36.4

26.0
40.4

48,3
49.4

--

65.9
54.8

--

46.L
32.8
46.9
46.3

61.9
45.3
55.4
54.9

--

58.1

--

46.4

31.0

62.0

--

51.6
62.7

--

30.4

42.5
63.2
39.6

-

67.0
61.5
37.2
68.0
50.4
60.6
53.1

--

72.4

24.5

35.9

---

54.5
56.4

43.4

57:9

-.
--.
-.
.-

62.5
61.6
57.5
57.8
63.0

33.6
46.0
36.7

59.9
57.7
52.1
54.6

--

53.6

40.0

59.0
49.5

.-

36.4

37.4

44.7

Appendix Table 3 -

State

Sample Size
for All Races

Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Virginia
Vermont
West Virginia
Washington
Wisconsin
Wyoming
US Average

- Continued
Percent of Students Using Computers
at School by Race
Black
White
All Races

311
1245
439
357
185
309
245
328
27?

45.9
53.8
45.7
64.3
52.2
53.1
75.5
66.8
75.5

30.8
24.7

------

54.6
54.0
47.9
64.3
53.0
53.4
75.9
66.9
75.9

23295

52.7

39.3

56.4

--

39.6

Source: Authors' calculations based on the Current Population
Survey, October 1989

Notes: We do not report estimates for states for which
there are fewer than 40 observations in the sample. The
sample includes students enrolled in public and private schools.

Figure I

9.

a.
7.
6
—

0—

if
,o

o

il:

20

30

'0

b iO

Oercent Nan.nne

eb

go

-

ido

Cumuiartve OistriDuciy Fçnc©n: Wnre Stucents

9—

.8

0
0
0

S

a-

5,

0

.3

0

U

2'

0'
o

B:

ib

Cumulative

20

30

.3 50 iS
Percent NonSte

70

eb

Sb

tOo

Distribution Rurxtion: Black Stucents

.8
C

0

C

a
C
aC.
S

.7

.6
-S

.2

0
0

C:

tb

2b

30

ib

sb

sb

Percent Non'eCste

'b

eb

cb

Cumulative Distribution Function: Kispanic Stucents

ido

Figure 2
o Central

NO: Central City

City

9

8H
0
C-

0
0
C

'I
'O

C
0

1
c
C

3

C)

2

I-I
0-i_I

——

—

10

0

I

I

20

30

I

I

40

50

I

60

I

80 g

70

ido

Percent Nonwrlite

Cumulative Oistributon Function: White Students
o Central

C

0

C

0
a
0

I

Not Central City

City

-

.6

C-

0.
.5

'0

0
C
0

U

.4

3.2 -

0
I

0

I

I

I

10

20

30

I

I

I

60
40
50
Percent Nonwhite

I

I

I

I

70

60

90

100

2: Cumulative Oistrtbutton Funcbon: Black Students

Figure 3

Plus aria Minus 1 Sto. Error

.9

a9J .-_

L
0

C. ...

4-

a
.2

24

3

44

Year

Figure 4:Extent of Segregation

54

64 5

— South and Border

Plus and Minus 1. 5th. Error

C-)

C

7L
0

.6

C

S.

I
0
L
00.
0
C.

a

.4
.3
.2 -

I

24

I

34

I

44

54

I

64

I

68 71

Year

Figure 3•g: Etent of Segregation — South and Border

0
0
L

.9

C
C-)

I0

a

.8

0.
C-,
Co

.7 -

V
a'
C

z

.6

1935

1915

1945

1955
Year

1965

1975

Figure 'U: Relative White/Black Pupil—Teacher Patio

0'
a

0
Co

L

-5

V

C
U
Co

V

-10

a
a.
U

-15

C,

C,
.4-

C

x

—20

-25

-

-

I

1915

I

I

I

I

I

I

1925

1935

1945

1955

1965

1975

1909

year

Figure '4B: White — Black Gap in Pupil—Teacher Ratio

igure S
Pelative Scnool Quality vs. Pepcertt of Population that is Black

'I.

—

I

—

I

'I

S.

—

I

—

—

a

I

I'

I

.5

j

-.

3

•.rt..,t 13.a. 152*

.â
r_.1
sin mo

Li

LI

;

I.

J

.1•

——

-

-

—

a

.5

—

.7-

—

—

I.

—

—

I

.5

-U

.1

-

...L .1.-L.

-

LI
4

•

.;a

——

: :

P_t_ t. 14

-

LI

.1

.aI IMO. $5.5

i pupit

CP8' a

valu9 t.iassaCttS

o
o
\Qo a go
2Q
0

-

Is,

(0

0

0
0

0
0

o

Foo

w

0

iS
0

0-

0

0

0
0

0.

0

0

0

0

S

0

0

L

value Per Student

0
0

GD

0
0

£
¶
S

4-,

0)

-j0

0'

0

ii)

0

II)

I,

C

0

—0.13

—0.12

—0.11

0.1

—0.09

0.08

0,07

0.06

73

7

1

74

75

76

77

78

79

AU

80

Year

81

82

83

Worker• Age 16-65

84

85

86

87

88

Black—Win Ic Wage Gap, 1973— 99()

Figure

89

90

(U

w

CIII

C
C
I.-

0)

a(I)

ci)

C

4-.

—-- All Men

All Women

YEAR

1972 1974 1976. 1978 1980 1982

Age

1988 1990

25-34J

1984 1986

Black-White Earnings Gap
(CPS,May 1973-78,OGRG 1979-90)

Figure 8

j

•

m

ci

4-a

C
I-

U)

.4-a

0

w

-a

0
0

Male Black

197.8

0.05

0.06

0.07

0.08

C 0.09

0.1

1980

Male White

1982

(CPS OGRO

Year

1

1986

979-9O)

Female Black

1984

Files,

x

1990

Female White

1988

RETURNS TO EDUCATION, BY RACE AND SEX

Figure 9

