NBER WORKING PAPERS SERIES

TRENDS IN EXPECTED RETURNS IN CURRENCY AND BOND MARKETS

Martin D.D. Evans
Karen K. Lewis

Working Paper No. 4116

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1992

This paper is part of NBER's research programs in Asset Pricing and International Finance
and Macroeconomics, Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4116
July 1992

TRENDS IN EXPECTED RETURNS IN CURRENCY AN]) BOND MARKETS

ABSTRACT

Under conventional notions about rational expectations and market efficiency, expected
returns differ from the actual cx post returns by a forecast error that is uncorrelated with current

information. In this paper, we describe how small departures from conventional notions of
rational expectations and market efficiency can produce trends in excess returns. These trends

are in addition to the trends typically found in the level of asset prices themselves. We report
strong evidence for the presence of additional trends in excess foreign exchange and bond returns.

We also estimate the additional trend component in excess returns on foreign exchange and find

that it varied between -.8% and 1% for one month returns and between -6% and 8% for three
month returns.

Martin D.D. Evans
Stem School of Business
New York University
100 Trinity Place, Rim 1200
New York, NY 10006

Karen K. Lewis
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER

Interpreting the behavior of expected asset price changes from observed a post returns requires

taking a stand on how market participants form expectations.

It is now common in both the

macroeconomic and finance literatures to make a joint assumption about expectations and market
efficiency that ensures expected returns differ from the actual a post returns by a forecast error that is
unoorrelated with current information. This paper investigates whether this joint assumption holds true.

First, we describe how small departures from conventional notions of rational expectations and market

efficiency can produce additional trends in asset returns.' While empirical research has found that the

levels of asset prices follow trends, our analysis shows that small departures from the standard joint
assumption can produce additional trends in excess returns beyond those in asset prices themselves. We
then show that there is strong empirical evidence for the presence of additional trends in foreign exchange

and bond returns.
Conventional notions of both rational expectations and market efficiency have been questioned

by recent research. Papers by Rogoff (1980), Lewis (1991), and Evans and Lewis (1991, 1992) show
that even when market traders are rational, their forecast errors can be correlated with current information

if they anticipate a discrete jump in the distribution of asset prices. In this case, forecasts of the future

asset price will rationally include the expectation of a discrete jump in the process. This expectation
induces the so-called "peso problem' where forecast errors can be serially correlated over small samples

when the jump does not occur. Recent empirical studies have found evidence of serial correlation and
small sample biases in foreign exchange and bond returns? This evidence suggests that a post returns

can provide a biased measure of a ante returns.
DeLong, Schleifer, Summers, and Waldman (1990) have questioned conventional notions of
market efficiency by showing how trend-chasing feedback traders can affect equilibrium prices. While

there is no single measure of expected returns if markets are comprised of heterogeneous traders, the
realized return will systematically deviate from the return based upon the true value of the asset price (i.e..

the price determined by fundamentals) during periods when feedback traders are active in the market.
In this paper, we show how peso problem effects arising from expected shifts in asset returns can

have some of the same empirical implications as the effects of heterogeneous traders. Specifically, we

show that if either type of effect is present and asset prices contain trends, then forecast errors will not

only be serially correlated, but they will appear to follow trends. Although this trending behavior is a
much stronger implication than the standard "peso problem" predicts, we emphasize that it will only arise

for finite periods. Our analysis does not imply that forecast errors follow trends over indefinitely long
periods of time.

We test for the presence of a small trend in cx post returns on foreign exchange and Eurocurrencies from the beginning of 1975 to 1990. Interestingly, we find evidence to suggest that both the

foreign exchange and bond markets have undergone periods when forecast errors and, hence, cx post
returns have contained trends. When we estimate the trend component in excess foreign exchange returns
we find that it has varied in annualized rates between -0.8% and 1% for one month returns and between 6% and 8% for three month returns.

At the outset, we should make clear how we view these results in relation to existing empirical
studies of excess returns. In particular, our findings do not suggest that excess returns should be treated
as non-stationary variables, a suggestion at odds with the existing literature. Even though excess returns
contain a non-stationary trend component, these series are very close to stationary variables in the sense

that their trend components are small. This explains why standard tests have failed to find evidence of

trends in excess returns before. Moreover, Monte Carlo studies of time series that are close to being
stationary suggest that they are more appropriately treated as stationary for econometric purposes? From

this perspective, therefore, our results are in agreement with the existing treatment of excess returns in
the literature.
From another perspective, however, our results suggest that the standard econometric treatment

of excess returns may be inappropriate. Empirical studies of risk premia in excess returns typically
assume that forecast errors are uncorrelated with current information. By contrast, our results suggest
that forecast errors have at times been highly serially correlated, a result consistent with findings based

upon survey data. Furthermore, these results do not necessarily contradict rational expectations, as we
will describe in more detail below.
The plan of the paper is as follows. Section 1 describes the relationship between heterogeneous

2

trading, peso problems, and empirical trends. Section 2 discusses the empirical evidence and some Monte
Carlo experiments to examine the robustness of the results. Section 3 provides estimates of the additional

trends in excess returns. Concluding remarks follow.

1. Peso Problems, Heterogeneous Trading, and Trends
To motivate our theoretical discussion below, consider the behavior of foreign exchange returns.

Figures 1 and 2 show respectively the three month forward prediction error and the forward premium

for the logarithm of the dollar exchange rate against the German mark, the British pound, and the
Japanese yen between 1975 and 1989. Figure 2 shows that the DM was at a premium against the dollar
for the period, even though the dollar rose substantially during the early 1980s, and then fell dramatically

in 1985. Figure 2 also shows a great deal of persistence in the forward premium of the pound and the
yen against the dollar.

To interpret these variations, it is useful to write the forward premium as the sum of the risk
premium and the expected change in the exchange rate:

(1)

F-S,= E,S1.1-S,+rp,

where F(

is the logarithm of the forward rate at time t for delivery at time 1+1, 5, is the logarithm of the

spot rate at time z, E is the expectation conditional upon information available at time 1,
risk

and

rp1 is the

premium. The forward premium in Figure 1 suggests that either the risk premium or the expected

change in

the

spot rates is highly persistent. The relationship in (1) applies to any spot rate process and

we will use this relationship below to describe spot interest rates as well. In the present context, S. is
the spot exchange rate.

The forward prediction error or, equivalently, the cx post excess return on buying foreign
currency forward is:

(2)

S+

—

F,

=

— EL+IS,÷L — (F,

—

E,S1÷1)

3

=

-

— rpt.

Under standard rational expectations assumptions, the market's forecast error, S -ES141, is white noise
and uncorrelated with all information available at time t In this case, excess returns will differ from the

risk premium by a white noise forecast error. Thus, movements in excess returns that are predictable
from time c information only arise from variations in the risk premia,

Recent empirical studies indicate that the forecast errors in foreign exchange and bond returns

are significantly autocorrelated. In this case, the excess returns in Figure 1 represent a combination of
risk premia and forecast errors that are jointly correlated, precluding a simple decomposition. Similarly,
the forward premia depicted in Figure 2 suggest that shocks to deviations between spot and forward rates

are persistent. From equation (1), this evidence suggests that either risk premia or expected changes in
spot rates or both are highly persistent.
In the remainder of this section, we will discuss how serially correlated forecast errors can arise
from expected shifts in the returns process or from the presence of heterogeneous traders. We will show

that when either effect is present and asset prices have a trend component, then forecast errors and
forward premia will not only be serially correlated but will also contain a trend component. Below we

begin by discussing the implications of expected shifts in the returns process before examining the
implications of heterogeneous trading.

1.1 Peso Problems and Trends
Consider first the case where only rational traders are in the market. In addition to the current

process determining spot prices, traders also believe spot prices may follow an alternative process.
Defining spot rates generated by the current process as (S I C) and the alternative process as (S I A),
the expected future price can be written:

(3)

ESL.l = (1 -XJE(S1+1 IC)

+ XE1(SI IA),

where E is the expectations operator conditional upon information available at time t, and A is the
probability of a switch to the alternative process.

4

As an example, suppose that the spot price is the exchange rate. When Engel and Hamilton
(1990) estimated a Markov switching model for the dollar exchange rate they found that the process could

be described by two "regimes": a dollar appreciating regime and a dollar depreciating regime. The

dollar appreciating regime corresponds roughly with the period, 1979 to 1985, while the dollar
depreciating regime corresponds to 1975 to 1979 and 1985 to 1988. If these regimes exist, rational
traders in one regime would anticipate a switch to the other regime. In terms of equation (3), suppose
that the current regime, C, is a dollar appreciating regime. However, rational traders anticipate a switch

to a dollar depreciating regime, the alternative regime "A". In this case, X denotes the transition
probability of switching from the appreciating to the depreciating regime.

Expectations in the form of equation (3) can in general induce forecasts errors that are serially
correlated in small samples, as is well-known from the "peso problem" literature. However, when the

spot rate follows a process with a random walk component, a "peso problem" can generate stronger
implications for the behavior of forecasts. Before describing these implications, we briefly summarize
the relationship between random walk disturbances and stochastic trends.

An important finding of recent empirical research on asset prices and interest rates is that they

have random walk components and hence contain unit roots.4 Since shocks to the random walk
component permanently affect the level of asset prices, the sum of these shocks cumulate into so-called
"stochastic trend" movements in prices. Variables with these random walk components are called "1(1)"
processes in the literature, and we will follow this terminology below. On the other hand, some variables

are only affected by transitory shocks. These processes are covariance stationary and are called "1(0)"
processes. A feature of 1(1) processes is that their first-differences are 1(0) stationary variables, affected

only by transitory shocks.
With these definitions, we can rewrite equation (3) as,

(4)

E,S1÷1 = (1

=

- XJ (5, j C) + MS1 A) + (1 - \) E(LSI4 I C) + X, ESL+I I A),

(1

-X,) (S IC) + X1(S, IA) + 1(0) terms.

5

The second line follows from the first because the expected change in the spot rate in either regime must
be 1(0) since the actual changes are 1(0).

Equation (4) shows the expected future spot rate decomposed into terms that contain some
permanent shocks and terms that do not, (i.e. the 1(0) terms). An important implication of (4) is that both

the expected change in the spot rate and the forecast errors will have permanent shock components that

generate trends if the current and the alternative regime for the spot rates contain distinct permanent
shocks. This can be seen by rewriting the expected change in the spot price when the current regime is
generating the prices:

(5)

E,S11

- (5,

I

C)

= \ ((51 I A) -

(5, j C)} + 1(0) terms.

Similarly, we can write the forecast errors as:

(6)

I

C)

—

ES1+1

=

— X,

{(S A) — (S I C)) +

1(0)

terms.

Both expected changes in equation (5) and forecast errors in equation (6) contain a component
that depends upon the difference between the two permanent shocks in the two spot rate processes. This
difference will itself be subject to permanent disturbances if the permanent shocks to the individual spot

rates are distinct. For example, if the current regime is a dollar appreciating regime but the market
anticipates a possible switch to a dollar depreciating regime, then the difference between the two possible

processes will grow over time. Therefore, both the expected change in the spot rate and the forecast
errors will follow a trend during periods when the shift to the alternative process is not realized.

It is also clear from (5) and (6) that the trend components are the same in both equations.
Intuitively, the current spot rate (5, I C) and the future realized rate conditional upon the current process,

C), differ by a stationary process. Therefore, examining the number of trends in the expected
change in the spot rate is equivalent to examining the number of trends in the forecast errors. Since the
expected change tends to be less noisy than the forecast errors, we will focus upon the former variable

6

in the analysis below.

So far our discussion has focused on the case where no switch in the process takes place.

However, in any given sample, there may be various switches. During some periods, the alternative
process

may generate spot rates, inducing forecast errors of the form,

A) - E1S11 = - V1 f(S j C) - (S I A)} + 1(0) terms,

(6')

where A' is the probability that the process will shift from process A to C. As long as (5, I A) and
(S C) are subject to different permanent shocks, the forecast errors will also appear to follow a trend
before the shift in regime occurs.
To illustrate how the probability of a switch in the process can induce trending behavior in excess

returns, we constructed some simple numerical examples based upon different probabilities of shifts to

alternative regimes, A. Estimates of the appreciating dollar state against the pound (state 1) and the
depreciating dollar state against the pound (state 2) were obtained from the estimates of the Markovswitching model of Engel and Hamilton (1990). For simplicity, the spot exchange rate was assumed to
follow a random walk with different variances in each state. Thus, the exchange rates conditional upon
each state were generated by the following processes:

(SJ I) = (S,.1 Ii) + mt = E-1m.7
where Var(v1.,) = 16.92 and

i

1,2,

Var(%J = 20.25. Based upon these generated series, the expected future

exchange rate including the anticipated switch in the process was constructed as in equation (4),

=

(1

)'*) (5 IC) + MS, IA)

= (I -X1) E-1

+ E-1 VA.r

where the current process, C, was alternatively state I or slate 2. Finally, using the generated series and

the expected future spot rate, the forecast errors, (S,÷ I C) - E1S,1, were constructed. These forecast

7

errors were constructed assuming that, first, the current process was state 1 and, second, the current
process was state 2.

Table 1 reports summary statistics from 200 replications of these series. The table reports the
mean and the first, sixth,

and

twelfth autocorrelation of the forecast error. The parentheses report the

standard deviation of the distribution of these statistics. Panel A reports the results conditional upon the

current process being state I while Panel B conditions the process upon state 2. The first column gives
the assumed probabilities of transition from the current state to the alternative process, X.

Two main conclusions arise from the results in the table. First, there is no tendency for the

forecast errors to be biased in one direction. In all cases, the mean of the forecast errors are
insignificantly different than zero. Second, although the forecast errors contain a random walk
component by construction, this component is only apparent when the probability of a switch in regime

is quite high. When the transition probability is 50%, the first-order autocorrelation coefficient is close

to 0.9. However, for more realistic probabilities less than 10%, there is little evidence of serial
correlation at all. This last result suggests that powerful methods must be employed when testing for the
presence of these possible trends, as we will in the following section.

Finally, it is important to recognize that "peso problems" may arise without inducing this trend

behavior in excess returns or expected returns. For example, in equations (5) and (6), the processes
conditioned upon each regime, (S A) arid (S I C), may be subject to the same permanent shocks and
so share the same random walk component. Such a case would arise if the two regimes differed only by

transitory disturbances. Thus, the implication that excess returns contain a random walk component is
a much stronger implication of "peso problems" than previously examined in the literature.

2.2 Heterogeneous Trading with Feedback Traders and Fundamentalists

Above, we showed how anticipations of a shift in the process that generates asset prices can

induce a random walk component in forecast errors as well as in excess returns. We motivated our

discussion by assuming that all traders were rational and shared the expectation that the process
generating the spot rates would switch. However, the phenomena we described above arises in more

S

general circumstances. In the most general terms, "peso problem" phenomena will occur when some
agents

whose expectations are reflected in the forward rate expect the price process to shift. A

homogeneous belief by market participants of a switch in the process of fundamental variables is just one

example of this phenomenon.
Recent research examining the effects of heterogeneous traders provides another example where

additional trends may appear in spot prices. According to this argument, some traders are rational and

informed while others chase trend movements in asset prices. Even though rational traders are in the
market, risk aversion limits the trades that they are willing to take against other less-informed traders.
As a result, the price may trend away from its fundamental value for periods of time.6

Some anecdotal evidence serves to illustrate the intuition behind these studies. First, DeLong,
Schleifer, Summers, and Waldmann (1990) describe examples based upon reports by several successful

traders in the U.S. stock market.' According to these sources, informed traders bet against uninformed
traders who become excited about trend movements in stock prices. Examples include the rise in stock

prices of conglomerates during the 1960's and the boom in Real Estate Investment Trusts during the
1970's, The profit-maximizing trading strategy by informed traders who knew that these prices were

overvalued was to buy with the rest of the market and then sell out before the uninformed traders
discovered that the stock was overvalued. Therefore, DeLong et at argue that this "trend-chasing"
behavior is consistent with the presence of rational traders.

Frankel and Froot (1988) provide supporting evidence that informed traders may chase trends
even though they believe that prices are inconsistent with fundamentals. They examine survey data by

exchange rate forecasting firms during the persistent rise in the dollar during the early 1980's. These

forecasters were recommending clients to buy the dollar, even though their longer-term forecasts
maintained that the dollar was overvalued. This evidence suggests that even informed traders were
chasing the upward trend in the dollar.
These anecdotes suggest an interaction between informed rational traders, uninformed "feedback

traders" who trade based upon the past trend, and passive investors. DeLong, eta! theoretically analyze
the equilibrium price determined by these traders assuming that at a given fl.iture horizon, the price is

9

given by its fundamental level. They find that the price systematically trends away from its true
fundamental level before the reversion of the price to its equilibrium value.'
Consider now how this scenario would generate additional trends in expected spot price changes

and forecast errors by rational traders. Suppose that rational informed traders know that the price will
eventually revert to its level implied by the fundamentals process. We will define this spot price process
as (S I F). Alternatively, the price may continue its current trend following a process defined as (S1 I T).

In this case, the rational traderst forecast of the future price is given by:

(7)

ES1.1 = (l-XJE(S,1I1D+X1E(S1IF),

where X, is the rational traders' assessed probability that the price will revert to its fundamental level
between r and r+ 1. Thus, rational traders incorporate both the anticipation of the trend continuing with
expected price, E(S1+1 'F), or reverting, implying expected price, E1(S1+1 I F).

We may relate this expectation to the empirically observed trend by noting, as before, that
financial asset prices appear to be subject to permanent shocks. Therefore, we may write,

(8)

E1S1.1 =

(l-XJ(SIT)+XjSI 9+ (1 ->.JEaS1,11T)+>.1E(SS,.11F),

= (1 - \) (S1 1) + \ (S I F) +

1(0)

terms.

If the price during trend chasing, (S I T), is subject to different permanent shocks than the price following
fundamentals, (S I F), the expected future spot price is a probability-weighted average of the two prices

and will appear to trend apart from the actual spat price during the trend-chasing period.
Comparing the rationally expected future price in equation (8) with the general "peso problem"
expectation in equation (4) reveals that they are observationally equivalent. If we call the process for the

price during trend chasing period the "current" process and the price implied by fundamentals as the

"alternative" process, then equation (8) simply says that informed traders believe a switch to an

10

alternative process is possible. In this case, during periods when prices do not revert to their fundamental

value, rational traders will underestimate the future price since they condition their expectations on this

possibility. Thus, the possibility that prices may revert to their fundamental value induces a 'peso
problem' in rational traders' forecasts.

The difference between the situation described here and the standard "peso problem" is
interpretation. In the standard "peso problem' prices are determined by expected future fundamentals.

Rational agents anticipate a switch in the process of fundamentals and, hence, in the process of asset
prices. By contrast, in the heterogeneous trading situation the switch need not arise from a change in the
fundamentals process. Here rational traders believe that either the trend generated by 'feedback" trading
will continue or else a switch towards the fundamentally determined value of the asset price will occur.

Unlike the standard "peso problem", the anticipation of this switch may simply arise from trading
behavior by uninformed traders.

Nevertheless, both situations lead to an additional trend in the

expectations by rational traders.

2. Do Expected Future Prices Periodically Trend Apart rrom Actual Prices?
We have shown that expectations of a switch in the process followed by a spot rate can induce

a trend in both the expected change and the a post forecast error of the spot rate. This implication is
clearly stronger than the standard "peso problem" result that forecast errors will be biased when observed

a post during periods when the switch does not materialize. We described how this behavior could arise

generally whenever some traders in the market rationally anticipate a switch in the spot rate process.
In this section, we begin by describing how this relatively strong implication of anticipated shifts
in the trend of asset prices may be tested empirically. We then present evidence supporting the presence

of trends in the forecast errors of returns.

2.1 Trends in Forward Rates
To evaluate whether expected future prices periodically trend away from actual prices, we must

relate the expected future price to an observable variable. From equation (1), the expected future spot

II

rate differs from the forward rate by a risk premium, i.e., F, = ES,÷1 + rp,. The risk premium is
typically treated as stationary 1(0) process in both empirical and theoretical studies.9 If the risk premium
is stationary, the forward rate will differ from the expected future spot rate by a stationary 1(0) variable.

In this case, the relationship between the forward rate and the actual price allows identification of the
trend relationships discussed above. Substituting equation (2) into equation (5) yields,

(9)

F, =

E1S,1

(1-XJ(S1IC)+A,(S,IA)+l(0)terms.

+I(O)terms

Thus whenever some traders rationally anticipate a switch in the spot rate process, the forward rate may
contain two trends: one trend arises from the current process, the other trend comes from the alternative

process.
To evaluate the trend component in the two processes more carefully, we will decompose the spot

price into its transitory and random walk components. It is well-known that any ARIMA process can be

written as a random walk plus a covariarice stationary transitory shock component. We can therefore
write the spot prices conditional upon the two processes i = C,A above as:

(10)

where

(S1 I

i) =

u + e,

with ULI = uu.u + Th.t'

,, is independent and identically distributed, and e1, is a stationary 1(0) process. Thus, in terms

of our previous discussion,

is

the permanent shock to spot prices under regime i = A or C. For

expositional simplicity, we will assume that ij,, is uncorrelated with the transitory disturbances to eu,
although none of the empirical results depend upon this assumption.

The representation in (10) shows that the price can be written as the cumulated effects of
permanent shocks, arising from the u, component, as well as mean-reverting stationary effects arising
from the e component. To write the price in terms of the past history of shocks, define an initial point

in time, say t = 0, and set Tho

0. Then the spot price can be written as:

12

(S1 Ii) = S',—1 m., + 1(0) terms.

(11)

(II) shows that the price generated by process us driven by the cumulated effects of the permanent

shocks, ij,. Above, we referred to this accumulation of permanent shocks as a trend. The spot rate
process is also affected by the composite effects of the stationary 1(0) components. Substituting (11) for

each process i into the forward rate expression in (9) yields,

F, =

(12)

Clearly, if 'lct

+

1(0)

terms = (I - )J Z.., m., + X, E-1 'lA.. + 1(0) terms.

'l*. the trend components of the current process will deviate from the trend components

of the alternative process.

2.2 Testing for Adflitional Trends

Equation (12) demonstrates that when anticipated shifts in the trend of asset prices are
incorporated into forward rates, the forward rate will contain two trends: one arising from the current

trend in the spot process, the other arising from the trend in the alternative process. One test of this
hypothesis would be to test whether forward rates and current spot rates are 'cointegrated." Recent
empirical studies have examined this relationship for a number of different financial assets and found that

forward rates and spot rates appear to be cointegrated.
There are, however, at least three reasons to think that the tests for cointegration in the literature

are inappropriate for our current hypothesis. First, as equation (12) shows, the importance of the trend

in the alternative process depends upon the probability, X, of a shift in the price process over the next

period. If this alternative process reflects a change in policy regime, X is likely be low for much of a
given sample. We might also expect X to be low if the alternative process incorporates rational traders'

anticipations of a collapse of the price process back to its fUndamental level. In either case, it will be
very hard to the trend in excess returns, as our results in Table 1 showed when X was small.

Second, if the trend in the current process is close to the trend in the alternative process, the

13

difference between the two trends may be difficult to detect. In other words, 1'k, =

the two trend

components may be very similar.
Third, since the random walk component will arise only during periods before anticipated shifts
in the spot rate process, the alternative trend movements may be difficult to find using the entire sample.

There may be several shifts in the process in any given sample, leading to a shift in the trend behavior
of the excess returns.
For alt three reasons, our framework suggests that any additional trend in forward rates not found

in spot rates is probably small empirically. On this issue, Campbell and Perron (1991) have recently
shown that processes with empirically small trends appear very much like processes without trends. If
the additional trends are small, it is unlikely that standard cointegration tests would find them.

We require a test capable of detecting trends that may be empirically small. To do so, we used
Johansens (1988) methodology to search for the presence of additional trends in a set of spot and forward

rates for related assets. This approach allows us to exploit the fact that "peso problem" effects are likely
to be correlated across markets for related assets. By combining cross-market information, the statistical

efficiency of our tests is greater than if we examined individual pairs of spot and fbrward rates. As a
result, we are more likely to be able to detect the presence of small additional trends if, in fact, they are
present. To check the robustness of our results, we also conducted a number of Monte Carlo experiments.

We will first describe the results of the Johansen procedure and postpone the discussion of the Monte
Carlo experiments until later.

2.3 Data Description
We examined forward and spot rates on foreign exchange and bond returns for the US, UK,
Germany and Japan. Spot exchange rates, along with one month and three month forward rates, were

sampled at the end of the month from Citicorp Database Services for the period 1975 to 1989.° The

exchange rates examined were the U.S. dollar against the German mark, the British pound, and the
Japanese yen.

We also used interest rates on Eurocurrency deposits. These series were obtained from Harris

14

Bank. We used one and three month spot rates on deposits, the forward rate on a one month deposit for
delivery at one month in the fUture, and the forward rate on a three month deposit for delivery at three

months in the future." To correspond to the currencies above, we chose interest rates denominated in
Germany marks, British pounds, Japanese yen, and U.S dollars.

2.4 Do Foreign Exchange Excess Returns Contain Additional Trends?

We begin by considering the null hypothesis that forward rates contain only the same trend

component as spot rates arising from 'k in other words, we test whether the other potential trend
components arising from ii,, in equation (12) are identically equal to zero.

To see the relationship between the spot and forward exchange rate, define the logarithm of the
exchange rate of currencyj against the dollar as x, and, for expositional simplicity, assume that exchange

rate realizations are drawn from the current process alone)' Thus, defining , as the permanent shocks
to the current exchange rate process, we have:

(13)

x=

E.,, 'k'

1(0)

terms,

where x is the foreign currency price against the dollar forj = £, DM. end 1. Denoting the forward rate
for future delivery of exchange rate x1 as fd, the exchange rate version of equation (12) is:

(14)

f,]' =

where b = (I - XJ, d =

b

A,,

flc + d

,,1 +

1(0)

terms,

and ,j are the permanent shocks to the alternative exchange ratej process.

Under the hypothesis that there are no peso problems" induced by anticipated policy changes

or the expected collapse of trends arising from feedback traders, l,J =

0

for all r. In these

circumstances (13) and (14) show that forward rates trend only with spot exchange rates. Alternatively,

if some traders condition their expectations upon an alternative process, forward rates may contain
additional trend components as described above in (12).

15

To consider the null hypothesis of jJ = 0, we proceeded in two steps. First we tested for the
number of trends in a vector of spot rates and a vector of forward rates individually. Then, we tested

for the number of trends when the vectors of spot and forward rates were combined. If there are no
additional trends in forward rates, the number of trends should not increase when we add forward rates

to the system of spot rates. Since we suspected that any additional tends would be small, we included
the pound/dollar, yen/dollar, and mark/dollar rates in the vectors of spot and forward rates to exploit any

cross-currency information. In this way, if expectations incorporate an anticipated shift in the future

value of the dollar, say, any additional trends should be correlated across currencies. So combining
exchange rates will increase the power of our tests.
Row I of Table 2 reports the Johansen (1988) test for the hypothesis that there are three or more

trends in the three spot exchange rates." Both Johansen's Trace Test and Maximal Ligenvalue Test do

not reject this hypothesis, indicating that each exchange rate can be written in terms of its own trend

component. Rows 2 and 3 report tests for the number of trends in the three forward rates. Row 2
considers forward rates at the one month horizon and row 3 considers forward rates at the three month
horizon. The results in these rows show that we cannot reject the hypothesis that there are three trends

in both vectors of forward rates."
Rows 4 and 5 of Table 2 report the test statistics for the hypothesis that the system of spot rates
and forward races contain at least four, five and six trends, respectively. If the null hypothesis of

= 0 for all r holds true, spot and forward rates for currencyj will share the same trends. In this case,
given the results in rows 1 - 3, the number of trends will remain the same at three. However, if forward

rates contain additional trend components shared across currencies, then the number of trends may
increase. In row S the hypothesis of six and five independent trend components is rejected at the 95%
confidence level for both test statistics at the 3 month horizon. The hypothesis is also rejected at the one

month horizon except for the trace test of five or less trends.15 These estimates indicate the surprising
result that forward rates contain an additional stochastic trend independent of the spot rate trend.
In summary, Table 2 provides evidence that forward exchange rates follow trends in addition to

those followed by spot rates. Specifically, when three spot exchange rates were combined with three

16

forward exchange rates! the system contained four stochastic trends, one more than the three spot
exchange rates alone, Of course, these results are subject to the caveat that the Johansen tests may not
be powerful enough to reject the presence of the additional trend. However! as we will show below with

the aid of some Monte Carlo experiments, this does not appear to be so in our data. We will argue,
therefore, that the surprising results in Table 2 are in fact robust.

2.5 Do Trends Arise in individual Currencies?
We now turn to consider whether the trending deviations between spot and forward rates implied

by the results in Table 2 are associated with a particular exchange rate. We will exploit the fact that
arbitrage ensures covered interest parity holds to combine the information contained in interest rates and

exchange rates.

Let R be the interest rate on deposits denominated in currency J. The covered interest parity
relationship can be written in the case of dollar deposits relative to the domestic currencyj deposits as:

(15)

f,= R±4-R.

Thus, arbitrage ensures that the forward rate is a linear combination of the current spot rate exchange rate

x, the current interest rate on dollar bonds R, and the interest rate on domestic currencyj bonds R4.
Using this parity condition! we can evaluate whether deviations between spot and forward rates
implied by the results in Table 2. are associated with a particular exchange rate. If spot and forward rates

share the same trend, then the forward premium f" - x shares this same trend, Since f' - x =
R4

—

and R can have at most one shared independent trend in addition to the trend in the spot exchange

rate. Therefore, the greatest number of independent trends that the spot rate! domestic and foreign
interest rates can contain under the null hypothesis of mJ = 0. is two.
Based upon this observation, we examined whether additional trends are present by testing for
the number of trends in the vector of the domestic interest rate! the exchange rate! and US interest rate.

If we find evidence of three or more trends in this vector! then the results can suggest which of the

17

forward exchange rates contain trends in addition to their corresponding spot rates.
Table 3 reports the Johansen test statistics for the three variable systems of the dollar interest rate,

the domestic interest rate, and the exchange rate against the dollar. We tested for the number of trends
in systems of one and three month interest rates separately. These tests are conducted for systems of the

spot rates in rows I and 3 and for the forward rates in rows 2 and 4. As the table shows under column
A, we cannot reject the hypothesis that three trends are present in the UK rates at either maturity. For
the Japanese yen in Column C, the Trace Test for three trends is not rejected at either maturity, although

the Maximal Eigenvalue test is rejected for the three month rates. These findings suggest that the pound

and yen forward rates contain a trend not found in the corresponding spot exchange rates. Since the
results in Table 2 showed that there was an additional trend in at least one of the forward rates, these
results suggest that the additional trend in the pound/dollar returns may be shared with yen/dollar returns.

2,6 Do Trends Arise Across Foreign Exchange and Bond Markets?
The results in Tables 2 and 3 suggest that the effects of "peso problems" can show up in different

exchange rates. This, in turn, raises the possibility that their influence can be detected in the different
assets. Indeed, "peso problems" are likely to have affected both interest and exchange rates.

Consider, for example, the effects of the change in the Federal Reserve's operating procedure

in 1979. Following the change, US short-term interest rates increased dramatically until a peak was

reached in 1981. At the same time, the value of the US dollar began an upward trend that would
continue until 1985. If market participants believed that the Fed. could not maintain the tight monetary
policy that had accompanied the change in operating procedure, such belieft would have induced a "peso

problem" in both the US bond market and the foreign exchange market. The behavior of the term
structure appears to support this hypothesis. Long-term interest rates were persistently below short-term
interest rates suggesting that bond traders believed short-term interest rates would be lower in the future

after monetary policy was relaxed. During this period, expected future short-term rates (implied by the

term structure) were lower than they turned out to be ex post. At the same time, tight monetary policy

contributed to an increase in the value of the dollar. However, since traders believed that a switch to

18

looser monetary policy was possible, they also anticipated a switch to a weaker dollar, These
expectations were reflected in forward rates that systematically predicted a weaker dollar than was
realized cx post.
As this example illustrates, "peso problems" in one market are likely to be correlated with "peso

problems" in another market when there is an anticipated switch in the fundamentals process common

to both assets. Similarly, through arbitrage across markets, feedback traders that drive a price from its

underlying value in one market are likely to influence other markets as well. Therefore, if additional
trends exist in foreign exchange returns, as Tables 2 and 3 show, these trends are likely to be correlated

with the additional trends in bond returns.
To examine whether the additional trends are detectable in foreign exchange and bond markets,
we combined the spot rates on the domestic interest rate, the exchange rate, and the US interest rate (W,

x3, It'), with their forward rates (fe, f', r') where

t

is

the forward interest rates in currencyf. Since

the relationship between spot and forward rates in (13) and (14) applies equally to interest and exchange

rates, we may use the same approach to test for the presence of additional trends in (r,f', f") as we did

when we considered forward exchange rates alone. Specifically, if there are no additional trends in
forward interest rates, we should find the same number of trends in the systems of spot and forward rates

as we did for the spot and forward rates separately.

Table 4 reports the results of the Johansen test for the number of trends in (Ri, x, R', r fd
The statistics for the German mark in Column B indicate that we can reject the hypothesis of three or

more stochastic trends in one month returns, although the evidence is less clear in 3 month returns.
Recall that there was no evidence of additional trends in foreign exchange returns for the mark in Table

3. Here we see that there is also no strong evidence of additional trends in mark bond returns. This
finding appears consistent with the idea that "peso problems" should be correlated across related markets.

The results for Japanese and UK rates reported in Columns A and C of Table 4 are quite
different. We would expect to find at least three stochastic trends in these systems because the results
in Table 3 indicated that both the yen and the pound contained additional trends. Table 4 confirms this
prediction. However, for the three month UK system, we find evidence of four stochastic trends. Since

19

the foreign exchange forward rate, 9, is a linear combination of the three spot rates, the additional trend

cannot arise from this rate. Instead its presence must indicate the effects of anticipated shifts in the
process for UK interest rates. For the Japanese systems, we cannot reject four trends in the one month
rates, and five trends in the three month rates. Both results suggest that the process for Japanese interest

rates was expected to shift.

To summarize, the evidence in Tables 2 - 4, indicates that exchange rates and interest rates
contain trends in addition to the those assumed in the existing empirical literature. As we showed above,

these additional trends would arise if traders considered shifts to alternative trends in their future
expectations of asset prices. We find that these trends appear across both foreign exchange and bond
markets. They appear to be most important in foreign exchange returns and in Uk and Japanese interest
rates.

2.6 Are the Results Robust?
The results above appear to provide strong evidence that the deviation between some spot and

forward rates contain statistically significant trends. These findings seems quite surprising because
standard models assume that forecast errors and risk premia do not trend away from the actual asset

prices. For this reason we wanted to make sure that our results were robust. In particular, we were
concerned that the Johansen tests may not be powerful enough to reject the presence of additional trends.

To examine this issue, and other assumptions about the data which may affect the test statistics, we
conducted a number of Monte Carlo experiments.

Our Monte Carlo experiments were constructed to generate spot rate processes with the same
variance in their permanent components as we observe in the exchange rate data. From these permanent
trend components in spot rates, we generated systems of forward rates with different numbers of trends
depending upon the experiment. Therefore, we knew by construction the true number of trends in these

artificial forward rates. We then calculated both versions of the Johansen test. Repeating this process
1000 times, we generated an empirical distribution for the test statistics where the number of trends is

known. The appendix gives the details of these experiments.

20

With the empirical distribution of the Johansen test statistics generated by these Monte Carlo
experiments, we can examine the power of the tests to reject additional trends. In other words, we can
ask whether these tests would fail to reject the hypothesis of a given number of trends when it should

reject. Figure 3 shows the empirical distribution of Johansen's trace test for four trends when (by

construction) there are wily three trends in the data. Because the exchange rate data was used to
parametarize this experiment, the Monte Carlo results can be compared to the test statistics in rows 4 and

S of Table 2 where we tested for four trends.
Figure 3 answers the question: If we test for four trends, but only three are truly present in the
system, how likely are we to find the test statistics in Table 2? The figure depicts two cases, representing

two different assumptions about the order of the VAR used to construct the Johansen tests. Raising the

number of lags in the VAR from one to three shifts the empirical distribution to left but not enough to
account for the results reported in Table 2. The probability of observing 28.09, the statistic when spot
exchange rates are combined with one-month forward rates, when in fact there are only three stochastic
trends, is considerably less than the 1% marginal significance level of 51.5 or 53.2 for the two empirical

distributions. Therefore, the Johansen test appears to have a good deal of power to reject four trends
when only three trends are present.

Figure 4 illustrates the analogous empirical distribution for the Maximum Eigenvalue test. As
for the trace test, raising the order in the VAR implies lower values for the empirical distribution. Again,

however, the probability of finding the statistics reported in Table 2 when in fact only 3 trends were
present is minuscule.

Figures 3 and 4 represent only a small fraction of the experiments we conducted. We also ran
experiments allowing for: (1) different numbers of trends holding the true trend number constant; (2)
different numbers of true trends; and (3) heteroskedasticity rather than homoskedasticity. One important
result to emerge from these experiments was that ignoring the presence of heteroskedasticity tends to bias

the test statistics upwards. This suggests that the statistics presented in Tables 2 to 4 are biased upwards
because exchange rates and interest rates are known to be heteroskedastic.
In summary, our Monte Carlo experiments indicate that the test statistics obtained in Tables 2 to

21

4 based upon the Johansen distribution assuming homoskedasticity are too high. The results in these tabes

are therefore biased toward finding too few rather than too many trends. We conclude that the tables

provide strong evidence of statistically significant, but probably small, trends in forward rates relative
to spot rates.

3. Estimating the Trends in Expected Returns
In this section we examine the size of the additional trends in forward rates. To do so we
estimate a time series model for spot and forward exchange tales consistent with the results presented

above. We then use the model estimates to identi& the path of the additional trend in excess foreign
exchange returns.
Our results in Table 2 indicate that the vector of three spot and three forward exchange rates, y141
—

[x,1, x"1,

f1, DM, f9', contain four trends. Following Stock and Watson (1988), we may

therefore represent the dynamics of y1 as the vector sum of four random walks and six stationary 1(0)
processes:

A w,÷

(15)

where w

a

+ ;+l

= w1 + u11,

E[tr1,1,u11') =

[w1j' is a 4 x 1 vector of independent random walks with co0 a vector of constants,; is 6>( I

vector stationary 1(0) process, I is a 4x4 identity matrix, and A is 6x4 matrix. In order to interpret
the four trends in w, we assume that the factor loading matrix A, has the following structure

a11 0 0 0

a, a, 0 0
(16)

A - a,1a,,a,,0
a41 a1, a4, aM

a,1 a,, a,, a
a51 a6, a1 ¼

22

With these restrictions imposed upon A we can interpret the first three elements of o, as the trends in spot

rates. The fourth element in co, is interpreted as the additional trend found in the forward rates but not
in the spot rate.'6

We are particularly interested in examining the behavior of the additional trend, i.e. the fourth

element in 0r To do so, we use a two step procedure to estimate the model for excess returns implied
by (15):

[1,, I3 A w,1 +

(17)

t41 — ARMA(n,m)

where 9,÷ — Ixf+1-ft, x?j_f,DM, 4+1-fJ' and 1.,

[13p

The first step in our estimation procedure is to obtain consistent estimates of the factor loading

matrix A. This procedure is described in the appendix. We then estimate the remaining parameters in

(17), co and the parameters of the vector ARMA process, by maximum likelihood with the aid of the
Kalman filter. In order to identify the ARMA component of excess returns, we estimated models with
all combinations of n and in

up

to n = in = 2. The best model was selected on the basis of Akaike's

information criteria. An ARMA(1,l) specification was chosen in the model for one month returns, and

an ARMA(1,2) specification in the model for three month returns)7 trends in the forward rates not
contained in the spot rates. In other words, these figures plot estimates of [13, —I,)Aw where co a
[0,0,0CO4j the component in x,÷1 - t arising from the additional trend. The basic pattern of the one
month and three month horizons are similar. Both trends have peaks in 1978 and 1980. They also have

negative swings from 1981 through 1983 and positive swings from 1985 until essentially 1990. These
general movements are consistent with a "peso problem" explanation if the dollar exchange rate switches

between appreciating and then depreciating states, as we discussed in section 1.

To see why, note from equation (6) that the excess return conditional upon the current state can
be written as:

23

(18)

(x141

=
=

C) —E1;÷1 + 1(0) terms

(x1+1 I

C)

X[E(x11

- E(x C) + X[E(x1.1 C) - E(x1÷1 I A)] -k 1(0) terms
C) - E(x11 j A)j + 1(0) terms.

Now suppose that the dollar were currently in an appreciating state, so that process C represents a
strengthening dollar. If traders believe that a switch to a depreciating regime, A, were likely, E(x11 I C)

< g(x1.1 I A) and the trend component in excess returns will be negative. By contrast, if the dollar were
depreciating representing a new regime C, and traders believe a switch to an appreciating regime were
possible, then E(x141 I C) > E1(x11 I A). In this case, the trend component would be positive.

Indeed, from the period of appreciating dollar from 1980 until 1984, the trend component is

mostly negative, while during the period of depreciating dollar from 1985 through 1989, the trend
component is positive. This evidence suggests that traders conditioned their forecasts during a trend
movement in the exchange rate upon a possibility that the exchange rate will shift to a process with a
different trend.

4. Concluding Remarks
In this paper, we have shown that rationally expected future asset prices and, therefore, their
forward prices can systematically trend away from the actual price. This possibility arises when rational

traders incorporate the expectation that trends in asset prices induced either by policy or by feedback
traders may shift over the forward rate contract horizon. We investigated this relationship by testing for

the number of trends in systems of spot and forward rates. If alternative trends do not affect market
expectations, then adding forward rates to a system of their corresponding spot rates should not increase

the number of trends. interestingly, we found evidence of additional trends in both foreign exchange

returns and in interest rates for the Japanese yen and the British pound. We conducted a number of

24

Monte Carlo experiments on these results and found them to be quite robust.
When we estimated the additional trend component in excess foreign exchange returns we find
that it has varied in annualized rates between -0.8% and 1% for one month returns and between -6% and

8% for three month returns. These findings are clearly inconsistent with standard models of the rLsk
premium or the treatment of systematic forecast errors. We believe that future research should further
investigate the origins of these trends.

25

References

Bacicus, David, Allan Gregory, and Stanley Zin (1989), "Risk Premiums in the Term Structure:
Evidence from Artificial Economies," Journal of Monetary Economics 24: 371-399.
Baillie, Robert T., and Tim Bollerslev, (1991), "Intra-Day and Inter-Market Volatility in Foreign
Exchange Markets," Review of Economic Studiss 58: 565-586.

Baillie, Robert T., and Tim Bollerslev, (1989), tommon Stochastic Trends in a System of Exchange
Rates", Jowrnalof Finance 44: 167-181.
Bekaert, Cleert, and Robert J. Hodrick (1991), "On the Predictability of Excess Returns in Foreign
Exchange Markets," working paper, Northwestern University.
Campbell, John Y., and P. Perron, (1991), "Pitfalls and Opportunities: What Macroeconomists Should
Know About Unit Roots," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, MIT Press.
Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller (1987), "Cointegration and Test of Present Value Models,"

kurnal of Political Economy, 95: 1062-2088.
Campbell, John Y. and RobertJ. Shiller (1991), "Yield Spreads and Interest Rate Movements: A Bird's
Eye View," Review ofEconomic Studies, 58: 495-5 14.
Cutler, David M., James M. Poterba, and Lawrence i-I. Summers (1990), "Speculative Dynamics and
the Role of Feedback Traders," American Economic Review 80: 63-68.

De Long, .1. Bradford, Andrei Schleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert J. Waldmann, (1990),
"Positive Feedback Investment Strategies and Destablizing Rational Speculation," Journal of
Finance 45: 379-396.

Diebold, Francis X. and Marc Nerlove, (1990), "Unit Roots in Economic Time Series: A Selective
Survey," Advances in Econometrics 8: 3-69.
Engle, Charles and James D. Hamilton (1990), "Long swings in the Dollar: Are they in the Data and do
Markets know it?" American Economic Reykw, 80: 689-713.

Evans, Martin D. D. and Karen K. Lewis (1991), "Do expected shifts in Inflation Policy affect Real
Rates'?" Working Paper, University of Pennsylvania.

Evans, Martin D.D., and Karen K. Lewis (1992), "Peso Problems and Heterogeneous Trading:
Evidence from Excess Returns in Foreign Exchange and Euromarkets," National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paner, No 4003.
Frankel, Jeffrey, and Kenneth Froot (1986), "The Dollar as an Irrational Speculative Bubble: The Tale
of Fundamentalists and Chartists," Marcus Wallenherg Papers on International Finance 1: 2755.

26

Frankel, Jeffrey, and Kenneth Froot (1988), "Explaining the Demand for Dollars: International Rates
of Return and the Expectations of Chartists and Fundamentalists," in R. Chambers and P.

Paarlberg, eds., gjçulture. Macroeconomics, and the Exchange Rate, Westfield Press:
Boulder, Colorado.

Frankel, Jeffrey, and Kenneth Froot (1989), "Forward Discount Bias: Is It an Exchange Risk
Premium?' Ouarterlv Journal of Economics 104: 13941.
Froot, Kenneth (1989). "New Hope for the Expectations Hypothesis of the Term Structure of Interest
Rates, Journal of Finance 44: 283-305.

Gonzota, Jesus and Clive Granger (1991), 'Estimation of Common Long-Memory Components in
Cointegrated Systems', Working paper, U.C. San Diego.
Grossman, Sanford, and Robert Shiller, (1981), "The Determinants of the Variability of Stock Market
Prices,' American Economic Review, 71: 222-227.
Johansen, Soren (1988), 'Statistical Analysis of Cointegrating Factors," Journal of Economic Dynamics
and Control, 12: 231-254.

Johansen, Soren, and Katarina Juselius (1990), "Maximum Likelihood Estimation and Inference on
Cointegration - With Applications to the Demand for Money,' Qxford Bulletin of Ecoroinics
and Statistics 52: 169-2 10.
Lewis, Karen K., (1991), 'Was There a Peso Problem in the U.S. Term Structure of Interest Rates:
1979.1982?', International Economic Review.
Meese, Richard A., and Kenneth Rogoff (1983), 'Empirical Exchange Rate Models of the Seventies:
Do They Fit Out of Sample?' Journal of International Economics 21, 3-24.

Meese, Richard A., and Kenneth J. Singleton, (1982), 'On Unit Roots and the Empirical Modeling of
Exchange Rates,' Journal of Finance 37: 1029-1054,
Mishkin, Frederic, (1991), 'Is the Fisher Effect for Real? A Reexamination of the Relationship Between
Inflation and Interest Rates,' National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 3632.

Rogoff, Kenneth S., (1980) 'Essays on Expectations and Exchange Rate Volatility,' pphlished Ph.D.
Dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Schwert, G.W., (1989) 'Tests for Unit Roots: A Monte Carlo Investigation,' Journal of Businesi_and
Economic Statistic 7: 147-160.
Soros, George, (1987) The Alchemy of Finance, Simon and Schuster: New York.
Stock, James H., and MarkW. Watson (1988), 'Testing For Common Tends," Journal of the American
Statistical Association 83: 1097-1107.

27

End notes

'Throughout the paper, we will use the word "trends" as short hand for the more precise terminology of
"stochastic trends.' These stochastic trends are the cumulation of permanent disturbances upon asset
prices. We do not consider deterministic trends in this paper.

tsing time series analysis, see Evans and Lewis (1991, 1992). For a structural approach, see Lewis
(1991). Froot(1989) and Frankel and Froot (1989) find evidence of systematic forecast errors in interest
rate survey data and in foreign exchange survey data, respectively.

'See, for example, Schwert (1989) and Campbell and Perron (1991).
1For a survey about unit roots, see Diebold and Nerlove (1990). Unit roots have been found in nominal
interest rates by Campbell and Shiller (1987) and Mishkin (1991), and in exchange rates by Baillie and
Bollerslev (1989), Meese and Rogoff (1983), and Meese and Singleton (1982). Other prices that appear
to be affected by permanent disturbances include those on stocks and commodities.

3lechnically, since (5, C) is an 1(1) process, then
definition.

J

C) - (5, C) must be an 1(0) process by

6See Cutler, Poterba and Summers (1990) and Frankel and Froot (1986) for a discussion of how different
traders interact in the market.
7For example, they cite stories of successful speculative strategies by the Wall Street guru, George Soros
(1987).

'More precisely, the growing trend movement in the price away from its fundamental level occurs when
there is uncertainty about the fundamental level.

'For example, standard models of time-varying risk premia imply that risk premia are stationary since
they depend upon the time-series properties of the change in consumption. For a further discussion and
examples, see Evans and Lewis (1992), Grossman and Shiller (1981) and flaclcus, Gregory, and Zin
(1989).
"'These data were kindly provided by Geert Bekaert and Robert Hodrick. For details, see Bekaert and
Hodrick (1991).
"Using the linearized term structure relationship from Campbell and Shiller (1991) for the case of pure
discount bonds as we have here, the forward rate on an k period bond contracted for trade in. it periods
is: ((k+n) Rb", - ii RJfk, where R', is the rate on aj period deposit at time t. In this paper, we only
consider the case where k = n for one month and three month deposits, so that F,k — [2k RaL - k WJIk
for k = 1, 3. Some of these deposits were available for earlier periods than for exchange rates. In the
combinations considered below, we used the longest time series of data available.
'2As we showed above in equation (6'), we could also condition upon the alternative process. Since we
wilt consider the null hypothesis of no alternative process, conditioning on the current process provides
a useful benchmark,

28

13Recall that we use the tenn 'trends" as short hand for the more precise terminology of 'stochastic
trends".
'1Although these results may appear to confirm the null hypothesis, in fact they are also perfectly
consistent with VA,
0. To see why, note that the forward rate in (14) can also be written as

= u +l(O)terms,

with 4=u +

+ dnA.

Written in this form, the forward rate contains a random walk component with innovations that are a
linear combination of the two permanent shocks. Judged in isolation, the forward rate will therefore
appear to contain a single trend whether 17A! t 0 or not.

"Percentiles of the distribution from Johansen and Juselius (1990) are provided in the appendix.
'6Notice the conventional view that forward and spot rates share the same trend place numerous
restrictions on the factor loading matrix A. Specifically, the factor loading matrix would be [A1, A1]'
where A1 is the sub-matrix comprising the first three rows of A in (16).
tTThe

model for three month returns has the same structure as the one month model except y141 —

r'. x÷1, f.2, f2, f.]' where f are now three month forward rates.

29

Table I

Results of Forecast Error Experiment
Transition
Probability

Mean

(Std. Dcv.)

P12

(Std. Dcv.)

(Std. Dcv.)

(Std. Dcv.)

A. Conditional on Process Generated by State 1
.50

.40

.30

.20

—1.01

.936

.780

.610

(30.00)

(.044L'

(.flO')

(.t1%'

— .59

.911

.760

(23.65)

(.053)

(.108)

.604
(.153)

—.27

.861

(21.38)

(.099)

.724
(.148)

(.181)

.752

.623

.485

(.112)

(.150)

(.174)

.01

(11.89)
10

.05

.578

—.15

.465

.401

.321

(6.93)

(.188)

(.185)

(.188)

.61

.186

.116

(2.97)

(.133)

.137
(.140)

(.132)

.745
(.127)

(.181)

.712
(.139)

(.177)

.636
(.187)

(.222)

.476
(.212)

.380
(.207)

B. Conditional on Process Generated by State 2
.50

1.61

(33.43)
.40

3.42

(25.32)
.30

2.01

(22.18)
.20

.10

.05

.901

(.085)
.853

(.089)
.771

(.137)

—1.88

.558

(10.85)

(.203)

.578
.574
.500

0.71

.264

.251

.199

(6.31)

(.147)

(.137)

(.12)

.084

.068
(.088)

.060
(.089)

—0.11

(3.64)

(.095)

Notes: Exchange Rate process & = t, where Var(i4) = 16.92 for State 1 and

Var (u) = 20.25 for State 2. (Variance parameters are from Engel and
Hamilton (1990),)

Table 2

Johansen Tests for Number of Stochastic Trends
n Exchange Rates
,

Variables
.

in
1.

Vector

Spot Exchange

Number of

Test

.

Stochast]c

T6
2

Trends
3

13.23

8.81

3

13.13

8.70

3

12.83

8.41

6

118.00

53.13c

5
4

64.91
28.09

35$3c

6
5

115.70c

66.23t

4945C
37.91c

4

28.31

15.63

Rates (xfl
2.

One Month Forward
Rates

(ffl

3. Three Month Forward

Rates (if')
4, One Month Forward

and Spot Exchange

Rates (x,f°)
5. Three Month Forward

and Spot Exchange

Rates (z,f)
Notes:

15.20

All systems are for * = £, DM, V. Tests are based upon AIC
information, criterion choice of one lag in VAR system.

'Johansen "Iace Test? See the appendix for percentiles of
distribution.

"Johansen "Maximal Elgenvalue Test." See the appendix for
percentiles of distribution.
csignificant rejection at the 5% confidence level.

Table 3

Johansen Tests for Number of Stochastic Trends in Spot Rates and Forward Rates Individually
•

Variables
.
in Vector

Number of
.

Stochastic

.

A. British Pound

Trends

T1'

T2b

3
2

22.84
11.18

10.77

3
2

23.64
11.70

11.94

3
2

3

Assets I =
B. German Mark
T1

1'3

C. Japanese Yen
T1

T2

24.41
3.23

21.18
2.79

One MonthC

1. Spot Rates

2. Forward Rates

34•78d
6.31

284gd

31,67d
6.14

2553d
6.14

25.57
3.72

21.84'

11.31

23.62
11.75

11.87

31.65(1

6.12

25•53d
6.12

25.54
3.73

2181d

11.36

22.07

12.24

19.94

14.57

19.76

16.91

11.66

6.30

3.25

Three Month'
3. Spot Etatcs
4. Forward Rates

Notes; Tests are based upon AIC information criterion choice of three Tags in VAR system.
5iohansen "'&ace Test." See the appendix for percentiles of distribution.
"Maximal Eigenvalue Test." See the appendix for percentiles of distribution.
tlnterest rate spots are for I Month maturities.
'Significant at the 90% confidence level,
'Significant at the 95% confidence level.
Finterest rate spots are for 3 Month maturities.

3.26

Table 4

Johansen Tests for Number of Stochastic Trends in Spot Rates and Forward Rates Jointly
.

Vanables
.
in Vector
1.

2.

One MonthC

Three Montht

Number of
.

Stochastic

Assets
.

A. British Pound

i=

B. German Mark

C. Japanese Yen

Trends

T1

T2b

T1

'2

T

5

4722d

7257d

5202c1

24.27

39.47

33 lOt
22.19

3

21.05

4147d
27.90'
12.25

9924d

4

9042d
4895d

27.75

22.32c

17.28

13.64

6
5

14660d
7526d

7134

105 50d
4343d

12525d

6610d

3413d

19527d
8977d

41.12

3

20.22

20.91
12.78

46.34
20.13

26.2Y
15.05

5914
30.41
15.83

28.74

4

T2

14.58
13.01

Notes: Tests are based upon AIC information criterion choice of three lags in VAR system.
4johansen 'Ttace Test." See the appendix for percentiles of distribution.
bjohansen "Maximal Eigenvalue Test." See the appendix for percentiles of distribution.

Systems of spot exchange rates and one month interest rates (or dollar and foreign currency, together with one
month forward exchange rates and one month forward ioterest rates for dollar and foreign currency.
dsignincant at the 90% conlidence level.
esignificant at the 95% confidence kvel.

'Systems of spot exchange rates and three month interest rates for dollar and foreign currency, together with three
month forward exchange rates and three month forward interest rates for dollar and foreign currency.

Appendix to Trends in Expected Returns In Currency and Bond Markets
This appendix begins by explaining how consistent estimates of the factor loading matrix A were

obtained in order to estimate the time series models for excess returns in equation (17) of section 3. It
then describes the Monte Carlo experiments we ran to investigate the robustness of the Job ansen statistics

reported in Tables 2 - 4. Figures 3 and 4 are based on some of the results of these experiments.

Estimation of the Factor Loading Matrix: The factor loading matrix A relates the stochastic trends w, to

the vector of spot and forward rates y:

(15)

y141 = A

÷ ;+

= co, + v41,

E[u11,u141t} =

Ii

To obtain consistent estimates of A, we exploit two properties of the process:

Ci)

a'A = 0 where a is the matrix of cointegrating vectors for y1.

(ii)

Cov0(ay) = AA' where Coy0 denotes the long run covariance matrix.

Condition (i) is not sufficient to uniquely identify A given a, for if a'A = 0, then a'AR = 0 tbr an
arbitrary 4x4 matrix R. Our procedure is therefore to write A=AR, and use condition (i) to identifs'
A'. Then we use (ii) together with the prior restrictions on A described in the text to identif' R.
We use the approach described by Gonzola and Granger (1991) to find A'. First we regress tSy

on Ay1 y11 and save the residuals as ;.

Then

we regress y,.1 on Ay1 y1.1 and the save the

residuals as e1. Next, the eigenvalue problem I XS - S01(S11)4S10
and

= 0 is solved for X1 > X2 .>

X6

the associated eigen vectors [m1,rn21. .m6J where = r'ET_1ee1. Gonzola and Ciranger demonstrate

that the estimate of A' given by [m,,m41m,,mJS01 is orthogonal to the estimated matrix of cointegrating

vectors for y,, so that condition (i) is satisfied, i.e. a'AR = 0.
To find R, we first need to estimate the long run coyariance matrix for ay. This is complicated
by the fact that in any finite sample an unrestricted estimate of the covariance matrix will have rank 6

white the assumed presence of 4 trends in the data implies that the covariance matrix should have rank
4. We used the Newey-West estimator of the long run covariance matrix (allowing for serial correlation)

to obtain a consistent estimate of the unrestricted covariance matrix, 0. Next we write U as rAP' where
A is a diagonal matrix of eigen values, and r is the matrix of eigen vectors. A consistent estimate of the

long run covariance matrix with rank 4 is then constructed as 0 =

PA!" where A4 is equal to A except

that the two smallest eigen values in A are set equal to zero. Note that since U is a consistent estimate
of the unrestricted covariance matrix, fl must be a consistent estimate when there are 4 trends in y1.
Finally, we use the estimates of K and fif to find R. Condition (ii) implies that R must solve

KRR'A' = 0, or equivalently that
RR' = (A'A'Y'A'U4At(A'AY.

(iii)

Since RR' is a symmetric 4x4 matrix, this condition places 10 independent restrictions on the 16
elements in R. 6 further restrictions are imposed by (16) in the text because 6 elements on the right hand

side are zero. in effect, therefore, there are 6 zero restrictions imposed on KR. Thus, (16) and (iii)
impose 16 independent restrictions on R which are sufficient to identify the matrix. Once we have found

the unique matrix R that satisfies (ii) and (16) given K, the consistent estimate of A is formed as KR.
The estimates ofthe factor loading matrices are:
Three month model

One month model

3.658 0.000 0.000 0.000
3.146 1.074 0.000 0.000

A = 2.526 -2.261 0.724 0.000
3.648 -0.054 -0.116 -0.112

3.151 1.045 -0,040 -0.040
2.550 -2.337 0.581 -0.140

Since y1 s

(x+1,

x1, x÷1,

-3.629 0.000 0.000 0.000
-3.234 -1.132 0.000 0.000
A = -2.486 2.297 -0.187 0.000
-3.535 0.037 0.337 0.932
-3.221 -1.114 0.052 0.144
-2.479 2.358 0.036 0.621

f&M fjJ' the fourth column of each matrix shows that the additional

trend has the largest effect on the pound and the yen forward rates.

Ii

Monte Carlo Experiments: In the experiments we consider tests on the d-dimensioned Vector ; =

[z',z,JJ' which contains in stochastic trends and r cointegrating vectors (hence if = in +r). The model
generating the data on ; is:

=

= v1 + Au1

E.1[u1,1,u1,1']

= Ft11 + u

E.,[u,,1,u3JI = E,,

(A2)

E,1[c1,1,e1J] =

(A3)

v,1 + ç

(Al)

where; v is an rn-dimensioned random walk with innovations e, u1, is an rn-dimensioned vector of
serially uncorrelated errors, and u1, is an r-dimensioned vector of serially uncorrelated errors. We
assume that the conditional covariance matrices Qt, Z,, and E,, are diagonal and that ç, u11 and u,,1 are

uncorrelated with one another. A is a diagonal matrix of dimension in and r is an rxrn matrix of
cointegrating vectors.

We considered the sampling behavior of the Johansen statistics using several different versions

of the data generation process described in (Al) - (A3). To conform with our results in Tables 2 - 4,
we ran two sets of experiments; one where ; contained 3 variables, the other where ; contained 6

variables. In each set of experiments we varied the number of stochastic trends generated in ; from 1

to d to examine the power and size of the test statistics. We also compared the test statistics on z,
generated with homoskedastic error terms (i.e. Q

= Q, E = E, and E,, =

E,),

against those on;

generated with heteroskedastic terms.
To parametarize the data generation process in (Al) -(A3) we use actual data on spot and forward

exchange rates. In the experiments where if = 3, define Y as a data matrix with rows laS,', SS?M,
aSITJ

and

when if = 6, define 1' as a data matrix with rows (S1t, aS1DM

at are the one month forward rates. In both cases we assume that A =

I,,,

iXS1T,àf,', afDM,

and that r =

where

(J,]# where

I is (r-,n)xm matrix of ones. When we ran experiments where A = I x 0.1, we found the results to

111

very similar to those reported below. (These results are available upon request.)

1-fornoskedasric Experiments: The following steps are repeated 1000 times.
1.

Sample from the first in columns of Y to create {ç}, from which we construct {v1fl. (v} is
therefore an rn-dimensioned random walk equal to the sample length T, with innovations that are

a random sample of Y. Next, re-sample from the first in columns of Y to create (u11} and use

(Al) to combine (u1,} with (vj to form {z1,}1.
2.

Sample from the last r columns of Y to create (u2j1, and then use (A2) together with {z1} to
calculate {24}

3.

Form {;} where; =

[z,t',z21'Jt. Calculate the .Tohansen Trace test and Maximum Eigenvalue

test forj trends wherej = I,2,...d using (a) a VAR with 1 lag, and (b) a VAR with 3 lags.
Record the results.

flereroskedastic Experiments: The following steps are repeated 1000 times.

I.

Estimate ARCH models for the elements in Y. Then re-scale the elements of? by dividing each
observation by its estimated standard deviation from the ARCH models. Sample from the first

in columns of scaled matrix Y to create (fl,

and

then re-scale [Efl using the ARCH

predictions to form {e,}. These innovations are used to calculate (vj. Next, re-sample from
the first in columns of Y to create {u1), and then re-scale using the ARCH predictions to form

{u1j.
2.

Finally use (Al) to combine {u1} with [v1} to form {z1.}.

Sample from the last r columns of the Y to create {uL1}, and then re-scale using the ARCH

predictions to form {u2j. Use (A2) together with {zJ to calculate
3.

As step 3 above.

Tables B and C report a sub-set of the empirical sampling distributions of the test statistics. The complete

set of results are available upon request.

iv

Table A

Percentiles of Johansen Test Statistics Distribution
No. of Stoch.
Trends

50%

80%

90%

95%

97.5%

99%

mean

var

7.024
12.568

Maximal eigen v&ue
1,

2.
3.

4.
5.

2.415
7.474
12.707
17.875
23.132

4.905
10.666
16.521

22.341
27.953

6.691
12.783
18.959
24.917
30.818

8.083
14.595
21.279
27.341
33.262

9.658
16.403

23.362
29.599
35.700

11.576

3.030

18.782
26.154
32.616
38.858

8.030
13.278
18.451
23.680

11.576

3.030
9.879
20.809
35.475
53.949

18.518
24.163

29.000

Trace
1.

2.
3.
4.
5.

2.415
9.335
20.188
34.873
53.373

4.905
13.038
25.445

41.623
61.566

6.691
15.583
28.436
45.248
65.956

8.083
17.844
31.256

34.062

21.962
37.291

48.419
69.977

51.801
73.031

55.551
17.911

9.658
19.611

Note: Reproduced from Johansen and Juaeius (1990).
Simulations based upon 6000 replication! of 400 step random walks,

7.024
18.017

34.159
56.880
84.092

Table B
Percentiles of the Johansen Trace Test
VAR
Lags

VAR
Dim.

No. of

14o. ol
Trends
Simulated Tested

Trends

80%

90%

95%

97.5%

99%

14.497

18.951

24.964

19,772

25.1(X)

28.829
28.462

31.241

14.699

3J.9)5

35.518
33.991

38.764 19.970 41.041
38.421 20.267 40.868

14.737

18.608
19.543

24.557
24.846

27.948
28.209

31.440
31.261

34.180
34.301

36.474 19.638 39.937
36.750 20.099 39.011

83.091

82.885

92.477
91.353

98.354
96.943

103.421 107.775 112.559 83.480
101.535 105.354 110.532 83.013

129.149
117.859

70.279
70.287

75.169
74.258

78.952
78.513

87.671 61.972
83.92! 62.062

103.029

86.253
87.407

92,609
94.484

97.619 102.069 107.853 77.482
101.327 104.983 110.152 78.134

144.437

99,384 102.211 75.768
101.463 106.827 76.179

125.012
131.803

2.5%

5%

10%

11.074
11.072

12452
12.841

10.450
11.038

12.23

14,49

12.683

20%

3
3

3
3

3
3

8.512
7.950

9.431

1

3
3

3
3

3
3

3
3

8.338
8,149

9.265

3
3

2
2

3
3

61.036
59.911

63.267
62.247

66.344

1

65.2 19

69.272
69.002

73.357
73.940

3
3

3
3

2
2

3

41.517
40.824

43.646
43.474

46.421
45.831

49.104
49,419

53.130
53.746

61.528

3

6
6

6
6

6
6

53.457

58103

53.17!

56.254

60.960
61.130

63,802
63.723

67.976
67.996

76.509

1

3
3

6
6

6
6

6
6

50.433
51.485

55.302
56.321

58.956
59.228

61171 65.896 74.962 84.883 90.338
62.076 66,354 75.127 85.393 90.834

1

6
6

3
3

4
4

63.991
64,279

66.819
66.516

69.769
69.783

72.812
73,226

76.754

6

3
3

4
4

48.256
48.668

49.969

52.510
52.261

54.921

58.060
58.306

1

1

1

1

3
3

6

9.886

9.360

5557

54.678

var

50%

1%

61.77!

77034

84.294

7&!80 83.948
64.743
65.541

95.626
96.050

93.271
124.973

100.825 103.812 107.800 84.637
103.154 106.086 84.399

89.544

82.513 86.351 65.414
81215 85.892 65.815

70.894
72.045

92.287
92.419

97.465
96.213

99.985

72.497

76.495
77.059

79.973
80.323

73.012

82.747
81.478

mean

Notes: Upper entry gcncraicd assuming homoskedastie errors, lower entry generated assuming conditionally heteroskedastie errors.

86.34!

•

Table C
Percentilcs of the Johansen Maximal Elgenvalue Test
VAR
Lags

VAR
Dim.

No. of
Trends

No. of
Trends
var

Simulated Tested

1%

2.5%

5%

10%

20%

50%

80%

90%

95%

97.5%

99%

5.992
5.914

6.894

7.757

9.240

12.245

16.278

19.356

22.260

24.780

6.685

7.897

9.429

12.723

16.967

19.239

21.845

24.139

27.543 13.079 22.253
26.905 13.334 21.792

12.137
12.777

16.381

l9.243
19.575

21.968
21.985

24.501

16.919

mean

1

3

3

3

4.859

1

3

3

3

5.143

3
3

3
3

3
3

3
3

4.939
4.916

5.944

6.516
6.705

7.525

8.954

1693

7.869

9.330

3
3

2

3

1

2

3

54,426
51.906

57.048
56.089

59.312
58,527

62.249 66.468
61.456 6.1242

3
3

3
3

2

3

3

34.942
34.692

37.717
37.553

39.820 42.389 44.204
39.329 42.564 45.854

53.590

2

66.171
65.753

69.329 72.657 76.842 54,019
68.798 71.050 76.46$ 53.628

83.181
78.322

6
6

6
6

6
6

19.238

20.015

18.664

20.054

21.487
21.450

29.915 35.250 39.165
30.229 36.517 40.299

42.045 45.867 49.153 30.594
43.788 46.880 51.445 31.055

40.325
48.556

6
6

6
6

6
6

18.587
18.070

19.456 20.517 22.213 24.196
19.216 2(1485 22.172 24.302

28.750 34.338
29.118 34.872

37.482
37.630

40.156 43.240
40.408 41453

46.046 29.467 37.302
45.521 29.707 37.992

6
6

3
3

4
4

48.114
47.550

50.431 52.559 54.859 52.404
49.959 52.633 54.877 58.459

64.509

1

70.487
69.913

73.779
72.840

77.094 79.051
71494 77.548

80.955 64.538 52.425
80.296 64.125 4.1651

3
3

6
6

3
3

4
4

32.027

35.034
34.838

45.656 50.421
41658 50.800

53.202

l

1

1

3

3
I

32.719

36.652
36.581

23.174 25.262
22.962 21113

38.709 40.859
38.160 40.831

74.600 84.032 88,846
73.880 82.587 86.708

53.381

64.2CM)

61.251
61.264

27.144 12.919 22.245
24.059 26.120 13.314 21.863

93.639 96.934
91.851 94.277

I01.043 75.3I3

108.521

1CC&429 74.466

99.946

55.599 57.179 58.898 45.749 32.941
51236 56.074 5.1031 61.310 45.836 31597

Notes: Upper entry generated assuming homoskedastic errors, lower entry generated assuming conditionally heteroskcdastic errors.

Figure 1: Three Month Excess Returns from Buying Dollars Forward

IT
a

U

a

'WI

1w

III

iii

ti

Yen/Dollar

IC

IC

1W

III

FIgure 2: Forward Premia and Spot Exchange Rates

C
C

4
I.

I
S

I

-

C
U

:T -). 1••

I..

1

a

''II

ti
'I

'19Th

1917

1981

$919

1983

1935

1987

1989

Three month Forward Premium

0

t
V

I,
(I
0

—

I,

ON

I
••••
-' /

L

I'

U

yR

'd

'¼

V

IN

\1¼

C

C.
0

It

V

0

t
0
-J
° 19Th

1979

nas

1981

19a1

1989

Spot Exchange Rates

Key:

f/S

DM15,

1/5, (measured as 100 1 per $)

1991

Figure 3: Monte Cark Distribution of the Trace Test

Figure 4: Monte Carlo Distribution of the Maximal Eigenvalue Test

The statistics test for the presence of 4 trends in the 6-dimensioned vector of forward and
spot exchange rates when in fact there are 3 in the generated data.
_______
empirical distribution of test statistics based on a VAR of order 1
— — —:
empirical distribution of test statistics based on a VAR of order 3
+
test statistics for I-month forward rates reported in Table 2.
o
test statistics for 3-month forward rates reported in Table 2.

Figure 5
Trends in Forward Premia (One Month Horizon)

Predicted Forward Premia (One Month Horizon)
I-,
c%4

"Additional" Trend in Forward Premia (One Month Horizon)

0

so0

t
I

74

Figure 6
Trends in Forward Prernia (Three Month Horizon)

'0
04

to
c

0
Predicted Forward Prernia (Three Month Horizon)

0
C-'
In

0
In

U?

C
In

0
"Additional" Trend in Forward Premia (Three Month Horizon)

C

0
C
C-'

-r
40

90

