                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        DO GASOLINE PRICES RESPOND ASYMMETRICALLY
               TO CRUDE OIL PRICE CHANGES?




                              Severin Borenstein

                              A. Cohn Cameron

                               Richard GiJbert




                          Working Paper No. 4138




           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                          August 1992

For helpful discussions and comments, the authors thank Anthony Brown,
James Huccaby, Bruce McDiarmid, Simon Potter, Andrea Shepard, Pablo
Spillar, Frank Wolak and seminar participants at U.C. Davis, U.C. Berkeley,
and U.C.L.A., University of Chicago, Stanford University, and the National
Bureau of Economic Research. Michael Schwarz, Kathryn Myronuk, Rika
Onishi and Troy Parades provided excellent research assistance. The authors
gratefully acknowledge support from the University of California
Universitywide Energy Research Group. The opinions in this paper reflect
only the views of the authors. They are responsible for any errors that remain.
This paper is part of NEER's research program in Industrial Organization.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper #4138
                                             August 1992


        DO GASOLINE PRICES RESPOND ASYMMETRICALLY
               TO CRUDE OIL PRICE CHANGES?


                                 ABSTRACT

         Our empirical investigation confirms the common belief that retail
gasoline prices react more quickly to increases in crude oil prices than to
decreases. Nearly all of the response to a crude oil price increase shows up in
the pump price within 4 weeks, while decreases are passed along gradually
over 8 weeks. The asymmetry could indicate market power of some producers
or distributors, or it could result from inventory adjustment costs. By
analyzing price transmission at different points in the distribution chain we
investigate these theories. We fmd that some asymmetry occurs at the level
of the competitive spot market for gasoline, perhaps reflecting inventory costs.
Wholesale gasoline prices, however, exhibit no asymmetry in responding to
crude oil price changes, indicating that refiners who set wholesale prices are
not the source of the asymmetry. The most significant asymmetry appears in
the response of retail prices to wholesale price changes. We argue that this
probably reflects short run market power among retail gasoline sellers.



Severin Borenstein                          Richard Gilbert
Department of Economics                     Department of Economics
U.C. Davis                                  U.C. Berkeley
Davis, CA 95616                             Berkeley, CA 94720
sjborenstein@ucdavis.edu.
and NEER

A. Cohn Cameron
Department of Economies
U.C. Davis
Davis, CA 95616
accameron@ucdavis.edu.
I. Introduction

    The 1990-91 Persian Gulf crisis brought to attention again the response
of retail gasoline prices to fluctuations in world oil prices. Consumer groups
and even a Republican president expressed concern about gasoline price
"gouging" and "profiteering." Some critics complained that retail prices
reflected the recently increased price of oil, rather than the historical price
at which the companies had purchased the oil used to make the gasoline. Of
course, prices in competitive markets should reflect the opportunity cost of
the inputs, not the accounting cost, so this complaint was easy to dismiss.
Other observers, however, asserted that gasoline prices react more quickly
to increases in crude oil prices than to decreases. If true, this would appear
to reflect a significant departure from the standard competitive model.

     In this paper, we test for asymmetry in the speed of retail price re-
sponses and find supporting evidence. Such asymmetries, however, are as
inconsistent with textbook monopoly behavior as they are with simple mod-
els of competition. Although such a pricing pattern could indicate market
power at some level of the distribution chain, the connection is not inune-
diately apparent. Many critics of gasoline price movements have placed the
"blame" for asymmetric retail price responses on the major refining com-
panies, but the cause could also lie at other points along the distribution
chain.

     The process of making and distributing gasoline for consumer use can
include from one to as many as four market transactions. A fully integrated
oil company could obtain oil from its own wells, refine it in its own refineries,
distribute the gasoline through its own delivery trucks, and finally sell it
to consumers from a station that the company owns and operates. More
frequently, however, some or all of the crude oil a refiner uses is purchased
from another company. Often, a refining company will sell some output as

                                       1
generic gasoline to another marketer or will buy some of the gasoline it needs
to supply its retailers, rather than produce it all in its own refinery. Further
downstream, most major oil companies deliver a substantial proportion of
their branded gasoline to retailers through some intermediary and none of
the major oil companies owns more than one-third of their name-brand
stations.

       Thus, transmittal of a price change from crude oil to retail gasoline may
depend on the response in many intermediate margins. Most service sta-
tions and CCjobbers who handle intermediate transactions set prices with-
out direct intervention from the gasoline refiners, so these decisions are not
completely coordinated between upstream and downstream companies.1
Whether the production and distribution process occurs wholly within one
firm or involves intermediate transactions, a company faces opportunity
costs at every point in the process. Because market transactions occur and
price data are available at most points in the production and distribution
process, we observe measures of these direct or opportunity costs.

       In the following section, we describe the production and distribution
process in greater detail and in this context, discuss the sources and appro-
priateness of the data that we analyze. In section III, we test for and find
that retail gasoline prices respond asymmetrically to changes in crude oil
prices, increasing in response to crude price rises faster than they decrease
in response to crude price declines. Nearly all of the response to a crude oil
price increase shows up in the pump price within 4 weeks, while decreases
are passed along gradually over the S weeks following the crude oil price
change.

   1
       Although the refiner cannot set prices at retailers that it does not own and operate,
       nonlinear pricing and and other incentives from refiners are common in an effort to
       lessen the double marginálization problem. See Shepard (1991b) for a detailed de-
       scription of the contractual relationships between refiners and dealers and Temple,
       Barker, and Sloan, Inc. (1988) for a description of common distribution practices.

                                              2
    In section IV, we present theories that could link such asymmetries
to each of the distribution tiers. We suggest that the asymmetry could
result from inventory costs and constraints — particularly the asymmetry
that may exist because inventories must be non-negative — or that it could
result from imperfections in competition at some stage of the distribution
process. Sellers at the refinery, wholesale, or retail points in the distribution
chain might exhibit short run oligopoly behavior in response to decreases,
attempting to maintain the former price until some other seller deviates and
cuts price. An alternative explanation relying on a market imperfection,
which would apply only to the retail market, is that imperfect informa-
tion on the part of buyers causes sellers to be less competitive whom input
prices are variable because a buyer is more likely at such times to attribute
individual price changes to market-wide cost effects.

     By analyzing the price response at each level of distribution, in section
V we attempt to distinguish between the competing explanations for the
asymmetric response. We find significant asymmetries in the transmission
of crude oil price changes to the changes in the spot price for generic gaso-
line. Although increases and decreases are both passed through within 2
weeks, increases are passed through significantly faster than decreases over
the first two weeks. At the next level of transmission, however, we find ev-
idence of a small, and weakly significant, "reverse" asymmetry: wholesale
gasoline prices respond somewhat more quickly to decreases in spot prices
for generic gasoline than to increases in spot gasoline prices. Finally, in
the transmission of price changes from wholesale to retail we find the sta-
tistically strongest evidence of an asymmetry, with retail prices changing
much more quickly in response to wholesale price increases than to whole-
sale decreases. The spot market evidence appears to lend some support to
inventory theories, though the asymmetry at this level seems larger than
could easily be explained by inventory costs alone. The asymnmetry in the

                                        3
wholesale-retail transmission indicates that imperfect competition in retail
markets may be substantially responsible for the asymmetric response of
retail gasoline to crude oil price changes.


H. The Production and Distribution of Gasoline
       The production and distribution of gasoline in the U.S. is illustrated
in figure 1. Motor gasoline is one of many products that can be made
horn refining crude oil, along with diesel fuel, kerosene, jet fuel, heating oil,
plastics and other products. The mix of outputs can be altered by changing
refining processes, but the scope for such output substitution is limited,
while maintaining efficient production. During our sample period gasoline
averaged about 45% (by volume) of refined output at U.S. refineries.2

       Gasoline produced at U.S. refineries, and the 5% of U.S. gasoline con-
suinption that is imported, is distributed through many channels. Refiners
often sell large quantities of generic gasoline directly from the refinery to
distributors or other refiners in spot transactions. Gasoline may be shipped
to the distribution terminal in a city and sold there as "branded" gasoline
(with company-specific additives and with the right to use the refiner's
name at resale) at a branded "terminal" (also known as branded "rack")
price. Gasoline from a name-brand refinery may also sold as generic gaso-
line at the terminal, without permission to use the refiner's name. Finally,
'unbranded" refineries -. those that do not operate their own chain of re-
tail outlets — sell unbranded gasoline at their city terminals for resale at
"unbranded" stations — stations that do not carry the name of a major
refiner.

       Once gasoline arrives at the city terminal it can be distributed directly
by the refiner ("direct-supplied") or through middlemen know as "j obb ers."

   2
       Energy Information Administration (1991), p. 16.

                                           4
              Imported Crude Oil




                                   End Usen

                                    Figure 1
About 55% of U.S. gasoline is distributed by "jobbers" or through other
companies that are not controlled by refiners.3 A typical jobber supplies
stations of many different brands and generally owns many of the stations
it supplies. A jobber might, for instance, supply 5 Shell stations, 3 Chevron
stations, and 5 unbranded stations, some of which the jobber owns and op-
erates. All gasoline sold at the Shell stations must be purchased at the local

    Temple, Barker, and Sloan, Inc. (1988), p. 19.

                                         5
Shell terminal by the jobber, and similarly for the Chevron stations. The
unbranded stations can be supplied with either the product of Chevron
or Shell, or gasoline from an unbranded refinery. The terminal price for
branded gasoline is the same regardless of the final use — branded or un-
branded — to which it will be put. Thus, the branded refiner competes
for its marginal sales at the terminal with unbranded refiners, which only
sell gasoline at the terminal for resale at unbranded stations. The terminal
price of branded gasoline is usually above the terminal price of unbranded
gasoline, but the difference seldom exceeds 3/4 of a cent.4

    Some gasoline is not purchased by jobbers at the terminal for delivery,
but is transported from the terminal to the retailer by the refiner. Most of
these direct-supplied stations are operated by an independent franchisee,
but some are owned and operated by the refiner. For company-operated
stations, no financial transaction occurs at the point of delivery, while
franchisees purchase the delivered gasoline at a "dealer tankwagon" price.
About 17% of U.S. gasoline is sold through refiner-operated stations.5

    At each point in the distribution process many arms-length transac-
tions occur between companies. The prices of these exchanges indicate both
the direct costs to the buyers and the shadow costs that vertically integrated
firms face. Major refining companies, for instance, must frequently decide
between refining additional crude oil or buying generic gasoline on the spot
market, presumably equating the costs of these two sources on the margin.
Thus, we use market transaction prices as indicators of the economic cost
of the product. at each stage of distribution.

    The cost of crude oil can be represented by the daily spot market price


    Branded terminal prices exceed unbranded terminal prices by an average of about
    1/41 in our dataset.

    Temple, Barker, & Sloan (1988), p. 19.

                                        6
of West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude oil. More than 80% of oil traded
worldwide is now traded at a spot price or under a contract with a price
tied to the spot price.6 WTI is the benchmark crude oil watched most
closely in the U.S.7 One criticism of using the spot price is that there isn't
an actual marketplace for spot crude oil transactions or real-time reporting
of prices. Rather there are many independent trades that take place at
different locations among wefl-informed traders. The price reported as the
spot price is taken from a survey of traders each day, as reported by Dow
Jones   International Petroleum Report and published in the Wall Street
Journal.5 We have also constructed a price change series using one-month
futures prices for sweet crude oil, contracts that are traded on the New
York Mercantile Exchange (NYME). This series has a correlation of 0.95
with the change in WTI spot prices. The results of our analysis are not
altered by the use of futures prices instead of spot prices.

    Generic gasoline prices are reflected in the spot gasoline prices for
delivery to New York and the Gulf Coast.9 As with crude oil, gasoline spot
prices are determined by a daily survey of major traders, as reported by
Oil Buyers' Guide and published in the Wall Street Journal. A gasoline
price change series from one-month ahead futures contracts traded on the
NYME has a correlation of 0.88 with the change in Gulf Coast delivery spot

    See Razavi (1989).

    The two other types of crude oil actively traded on U.S. spot markets are North
    Slope Alaska and West Texas Sour crude. The daily prices of each has a correlation
    of 0.99 with WTI over our sample period. The correlation of daily price changes over
    our sample period is 0.90 between WTI end North Slope crude and 0.72 between
    WTI and West Texas Sour crude. The basic results we present are not sensitive to
    the choice of crude price used.

    Razavi (1989) discusses potential reporting errors. Support for the reliability of
    these spot prices, however, is evident from the fact that many long-tenn contracts
    are indexed by this price.

    The two prices have a correlation of 0.99 over our sample period. The daily price
    changes have a correlition of 0.72.

                                          7
prices. We use the Gulf Coast spot price for our analysis, but the results are
unchanged by switching to the New York spot prices of the NYME futures
price series.

       The branded and unbranded city terminal prices are averages of 17
cities east of the Rocky Mountains from weekly surveys conducted by Lund-
berg Survey on Friday of each week. Spot markets are not as well estab—
lished in the west and the spot and futures commodity prices that we have
are for delivery in the east so we omit cities in the western U.S. from our
analysis.

    As mentioned above, there is often one more transaction point for
gasoline, when the product is delivered and sold to the retailer at a dealer
tankwagon price. Unfortunately, the data available on these transactions
are incomplete — they cover only direct-supplied stations — and probably
unreliable — refiners admit that they frequently discount off of the posted
DTW price.'0

       Retail gasoline prices present a number of data problems. The retail
price we use is the average of unleaded regular self-service gasoline prices
in 42 U.S. cities east of the Rocky Mountains collected semi-monthly by
Lundberg Survey on either the first and third or second and fourth Friday
of each month.11 The first complication with the retail price data is that
all but one of the cities are surveyed only once each month, either always in
the first survey or always the second survey of the month. The first survey
average price for each month is the average of 22 cities and the second is

  10   The analysis that we have done with these data yield results consistent with our
       other Endings, but we do not include these results due to the questionable quality

  '    of these data.

       Unfortunately, these seen to be the best available retail gasoline survey data. Other
       sources, such as the Oil and Gas Journal Database, use wholesale prices to estimate
       approximate retail prices. As with all prices in this study, the Lundberg prices are
       exclusive of excise or sales taxes, and are in current dollars.

                                              S
the average of 21 cities, with one city (Atlanta) appearing in both surveys.
To correct for different means for the different cities included in the two
surveys, we include a fixed effect parameter for the second survey of the
month in all of the data analysis.12 The second complication is caused
by the irregular sampling period. About 85% of the surveys occur two
weeks after the prior survey, but 15% occur three weeks later. The weekly
periodicity of the other price data, however, allow us to correct for this,
and to potentially even recover all of the weekly adjustment parameters.

      Figure 2 presents the semi-monthly price movements of retail, terminal
and spot market unleaded gasoline and spot WTI crude oil over our sample
period from January 1986 to December 1990. This figure indicates that
retail gasoline prices are less volatile than upstream gasoline prices or spot
crude oil prices. The standard deviations of semi-monthly changes in aver-
age retail, average terminal, spot market gasoline and spot market crude oil
prices are, respectively, 2.9lj, 4.121, 5.74j, and 4.231. The smoother retail
prices are indicative of the lags that we find in the adjustment of retail
prices to changes in upstream prices and to the less-than-full adjustment
that retail prices exhibit, e.g., a 11 increase in the spot price of gasoline or
crude oil leads to a long-run increase in retail gasoline prices of less than
11.

      Figure 2 also shows that margins between gasoline and crude oil prices
(e.g., spot gasoline price minus spot crude oil price) exhibit substantial
serial correlation. The explanation for this pattern lies in the determi-
nants of petroleum product supply and demand. Refiners can meet an
increased demand for gasoline by squeezing more gasoline from each barrel
of crude, by refining more crude, or by raising the wholesale gasoline price.

  32 The estimated difference in average prices was alWays aroUnd r.sj and highly sta-
     tistically significant. Tests for changes in this difference over time did not indicate
     that it changed significantly within our sample.

                                             9
C
0
0
0a)0
4-s
C
a)
C)
C
C)
01-




                                 Figure 2


Refiners with sophisticated upgrading capacity (catalytic cracking, hydro

cracking, and coking) have some flexibility to vary gasoline production by
changing the severity of crude processing, but these refiners tend to be in-
frarnarginal sources of supply. The marginal source of supply comes from
running increased or decreased quantities of crude in less sophisticated re-
fineries. These refineries are reluctant to run more crude if they expect low
prices for heavier products (e.g., heating oil), which in these refineries are
unavoidable by-products of gasoline manufacturing. Thus, when refiners
anticipate Tow margins for heavy products, or when refiners underestimate
gasoline demand, gasoline margins will rise or tend to stay high. Conversely,

                                     10
gasoline margins will remain low if margins on heavy products are expected
to be high enough to entice marginal refiners to run large amounts of crude
and continue supplying gasoline in a depressed market.'3



III. Do Gasoline Prices Respond Asymmetrically to Oil Price Changes

111.1 Adjustment Model

         We begin the empirical analysis of gasoline pricing by testing the com-
mon belief that retail gasoline prices adjust more quickly to increases in
crude oil prices than to decreases in crude oil prices. To estimate the rate
at which gasoline prices adjust to crude oil price changes, we assume a
simple linear long run relationship between retail gasoline and crude oil
prices, ii o + q51C. While we recognize that the adjustment of retail
prices to changes in crude prices is not instantaneous, we assume that the
adjustment function is time-invariant during our sample period and is hide-
pendent of the absolute magnitude of the crude oil price change. Defining
AC1 = C — C_1 and SR1 = R1 —                R, the adjustment could be modeled
as :14


                                              = /3, SC1
                                                                                        (1]


                                     AR0=flSC1
     The complex interdependence of petroleum supply and demand is reflected in the
     following observation from the Fetroleum Economist (August 1988, p. 280): "Gaso-
     line is becoming increasingly tight and straining upgrading capacity, chiefly as a
     result of the increased proportion of low-lead or unleaded requirements, but this
     simply creates surplus problems for the other products and accounts for caution on
     throughput levels even with superficially attractive refining margins."
  14 We ignore      here systematic drift in retail prices that is not associated with crude
         oil price changes. We do control for such effects, however, in the econometric
         estimation.

                                              11
where the superscript on z\R indicates that it is solely the change resulting
from the period t change in crude oil price and n is the number of periods
it takes for retail prices to complete adjustment to the period i change in
crude oil prices.

        Under these assumptions, the total change in retail gasoline price in
any period t will depend on the crude oil price changes in the previous n
periods.

                                                                                  [2]



    Equation [2], however, imposes symmetric responses to increases and
decreases in crude oil prices. Recognizing that the adjustment process could
be different for increases than for decreases, we instead assume


                                         = fi' AC1
                                                                                [3a]

                               ADt
                               LSJLI+n
                                         —    0 Afl
                                             Mn '—t,
if AC    >0, and
                                  AR = yo
                                Ant            Afl
                                         = 7i ai..1
                                                                                 [3b]

                                ADt
                               '—-       — Ar
                                         — 7n
ii AC1 <0J5
    Defining

              AC7 =max{ACt,0} and ACI =min{AC1,0}                                 [4]



    The choice of assigning the LiC1 = C) cases to the estimates of i or fi will have
    no effect on the parameter estimates, because no cbange due to the zero change in
    crude oil prices will be expected, by assumption.

                                         12
the adjustment of retail gasoline prices to crude oil price changes, allowing
for the possibility of asymmetric adjustment rates, would be:


                            = Em     ACt + -,' iCT)                        [5]


111.2 Econometric Issues

       A number of econometric issues must be address before proceeding with
estimation of an equation similar to [5]. The issues that we discuss here arise
in the estimation of all of the downstream price transmissions. Additional
complications are present when we estimate the response of retail prices to
upstream price changes due to the inconsistent and longer periodicity of
the retail price survey data we use. We address the complications specific
to estimation using the retail price data in appendix A.

Restrictions Imposed on the Lag Response Structure: The additive lag struc-
ture we use places few constraints on the adjustment path, allowing it even
to be non-monotonic. It also allows a certain intertemporal independence
that may be non-standard. For instance, if the price of crude oil increases
by 101 per gallon in week t and decreases by the same amount in week
t + 1, our model would not necessarily cause the direction of adjustment to
reverse when the crude oil price does. The retail price could continue to rise
in week t + 1.16 This contrasts with a standard partial adjustment model,
an approach that has been used by previous authors studying adjustments
to oil price changes.

       If the long run equilibrium relationship is assumed to be R =
then we could estimate a partial adjustment model such as

                        —       = /9(Øo   + hiCt_i — R1).                   [6]

  16
       Thiswouldoccurin[SJifOj>yo.

                                       13
Bacon (1991) tests for asymmetry in adjustment rates by including a quad-
ratic term in the adjustment process:

        — R1—,    = i3(o + ciCt_i — lit—i) + /32(o + Ø,C1_1 — R_,)2,                     [7]


so that the test of /32 = 0 is the test of whether adjustment to increases
and decreases in crude oil prices occur equally quickly.'7 The partial ad-
justment model, however, imposes equal proportional adjustments towards
the new equilibrium in all periods after a shock to crude oil prices, a serious
constraint. Furthermore, Bacon's method for diagnosing asymmetry with
a quadratic term imposes a structure on the asymmetry, implying that the
asymmetry becomes proportionally larger as the difference between the cur-
rent retail price and the long-run equilibrium price increases. Nonetheless,
the qualitative conclusions we draw from the estimation of our model for
retail adjustment to crude oil prices, and similar models later in the paper,
are supported as well by estimation of the asynirnetries from [7], though
the results are statistically weaker using the Bacon approach.

Incorporating the Long-Run Relationship Between Gasoline and Crude Oil
Prices

  17   The approach employed by Bacon 'uses and presented in [1 uses C               than Ct
       as the basis for the target R. It is standard to use C as the basis for the target ,R,
       but if adjustment time is greater than the periodicity of the data, this can lead, to
       very noisy estimates. Bacon experiments with different lags of C and finds that two
       weeks, the period between observations in Bacon's data gives the smallest standard
       errors on the adjustment parameters. He finds evidence of asymmetric adjustment
       in the hypothesized direction, but characterizes the asymmetry as small. Norman
       and Shin (1991) use this approach to estimate retail-crude adjustment asymmetry
       in the U.S. They use estimated weekly retail prices from Oil & Gas Journal ror
       1984-1989. They report finding no indication of asymmetric adjustment, but they
       use C as the basis for the target R1.
  15   The asynunetric response of retail gasoline to crude oil price changes is significant
       at only the 9% level using the quadratic partial adjustment model and ignoring the
       inconsistent periodicity of observations. In applying this method to our data, we
       use the crude price from the previous retail observation (2 or 3 weeks prior) as the
       basis for the target lit. When the contemporaneous crude wice is used, the results
       are statistically and economically insignificant.

                                             14
        The principle advantage of the partial adjustment model over the lag
    adjustment model presented in [5] is that [5} takes no account of the long
    run relationship between the prices of the upstream and downstream goods,
    and the tendency to revert towards that relationship. To address this, we
    estimate [5] as an error-correction model. The error correction term is the
    one-period lagged residual from the regression R4 = çl, + q5iCt + q52WKt,
    where WK1 is a time trend. The weekly regression is then:




                                                                               [8]
                              + O1(R_i —       —         — çb2WK)

        The constant term is included to account for the fact that gasoline mar-
    gins may have systematically changed during our sample period, whether
    due to inflation or other factors. In estimating the response of either termi-
    nal prices or spot gasoline prices to prices ofupstreamproducts, we estimate
    [8] directily with 260 weekly observations from 1986 through 1990. To take
    account of the longer and inconsistent periodicity of retail price surveys,
    which make retail price and the error correction variable available only ev-
    ery two or three weeks, we make adjustments to [8], which are exp'ained in
    Appendix A.

        It is possible that the error correction effect may itself be asymmetric.
    Tests for this, however, failed to reject the null hypothesis at even the 20%
    level in any of the adjustments tbat we estimate. To the extent that any
    asymmetry in adjustment is present, it appears to be captured in the weekly
4
    adjustment parameters.

        The error correction term also complicates interpret ating the param-
    eters to explain the path of adjustment to a one unit change in crude oil
    prices. The adjustment in the nt/i period after a change in the crude oil

                                          15
price wifi be the sum of the estimated response parameter from [8] (j3,
or y,) and the error correction effects over the n weeks. To arrive at an
estimate of the full adjustment path, we construct cumulative adjustment
functions for both increases and decreases in the price of crude oil, which
we explain below and in Appendix B.


Accounting for the Joint Production of Gasoline and Other Petroleum Prod-
ucts: As discussed in section II, refining of gasoline from crude oil also
produces other goods that have economic value. The incentives to produce
more or less gasoline, and thus the price of gasoline, will depend to some ex-
tent on the demand for other refined products. The effect could be positive
or negative; while some substitutability among outputs is possible, leading
for instance to a positive effect of heating oil demand on gasoline prices,
the scope for substitution is limited. If companies refine more crude oil in
order to produce more heating oil, the output will include more gasoline,
thus depressing the price of gasoline. As mentioned earlier, the latter effect
is thought to be more significant in the refining industry.

     Despite the role that prices of other petroleum products may play in
determining the price of gasoline, it is unlikely that omitting other refined
product prices in estimating the adjustment of gasoline to crude oil price
changes will lead to significant bias. The exogenous determinants of changes
in other refined product prices are principally demand shifts, which are not
likely to be correlated over a 1 to 10 week period with changes in the price
of crude oil.

     Still, we checked the sensitivity of our results to exclusion of other re-
fined product prices by including the current and lagged changes in heating
oil prices — the other major refined product and the one for which demand
is probably most volatile — in regressions of downstream gasoline prices on
crude oil prices. For the same reasons that heating oil prices are likely to

                                      16
influence gasoline price, gasoline prices are likely to influence heating oil
prices, so we instrumented for beating oil prices with a measure of heating
degree days in the northeastern region. Regressions in both levels and dif-
ferences indicated that heating oil margins (the price of heating oil minus
the price of crude oil) have a significantly negative impact on gasoline prices
at each level of the distribution chain. This is consistent with the industry
wisdom that gasoline and heating oil are production complements on the
relevant margin.

    Inclusion of heating oil margins in the adjustment functions had little
impact on the estimated asymmetries in the adjustment of gasoline products
to crude oil price changes - This is not surprising, since changes in heating oil
margins were not significantly correlated with crude prices over our sample
period. When heating oil margins were included, the estimated asymmetry
was slightly smaller for the response of spot gasoline to spot crude oil and
slightly larger for the responses of terminal and retail prices to crude oil
price changes, but none of the differences were statistically significant. Of
course, the joint production issue does not arise in estimating the response
of terminal or retail prices to changes in upstream gasoline prices.


Endogeneity of Crude Oil Prices: Do downstream prices for gasoline in-
fluence the price of crude oil? To the extent that U.S. demand for gaso-
line reflects fluctuations in the worldwide demand for petroleum products
(probably due to cyclical fluctuations across the developed countries), U.S.
retail gasoline price could be a proxy for causal factors determining the
worldwide price for crude oil. Thus, crude oil prices could be endogenous
and correlated with the error in our estimated adjustment function. The
bias from this possible correlation is unlikely to be very large, for two rea-
sons. First, the retail price of gasoline in the U.S. demonstrates a negative,
though statistically insignificant, correlation with U.S. GNP growth dur-

                                       17
ing the 19808.19 Inclusion of a (interpolated) GNP growth variable in the
adjustment functions we estimate has virtually no effect on the regression
results.

       Second, week to week changes in the world demand for petroleum
products are likely to be much smaller than week to week changes in world
oil supply factors, including changes in beliefs about future supply. Thus,
when we observe the relationship between the change in downstream prices
of gasoline over a one to three week period and change in upstream gasoline
of crude oil prices during the previous 10 weeks, the dominant effect that we
are likely to be observing is that of the upstream price on the downstream.

St ationarity and Coiniegration of Time Series Variables: Augmented Dick-
ey-Fuller tests on the levels of prices reveal that the individual price series
are first difference trend stationary.20 Upon differencing, the correlograms
for spot crude oil and spot gasoline are not quite fiat, but show no obvious
pattern, while first differences in the other series exhibit positive autocorre-
lation. 21 The various price series are borderline cointegrated in our data.
Though the ADF test statistics based on residuals from OLS regressions
that include a constant term and time trend generally do not lead to re-
jection of the null hypothesis of non-stationarity,22 the coefficients of the


       In fact, during mit sample period, 1986-1990, the correlation between spot WTI
       crude oil prices and U.S. GNP growth is not statistically significant.

  20 Lags up to 10 weeks and & constant term and time trend were included. For crude
     oil, spot gasoline and terminal prices the test statistics are respectively -3.06, -3.09,
       and -2.73, smaller in magnitude than the 5% critical value of -3.43. For semi-
       monthly retail gasoline prices the test statistic (with 5 lags, including a dummy
       variable for odd or even survey, and the same time trend as weekly data) was -2.77
       compared to the s% critical value of -3.82. So in all cases the null hypothesis of a
       random walk with drift is not rejected.

  21 The first four order correlation coefficients for first differences in tenninal price
     (weekly) and retail gasoline price (semi-monthly) are respectively 0.52, 0.32, 0.21,
       0.02, and 0.45, 0.23, 0.04 and -0.04.
  22    For spot gasoline on spot crude oil, terminal on spot crude oil, and terminal on

                                               18
lagged residual are quite large in magnitude, ranging from -.11 to -.42 in
the various cointegration tests. We therefore proceed under the assumption
that the price data are cointegrated

111.3 Asymmetric Retail Price Responses to Crude Oil Price Changes

       We estimate equation [8] (as adjusted in appendix A) using semi-
monthly retail prices and weekly crude oil prices from 1986 through 1990,
both expressed in cents per gallon.23 The regression results are shown in
Appendix C. From the parameter estimates in Appendix C, we construct
the cumulative adjustment function for a one cent per gallon change in
crude oil prices. The cumulative adjustment function takes into account
both the estimated response parameters and the error correction effect. Its
exact construction is documented in Appendix B. The results are presented
in figure 3.

       Figure 3 displays separately the estimated cumulative proportional ad-
justments to increases and decreases in crude oil prices.24 Figure 3 indicates
that retail gasoline prices adjust more quickly to increases than to decreases
in crude oil prices. There are many possible tests of this hypothesis. Strictly
speaking, symmetry implies that         = V i, which is rejected at the 1%
level. This, however, is a very strict interpretation of the question of asym-

       spot gasoline, the ADF test with lags to 10 weeks are respectively -3.28, -3.14 and
       -4.71 compared to a 5% critical value of -3.82. For retail gasoline on spot crude oil
       using semi-monthly data, we additionally include a dummy for odd or even survey.
       The ADF statistic, with changes in residuals to 5 lags, is -3.27 compared to a 5%
       critical value of -4.20.
  23   We also tried including monthly seasonal variables to control for seasonality in the
       rate of change of retail prices. These variables were not jointly significant and their
       inclusion had almost no effect on the estimated adjustment rates.
  24 These results   are front data that are not deflated by a price index. This wifi not hiss
       the results, because the constant term captures any systematic drift on average,
       and price inflation was relatively constant throughout this period. We have also
       carried out the estimation with the data deflated using a weekly consumer price
       index — interpolated from the government's monthly c.p.i. — with nearly identical
       results.

                                              19
                                                                                   4
               Cumulative Adjustment of Retail Price
                 To Spot Crude Oil Price Change

.o
a)
E

00
      U.
t
C
0
0      -'
C-
0
I-
C-
a)
>

E
C-)



                        2     3     4        6   6    7     8
                     Weeks After Spot crude Oil Price change


                                   Figure 3


metry and is not particularly informative about the underlying issue of
whether such an asymmetry affects consumer costs. Alternatively, we can
compare the gain to consumers from a given decrease in crude oil prices
over the lifetime of the retail price adjustment with the loss to consumers
during the adjustment process from an equal size increase in oil prices.

       For instance, a one cent per gallon increase in the price of oil is esti-
mated to increase gasoline prices by 0.211 during the week of the crude oil
price increase (week 0), while a one cent per gallon decrease in the price
of crude is estimated to decrease gasoline prices by 0.061 during the same
period. Thus, in the week of the crude oil price change, a consumer's costs

                                        20
    would. increase by 0.13j more per gallon when crude prices increase than her
    costs would decrease when crude prices decrease. Similarly, in week 1, the
    difference would be 0.451— 0.16j = 0.29j per gallon. Under the simplifying
4   assumption that consumption is uniform over the period of adjustment, the
    sum of the differences in cumulative proportional adjustment over the life
    of the adjustment is an estimate of the asymmetry in cost to the consumer
    per one cent change in crude prices for each gallon of weekly consumption.
    That is, the asymmetric adjustment process has a net cost to consumers
    through week it of


                            A Consumer Cost = (Bj — G3)                                  [9]



    per gallon consumed each week, where B3 and G3 are the cumulative re-
    sponses through week j to a one cent increase and decrease, respectively,
    in crude oil price.25 Equality of the right-hand expression to zero is a
    nonlinear restriction, because the cumulative adjustment function is a non-
    linear function of the estimated parameters, as explained in appendix B.
    The empirical distribution of this statistic can be estimated with a boot-
    strap method. We do this, determining the distribution of the measure of
    asymmetry defined in [9] based on 1000 bootstrap regressions of equation
    [8}. Rejection of this restriction would indicate that the total cost increase
    to consumers from an increase in crude oil costs is not equal to the total
    consumer cost decrease from an equal size decrease in crude oil prices over
    the life of the adjustment.

           Such a comparison raises the question of the appropriate window over
    which the gains and losses should be compared, i.e., the choice of it. The
    problem is analogous to the choice of the event window in a stock market

      23
           Equation [9] i approximately the difference in the areas under the two cumulative
           adjustment curves from week 0 to week n.

                                               21
event study; if the window chosen is too small it will fall to capture the
full effect of adjustment, but if it is too large the noise will make it difficult
to identify the actual adjustment processes and whether they differ. Un-
fortunately, the theories discussed in the following section do not suggest
a natural window over which the asymmetry hypothesis should be tested.
We present tests based on the adjustments through week 5 and week 10.
The latter is chosen because we estimate the lag responses out to 10 weeks,
and we assume that all significant short-run adjustments are completed
by this time. Estimates of the asymmetry through week 10 will probably
be unbiased, but they are likely to be noisy. Tests based on adjustment
through week 5 are likely to be much less noisy, but may reflect incomplete
adjustments in some cases and thus may be biased.

    Assuming that the cumulative adjustment is significantly asymmetric
only through week 5, the results presented in figure 3 imply a total cost
asynunetry of about 1.54$ per one cent change in crude oil prices for every
gallon. the consumer buys per week. This difference is significant at the 1%
level. Thus, if a consumer uses 10 gallons of gasoline per week,26 a 5$ per
gallon increase in crude oil prices (equivalent to a $2.10 per barrel crude oil
price increase) costs the consumer $0.77 more than a 5$ per gallon decrease
saves her through week 5 of the adjustment. The total cost asymmetry
through week 10 is 1.881 per one cent change in crnde oil price for every
gallon the consumer buys per week (also significant at 1%) implying that a
5$ per gallon increase in crude oil costs the average consumer $0.94j more
than a similar size decrease would save her. The asymmetry implies that
variability in crude oil prices, even if there is no systematic increase or
decrease in price, is costly to consumers.


 26 This is
            about the U.S. average per vehicle during our sample period. Energy Infor-
    mation Adnünistration (1991), p. 7.

                                          22
     The fact that the asymmetric adjustment process indicates greater
costs for consumers than would occur with symmetric adjustment does not
imply either market power or supernormal profits among sellers at any
point of the production process. Although two of the hypotheses discussed
in the next section suggest that temporary market power could explain the
asymmetry, other explanations consistent with competitive markets are also
plausible.

     Finally, it is worth noting that the 10-week transmission of an z cent
change in the price of a gallon of crude oil is less than x cents. This sort
of incomplete adjustment over the 10 weeks reoccurs in many of our sub-
sequent estimates of price transmission through the points of distribution.
In this case, it could be attributed to the fact that there is substitution in
inputs and outputs in the refining process, but that explanation is less con-
vincing in explaining the incomplete adjustment of retail or terminal prices
to gasoline commodity prices. The scope for substitution is extremely small
in those cases, but similar incomplete adjustments are estimated.

   At least two other explanations are possible. First, the transmission
we observe could reflect only the short-run adjustment to the upstream
cost change. If the short-run supply curve is upward sloping, we would
expect only partial transmission of a price change over the period observed.
For instance, an increase in oil prices might be partially passed along to
terminal prices in the short run, but also lead to losses among some or all
refiners. As refiners exit the market, price would rise further in the long
run, which we would not observe in a 10-week adjustment. An alternate,
but related explanation is that the downstream industry under observation
experiences industry diseconomies of scale, so that the industry supply
curve downstream is upward sloping even in the long run. In that case, the
adjustment we observe could be all that actually occurs.

                                    23
IV. Explanations for Asymmetric Retail Price Adjustments
    We have identified three hypotheses that might explain departures
from symmetric responses of retail gasoline prices to changes in crude oil
prices. These hypotheses differ in the assumed degree of economic sophis-
tication of the agents and in the incentives that the agents are assumed
to face. They also differ in the competitive structure that is assumed at
various points along the distribution chain. Most importantly, they differ
in their implications for selling margins at different points in the distribu-
tion chain. These differences yield the predictions that could enable us to
differentiate among them.


Hypothesis 1: Prices an sticky downward, because when input prices fall7
the old output price offers a natural focal point for oligopolistic sellers. In
response to a negative cost shock, a firm might choose to maintain a prior
price until demand conditions force a change. Consider a slight modifica-
tion of Tirole's (1988) price-setting version of the Green and Porter (1984)
oligopoly model. There are two firms, k = i,j. Let p be the price that firm
k was charging before a cost shock that lowers both firms' constant marginal
cost from cc to ci. Demand at firm k is stochastic: qj = Fk (p1, p1 )O', where
® is a random variable. Moreover, the firms' products are close substitutes,
so that a small price change by one firm induces a large change in the other
firm's demand. Each firm observes only its own price and its own demand.

     Suppose that there is a probability a that demand falls to a level
that would cause each firm to set a competitive (Nash equilibrium) price,
p, whether or not other firms are charging the higher old price. The
incentive to lower price may be the result of a perceived change in the
gains from cooperation, or a consequence of myopic behavior induced by
reduced cash flow. Call this threshold level . When demand falls below
a firm's threshold, the firm cannot determine whether this is the result of

                                      24
a market shock e or a low price charged by its rival. If both firms charge
the old price, j4, firm i makes an expected profit:



           V(j4,p,) ir'(p,p)+(1 — a)V'(j,14)+/3aV'(p,pj,                [101


where V'(p,,j4) = ,r(pf,,p)/(1—/3). the present value of profits when both
firms set competitive prices, a = prob{O <                i or j}, and 3 is
a discount factor assumed common to all firms. Thus, firm i's profit at the
old price is:


                        —    r1(pf3,14)+flax(p,p)/(1—$)                   11I
                  (po,p)—
                                       1—13(1—a)

      For (pf3,14) to be an equilibrium, V'(14,p) must reach a global max-
imum at 14. Also, to explain the observed pricing behavior, both firms
must be opposed to any price different from 14. Firm i would not increase
profits by raising 14 in response to a negative cost shock, assuming that
firm] does not change its price (8r1(4,p)/Op c 0). If their products are
close substitutes, any reduction in price would cause demand at firm j to
fall below its threshold, which would cause firm j to set a Nash price. Let
psi     argmaxlr1(pj,po). A price reduction would lower firm i's profits if



                                        ,r(p,p)                     -3)

      or


                                                                          [12]
                          (1— a)[ir1(p',14) —
                                      25
     Given the short time frame of adjustments to cost shocks in this mar-
ket, it is reasonable to assume that /3 is close to one (at least dnring times
when the firm's time preference is not constrained by cash flow). In a
symmetric market, if ir(p,p) — 0, the right-hand side of [10] is at most
        so that [12] would be satisfied if a is not too large.

    A main point of this simple model is that even if firms are prone to re-
main at their old prices following a negative cost shock, there is some prob-
ability that firms will experience a negative demand shock that will induce
a reversion to competitive pricing. The probability that closely interdepen-
dent firms will set prices at competitive levels increases over time. Fur-
thennore, with numerous clusters of interdependent firms, average prices
will exhibit a gradual decline toward competitive levels following a negative
cost shock.27

    An oligopolistic coordination equilibrium of the kind described here is
consistent with a rapid response of prices to positive cost shocks and a slow
response to negative shocks. If the price    represented a normal profit
margin, there would be no reason for firms to hesitate in raising prices in
response to a positive cost shock.

    The theory is sufficiently general that it might describe the price change
transmission mechanism from spot crude oil to spot gasoline, from spot
gasoline to gasoline sold at the city terminals, or from terminal gasoline
to final retail sale. Upon closer scrutiny, however, the theory is very un-
likely to describe the transmission of crude oil price changes to changes in
the spot gasoline market. The spot gasoline market is close to perfectly
competitive with hundreds of well-informed buyers and sellers. Although
transaction prices are not posted per se, they are constantly monitored

 27 The
        decline in price over time could be gradual for the market as a whole, but not
    for any particular firm or cluster of independent finns.

                                          26
and they necessarily track the prices for gasoline futures, which are traded
on the NYME, quite closely.28 Sellers on the gasoline spot market must
consider themselves price takers, so the theory would not be applicable.

     The oligopolistic coordination theory could possibly explain asymmet-
ric terminal price movements in response to spot gasoline or crude oil
price changes, if such an asymmetry exists. In fact, this seems to be the
implication of complaints that the oil refining companies collude to slow
passthrough of oil price decreases. There is, however, an important check
on oligopolistic coordination in the sale of even branded product at the
terminals. If a refiner's branded price at the terminal gets too high relative
to the spot price from gasoline, the refiner will quickly see two effects: (1)
it will lose most or all sales for use other than branded resale, i.e., marginal
sales on which it competes with unbranded gasoline, and (2) branded re-
sellers of the refiner's product, jobbers and retailers, will suffer reduced
margins or reduced sales and will pressure the refiner to lower its price.

    The theory seems most likely to describe the reaction of retail prices to
changes in the wholesale or terminal price. Sellers are spatially and other-
wise differentiated. They face many competitors, only some of which they
can monitor at low cost. If stations in an area are operating at competitive
margins and then the wholesale price of gasoline declines, it seems plausi-
ble that each station might maintain its retail price until it sees convincing
evidence (in the form of lower sales) that competing stations have lowered
price. The sellers are certainly not price takers, and the buyers are not
completely informed about the price of each seller.29

Hypothesis 2: Production lags and finite inventories of gasoline imply that

 28 See
        Ng and Pirrong (1992).
 29 See
        Shepard (1991a) and Borenstein (1991) for evidence of price discrimination and
    local market power among retail gasoline sellers.

                                         27
negative shocks to the future optimal gasoline consumption path can be ac-
commodated more quickly than positive shocks. If half of all world oil re-
serves suddenly disappeared, the long run competitive price of gasoline
would increase greatly and consumption would decrease greatly. Oil com-
panies could accommodate that change quickly by raising gasoline prices.
Since refinery production schedules cannot be adjusted immediately — such
responses generally take at least 2 to 4 weeks to implement — the result
would be a short run building up of finished gasoline inventories. In con-
trast, if world oil reserves doubled overnight the short run response in the
gasoline market would be limited by available supplies of finished gasoline.
Essentially, this argument relies on an asymmetry between the short run
cost of decreasing inventories versus increasing inventories. While it is clear
that inventories must be non-negative so the cost of decreasing inventories
must increase substantially at some point, the elasticity of the marginal cost
of increasing inventories is less clear. If, for instance, storage adjustment
marginal costs were decreasing at low levels of reserves and constant at all
higher levels, as would be the case if refiners had substantial excess storage
capacity, then the asymmetry in storage adjustment costs would exist.

     Reagan and Weitzman (1982) present sucb a model with asymmetric
inventory adjustment costs due to the non-negativity constraint on inven-
tories. They find that in the short run prices should respond more to
situations of excess demand than to excess supply, because the ability and
incentive for competitive firms to respond with inventory (quantity) ad-
justments is greater in the case of excess supply. Bresnahan and Spiller
(1986) develop a related theoretical model that explains "backwardation,"
the premium of spot prices over futures prices. They note that arbitrage
constrains the amount by which futures prices can exceed current spot
prices (known as a "contango" condition, the opposite of backwardation),
because all current consumption can be shifted into the future. By contrast,

                                      28
the only future consumption that can be shifted to the current period — the
arbitrage that would limit backwardátion — is the current inventories that
otherwise would be held to the next.

    Over the period of our dataset, U.S. reserves of finished gasoline fluc-
tuated between 21 and 31 days of contemporaneous consumption. Whether
there is an asymmetry in inventory adjustment costs and whether it is likely
to have a non-trivial effect on prices when inventories are within this range
are empirical questions that we hope to address in future work.

    This inventories theory could explain asymmetry in the adjustment of
spot (or futures) gasoline prices to spot (or futures) crude oil prices or in
the adjustment of terminal prices to the upstream spot prices. It is unlikely
to be relevant to an asymmetry that could occur between terminal price
and retail price changes, because service stations do not generally set price
in order to ration scarce inventories. Service stations can almost always
order and receive delivery of gasoline on less than 48 hours notice.30

Hypothesis 5: Volatile cnsde oil prices. create a signal-extraction problem
for consumers that lowers the expected payoff from search and makes retail
outlets less competitive. When a consumer knows that crude oil prices or
retail gasoline prices are currently volatile, he or she may be more likely
to believe that an increase in one station's retail price reflects crude oil
price changes, rather than a change in the station's relative price in the
retail market. Thus, the expected gain fràm search in reaction to a retail
price increase may be smaller when crude oil prices are known to be volatile
than when they are fairly stable. Each retailer realizes that this implies a

  ° At least two major refiners we have spoken with say that they 5et no minimum
    quantity for delivery to their branded stations though one does require that the
    stations it delivers to have underground storage tanks of at least a minimum sire,
    and it is customary for & station to order sufficient quantity to fill its tanks. The
    most active stations receive deliveries every few days, while those selling less volume
    may get supplied only every one to two weeks.

                                           29
temporary decline in the elasticity of demand it faces and thus increases its
margin. This temporarily increased market power of retailers may dampen
the rate of passthrough of upstream price decreases and exacerbate the
rate of passthrough of upstream price increases, possibly even resulting in
temporary "overshooting" on increase. Since this is a theory of costly search
it applies to retail margins, but has little to say about refiner or wholesaler
margins.

    Bénabou and Gertner (1991) formalize a theory of costly endogenous
search and conclude that common cost shocks among competing firms (or
economy-wide inflation) can increase or decrease the equilibrium amount of
consumer search, and thus increase or decrease competition among sellers.
They find that search is more likely to decrease due to common cost shocks
if the cost of search is high to begin with.


    These three hypotheses do not exhaust the possible explanations for
the asymmetric response of retail gasoline to crude oil prices. Still, varia-
tions on these theories have been suggested either directly in the context
of gasoline pricing, as is the case for hypothesis #1, or more broadly, but
with obvious application to the gasoline market, e.g., hypotheses #2 and
#3. Recognizing that we will not in this study be able to identify the
single model that describes the actual transmission process from crude oil
to retail gasoline prices, we seek instead to narrow the field by ruling out
common explanations that are not supported by a more detailed analysis
of the data.


V. Identifying the Asymmetric Transmission of Price Responses
    The first price transmission we investigate for asymmetry is from chan-
ges in crude oil prices to changes in the commodity price for generic gasoline.
The spot and futures gasoline markets are used by independent refiners and

                                      30
marketers of gasoline to obtain and sell gasoline, as well as by firms inter-
ested in hedging risk or speculating on future shocks, to gasoline demand
or supply. It is also used by the major refiners to balance excess supply or
demand for their branded product. With the proper additives and the ap-
propriate insignia on the side of the delivery truck, generic gasoline bought
in the spot market can be marketed as gasoline of a major refiner.

    The large number of participants in the gasoline spot and futures mar-
kets, and the generic nature of the product, make these markets quite
competitive. Since the refined gasoline product is traded in these markets,
price will reflect not only the cost of inputs in making gasoline, particularly
crude oil, but also the short run constraints on delivery due to the avail-
ability of gasoline inventories. If asyrrunetric inventory adjustment costs,
as explained in hypothesis #2, are responsible for the asymmetry of retail
price adjustment to crude oil price changes, one might expect this to be
evident in the relationship between the spot gasoline price and spot crude
oil prices. ilypotheses #1 and #3 would not be supported by an asymnme-
try in spot gasoline price adjustment, because of the low seaich costs and
competitiveness in the spot gasoline market.

    The estimates, represented in figure 4, exhibit an asymmetry in the
response of gasoline spot prices to changes in crude oil spot prices. The
asymmetry is 1.801 after 5 weeks (per one-cent change in crude oil spot
price) and is statistically significant at the 1% level. It is 1.361 after 10
weeks, but it is significant at only the 8% level.3'

    The adjustment of generic gasoline prices to changes in crude oil prices
appears to occur very quickly and the cumulative adjustment is fairly sym-



    We have also estimated this adjustment function using daily data and have found
    very similar results.

                                       31
              Cumulative Adjustment of Spot Gasoline




I
                 To Spot Crude Oil Price Change




             —'                                                \ \/r\\/
      0:5
      0.4

      0.2                                                  + = Price Increase
      0.1                                                  - = Price Decrease
       0     '                     I      I            I       I      I     I       I

             0      1      2      3      4         5   6       7     8      9      10
                        Weeks After Spot crude Oil Price change


                                       Figure 4


metric at the end of week 2.82 In the first two weeks, however, there is
a significant asymmetry. One might wonder, however whether this might
be an artifact of the spot price data collection.33 To check this, we com-
pared the resulis to those using the one-month ahead futures price series
and found very similar results.

 32   The cumulative adjustments to increases and decreases are not significantly differ-
      ent at the s% level in any week alter week 1. These tests are not independent week
      to week, but they do provide a guidepost for analyzing the estimated differences.

      Ng and Pirrong (1992) find that new information in refined petroleum product
      markets generally affects prices in the futures market before it appears in the spot
      market. The lag they find, however, is only about 2 dayB.

                                              32
           Cumulative Adjustment of Terminal Price
              To Spot Crude Oil Price Change
    1.1•




    Q3


I
                  Weeks After Spot crude Oil Price change


                                  Figure 5


     These results app ear to violate weak form efficiency in the spot or
futures unleaded gasoline markets. It appears that the change in today's
crude oil price can be used to predict next week's change in the unleaded
gasoline commodity price. Though this interpretation is correct, it may not
be possible to trade profitably on this information. The reason again relates
to the level of inventories and the marginal cost of changing inventory levels.
If gasoline inventories are low, then a decrease in crude oil prices might not
be immediately transmitted downstream because the very short run scarcity
value of the gasoline exceeds its eventual replacement cost. Arbitraging may
not be possible because the higher short-run price reflects the temporary

                                     33
            Cumulative Adjustment of Terminal Price
               To Spot Gasoline Price Change




     0.2
                                                     + = Price Increase
     0.1                                             - = Price Decrease
       0                •     I              I   I       I    I    I
                                                                   9 10
                                    I

            0     1     2    3      4        5   6       7    8
                      Weeks After Spot Gasoline Price Change


                                  Figure 6



scarcity.

     The brief asymmetry in the gasoline commodity price response to crude
oil price changes is probably part of the cause for the asymmetric response
of retail prices to crude oil price changes. It is consistent with the theory
that asymmetries in inventory response costs explain part of the retail price
response. There are other possible interpretations, but in any case, this
component of the explanation cannot be attributed to hypotheses #1 or
#3
     Is the spot gasoline response asyrmnetry the entire explanation for the

                                        34
retail price response asymmetry to crude oil price changes? Probably not
for at least two reasons. First, the retail price asymmetry is significant at
5% until week 7 and is of much larger magnitude than the asymmetry in
spot gasoline response to crude oil prices at every point between weeks 2 and
6. If all downstream responses to spot gasoline markets were symmetric,
then any asymmetry in the reaction of downstream gasoline markets to
crude oil would be insignificant after the second week.

     Second, figure 5 indicates that whatever asymmetry is present in the
response of spot gasoline prices to crude oil prices, it is much weaker in the
response, of terminal prices to crude oil prices. Based again on the type
of regression and cumulative adjustment function explained in section 1111,
figure 5 indicates that terminal prices do not increase more quickly than
they decrease in response to crude oil price changes. Though there is a
slight asymmetry in the first two weeks that probably reflects the response
of spot gasoline to crude oil price changes, the estimated cost asymmetry
in the response of terminal prices to crude oil prices is 0.131 over the five
weeks and statistically insignificant. It is negative, —0.94j, at ten weeks,
but also not significant. The adjustment of terminal prices to crude price
changes appears to be largely complete in 3 weeks.

    The reason that terminal prices do not show the asymmetry in re-
sponding to crude oil that spot gasoline does is in part attributable to the
response of terminal prices to spot gasoline price changes, as shown in figure
6. Terminal prices appear to adjust more quickly to declines in the spot
gasoline price than to increases. The 5-week cost asymmetry difference
is —0.411 and is significant at 7%. The ten-week difference is 0.171 and
not statistically significant. The explanation for a "reverse" asymmetry
through week 5 is not immediately apparent, but its magnitude is also rel-
atively small compared to the asymmetries between retail or spot gasoline

                                     35
                 Cumulative Adjustment of Retail Price
                     To Terminal Price Change


  0
  E

 'O
  C

 t
  C
  0
  0
  0.
  0
  1-
 0.
  a)


  D
  E
 C)




                          Weeks After Terminal Price change


                                   Figure   7'




and crude oil.

       The results presented in figures 5 and 6 conflict with hypothesis #1 to
the extent that it might explain an asymmetry in the price adjusting behav-
ior of the major refiners, If crude oil price decreases facilitated coordination
among the major refiners of gasoline that induce the retail price asymmetry
described in section III, then transmission of changes fiom crude oil prices
to terminal prices would be expected to exhibit that asymmetry.

       The most significant source of the retail price response to spot crude
oil price changes seems to be in the transmission process from terminal to

                                      36
retail prices. Figure 7 indicates that terminal price increases are transmit-
ted to retail prices significantly more quickly that terminal price decreases.
The cost asymmetry is estimated to be 1.671 at five weeks for every one cent
change in the terminal price (significant at 1%) and 1.711 at ten weeks (sig-
nificant at 1%) . The estimates are about the size of the estimated overall
asymmetry in retail gasoline price responses to crude oil price changes. In-
creases in terminal prices are mostly transmitted to retail prices by the
first or second week after the the terminal price rise. Decreases in terrriinal
prices, however, are passed through to retail gradually over the following 9
weeks.

    The pattern of the retail-terminal asymmetry is quite different from
the retail-crude asymmetry. The retail-terminal asymmetry is more pro-
nounced in the first few weeks, but it disappears statistically by week 4,
The retail-crude asymmetry is less striking over the first few weeks, but is
statistically present until week 7.

    The estimated retail-terminal asymmetry supports hypothesis #1 as
it relates to the retail gasoline market and to hypothesis #3, that the
consumers' signal-extraction problem resulting from noisy common input
prices temporarily lowers the elasticity of demand faced by retail outlets.
This may result in retailers increasing prices more quickly and decreasing
prices more slowly in response to input price changes than would occur if
consumers were perfectly informed.




    Karrenbrock (1991) also linda that retail gasoline prices respond asymmetrically
    to changes in wholesale prices, though his use of monthly data (from the Energy
    Information Administration) limits the precision of the estimates regarding the size
    of the asynunetry.

    The cumulative adjustments to increases and decreases are not significantly differ-
    not at s% in any week after week 3.

                                         37
VI. Conclusions
    Gasoline prices clearly respond with a lag to crude oil prices changes.
This ragged response can be estimated precisely enough that it is possible
to identify asymmetric responses to crude oil price increases and decreases.
The evidence we have gathered supports the common belief that retail
gasoline prices respond more quickly to increases in crude oil prices than
to decreases. Establishing the points in the distribution chain at which the
asymmetries occur is a powerful tool in distinguishing between the possible
explanations for the phenomenon. The response of spot gasoline markets
to changes in crude oil prices is responsible for some of this asymmetry, but
is short-lived, lasting only about 2 weeks.

    The largest source of the asymmetry appears to be the response of
retail gasoline to wholesale price changes at the terminal level. At any
point in time, wholesale gasoline prices should fully incorporate informa-
tion about current inventories, so the explanation for the asyrmnetry in
retail adjustment to changes in wholesale gasoline prices must be found
elsewhere. This result is consistent with the theoretical work of Bdnabou
and Gertner (1991), which demonstrates that consumers may search less
when the common input prices of all retailers become more variable, caus-
ing short run decreases in the elasticity of demand that each retailer faces.
It is also, however, consistent with a model of sticky downward price adjust-
ment in an oligopoly with imperfect monitoring. In further work, we hope
to be able to distinguish between these and other possible explanations.




                                     38
Appendix A: Adjustments for Inconsistent Periodlicity of Retail Price Data
      As explained in the text, the time between retail price surveys is usu-
 ally two weeks, but is three weeks in about 15% of the observations. In
 all regressions in which retail price is the dependent variable1 however, the
 explanatory variables are still observed every week. So, we can still theo-
 retically recover the adjustment parameters for every week after the crude
 oil price change. The weekly change model in [5] can be written as:


                   & — Re-i = EQ AC1t + ii a1C1)                       [ALl]

 or


                     —
                            = E(I3 ACjt1...1 + yj    AC_1)             [A1.2)

 or


                    —       =         AC72 +                          [Al.3j

 So, if there is a two-week gap between observations of retail price, summing
 [ALl] and [A1.2] gives



      -      =                  + A4t1_1) + 7(AC + AC1)}. [A2.1]

If there is a three-week gap between observations, then summing [Al .1],
 [A1.2], and [A1.3] gives



            -        =               + Ac711 +     Ct2)               fA2.2]
                         + 71(AC11 + zC11 + AC1)},
                                     39
where the $ and 7 parameters estimated in [42.1] and [42.2] are the same
weekly adjustment parameters.
     Allowing for the asymmetry and estirriating the adjustment relation-
ship [A2.l]/[A2.2} out to 10 weeks implies estimation of over 20 pararn-
eters on a dataset that includes 119 observations after differencing. For
parsimony, we estimate the adjustment rates by imposing the restrictions
    = Pt, =         etc., and similarly for the 7's. The data do not reject
this constraint at even the 30% level, possibly due to the kiw power of the
hypothesis test, and it reduces by 10 the number of paramSers to estimate.
     When we indude an error correction term and adjust for the fact that
the first survey of each month incdudes a different set of cities than the
second survey, we actually estimate retail price changes from:


                       It    i—i                 j—1
    14—           =°+ E{m    E(C7I..k) + 'U
            5—'                                                        [A31
    -F 0,   E(&k)(Rt_j — —               — 42WKt_j — q3SRV21_5)

    + 02SRV21

where j is the number of weeks between the survey that occurred at time
t and the previous survey, 5RV2 is a dummy variable equal to one if the
survey at time I is the second survey of the month, WK is a time trend, 0,
is the estimated error correction parameter, the parameters are estimated
from a previous regression of R, on a constant, C, SRV2, and WK1, and
& is an estimated parameter to adjust the error correction effect for the
inconsistent periodicity of observation, as explained below. As mentioned
previously, we restrict every /3, = j9,.. and    y,—, if i is an odd number.

    hicllusion of an error correction term in the regression raises further
estimation issues because of the infrequent retail price data pemiodicity.
For j = 2, the error correction term should involve both Rh.., and R.2,
                                                     o
but data on Ri...., are not available. Defining qX, = + ØiCt + *2WK +
i3SRV2, the error correction term 9,{(R,_1 —              (R_2 —

                                    40
is approximated by O(I. + &)(R..2 — X1_2), imposing the restriction that
(R1—X2.1) = a(R_2—X1_2). For j = 3, the approximation is O(1+
& + &2)(R1_3 — X_3). The coefficient & is estimated by the regression
(.R —    — ØX1) = a1(R...3 — X1_1), where j = 2 or 3. The effect of this
approximation will be small if a is close to 1. In all the retail regressions
for which we report results in this paper, & 0.8.36




    Alternatively, we can write fs] as a fimction R = f(Rt_i), lag the equation and
    substitute for R_ to give itt = g(R4_2), and similarly R = h(&_3) for surveys
    three weeks apart. These functions can then be estimated by non-linear least
    squares. This is a much more cumbersome procedure, but it yields similar results
    for the response of retail price to crude oil price changes.

                                           41
Appendix B: Construction of the Cumulative Adjustment Functions
      horn the parameters in equation [10] or [111, we construct a cumula-
 tive adjustment function that represents the response path to a one-cent
 change in the independent variable that occurs from a point of long-run
 equilibrium. We describe the construction of the cumulative adjustment
 function for a one-cent increase, but the process is the same for a one-unit
 decrease with y substituted everywhere for /3.
       The period 0 adjustment is simply the estimated $o. The relationship
 had been in long-run equilibrium at time 0, so there is no error correction
 effect. For all later periods i, the marginal adjustment is the estimated /3
 pius the estimated error correction effect. The error correction at any time
 t is expected to be the estimated error correction parameter, O multiplied
 by the difference between the cumulative adjustment at the beginning of
 the period and the long run estimated adjustment to a one unit change in
 the independent variable, Ø.

                        B0 = /3o,
                        B1 = B0 + 9i(Bo —
                        B2 = B1 + 01(B1 — Øi) +/2,                      [B1]


                       B10 =B9+01(B9—h)+ flue.




                                      42
  Appendix C: Retail Adjustment to Crude Oil Price Changes
     Dependent Variable: Retail Change
    Total Observations: 119
    J?2 = 0.683     E2 = 0.640
     SSR = 398.43     SEE = 1.957
    Durbin-Watson Statistic = 1.650
               Variable          Coefficient    Std. Err.     T-statistic
               Constant               -1.866          0.451          -4.13
               ACrnde+0                0.209          0.048           4.37
               ACrude-4-1              0.209         0.048            4.37
               Crude+2                 0.071         0.064            1.11
               ACrude+3                0.071         0.064            1.11
               ACrude+4                0.052         0.069            0.75
               ACrude+s                0.052         0.069            0.75
               ACrude+s               -0.012         0.064           -0.19
               ACrude+7               -0.012         0.064           -0.19
               ACrude+5               -0.028         0.052           -0.54
               Crude+g                -0.028         0.052           -0.54
               Crude+to                0.007         0.092            0.08
               Cnde—0                  0.057         0.048            1.17
               àCrude—1                0.057         0.048            1.17
               .ACrude—2               0.058         0.053            1.09
               iCrude—3                0.058         0.053            1.09
               ACrude—4                0.045         0.050            0.91
               ACrude—5                0.045         0.050            0.91
               ACrude—6                0.040         0.048            0.83
               ACrude—7                0.040         0.048            0.83
               ACrude—8                0.066         0.049            1.33
               ACrude—9                0.066         0.049            1.33
               Crude—10               -0.147         0.088           -1.67
               SRV2                    2.919         0.372           7.84
               ERRCORR                -0.067         0.023           -2.84

SRV2 is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the observation is the second survey
of the month.
ERRCORR is the one period lagged residual from the estimated long run
equation:
    = 33.4864 + 0.7313428 * C + 1.228612 * SRV2 + 0.03166278 * WK
where WK1 is a time trend, the week number beginning in January 1986.

                                    43
                              References
Bacon Robert W. (1991). "Rockets arid Feathers: The Asymmetric Speed
    of Adjustment of U.K. Retail Gasoline Prices to Cost Changes," Energy
    Economies, July.
Bénabou, Roland and Robert Gertner (1991). "The Informativeness of
    Prices: Search with Learning and Cost Uncertainty," M.I.T. discussion
    paper, June.
Borenstein, Severin (1991). "Selling Costs and Switching Costs: Explaining
    Retail Gasoline Margins," Rand Journal of Economics, Autumn.
Bresnahan, Timothy F. and Pablo T. Spiller (1986). "Futures Market Back-
    wardation Under Risk Neutrality," Economic Inquiry, July.
Dickey D.A. and W.A. Fuller (1979). "Distribution of the Estimators for
    Autoregressive Time Series with a Unit Root," Journal of the Americal
    Statistical Association.
Energy Information Administration (1991). The Motor Gasoline Indus-
    try: PastL Present, and Future, Washington D.C.: U.S. Government
    Printing Office, January.
Karrenbrock, Jeffrey D. (1991). "The Behavior of Retail Gasoline Prices:
    Symmetric or Not?," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, July/
    August.
Ng, Victor K. and Stephen Craig Pirrong (1992). "Disequilibrium Adjust-
    ment, Volatility, and Price Discovery: Spot-Futures Price Relations in
   Refined Petroleum Products," University of Michigan Working Paper,
   February
Norman., Donald A. and David Shin (1991). "Price Adjustment in Gasoline
    and Heating Oil Markets," American Petroleum Institute Research
    Study #060, August.
Ra.zavi, Hossein (1989). "The New Era of Petroleum Trading: Spot Oil,
    Spot-Related Contracts, and Futures Markets," World Bank Technical
    Paper Number 96.
Reagan, Patricia B. and Martin L. Weitzman (1982). "Asymmetries in
   Price and Quantity Adjustments by the Competitive Firm," Journal
    of Economic Theory.
Shepard, Andrea (1991a). "Price Discrimination and Retail Configura-
   tion," Journal of Political Economy, April.
Shepard, Andrea (l991b). "Contractual Form, Retail Price and Asset Char-
    acteristics," Stamford University discussion paper, October.
Temple, Barker, and Sloan, Inc. (1988) "Gasoline Marketing Practices
   in the 1980s: Structure, Practices, and Public Policy," prepared for
   American Petroleum Institute, Washington D.C., May.
West, Kenneth D. (1988) "Asymptotic Normality when Regressors Have a
   Unit Root", Econometrica, 1397-1417.

                                   44
