NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IVORY TOWER VERSUS CORPORATE LAB:
AN EMPIRICAL STUDY OF BASIC
RESEARCH AND APPROPRIABILITY

Manuel Trajtenberg
Rebecca Henderson

Adam Jaffe

Working Paper No. 4146

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1992

We gratefully acknowledge support from the National Science Foundation through grant
SES91-10516, and from the Ameritech Foundation via the Ameritech Fellows program
of the Center for Regional Economic Issues at Case-Western Reserve University.
are
This paper is part of NBER's research program in Productivity. Any opinions expressed
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4146
August 1992

IVORY TOWER VERSUS CORPORATE LAB: AN EMPIRICAL STUDY OF
BASIC RESEARCH AND APPROPRIABIUTY
ABSTRACT

We explore the use of patent citations to measure the "basicness' and appropriability of
inventions. We propose that the basicness of research underlying an invention can be
characterized by the nature of the previous patents cited by an invention; that the basicness of
research outcomes relates to the subsequent patents that cite an invention; and that the fraction

of citing patents that are assigned to the same organization as the original invention is a
measure of appropriabiity. We test the validity of these presumptions by comparing the value
of our measures for university and corporate patents, and find that many of the measures do
conform to our a priori belief that university research and research outcomes are more basic
and harder to appropriate than those of corporations. We also find some evidence that
basicness of outcomes is correlated with basicness of research, and that appropriability is lower
for basic outcomes.

Manuel Trajtenberg
Tel Aviv University
Ramat Aviv
Tel Aviv 69978
ISRAEL
and NBER

Adam B. Jaffe
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge MA 02138
and NBER

Rebecca Henderson
Sloan School of Management

MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER

"It is the taste for the lifestyle of academic science, the compatibility
of research with teaching, and the persistence of public authorities in
subsidizing science at a level to which none of the constituents would
willingly subscribe, that prevent the collapse of the economic structure
erected upon a high level of scientific activity. If the support were to
be removed, the effects in our view would be quite disastrous."(Dasgupta
and David, 1987)
1. Introduction

Economists have long understood that the peculiarities of information as
a commodity, and the resulting imperfections in the market for new knowledge,
severely limit the appropriability of the returns to innovation (Arrow, 1962,

Levin et at, 1987, Cohen and Levin, 1989). Although appropriability problems
plague all forms of research investment, they are thought to be more severe as
we move from applied to more basic research. This view has supported a partial

social division of labor whereby public institutions such as universities
perform most of.the basic research, and private firms do the R&D necessary to
commercialize the fruits of advances in scientific knowledge.

The unambiguous association of "basicness" with "low appropriability" is,

increasingly untenable. First, there is the simple
becoming
observation that some profit-making firms do perform basic research, and the
however,

empirical evidence indicates that it is very profitable (Griliches, 1986).
Either the motives of firms for performing basic research are more complex
than previously thought, or the nature of such research cannot be defined just

in terms of appropriability (Cohen and Levinthal, 1989, Mowery and Rosenberg,

1989). Second, there is much current interest in the role of universities in

explaining the technology-based growth of particular regions, such as Route

128 around Boston or Silicon Valley in California (Dorfman, 1988; Jaffe,
1989). This geographic localization of the benefits of university research
suggests that basic research results do not spill out as easily, as widely, or
as quickly as the traditional view would suggest.'

In our view, better understanding

of

these

phenomena

requires

'Our companion paper (Jaffe et al, 1992) looks explicitly at the extent
of geographic localization of knowledge spillovers.

-2-

clarification of concepts that are often used interchangeably. The notion of
basicness of research relates to the kinds of questions that researchers ask,
and how their work relates to the pre- existing body of knowledge. The notion

of the basicness of research outcomes relates to the role of innovations as
stepping stones to subsequent technological developments. Appropriability, in

turn, relates to the attributes of innovations that make it easier for their
developer to convert social returns into private rents. Stated this way, the
conventional view of basic research rests on implicit assumptions that basic

innovations are produced by basic research, and that basic innovations are
relatively difficult to appropriate. These conjectures have important policy

implications, and yet they have never been subjected to rigorous empirical
scrutiny, probably because of the lack uf suitable empirical counterparts to
the concepts involved.

In this paper we intend to turn these assumptions into testable
hypotheses. This requires us to identify the attributes of research and of
research outcomes associated with basicness and with appropriability, to find

measurable proxies for these attributes, and to "validate" these measures

statistically. We can then investigate how the basicness of innovations
relates to the basicness of the underlying research, and how both influence
appropriability. We propose to do this using detailed patent data and patent
citations in particular, because these citations provide good evidence of the
links both between an innovation and the body of knowledge that preceded it,

and between an innovation and the technological developments that it led to.

We use matched samples of university and corporate patents to exploit our
prior that university research is more basic than corporate research, and rely
on the contrast between them to "validate" the measures.

The emphasis in the paper is thus on developing new ways to measure some
key but elusive concepts in the economics of technical change that have so far

defied systematic quantification. This paper can also be seen as a pilot
study, in that its empirical findings should help decide whether or not it
would be justified to pursue this line of research in "full scale". We begin

in section 2 with a background discussion of the different notions of basic

-3-

research, and the use of patent data in such context. In section 3 we
introduce

the proposed measures of basicness and appropriability, and

elaborate on their construction and interpretation. Section 4 dwells on the
design of the sample, and the related validation procedure for these measures.

The empirical results are presented and analyzed in section 5. We find that

our measures capture indeed important aspects

of

basicness

and

of

appropriability; that there seem to exist "technological trajectories" showing

persistence and coherence; that some of the features of innovations are
related to some of the attributes of the underlying research, and similarly
that appropriability is associated just with some aspects of basicness -

the

simplistic notion of a one-to-one equivalence between these concepts is
therefore not warranted. We summarize the findings in section 6, and suggest
various ways to further pursue this line of research.

2. Background

2.1 Definitions of Basic Iesearch
The distinction between basic and applied research is widely used and has

existed for a long time, and yet the underlying notions remain ill-defined.
Thus, for example, while economists tend to think of basic research in terms
of the difficulty with which it can be appropriated, scientists view it mostly

in terms of its relationship to prior research, or in terms of its scientific

and technological impact. The tacit assumption underlying most of this
literature is that these views are necessarily equivalent, but on close
examination the presumed equivalencies are far from certain.

The scientific and technological literature characterizes as "basic"
research that focuses on scientific rather than on technological questions;
that seeks to elucidate general laws rather than solving particular technical
•

problems; that draws upon new scientific principles and offers original
solutions to old puzzles (e.g. Kuhn, 1962; Rosenberg,i982). Thus for example,

the research activities of the team headed by William Shockley at the Bell
Labs that led to the discovery of the transistor can be seen as basic in this
sense (Nelson, 1962).

-4-

This same literature, however, often defines what is basic according to
the nature of the outcomes of the research enterprise: research is regarded as

basic if it is uniquely innovative and represents breakthroughs relative to

existing knowledge; if its results have a major impact upon a given field
(e.g. Watson and Crick's discovery of DNA), or a diffused but significant
impact across a broad range of fields (e.g. the laws of thermodynamics, the
mathematics of chaos) ; if they turn out to be fundamental to much later work,

and

are

often referred to by scientists and

practitioners

in the same or other

fields.

The closest to an "official" definition of basic research is that of the

National Science Foundation, which bases it on the motivations and goals of

the researcher: research is defined as basic if it has as its objective "a
fuller knowledge or understanding of the subject under study, rather than a

practical application thereof"; conversely, applied research is seen as
directed toward gaining "knowledge or understanding necessary for determining
the means by which a recognized and specific need may be met" (NSF, 1985,

p.

221) 2

Economists, in turn, tend to characterize basic research according to the
features of the outcomes of research that are of economic relevance, rather

than according to the features of research activities per se. Thus, basic

research is often defined implicitly as research that leads to basic
innovations, which are characterized in turn as generating benefits that are
exceedingly difficult to appropriate (in the sense of a low expected ratio of

private to social returns).3 Nelson (1959), for example, argued that firms
2These definitions are important in that they are used in the science and

technology surveys conducted by the NSF, which constitute one of the main
sources of statistical information on the magnitude and composition of
research activities and R&D expenditures in the USA.

3To illustrate, consider the following quotes: "Its 'output' [of R&D] is

the flow of new information, both of general character (the result of
'fundamental' or 'basic' research) and relating to specific applications
('applied' research)." Freeman, 1982, p.
"Thus basic research, the
10;
output of which is only used as an informational input into other inventive
activities, is especially unlikely to be rewarded." Arrow (1962), p. 618;

-5-

would be able to reap only a small fraction of the benefits of basic research,
since they have difficulty commercializing results in fields other than or far

from their existing product line. Thus the nature of the results of basic
research makes it hard to establish property rights that would prevent their
exploitation by others. Similarly, basic research is thought to be riskier and

to have longer lead times than more applied research, which would also limit
its appropriability.

In order to prepare the ground for the actual measurement of basicness

and appropriability, and following Kuznets (1962), we would like to draw a

clear distinction between research on the one hand, and innovations (or

research outcomes) on the other, mimicking in this context the classic
input-output divide. From this follows an equally sharp distinction between

basicness of research as a characteristic of the activities leading to
innovations, and basicness of innoval.ions, which is a feature of the outcomes
of such activities.4

Moreover, these distinctions imply that the nature and strength of the
links between basicness of research and basicness of innovations are an open
empirical question, and not necessarily a one-to-one correspondence. This is
so because of the high degree of uncertainty that characterizes research, and

the serendipitous character of so many important innovations.5 Thus defining

"The payoff [to basic research] is uncertain and distant, and the knowledge
quickly moves into the public domain"; "The output [of basic research] is a
peculiar kind of good that may be used, not to produce a final good, but to
play some further role in the invention of a new final good". Mowery and
Rosenberg (1989), pp. 10 and 11.
41t should be clear that the "basic versus applied research" dichotomy is
just a coarse two-way partition of a composite attribute of research that is
essentially continuous, and which we shall refer to as "basicness" (we use
this characterization also for innovations).

5There are plenty of historical examples of breakthroughs made by
researchers while pursuing research goals that would surely qualify as applied
research; see for example the cases of Pasteur, Carnot and Jansky as described
in Mowery and Rosenberg (1989). Although more difficult to document, it is
equally clear that a great deal of what is regarded as "basic research" does
not lead to important innovations: uncertainty works both ways.

-6-

the nature of research according to the nature of the outcomes begs the

question of what either of them truly is, at least for the purpose of
the

between

the

degree

of

appropriability of the benefits from innovations on the one hand, and

the

quantification. Similarly,

relationship

characteristics of the underlying research and of the innovation itself on the
other, is a compelling issue for investigation, not a foregone conclusion.

Finally, a word of caution: definitional matters can easily turn into
mine fields, where semantics overwhelms substance. We are not interested in

taxonomies or definitions per se; rather, we want to shed light on the
measurable characteristics of the process that leads to innovations, and their

relationship to the economically relevant attributes of the innovations
themselves, as these are revealed ex post. We intend also to clarify the links

between the concepts defined here and commonly held notions of basicness and

appropriability, hoping that this will facilitate the analysis of RkD and
innovation as empirical phenomena.

2.2 The Else

of

latent Data

The measures of basicness and appropriability that we put forward here
rely exclusively on information contained in patents. We are thus tapping one

of the richest source of data on innovations, and certainly the one with the

widest coverage. We intend to exploit detailed information that appears on
individual patents, and not just patent counts as has been comnion practice in
much of the research in this area.5'7

A great deal of research in economics has used patents as indicators of
various aspects of the innovation process, with varying degrees of success
(see e.g. Griliches, 1984 and 1990; Jaffe, 1986) ; related work has shown that
patent citations contain information about the value of patents and the links
among them (Carpenter et al, 1981; Carpenter and Narin, 1983; Trajtenberg,
1990a and 1990b)

7Kuznets had foreseen long ago the potential of patents as a rich source
of data far beyond mere patent counts: ". . .the mere number of patents, or even
their classification.. . is only a fraction of the information in the files of
patent offices.. .such information.. .is conceivably raw material for a more
intensive study of the output of inventive activity. ..
would permit
indentification of the patentors, and provide an initial step in the study of
the characteristics of inventors that is indispensable for a better analysis

[it]

-7-

A patent is a temporary monopoly awarded to inventors for the commercial
use of a newly invented device. For a patent to be granted, the invention must

be non-trivial, meaning that it would not appear obvious to a skilled
practitioner of the relevant technology, and it must be useful, meaning that
it has potential commercial value. If a patent is granted, an extensive public

document is created. The front page of a patent contains detailed information

about the innovation, the inventor, the
antecedents

assignee,

the

technological

of the invention, etc. all of which can be accessed in

computerized form (see figure 1).

An item of particular importance for our purposes is the citations to
previous patents (see item 56 on figure 1, "references cited"): we believe
that the notion of "basicness of research" is embodied in the relationship
between the innovation and its technological antecedents, and likewise that
the essence of "basicness of innovations" is embodied in the relationship of
the

research outcomes to subsequent technological developments. Patent

citations, made and received, provide an effective means for identifying and
tracing these relationships.

Patent citations serve an important legal function, namely, they delimit

the scope of the property rights awarded by the patent. Thus, if patent

2

cites patent 1, that means that 1 represents a piece of previously existing
knowledge upon which patent 2 builds, and over which 2 cannot have a claim.
The applicant has a legal duty to disclose any knowledge of the prior art, but

the decision of which patents to cite ultimately rests with the patent
examiner, who is supposed to be an expert in the area and hence to be able to

identify relevant prior art that the applicant misses or conceals.8 The

of the supply side of inventive activity". Kuznets (1962), p. 40.

8Thus there is reason to believe that the use of patent citations to
trace technological linkages is more "robust" and less "noisy" (in the sense
of the role played by extraneous motives in the decision of what to cite) than
the reliance upon other bibliographic data such as citations in the scientific

literature (Van Raan, 1988; Veingart et at, 1988). Moreover, these other
bibliometric techniques are of limited value in tracing the economic impact of
scientific results, since they are entirely self contained.

-8-

framework for the search is the patent classification system, which currently
consists of over 100,000 patent subclasses, aggregated into about 400 3-digit

patent classes. The combination of the citation information with detailed

information about each applicant provides a unique mechanism for placing
research and research results in their broader technological and economic
context.

Two important limitations of the reliance on patents for our purposes
should be mentioned: first, the range of patentable innovations constitutes
just a sub-set of all research outcomes, and second, patenting is a strategic
decision and hence not all patentable innovations are actually patented. As to

tbe first, consider Figure 2.a where we depict "basicness" as a measurable
feature of research outcomes, that ranges from the most applied on the left to

the most basic on the right. Clearly, neither end of the continuum is
patentable: "Maxwell's equations" could not be patented since they do not

constitute a device (ideas cannot be patented); on the other hand, a
marginally better mousetrap is not patentable either, because the innovation
has to be "non-trivial".

There is some internal range of unknown width that is patentable; within

it we believe that patents and patent citations can be used successfully to

measure the relative basicness of innovations. Obviously, research that
produces outcomes outside this range will not be picked up by our measures, at

least not right away. However, if unpatentable basic scientific discoveries

eventually do bring about technological advances of potential commercial
significance, at some point patents will be observed and hence measures of
this sort will probably pick them up. Thus, the patentability requirements

restrict the scope of our measures such that purely scientific advances,
devoid of immediate applicability are excluded, as well as run-of-the-mill
technological improvements that are too trite to pass for discrete, codifiable
innovations.

The second limitation has to do with the fact that, due to strategic or

other considerations (such as different motivations or reward systems),

-9-

inventors may decide not to apply for patents even though their innovations
would pass the patentability requirements. In other words, the "propensity to

patent" may vary across inventors, perhaps in a systematic way. For example,
until recently universities could not obtain patents based on federally funded

research (which is about 907. of university research), and hence it is likely

that many of their innovations were not patented. Firms, on the other hand,
may elect not to patent and rely instead on secrecy to protect

their property

rights, and this practice may be more common in certain industries than in
others (see Levin et al, 1987). Aside from restricting the potential coverage

of our measures (again to an unknown extent), the question is whether these
limitations may affect the statistical properties of our measures; this issue
is discussed in section 4.2.

3.

leasures

of Basicness and Appropriability

The measures that we put forward here are grounded in a view of technical

advance as a process that unfolds over time, displaying coherence and
cumulativeness. Within such a framework each individual innovation is but a
node, a juncture alongside the innovational stream to which it belongs, that
builds upon what came before, and creates opportunities for future invention.

Thus each innovation has a past and a future: there is a body of knowledge
that precedes and feeds into it, and there are down-the-line technological
advances that stem from and build upon it. Clearly, basicness as discussed
above can be ascertained only as we look back and forth over time: a snapshot

of an innovation taken in isolation cannot reveal its impact or its standing
vis-a-vis past and future.

We propose, accordingly, two sets of measures:9 the first looks at
9Since this is virtually the first time that measures of this sort have
been constructed (except for citation counts), we had to do a great deal of

search and experimentation until we "converged" to the set of measures
reported here. The measures discarded were statistically undistinguishable
from the measures kept, and/or devoid of a clear interpretation. The good news

is that the final set appears to be "robust", in the sense that we kept
getting virtually the same results with the many variants that we tried.
Still, this can only be regarded as a tentative set, and only further research
can confirm its usefulness and significance.

- 10

-

basicness as an attribute of the research that lead to the patent being
evaluated (the "originating" patent),1O the second refers to the posterior

impact of the innovation. Thus, we base the former, which we refer to as
"backward-looking" measures ("B/measures" in short), upon the characteristics
of the patent's predecessors, both in themselves and vis a vis the attributes

of the originating patent. Similarly, we construct the "forward-looking"
("F/") measures on the basis of data on the patents that subsequently cite the
originating patent.

Aside from basicness proper, we compute measures of "distance" in time

and technology space both between the innovation and its predecessors, and
between the innovation and its offsprings. The presumption is that remoteness
in time and technology may be related to aspects of basicness or, more likely,

to the conditions of appropriability. Finally, we propose a measure of actual
(or ez post) appropriability, both F and B. For the definition and computation
of the measures we use the following notation (refer to figures 4 and 5):11

NCITING: number of patents citing the originating patent ("0-patent").
NCITED:
number of patents cited by the 0-patent.
NPCITES: number of non-patent sources cited by the 0-patent.
NCLASS:

3-digit original patent class.

CATCODE: 2-digit "technological class", which aggregates up NCLASS
FIELD:
1-digit classification by main technological fields.
LAG:
difference in years between the application date of a citing or
cited patent, and the application date of the 0-patent.

Index

i corresponds to the 0-patent, i+l to citing patents, and i-i to

cited patents. All measures but one ("SCIENCE") will be defined and computed

'°For expositional convenience we shall use from now on the terms
"patents" and "innovations" interchangeably, even though we are very mindful
of the fact that, as commonly understood, the overlap between them is by no
means full.
are,

''CATCDDE is taken from Jaffe (1986). The technological areas in FIELD
1:
Drugs and Medical; 2: Chemical (except Drugs); 3: Electronics,

-11-

in equivalent ways backwards and forward; however, their precise meaning and
interpretation varies in some cases across the forward/backward (F/B) divide.

3.1 Ieastsres of liasicmess

Tbe first, and probably the key aspect of F/basicness is what we call the

overall "importance" of a patent, denoted IMPORTF (the F for forward), which
corresponds to the most intuitively appealing notion of what basic innovations
are all about. In the words of Kuznets (1962),

"Some inventions, representing as they do a breakthrough in a major
field, have a wide technical potential in the sense that they provide a
base for numerous subsequent technical changes [our emphasis] . . . the first
steam engine, which initiated a whole series of major technical changes
and applications.. .is vastly different from the invention of the safety
match or the pocket lighter. This wide range is for our purposes the
major characteristic relevant to the problem of measurement". (p. 26).

Thinking of citations to a patent as coming from follow-up advances that at
least in part build upon or stem from the originating patent, we would like

IMPORTF to reflect both the number of subsequent citations, and their
importance. Thus we define (see figure 4),12'13
nci t ingj

IMPORTI. =
1

NCITING. ÷ A

NeTTING.

1

jt4

where

0 <

A < 1

is an arbitrary "discount factor" that is meant to

Optics and Nuclear; 4: Mechanical Arts; 5: Other.

L2As mentioned before, citations counts have been used in previous
research as an indicator of the importance or value of patents; thus for
example, Trajtenberg (1990) found that patents weighted by citations are
highly correlated over time with the social gains from innovation in a
particular industry. The only difference is that here we augment IMPORTF with
"second- eneration" citations, thus basing it on more extensive information on
the subsequent impact of the patent.
'3Notice that the unavoidable truncation of the data at the point in time
when the data are collected (7) means that NCITTNG÷i
(that is, the number

of citations to citing patents) is necessarily a partial measure of importance
of the citing patents; thus, IMPORTF should be taken to mean the "importance"
of patent i as revealed - or realized - up to 7.

- 12

-

downweight the 'second-generation1' descendants of a patent relative to the
first-generation citing patents. In all calculations reported here we have set

A =

0.5,

but none of the results appear to depend upon it (we experimented

with values of A in the 0.25 - 0.75 range).
The second notion of F/basicness is that of "generality' (GENERAL) ,

that

is, the extent to which the follow-up technical advances are spread across
different technological fields, rather than being concentrated in just a few

of them.'4 We compute GENERAL on the basis of the Herfindahl index of
concentration, whereby the number of citations in each 3-digit patent class

(NCLASS) plays the same role as the sales of each firm in the traditional
industrial organization context, that is,

N
GENERAL. =

1

-

k=l

(NCITING.k/NCITTNG.)2
i

where k is the index of patent classes, and N the number of different
classes to which the citing patents belong. Notice that 0

GENERAL

1, and

that higher values represent less concentration and hence more "generality".

Turning now to the B/measures (that is, to basicness of research), we
define the equivalent to IMPORTF as,
tic

TMPORTB. =
i

NCITED.

+

it e di

A

NCTTTNG. 1
j=1

Thus, TMPORTB will be large if the 0-patent cites many previous patents, and
these cited patents are "important" in the usual sense that they in turn were

highly cited (as with IMPORTF we use A =

0.5).

In other words, IMPDRTB

"Thus for example, if a patent in solid-state physics is cited by later
patents in chemistry, in superconductivity and in medical instrumentation, we
would regard it as more general, and hence more basic, than a similar patent
that received the same number of citations but all or most of them belong to
the same field.

- 13 -

reflects

the extent to which a given 0-patent stands on a wide base of

previous innovations which are in themselves important. However, and unlike

IMPORTF, it is not entirely clear how IMPORTB relates to basicness: the
presumption is that IMPORTB is an aspect of originality or creativity, in that

more original patents would have fewer and/or less important predecessors and

therefore lower values of IMPORTB. On the other hand it could be that
"importance breeds importance," and hence patents that prove cx post to be

successful would tend to display higher values of IMPORTS as well. The
equivalent B/measure for GENERAL, which we label ORIGINAL, is defined as,

N
ORIGINAL. =
1

Thus

1

-

1
) k=1 (NCITED.k/NCITED.)2
1

the larger is ORIGINAL the broader are the technological roots of the

underlying research. Since synthesis of divergent ideas is arguably an element

of originality, we conjecture that ORIGINAL captures indeed an aspect of
B/basicness.tS Finally, we define a measure of scientific base which lacks a
F/counterpart,

SCIENCE = NPCITES

/

(NPCITES

+

NCITED)

that is, SCIENCE measures the predominance of scientific sources as proxied by

NPCITES,'6 over technological ones (embedded in NCITED). The conjecture is
that more basic research would tend to draw relatively more from science than

'5Veizman (1991) develops a "theory of diversity" which in priciple could
be applied to the measurement of diversity of any set of interrelated objects
(his particular motivation is the measurement of the value of diversity of

things such as endangered species or architectural styles). However, his
approach rests on a postulated binary distance metric, which is hard to
visualize in our context.

lôThese "non-patent references", which appear on the front page of
patents under the heading "Other Publications" (see Figure 1), may include
articles in scientific journals, books, abstracts, proceedings, etc. They
constitute knowledge or ideas to which the patent is related, but do not carry
the legal weight of patent citations.

- 14

-

from technology, and hence would be associated with higher values of SCIENCE.
3.2 leasures of Distance

The F/looking time distance measure is defined simply as the average
forward LAG, that is,
nc it

TIMEF. = (

LAG.)/ NCITING
j=l

The F/distance in technology space is computed as follows: if the citing

patent is in the same 3-digit class (NCLASS) as the 0-patent, then the
"distance" between them, TECH, is set to zero; if they are in the same 2-digit
class (CATCODE) but not in the same 3-digit class, then TECH =

0.33;

if they

are in the same 1-digit class (FIELD) and nut in the same 2- or 3-digit class,

then TECH = 0.66; if they are even in different 1-digit classes then TECH =1.
The average distance for 0-patent i is then,
nc it

TECHF1 = (

ing
TECH)/ NCITING

The equivalent B/distance measures, TIMEB and TECHB, are defined in an

exactly analogous way, just by substituting NCITED for NCITING in these
formula. Their interpretation is also straightforward: larger values of TIMEB

would indicate that the 0-patent draws from older sources, large values of
TECHB that the innovation has roots in remote technological fields.

Vhether or not these distance measures capture aspects of basicness is an

open question. The (somewhat weak) presumption regarding TIMEF is that more

basic innovations will take longer in generating offspring, since the
technical difficulties of the required R&D efforts would be commensurable to

the degree of "basicness". As to TECHF, if basicness implies a higher
probability of serendipitous discoveries, and if these tend to occur in remote

technological areas, then it is plausible that the incidence of far-removed
follow-ups would be higher the more basic a patent is. However, it is not at
all clear whether these "ifs" hold up in reality, and even if they do, it is

- 15 -

not clear whether that would result also in a larger average technological
distance. On the other hand, and as argued in section 5.4, it seems a priori

more likely that the distance measures would be related to appropriability
(the same applies to the B/measures, TIMEB and TECHB).

3.3 Ix post appropriability

The F/measure of actual appropriability that we propose, PSELFF, is
defined simply as the percentage of citing patents issued to the same assignee
as that of the o-patent. The rationale for this measure stems from the premise

that citations reflect follow-up developments of the original innovation, and

that these developments are the conduit that leads to the realization of

benefits (by refining and improving the original innovation, and hence

shifting downwards as it were its supply curve). Thus, the higher the
proportion of these later developments that take place "in-house" the larger
would be the fraction of the benefits captured by the original inventor. The
equivalent B/measure, PSELFB, captures virtually the same notion, that is, it
measures

the

extent

by

which the originating innovation represents

appropriation of benefits to its predecessors. The presumption underlying both

is that more basic innovations are more difficult to appropriate, and hence
will result in lower values of PSELF.

Schematically, the measures proposed are as follows:

Basicness

Distance

Appropriability

Forward

Backwards

IMPORTF
GENERAL

IMPORTB
ORIGINAL
SCIENCE

TECHF
TIMEF

TECHB
TIMEB

PSELFF

PSELFB

- 16

-

4. Research Design
4.1 Sample Design and Data Gathering

Since this is essentially a pilot study (in that the emphasis is on
constructing the measures and exploring their "validity" and feasibility for
further research), we rely on a relatively small sample of patents, and hence
we had to exercise a great deal of care in designing the sampling scheme. The

main considerations were: (i) we wanted to maximize the chances of seeing
patents that span the patentable range illustrated in figure 2; (ii) since we

restricted ourselves to patent data, we wanted to be able to "validate" the
proposed measures relying only on priors about the institutional distribution
of basic research, that could be translated into the sampling scheme; (Hi) we
wanted to cover sufficiently long sequences of innovations so as to be able to
compute measures that rely on backward and forward linkages; (iv) we needed to

be able to control for technological areas, since citation practices may vary
systematically across them.

Requirements (i) and (H) led us to start from patents assigned to
universities, and contrast them to matched samples of patents assigned to
corporations: the presumption is that universities do more basic research, and

hence that their patents would help cover the upper segment of the patentable

range.17 More importantly, that same prior would enable us to "validate" the
proposed measures (see section 4.2). The drawback is that university patents
constitute a tiny fraction of the universe of patents issued in the 115 in any

given year (less than one percent), and cannot be regarded as representative
of patents at large. However, since we do not purport here to characterize the

"true" distribution of basicness across the whole population of patents, the
extent to which the sample is representative is not of much consequence.

In order to satisfy (Hi) we took all university patents applied for in
1975 (316 patents) and in 1980 (482 patents), which gave us substantial time

t7Total research spending at universities and federally funded research
and development centers was $12.1 billion in 1987 (NSF, 1989); private firms
reported that same year outlays of $2.7 billion in basic research.

- 17

-

horizons backwards and forward.l$'19 We identified and gathered data on each
of the (earlier) patents cited by these "originating" patents, and on each of

the (subsequent) patents citing them, thus forming a complete set which
encompasses three successive generations of related inventions (see figure 3)

We also obtained the number of citations made and received by each of the

cited and citing patents, which gave us some information

about

the

"grandparents" and the "grandchildren" as well. Rarely does empirical work
examine such long stretches of the innovational stream.

To give us a base of comparison and increase the chances of seeing a
substantial variance in the measures of basicness, we identified two samples

of corporate patents in parallel to the university patents. The first was
drawn from the universe of patents granted to the top 200 R&D-performing U.S.

firms in 1986, as reported in 10-K reports and coded by the Compustat data
service. We expect that at least some of these firms perform appreciable basic

research. The other corporate sample was drawn from the universe of patents
assigned to all other U.S. corporations, which are by definition "smaller" in
terms of R&D expenditures; presumably they engage in proportionally less basic
research.

In order to control for technological field, each of these samples was
drawn to match the university patent cohorts by patent class, application year

and grant date. That is, for each originating university patent, we selected a

corporate patent from each universe that had the same application year and

'81n principle there should always be enough of a backwards horizon, but
in practice the availability of data declines dramatically as we go back in
time, to the point that for the 1975 cohort, for example, a great deal of the
data of the cited patents are missing, and that created serious problems in
computing the measures. There is reason to believe though that this limitation

will soon vanish, as more and more patent data become computerized and
available as such.

'We succeded in gathering forward patent data only up to 1989, primarily
because we had to rely on "third parties" to obtain the data, and that meant
long delays. Again, availability is improving by leaps and bounds, and costs
of retrieving patent data from computerized searches are declining, so that in
future research one should be able to obtain much more recent data.

- 18

(3-digit)

-

patent class as the university patent, and was granted as close in

time as possible. This design allows us to compare averages of measures of
basicness across institutional groups, without worrying that the estimates

might differ only because universities and corporations exhibit different

distributions of patents across fields. We then collected data on the
predecessors and successors of these corporate patents, exactly in parallel to

the set of university patents. As figure 3 makes clear, this sampling scheme

lead to "explosive" data requirements: starting from just 319 university

patents applied for in 1975 we ended up collecting data on over 10,000
patents, and likewise starting from 482 patents in 1980 the number climbed to
over 15,000.

4.2 Validation and Selectivity
As mentioned above the choice of university patents as the "core sample"

was meant to allow us to validate statistically the measures of basicness
without having to resort to additional (external) information, but rather with

reference to commonly held priors. In this section we discuss the rationale

for this validation procedure, and the closely related issue of sample
selection bias.

University patents constitute a tiny fraction of all patents issued in
the U.S. and, given the institutional idiosyncrasies of universities they can

hardly be regarded as "representative" of the universe of all U.S. patents.
Moreover, the vast majority of research outcomes from universities do not lead

to patents, for three distinct reasons: (1) if university research is indeed
more basic, the distribution of outcomes will be located over the right-hand

segment of the continuum shown in figure 2, and therefore most of them will

not be patentable;

(2) up to 1980 universities were precluded by law from

charging royalties for patents stemming from federally funded research, which

account for the bulk of university research; (3) the "propensity to patent"
of university researchers is probably lower than that of their counterparts in

corporations, since the incentives that they face (in terms of promotion,
prestige, etc.) encourage primarily publication of research outcomes in the
scientific literature.

- 19

-

The question is whether the (small) sample of outcomes captured by
university patents can

be regarded as random or, if biased, whether the biases

might affect the validity of our intended statistical analysis. In order to
address this issue, we restate the research design in such a way as to clarify

the roles played by priors, samples, and selectivity. Suppose that basicness

is unidimensional, and that the goal is to find an indicator of basicness b

such that E(b) >

E(b)

c=> fl >

fl,

where the

fl's

and

parameters, E(.) denotes expected value, and

are the unknown
stand for different

types of assignees (e.g. university versus corporations). In order to
"validate" the use of b as an indicator we rely on the widely held prior
that the distribution of basicness of the whole population of research
outcomes from universities, F,,, lies to the right of the corresponding
distribution for corporations, F (see figure 2.a); thus, assuming that F,,

and F belong to the same family of distributions, the prior implies that
fl, >

fl,.

"Validation" of a particular measure b simply means in this context

that, given appropriate samples and statistical tests, one rejects the null
H: (flu -

flu)

0 using as a statistic (b -

be).

Notice that when focusing on validation the actual magnitudes of the
or the proper way to estimate them is not an issue: all that counts is
that there is a strong presumption that university research yields more basic

outcomes than corporate research. It is thus immaterial for our purposes
whether or not E(b1) =

fl.

Rather, the issue is whether the sampling scheme

affects the power of the test as described above. For it should be clear that,

most of all, we need to guard against a type II error, which in the present
context would mean accepting the null by virtue of a selectivity bias in the
measures.

How can that happen? Consider figure 2.b: if for example universities
were patenting research outcomes coming just from the shaded area of

F,,

whereas corporate patents were drawn randomly from the whole distribution F,

such that

E(b) >> fi,,

and E(b)

then it is clear that the proposed

validation procedure would not be valid: had the sample of university outcomes

- 20

-

E(b),

been truly random, we may well have found that E(b) <

in which case

b could not be regarded as a good proxy for basicness. Thus, it is clear that

the condition for the "validity" of the proposed test, in the sense of
yielding a small probability of type TI error, is

E(b) -

(1)

fi <

E(b)

-

fi

Can we presume it to be fulfilled? Quite likely so, considering that the

reasons that account for the small number of research outcomes patented by
universities imply also that university patents are most likely drawn from an

area such as the shaded one in figure 2.c, and hence that E(b) << j3,.
Moreover, if university patents stem mostly from privately funded research, it

is quite likely that such research would be from the outset aimed at more
"applied" outcomes than research funded by the government, which is supposed
to advance precisely those areas of science that have no immediately apparent

commercial benefits. On the other hand, it is not clear whether and how the

incentives of corporations to patent may vary along the range of F. It is

quite likely that corporations also tend to patent less basic research
outcomes than their own mean, but it is highly implausible that they will
restrict themselves to a narrow segment far left as universities presumably
have been doing, at least until 1980.

To sum up: university patents constitute by no means a random sample of

university research outcomes, and probably corporate patents are not drawn
randomly from the distribution of corporate research either. However, there is

a strong presumption that condition (1) holds, and hence that the selectivity
biases inherent to the sample scheme are immaterial to the goal of validating

the measures of basicness. Notice though that not much can be said if the
results happen to be "weak" (i.e. if some of the differences between the be's

and the

be's turn out to be not very significant): that may well be due to

the selectivity biases, which would translate into substantial probabilities
of type I error. Better that than risking over optimistic inferences as to the
effectiveness of the proposed indicators.

- 21 -

5. Statistical Analysis and Results
5.1 A first look at the measures
Tables 1 and 2 present descriptive statistics of the measures and Pearson

correlations

between them, and figures 5 and 6 depict the empirical

distributions of some of them (see the appendix for additional details).
Notice first the striking similarity in the shape of the distributions of
IMPORTF and IMPORTB, and likewise for GENERAL and ORIGINAL; as it turns out,
this is true for all equivalent F/B measures, which is an interesting finding
that deserves further scrutiny (see below, and the appendix).

As figure 5 shows, the distribution of IMPORTF is extremely skewed (for
1980 the mean is 12.6 and the median just 5.5). If we interpret INPORTF as an

indicator of the "value" of patents, the observed skewness would fit nicely
with previous findings regarding the distribution of such values (e.g. Pakes

1986, Trajtenberg 1990): most patents turn out to be of very little value
(i.e.

to have few if any "descendants"), and only a handful "make it big".

IMPORTB is similarly skewed, which would mean that most patents come from

"bumble origins", and few have important technological predecessors. Thus
important innovations appear to be in very short supply as one looks either up
or down the innovational stream.
The distributions of GENERAL and of ORIGINAL look much more "normal"

(bell- shaped),

except for the large mass at zero. Sixty percent of the patents

with GENERAL=0 had just one citing patent, which means that GENERAL could only

be zero; an additional 257, of these patents had NCITING =

2,

which are very

likely to render GENERAL=0. Still, the mass at zero is not an artifact:
patents that "fathered" just one or two further technological developments can
claim indeed little generality.20

20For ORIGINAL=0 the percentage of patents with NCITED=1 or NCITED=2 was
just 397. (257. for 1975), thus it would seem that the finding of a large mass
at zero is more telling for ORIGINAL than for GENERAL. The only qualification
is that there are many missing backwards data, and thus many of the patents

for which NCITED=l or 2 might have received a value of zero for ORIGINAL
(rather than missing) if the data had been available.

- 22

-

Turning to the correlations between measures of the same type (F and B)
notice in table 2 that the various measures do capture different aspects of

the underlying phenomena:2' none of the correlations exceeds 0.5, most are
much smaller. The variables that exhibit the largest pairwise correlations are

GENERAL and TECHF and, in parallel, ORIGINAL and TECHB. This is not too

surprising, since both measures refer to the positioning of patents in
technology space.22 The other pair exhibiting a high correlation is IMPORTF
and GENERAL, and likewise IMPORTB and ORTGINAL (see the appendix).

5.2 "Validating" the measures: comparison of means
Table 3 presents simple comparisons of the sample means of the proposed

measures between university and corporate patents. To recall, our prior is
that research, and research outcomes from universities are "more basic" than
those from corporations, and therefore if our measures do capture aspects of
basicness university patents should rank higher than corporate patents along
those dimensions.

IMPORTF
the
backs
university patents received
prior:
strongly
significantly more first- and second generation citations, and the difference

seems to increase over time (see the results for 1975 vis a vis 1980). The
figures for GENERAL indicate that the follow-up innovations from universities

spread indeed more widely over different technological areas, but the 1975
results suggest thatthese differences tend to narrow down over time. In fact,
we recomputed GENERAL for the 1975 cohort truncating the citation data in 1984

so as to replicate the time span of the 1980 sample, and the results are

almost identical to those for 1980. Thus at first the offsprings from
corporate patents tend to be more technologically concentrated, but eventually

these spillovers become more diffused, narrowing the gap in that respect

2lThe results for the 1975 sample are very similar in every respect,
hence we chose to show just those for 1980.

22GENERAL (ORIGINAL) refer to the spread over patent classes of the
citing (cited) patents regardless of where the originating patent is located,
whereas TECB (F and B) measures the average "distance" in that same space from

the originating patent to the citing (cited) patent.

- 23

-

between them and university patents. This fits nicely the common wisdom
regarding the way spillovers work, and goes in tandem with the finding in our

companion paper (Jaffe et al 1992) of diminishing geographic localization of
spillovers over time.

As conjectured, IMPORTB shows that corporate innovations rely on more
numerous and more "important" predecessors than universities (the differences

though are significant for 1975 but not for 1980). This suggests that
university research is located nearer the origins of innovational paths, and

that this may be an aspect of basicness. ORIGINAL does not live up to
expectations: there is a slight difference for 1980 but it lacks statistical
significance, and for 1975 the difference even has the "wrong" sign. SCIENCE

does conform with the prior, and strongly so: university patents do rely
relatively more on non-patent (i.e. scientific) sources than corporate patents
(recall that this is cannot a "field effect", since the samples are matched by
technology field) 23

The results for the distance measures are weak and inconclusive:
technological distance "works" for the 1980 sample but not for 1975, whereas
distance in time does not work at all. In fact, in most cases the results for

TIME (F and B) run contrary to the prior, that is, the follow-up innovations

of corporations appear to take longer than those of universities. In sharp
contrast to them, the appropriability measures do perform very well: PSELF (F
and B) is much larger for corporations than for universities, suggesting that
corporations are in fact more successful at reaping the benefits of their own
research.

In sum, with the exception of ORIGINAL, and with some reservation

It is possible though that this result reflects to some extent
in
citation
between
differences
university and corporate
practices
researchers, and not just genuine differences in the nature of their research
(i.e. more "scientific"). Bowever, the fact that there are symbiotic linkages
between universities and corporations in fields such as biotechnology (where
most of the NPCITES occur) would suggest that citation practices are actually
similar; unfortunately our data cannot discriminate between these effects.

- 24

-

regarding the time span of GENERAL, the contrast between universities and
corporations does "validate" the measures of basicness and of appropriability,

in the limited sense that we cannot reject with them the prior that
universities do perform more basic research. On the other hand, the conceptual

ambiguity of the distance measures surfaces also in the empirical results:

there is some evidence to the effect that the offsprings from university
innovations may be more remote in technology space, but certainly not in time.

In general F/measures perform somewhat better than B/measures, and the 1980
sample shows crisper results than 1975.

A subsidiary hypothesis was that the basicness measures would exhibit
higher values for patents of top corporations (i.e. those belonging to the 200

corporations with the largest R&D outlays) than for those of "other"
corporations: presumably the larger corporations can afford to invest in more
basic research, since they may be able to appropriate a larger fraction of the
benefits. Table 4 shows that there may be something to it, but the differences

are for the most part very slight; the one significant exception is
appropriability, and to a lesser extent IMPORTF. Thus top corporations seem to

generate more "important" innovations, and they do capture more of the
benefits from them, but otherwise their research and research outcomes look
similar to that of smaller R&D performers.

However, it is quite likely that the lack of contrast between them stems
simply from the particular sample chosen, which is by no means representative

of corporate research, hut rather replicates exactly the technological
composition of university (patentable) innovational efforts. Thus, it may well

be the case that in those particular fields there is little difference between
"small" and "big" firms, but that those differences do exist in the population

of corporate innovations at large. In fact, a large proportion of our sample

is in biotechnology, and we know that in this field small firms, both by
themselves and in cooperation with universities, are particularly innovative.2

24Tn particular, that may explain the significantly lower value of
IIPURTB for other- corp, which would imply that the smaller corporations engage
in more "creative" research.

- 25

5-S

-

The Links across the F/B divide: "technoLogicaL trajectories"?

Having shown that our measures capture indeed aspects of basicness, we
use them now to address the next set of issues: does basic research lead to
basic innovations? does the nature of the research efforts affect the features

of the resulting innovations? As a first cut at these questions (and
sidestepping causality) , we

look for preliminary evidence of statistical

linkages between the characteristics of innovations and of research, by
scrutinizing the correlations within and between F/ and B/measures. Looking
once more at table 2, notice the similarity of the patterns of correlations of

the F/measures to those of the B/measures: virtually every association of a

pair of F/measures is replicated by its equivalent B/pair (e.g.

the

correlation between GENERAL and TECHF mirrors that of ORIGINAL and TECHB,
IMPORTF and GENERAL mirrors IMPORTB and ORIGINAL, etc.). What we find then is

that equivalent F/H measures tend to replicate each other, both in the shape
of their distributions (recall the findings in section 5.1) and in relation to

others, suggesting that the features of research and the features of the
resulting innovations correspond to a common pattern.

Turning now to the correlations across the F/B divide, notice in table 5

that the largest correlations are along the main diagonal, that is, between

equivalent F/B measures.25 Thus it would seem that "importance breeds
importance", originality breeds generality, coming from far away in technology

space leads far away as well, etc. In that sense, then, the (ex post)
characteristics of patented innovations as they reveal themselves in the
F/measures appear to be related to the attributes of the research that lead to

them.26 These systematic linkages between equivalent F/B measures seem to

suggest that technical change takes place along certain "technological
trajectories", exhibiting coherence (in terms of the attributes of the

25The one exception is TIMEB which shows a higher correlation with
IMPORTF (and sligthly higher with GENERAL) than with TIMEF; notice also that
SCIENCE does not have an equivalent F/measure.
26This echoes Kuznets' conjecture that "There is a positive correlation
between the magnitude of the technical problem resolved by an invention and
the magnitude of its technical potential". Kuznets (1962), p. 26.

- 26

innovations

-

that occur along them) and persistence (see Dosi 1982, 1988, and

Freeman, 1990)

In order to pursue this theme further we constructed the following
+

composite measures: IMPDRTT = (IMPORTF + IMPORTB)/2, GENERALT = (GENERAL
+ TIMEB)/2, and computed the correlations
ORIGINAL)/2, and TIMET = (THIEF

between them (averages for the two samples): Corr(IMPDRTT, GENERALT) = .29,
- .11. Thus, certain
Corr(IMPDRTT, TIMET) = - .17, Corr(GENERALT, TIMET) =
paths of innovative activity are more likely to render important and general
innovations over time, and these innovations would tend to follow each other
in quick succession. Dther paths are likely to result in run-of-the-mill and
technologically focused innovations, and the advance along them is likely to

be slow. In other words, there seem to be more and less "hot" innovational
tracks, that persist at least over decade-long periods (the average time span
in this study is of 14 years

Mean(TECHB) + Mean(TECHF))

5.4 1 production function' for basicness, and institutional effects

further into the links between basic research and basic
Probing
innovations, we run regressions of each of the F/variables on the B/measures,
dummies for technological fields, and dummies for corporations. The purpose

was twofold: first, to estimate a sort of production function whereby the
attributes of the patented innovations play the role of "outputs" and the
characteristics of the underlying research play the role of "inputs". Second,

to see whether the differences in the means of the F/measures between
universities and corporations remain there after controlling

for

the

characteristics of research and technological fields.

Table 6 shows the regressions of TMPORTF and GENERAL:27,28 in line with

"Since we use the same set of regressors in all regressions, there was
no point in estimating them jointly using Zellner's STiR.

2SVe run similar regressions for TECIIF and TTMEF as well, but virtually
the only significant variable in each was the equivalent B/measure (TIMES in
the regression of TIMIEF, and TECHB in TECHF), and hence there was no point in
reporting them.

(I

- 27

-

the findings of table 5, the most significant coefficient in the regression of
IMPORTF is its equivalent B/measure, IMPORTB (and likewise ORIGINAL is the

most significant in the regression of GENERAL).29 Notice, however, that
smaller values of IMPORTB mean that the patent is more "basic" in the sense of
being closer to the roots of a given innovational path, and hence if hasicness

leads to basicness we would have expected a negative sign on the coefficient
of IMPORTB. The positive and highly significant coefficient that we obtained

may be seen instead as lending support to the notion of technological
trajectories suggested earlier. Here that could be interpreted as follows:
highly "creative" research (in the sense of small values of IMPDRTB) is most

likely to exhibit a large variance in terms of its outcomes - some may do

extremely well, others may fail miserably (i.e. high and low values of
IMPORTF) . On the other hand, once a research avenue has proven its worth (i.e.

high values of IMPORTB), further significant innovations along those lines are

very likely to come, showing up in high IMPORTF. If the latter effect
dominates, we will find indeed a positive association hetween IMPORTF and
IMP ORTB.

The results in GENERAL are well in line with conventional wisdom: more

original research, as well as research that draws from

far

removed

technological areas (high TECHB), lead to innovations of wider technological
significance. More reliance on scientific sources also enhances the generality
of the outcomes (this finding does not hold for the 1975 sample) .

The negative

signs on TIMEB in both regressions imply that more important and more general
innovations stem from more recent (or up to date) research sources.

As to the second issue explored in these regressions, it is clear that
there does remain an "institutional effect" after controlling for the type of
research, meaning that even if universities and corporations were to engage in

29Since citation practices vary by technological fields, we suspected
that these results might mean only that patents from citation-intensive fields
get high values of IMPORIF and of IMPORTB. The results remain, however, even

if dummies for 49 technological fields ("CATCODE") are included in the
regressions.

- 28

-

research having similar characteristics, universities would still produce on
average more "basic" innovations. Finally we note that the R2's of about .10
obtained in these regressions should not be judged harshly, considering that

what we are trying to account for are attributes of innovations that have
defied quantification up to now.

5.5 Appropriability
Economists have long regarded appropriability as one of the key notions

in the economics of technical change, and yet its elusive nature has
frustrated recurrent attempts to quantify it and thus to incorporate it in
empirical studies of innovation (a notable exception is Levin et al 1987, and
subsequent studies that used the Yale survey).

The measure of (actual) appropriahility suggested here is PSELFF, defined

as the fraction of citing patents granted to the sane assignee as the one of

the originating patent, and a similarly defined B/measure, PSELFB. Clearly,

this is likely to be just a crude and partial measure: if for example the
down-the-line benefits from an innovation do not involve further technical

advances, or if they do but most of those subsequent innovations are not
patented, then PSELF will be widely off mark. Thus, one of the key issues is
whether or not the denominator of FSELF (i.e. the total number of citations)

is indicative of total realized benefits: if that is the case then the
fraction of self-citations may well be a good proxy for the ratio appropriated
by the inventor, otherwise it surely will not.

We have already seen that PSELF (F and B) is significantly higher for top

corporations than for other corporations, and higher for both vis a vis
universities. The question now is what are the attributes of innovations that

may influence actual appropriability, that is, what determines em ante
appropriability. Following the discussion in section 2.1, we suggest as
indicators of em ante appropriability the measures of distance and generality,

TIME? (B), TECHF (B), and GENERAL (ORIGINAL). High values of TIMEF (B) mean
that the follow-up innovations take long, and hence that the realization of
the benefits occur far in the future; thus the innovation would be perceived

-29-

ex ante as being "less appropriable", since it is less likely that the
(private) inventor will be able to retain control over the innovational path

long enough to enjoy the benefits. Similarly, suppose that the innovation

results in marketable products in a wide range

of

fields,

or

in

technologically distant fields. Presumably, it is more difficult to anticipate
these spinoffs than those within the same field; or, as Nelson (1959) argued,

if the firm is specialized it may not be able to take advantage of
technological "diffused" or "remote" spillovers. Thus, the potential benefits

associated with them would look ez ante less appropriable. As with time,
distance and generality are likely to affect the incentives to innovate, and
hence also the institutional distribution of research efforts.

A thorny problem is that these distance and generality measures are
computed ex post, and hence they could be regarded as indicators of ez ante

appropriability only if they are on average correctly anticipated by the
inventors. Some evidence to that effect are provided by the findings related

to technological trajectories: these suggest that

the

conditions

of

appropriability have some degree of persistence along these trajectories, and
hence that inventors may be able to foresee to some extent the remoteness and
generality of the expected fruits of their innovations. In addition, we shall

use for this purpose a new variable, EAGENER ("ex ante generality"), defined
as the number of distinct 3-digit patent classes among the original and cross

classifications to which the originating patent was assigned.3° As it turns
out EAGENER is highly correlated with GENERAL, and also with TECHF. Since the

classification is done at the time when the patent is assigned, EAGENER is
certainly determined ex ante.

Table 7 shows regressions of PSELFF and PSELFB on these measures. The
strongest result is the negative and very significant coefficient of TIME, F

and B. A straightforward reading of this finding is simply that spillovers

30Pateots are assigned to an "original" classification, and to any number
of "cross" classifications: the former represents the main technological area
which the innovation belongs to, the latter consist of additional areas which
the patent examiner regards as related to the innovation.

- 30

tend

-

to occur in-house faster than externally. Thus the same R&D organization

can recognize earlier the potential for further developments of a given

innovation, proceed along a pre-conceived research path

that

renders

interrelated innovations, etc. For the converse reasons outsiders would take
longer in benefiting from spillovers originating in labs other than their own.

The leap of faith from this interpretation to appropriability is that
inventors can somehow anticipate THIEF (perhaps on the basis of THIEB), and
behave accordingly.

GENERAL and ORIGINAL fit the conjecture but just with borderline
significance, and so does EAGENER. On the other hand TECHF and B do not at all

(TECHF even exhibits a puzzling positive and significant coefficient for
1975). Thus it

seems that appropriability has to do more vith technological

than with technological "distance", at least as these are measured
bere. Notice also that the gap in the extent of actual appropriability between
universities and corporations remains even after controlling for distance and
generality, meaning that corporations are better at reaping the benefits from
their innovations regardless of which technological trajectories they choose.
"focus"

Finally, we note that the results for 1980 are better than those for 1975,

which we take primarily as a reflection of data availability, both in the
sense of number of observations and in the extent of missing data.

6. Conclusions and Suggestions for Further Research

This paper is first and foremost and attempt to quantify and clarify
important aspects of the process of technical change (i.e. basicness and
appropriability), and explore the linkages between them. We rely for that
purpose on detailed patent data, thus awarding the proposed measures a very

wide coverage, limited only by the extent to which innovations manifest
themselves in patents: very basic scientific discoveries on the one hand, and
minor improvements on the other would not be captured by our measures.

Relying on the prior that universities perform more basic research than

corporations, we find that the forward-looking measures of importance and

generality do seem to capture aspects of the basicness of innovations;

31 -

similarly,

the reliance on scientific versus technological sources, and (to a

less extent) the closeness to the origins of innovational paths, appear to
reflect aspects of the basicness of research. On the other hand the proposed
measure of originality does not seem at all able to discriminate between more
and less basic research.

The fraction of citations coming from patents awarded to the same
inventor was found to be much higher for corporations than for universities,

the notion that FSELF may be indicative indeed of actual
supporting
appropriability. The measures of technological distance appear to be related
to basicness but the evidence is not clear-cut, whereas distance in time does
not conform at all with the prior. In all, then, the initial validation of the

measures rendered very satisfactory results for the F/basicness and for the
indicators of actual appropriability, less so for the measures of B/basicness,
and all but failed for the distance measures.

A second set of findings revealed interesting similarities between
equivalent F and B measures, suggesting that there are strong "family effects"

in successive generations of patents. Further work along these lines would

seek to identify and characterize more in detail different technological
trajectories, and relate them tQ conventional economic data. The analysis of
appropriability shows that it tends to diminish with distance in time and to a
lesser extent with the technological spread of research outcomes, but not with

technological distance. As an extension, it would be interesting to relate
these measures of appropriability to those obtained in the Yale Survey (Levin
et al, 1987).

The results are thus quite encouraging, particulary if viewed as those of

a pilot study. The next step would be to use these measures in tanden with
other economic data coming from independent sources, and see whether or not

they make a difference. The prime target would be to redo studies that have

used simple patent counts as indicators of innovation,

usually

with

disappointing results. In particular, we would like to re-examine the series

of studies by Griliches and associates at the NBER (Griliches, 1981; Pakes,

- 32

-

1985; Griliches and Cockburn, 1988) , which sought to identify the impact of
R&D and of patent counts on the market value of Compustat firms. Ye
hypothesize that if we were to use composite indicators based on our measures

instead of simple patent counts, the impact on stock market value would be
much more noticeable.

In particular, we expect that IMPORTF would have a very significant
effect, and that it will improve even further when adjusting it with PSELFF,
since what should influence the worth of the inventor is just the appropriable

rents, not the total. Likewise, we expect that GENERAL would have a negative

impact on the value of small firms, but not of

highly

diversified

corporations. Another hypothesis is that the B/measures of basicness would be

more closely related to R&D expenditures than to indicators of performance
such as market value. If these hypotheses are confirmed, that would pave the

way for the wide-scale use of the proposed measures as key variables in
empirical studies of innovation.

- 33

-

Appendix: Further Comments of Tables 1 - 3
Note in table 1 that the large difference in the means of IMPDRTF between
the two samples (13 for 1975 versus 7 for 1980) is due simply to the fact that
the 1975 patents had a 5-year longer forward time horizon; the same accounts
for the differences in TIMEF. Even though the date of the originating patents
should not matter for the availability of B/measures, in fact it does because
of the higher fraction of missing data that we encounter the further back in
time we go; that accounts for the difference in the means of TIMEB between the
two cohorts, and may also explain in part the differences in IMPORTB.

Similarly to GENERAL and to ORIGINAL, there is also a large mass at zero
for SCIENCE, which reflects a very large proportion of zeros for NPCITES. This

is related to same extent to the distribution of patents by technological
fields: for the 1980 sample about 507, of the patents with non-zero NPCITES
belong to Drugs and Medical, whereas this field accounts for just 377. of the
sample. Clearly, it is more of a common practice to cite non-patent sources in
Drugs and Medicine than in say, Mechanical Arts or Electronics.
We noted that IMPORTF and GENERAL exhibit a significant correlation, and
a
positive
correlation between FICITI/IC and GENERAL simply because the distribution of
NCITING is very skewed, and few citations necessarily imply high concentration
and hence low values of GENERAL (the same for NCITED and ORIGINAL). In fact,
the correlations between these variables are on the order of 0.33, which seems

likewise IMPORTB and ORIGINAL. One would probably expect

to suggest that the "spurious" aspect of it does not dominate.3' Moreover
IMPORTF comprises also second-generation citations, and those do not enter
into the computation of GENERAL. Thus there is some indication that more

"important" patents tend to be also more "general", and likewise that
innovations

stemming from more "important" origins tend to be aore "original".

We noted above the similarity in the distributions and correlations
patterns

of equivalent F and B measures. It is quite clear that these results
are not spurious, since the F/variables "occur" independently of the backward
ones, and are literally ex post whereas the backward measures are set ex ante.
Thus for example when an patent is issued, the value of ORIGINAL for it is
already determined; as time goes by the said patent may receive any number of
citations, and these may be distributed in any way across patent classes, so
that
T years later it will show a certain realized value of GENERAL. From
the point of view of the construction of these measures there is clearly no
need for them to exhibit similar distributions or patters of correlations with

other variables. The fact that they do is then an empirical finding that
reflects something real about the underlying process of technical change.

'The logic of the relationship between NCITING and GENERAL is the same

as that between market size and the Herfindahl (one minus it) one would
expect very small markets to be highly concentrated, but for the rest of the
distribution it is not clear at all how the relationship goes (in fact it
seems that very large markets are highly concentrated).

- 34

-

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Arrow, K.J.: "Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for
Inventions," in It. Nelson (ed.) The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity,
Princeton University Press, 1962

Carpenter, M.P., Narin F. and Wolf P.,"Citation Rates to Technologically
Important Patents." Vorid Patent Information, Vol. 3. No.4., 1981.

Carpenter, hi. and F. Narin.: "Validation Study: Patent Citations as
Indicators of Science and Foreign Dependence," Vorld Patent Information,
Vol.5, No. 3, pp. 180-185, 1983.
Cohen, V. hi. and R. C. Levin, "Empirical Studies of Innovation and Market

Structure". In R. Schmalansee and R. Willig (eds.), Handbook of Industrial
Organization, North-Holland, 1989.
Cohen, V. hi. and D. Levinthal: "Innovation and Learning: The Two Faces of
R&D." Economic Journal, 1989.

Cockburn, I. and Z. Griliches, "Industry Effects and Appropriability
Measures in the Stock Market's Valuation of R&D and Patents". American
Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 1988 (78), pp. 419-423.

Dasgupta, P. and P. David.: "Information Disclosure and the Economics of
Science and Technology," Chapter 16 in G. Feiwel (ed.), Arrow and the Ascent
of loden Economic Theory, NYU Press, 1987.

Dorfman, N: "Route 128: The Development of a Regional High-Technology
Economy" in D. Lampe (ed.), The Massachusetts Miracle: High Technology and
Economic Revitalization. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1988.

Dosi, C. "Technological Paradigms and Technological Trajectories: A

Interpretation of the Determinants and Directions of Technological
Change", Research Policy, 1982, 11(5), pp. 147-62.
Suggested

Dosi, C. "Sources, Procedures, and Microeconomic Effects of Innovation".
Journal of Economic Literature, 1988, 56(5), pp.1120- 1171.
Freeman, C. The Economics of Industrial Innovation, 2nd ed. Cambridge:
MIT Press, 1982.

Freeman, C. "Schumpeter's Business Cycles Revisited", in Heertje and
Perlman
Evolving Technology and Market Structure, Studies in
(eds.),
Schumpeterian Economics, Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press, 1990.
Griliches, Z., "Market
(7), pp. 183-87.

Value,

R&D and Patents". Economic Letters (1981)

Griliches, Z. (ed.), R&D, Patents and Productivity. University of Chicago
Press, 1984

- 35

Griliches,

-

Z.: "Productivity, R&D and Basic Research at the Firm Level in

the l970s.t1 American Economic Review, 1986

Griliches, Z. "Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: a Survey,"
Journal of Economic Literature, 1990, 27, pp. 1661-1707.

Jaffe, A.: "Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R&D: Evidence
from Firms' Patents, Profits and Market Value," American Economic Review,
1986, 76(5), pp.984-1001.
Jaffe, A.: "Real Effects of Academic Research," American Economic Review,
1989, 79(5), pp. 957-70.

Jaffe, A., Trajtenberg, M. and Berderson, R. "Geographic Localization of
Knowledge Spillovers, as Evidence by Patent Citations'. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 1992 (forthcoming).

Kuhn, Thomas, The Stncture of

Scientific

Revolutions.

Chicago:

University of Chicago Press, 1962
Kuznets, S. "Inventive Activity: Problems of Definition and Measurement,"
in R. Nelson (ed.) The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity, Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1962.

Levin, R., A. Klevorick, R.R. Nelson, and S.G. Winter, "Appropriating the

Returns from Industrial Research and Development," Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 1987, 5, 783-820.

Mowery, D.C. and Rosenberg, N. Technology and the Pursuit of Economic
Growth, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989.

National Science Foundation, Science and Technology Data Rook, Washington
D.C. NSF 1985.

National Science Foundation, Academic Science/Engineering R&D Funds,
Fiscal Year 1987, 1989

Nelson, R. "The Simple Economics of Basic Scientific Research," Journal
of Political Economy, 1959

Nelson, R. "The link between science and invention: the case of the
transistor," in R. Nelson (ed.) The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity,
Princeton University Press, 1962

Pakes, Ariel, "On Patents, R&D, and the Stock Market Rate of Return".
Journal of Political Economy, 1985, 95(2), pp. 390-409.

Pakes, Ariel, "Patents as Options: Sone Estimates of the Value of Holding
European Patent Stocks", Econometrica, 1986, 54(4), pp. 755-84.

Rosenberg, N. Inside the Black Box: Technology and Economics. Cambridge,

- 36

-

England: Cambridge University Press, 1982.
Trajtenberg, M. "A Penny for Your Quotes: Patent Citations and the Value
of Innovations," Rand Journal of Economics, 1990a, 21(1), pp 172- 187.

Trajtenherg, M. Economic Analysis of Product Innovation: The Case of CT
Scanners. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990b.

Van Raan (ed), Handbook of Quantitative Studies of

Science

and

Technology, Amsterdam: North Holland, 1988.

Weingart, P. R. Sehringer and hi. Winterhager. "Bibliometric Indicators
for Assessing Strengths and Weaknesses of West German Science," Chapter 13 in

Van Raan (ed), Handbook of Quantitative Studies of Science and Technology,
Amsterdam:

North Holland, 1988.

Weizman, hi. "On Diversity", Harvard University, Department of Economics,

Working

Paper Series, 1991.

Table 1
Descriptive Statistics

(i) Basicness leasures:
N

Variable

IMPORTF 1975

IMPORTB

ORIGINAL

SCIENCE

Std

0ev

Sum

948

12.5786
6.9575

23.2100
14.6781

11925
10061

806
1127

0.3235
0.2693

0.2872
0.2742

763
1340

21.3388
27.7608

719
1261

945
1446

Minimum

Maximum

0 380.5000
0

250.5000

260.7115
303.4474

0
0

0.8750
0.8512

22.1050
33.3325

16282
37200

0
0

204.5000
393.5000

0.2247
0.2717

0.2691
0.2736

161.5900
342.5935

0
0

0.8200
0.8819

0.1355
0.2023

0.2519
0.2962

128.0122
292.4922

0
0

1.0000
1.0000

0.3183
0.3164

0.2983 251.7629
0.3143 355.6418

0

1124

0

1.0000
1.0000

1980 1446

GENERAL

lean

(ii) Di3ianee Iea3ureS:

TECHF

TIhEEF

TECHB

TUEEE

791

811

7.2633

2.4875

5891

1126

4.3754

1.r5501

4927

0
0

13.0000
9.0000

708

0.3141

0.3378

222.4072

0

1.0000

1261

0.3003

0.3081

378.6438

0

1.0000

909

7.6583
9.1720

3.9544
4.8534

6961

12538

0
0

17.0000
22.0000

1367

(iii)

Appropriabiliiy Ieasures:

PSELFF

PSELFB

1061

0.1069
0.1556

0.2399
0.2920

83.6737
165.1267

0
0

1.0000
1.0000

719

0.1411

0.2981

101.4825

0.1259

0.2473

168.9854

0
0

1.0000

1342

783

1.0000

The top line of each variable corresponds to the 1975 sample, the bottom one to
the 1980 sample.

Table 2
Correlationsa Between Measures of the saue Type -

1980

Saap1e

(i) Forward Measures
IJPORTF

GENERAL

TECRF

PSELFF

TIMEF

1.00000

IIPORTF

0.0
GENERAL

0.23884
0.0001

1.00000
0.0

TECIEF

0.00273
0.9271

0.37257
0.0001

1.00000
0.0

TIIEF

-0.05065
0.0893

0.01899
0.5243

0.00585
0.8448

1.00000
0.0

PSELFF

-0.01976

-0.07418
0.0157

-0.03468
0.2592

-0.16184
0.0001

0.5202

(ii)

IIPORTB
JIPORTE

ORIGINAL

1.00000

0.0

Backwards Measures
TECRB

TIXEB

PSELFB

SCIENCE

1.00000

0.0

ORIGINAL

0.30641
0.0001

1.00000
0.0

TECUB

0.01442
0.6090

0.43794
0.0001

1.00000
0.0

TIMEB

-0.12605
0.0001

-0.10846
0.0001

0.04796
0.0887

1.00000
0.0

PSELFB

-0.03578
0.2042

-0.08317
0.0031

-0.06184
0.0282

-0.20613

-0.16230

-0.06578
0.0195

-0.00508
0.8571

-0.17287

0.0001

SCIENCE

0.0001

0.0001

1.00000
0.0
-0.02025
0.4587

1.00000
0.0

apearson correlation coefficients; significance probabilities right under.

Table 3
Comparison of leans:

lJniversities

Universities

vs. Corporations

Corporations

(i) Ba.sicnes3 Ieasttre3

I5PORTF (1980)
(1975)

GENERAL

6.04"'

8.80
16.76

10.49*

0.31

0.25
0.31

0.34

ISEPORTB

26.83
16.31

28.22

ORIGINAL

0.28

0.27

0.20

0.24

0.28
0.20

0.16"
0.10"

0.35

0.30"

0.32

0.31

TECHB

0.33
0.30

0.29"

TB[EF

4.44

4.34

6.48

7.69b

9.08
7.50

9.22
7.75

0.09

0.19"
0.13*

SCIENCE

23.75"

(ii) Dis1ance Iea.siires

TECh

TIMEB

0.52

(iii) Appropriabiliy Ieasure3
PSELFF

0.07

PSELFB

0.06
0.14

0.16"
0.14

The top row of each variable corresponds to 1980, the bottom to 1975.

In

italics: figures for which the differences from universities have the "wrong"
sign (i.e. contrary to the prior).
from the mean of university patents statistically
•,
signicant at the .1, .05 and .01 level respectively.
aThe difference is significant for a "truncated" sanple - see text.

, '": differences

bStatistically significant but in the "wrong" direction.

Comparison of leans:

(i)

Table 4
versus Other Corporations

Top

Top- Corp.

Iasicness leasures
IIIPORIF 1980)
1975)

GENERAL

IMPORTB

Other- Corp.

6.67

5.4l

11.83

9.16k

0.25
0.32

0.24
0.30

32.16
23.00

24.44

ORIGINAL

0.26
0.24

0.27
0.23

SCIENCE

0.17
0.11

0.16
0.10

TECIIF

0.30
0.32

0.29
0.31

TEC1IB

0.28
0.31

0.29
0.33

IIhEEF

4.27
7.52

4.41

8.98
7.52

9.45

PSELFF

0.24
0.16

0.13S•
0.10"'

PSELFB

0.19

0.13"

0.19

0.09"'

24.14b

(ii) Distance leasures

TIMEB

7.85

7.93

(iii) Jppropriabiliiy leasures

The top row of each variable corresponds to 1980, the bottom to 1975. In
italics: figures for which the differences from top-corp. have the
"wrong"
sign (i.e. contrary to the prior).
',

", "': differences from

signicant at the .1, .05 and

bdifference

the mean of top-corp. patents statistically

.01 level respectively.

statistically significant but in the "wrong" direction.

Table 5

Correlationsa Across F/B easures
1975
IIFORTF

GENERAL

TECIIF

TIJEF

FSELFF

IIPORTB

0.24651
0.0001

0.07151
0.0666

-0.06931
0.0788

0.02421
0.5349

-0.01046
0.7918

ORIGINAL

0.08039
0.0311

0.20239

0.15370

0.07853

0.06144

0.0001

0.0001

0.0499

0.1312

0.05906
0.1164

0.23280
0.0001

0.32970
0.0001

0.01081
0.7894

0.08186
0.0461

-0.12464

-0.11319

TECIIB

0.0002

0.0016

-0.01841
0.6128

0.11177
0.0018

0.03416
0.3505

PSELFB

-0.02115
0.5713

0.04388
0.2738

0.03994
0.3243

-0.02514
0.5308

0.14500
0.0003

SCIENCE

-0.05102

-0.03886

0.1170

0.2711

-0.00674
0.8501

-0.07365
0.0368

0.07049
0.0489

TIJEB

1980

IIPORTF

GENERAL

TECBF

TIMEF

PSELFE

IIPORTB

0.25564
0.0001

0.11549
0.0002

-0.04681
0.1297

0.04647
0.1322

0.01460
0.6458

ORIGINAL

0.05487
0.0514

0.24628
0.0001

0.20265
0.0001

-0.01127
0.7213

0.00605
0.8521

TECEB

-0.02012
0.4756

0.18751
0.0001

0.38723
0.0001

-0.02765
0.3817

0.05124
0.1143

TIJEB

-0.16763

-0.11465

0.00468

0.0001

0.0002

0.8781

0.09005
0.0031

-0.01243
0.6917

-0.05691
0.0371

-0.05004
0.1030

-0.01364
0.6573

—0.04648
0.1299

0.21125

-0.00537
0.8382

0.05175
0.0825

0.03790
0.2042

-0.02885
0.3335

0.01749
0.5692

PSELFB

SCIENCE

0.0001

apearson correlation coefficients; significance probabilities right under.

Table 6
Regressions of IXPORTF and GENERAL on B/Variables

IMP ORTI

1975

Constant

19.7

IMPORTB

(5.7)
0.3

ORIGINAL

TECIIB

TIMEB

SCIENCE

TC

OC

R2
#

cbs.

1980

1975

1980

8.2

0.3

0.2

(5.1)

(6.8)

(5.9)

0.1

0.0005

0.0005

(0.9)

(1.9)

(6.7)

(8.8)

-4.0

-2.2

(-1.0)

(-1.2)

0.11

0.18

(2.3)

(4.8)

7.0

-0.04

0.17

0.11

(2.3)

(-0.02)

(4.7)

(3.4)

-0.005

-0.005

-0.3

-0.4

(-0.8)

(-3.9)

-6.1

1.6

(-1.0)

(0.8)

(-1.4)

(-2.2)

-0.04

0.14

(-0.5)

(3.7)

-8.7

-3.1

-0.03

-0.05

(-3.8)

(-3.0)

(-1.3)

(-2.4)

-13.0

-3.0

-0.05

-0.05

(-5.6)

(-2.9)

(-1.8)

(-2.3)

0.12

0.10

0.09

0.11

707

1259

612

1002

t-values in parentheses
All regressions include 4 dummies for technological "fields"

Table 7
Regressions of Appropriability Measures

(i) PSELFF

1980

1975

Intercept

0.19

(6.3)
GENERAL

-0.06
(-1.9)

EAGENER

0.24
(7.5)

0.19

(6.0)

- 0.04
(-1.2)

-0.012

TIMEF

CORP

R2

#

of

obs.

0.11

0.092

-0.00

-0.001

(3.2)

(- 0.1)

-0.02

(3.0)
-0.02

-0.03

(-5.3)

(- 5.2)

(-5.1)

(-1.0)
-0.03
(-5.3)

0.08

0.07

(4.2)

(4.0)

0.09
(4.9)

(5.0)

.06

.06

.05

.06

767

755

1059

1060

(ii) PSELFB

1975
Intercept

ORIGINAL

TECHB

TIMEF (B)

CORP

R2

#

of

-0.012

(-1.5)

(- 1 .5)
TECIIF

0.24

(7.5)

obs.

t values in parenthesis.

1980

0.21

0.19

(6.3)

(9.2)

-0.08

(-1.6)
0.04
(1.0)
-0.01
(-2.6)
-0.00
(-0.0)

-0.09
(-3.3)
0.00
(0.1)
-0.01
(-7.2)
0.10

(7.0)

.01

.08

707

1259

0.09

Figure :

Front

Page of a Patent

United States Patent [19]

[iii

Carison et al.

[451

(54] TOMOGRAPI (IC SCANNER WIT! I
CADMIUM TUNGSTATE SCINTILLATION
CRYSTALS
(75] Inventors. Roland W. Cannon, Lyndlturst; Carl T. Jngstich, Cl,agrin Falls, both of
Ohio

[73] Assignee: Ohio Nuclear, Inc., Solon, Ohio

[2l
[22]

AppI. No.: 927,602
Filed:
Jul. 24, 1978

(51] Int. Cl.1
(52] U.S. Cl

250/361 R; 250/368;
250/445 T
250/361 R, 363 R, 363 S,
250/366, 367, 369, 445 T, 483

References Cited

(56]

U.S. I'ATENT DOCUMRNTS
4,039.8)9
4.068.129
4.070.581
4,114.042

8/1977
1/1978
1/1978

Curlier ci at
Rahniin
Gibbons ci at

9/1978 LeMay

4,145.610 3/1979

Perithou

nal of Applied Physics, Luezohino et al., vol. 33, No. I,
Jan. 1962, pp. 148—155.

Bismuth Germanate: A Iligh—Z Gamma Ray and
Charged Particle Detector, Harshaw Chemical Co.,
Solon, Ohio, pp. 1—6.

Harshaw Scintillation Phosphors, Harshaw Chemical
Co., Solon, Ohio, 1975.
Harshuw Chemical Catalog, Other Harnhaw Scintillation Phosphors, pp. 20—21, (date unknown).

GaIT 1/20

(SI] Field of Starch

4,220,860
Sep. 2, 1980

250/483.

250/40)
250/445 T

250/445T
250/445 T

OTHER PUBLICATIONS
Scintillation Counters, Birks, McGraw—Hill, 1953, pp.
56—61, 121—125.

Luminescence and the Scintillxtion Counter, Curran,

tluttcrrorihs Scientilic Publications, London, pp.

Primary Examiner—Davis L. Willis
Aitorney, Agent, or Firm.—Fay & Sharpe
[57]

ABSTRACT

A radiation detector suitable for use in tomographic
scanners comprising at least one cadmium tungutate
scintillation crystal optically coupled wittt a nihicon
photodiode or other photoelectric transducers. A plurality of cadmium tungstate crystals may be coupled to
one silicon phiolodiode with, tiber optic lighl guides. In
a tomographic scanner, radiation passing through the
scan circle impinges on the cadmium (ungstate crystala
causing them 10 scintillate. The light scintillated atrikes
Ihe area of the p.n junction of the photodiode causing
the photoelectric effect to be manifested. The intensity
of radiation striking the crystal is determined by measuring the photoconductive conductance, photoemiaaive current or photovoltaic potential. From these Intensities au image is computed of the radiation attenuation in the examined ucan circle.

82—89, 131—135.

Pliniocifects in Silicon Surface—Barrier Diodes, Jour-

21 Oglms, 4 DrawIng Flguru

FIGURE 2

Distribution of Research Outcomes according to "Basicness"
a. The prior regarding the location of Universities (Fu) vs. Corporations (Fc)

Fu

MaxweIIs
Equations
1¼

more basic——)

basicneSs

PATENTABLE RANGE

b. Hypothetical selectivity bias leading to high prob. of type II error

Fu

Fc

13u

E(b0)

c. Selectivity bias which does not affect the validity of the indicators

(low prob. of type ii error)

E(bc) 13c

E(b)

'3

Figure 3: Sample Design
1975 Cohort
Top corporations

Universities

"Grand-Parents"

'-----I

I

I

"Parents"

L1282

I

I

[_

"Originating"

1

<matched=>

I
"Children"

!III

1

I-

Total:

]

I

[_
I

[319 1 <=matched=>
I

[ 193J
r - I- - 1

I

children"

I

I

I

I
"Grand-

Other Corporations

---

I

L

I

I
L

--J

-

3581

[134_IJ

3534

--J

-

3634

1980 Cohort

Top corporations
"Grand-Parents"

I.

--

-

L---

I

___

"Parents"

[713

I
____
"Originating"

[482
I

[ l701
__

"Children"

1

"Grand-

children"

Total:
Total #

L..__j
5351

of

Universities

I
<=niatched=>

J

[i

Other Corporations

L--I

I

L48u1 <=matched> [

L1

I

__________

I

r-—1
-

---

482

1

[24J
I

1-'
I.

5288

patents for 1975: 10,749; for 1980: 15,359; Grand total:

- - - -i
4720

26,108

FIGURE 4

Computing the Measures of Basicness: An Illustration

FIELD

2

1

II

I

10

CATCODE

I

15
I

I

NCLASS

120

100

230

3

2

cited patents

4

1

00

I

I

E1

("parents')

300

150

I

I

0

i—i

—1

originating patent

0000

citing patents
("children")

I

3

I

I

142

2

2

00

j+1

I

I

30

IMPORTB1 = 4 + 0.5*11 = 9.5

IMPORTF1 =

GENERAL =

1

ORIGINAL =

1

TECHF =
TECHB =

÷ 0.5*17 =

8

—

16.5

] =

F

F

(I)2+()2÷()2

[3*0+24+1*+2*1] / 8 =
[2*0+14+1*1]

/4=

=

FIGURE 5

Frequency Distribution of' Basicness Measures

(')Truncated—Values of IMPORTF>105 do not appear

(**) Truncated—Values of IMPORTB>300 do not appear

FIGURE '

Frequency Distribution of Basicness Measures

R I G I N4JJ

4
'I

40.OZ

I
I

2O. 'I

0 .0

'I

I.
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

1975

0.9

