                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  INCOME DISTRIBUTION, COMMUNITIES AND THE
                QUALITY OF PUBLIC EDUCATION: A POLICY ANALYSIS




                                     Raquel Fernandez

                                     Richard Rogerson




                                  Working Paper No. 4158




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 1992


The authors acknowledge financial support from National Science Foundation grant
SES-9 122625 and wish to thank Kevin Lang, Glen Loury, Mike Riordan, Bob Rosenthal and
Monika Schnitzer for helpful comments as welt as seminar participants at the 1992 NBER
Summer Institute and at the European Research Conference on Politics and Economic Policy in
Sesimbra, Portugal. This paper was prepared under a cooperative agreement between the
Institute for Policy Reform (IPR) and the Agency for International Development (AID),
cooperative agreement # PDC-0095-A-00-1 126-00. Views expressed in this paper are those of
the author and not necessarily those of IPR or AID. This paper is pan of NEER's research
program in Public Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                            NBER Working Paper #4 158
                                                            September 1992




                    Income Distribution, Communities and the Quality of Public
                                  Education: A Policy Analysis



                                           ABSTRACT

       This paper analyzes within the context of a multicommunity model the effects of several

policies that affect the financing of public education. The key features of the model are: (I)

individuals differ with respect to income, (ii) individuals choose in which community to reside,

(iii) communities are characterized by a proportional tax on income and a quality of public

education, and (iv) a community's tax rate is chosen by majority vote. We examine three types

of policies: subsidies for residency of specific income groups in particular communities,

ceilings or floors on community level educational spending, and income redistribution. In each

case   we examine the consequences of these policies for both welfare and the quality of

education across communities. We identify several policies which make all individuals better

off and increase the quality of education in all communities.



Raquel Fernandez                                           Richard Rogerson
Department of Economics                                    Department of Economics
Boston University                                          University of Minnesota
Boston, MA 02115                                           Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
                                        —I-.




1. Introduction

     One   of   the most striking features of the primary and secondary public

education system in the US is the large disparity in spending per student

across districts.' As Table I illustrates for jurisdictions in several

states, spending per pupil can vary by as much as a factor of two even across

nearby communities. It is not really surprising that this is so. Given that

a substantial proportion of the expenditures on public education is financed

at the local level (approximately 45%), the differences in expenditures per

student reflect, in large part, the realities of the US income distribution

and its allocation across states and neighborhoods.

     These unequal levels of educational expenditures per student have been

condemned by many on grounds of efficiency, morality and legality. Advocates

of reform have argued along the following lines: (i) Large differences in

financing are inefficient since, given same initial abilities, poorer schools

will turn out far fewer future scientists, violinists, etc., due to inadequate

resources. (ii) A system that allows the accidents of geography and birth to

determine the quality of education received by an individual is inimical to

the idea of equal opportunity in the market place. And, (iii) that education

is a fundamental right, equal access to which is thus mandated by the 14th

Amendment of the US Constitution or by similar clauses in state

constitutions

     In the last few decades the question of whether inequality in educational

expenditures constitutes a denial of equal opportunity and of constitutional


     1For an eloquent, if unsystematic, portrayal of this fact see Kozol
(1991).
     2For a review of some of these arguments see Berne (1988) and Wise and
Cendler (1989).
                                        —2—


guarantees has been the subject of many court battles.3 Arguments marshalled

in defense of the status quo have contested the relationship between

educational expenditure and educational quality (and hence equal opportunity)

and the intrusion by the state on matters of local control.4 Nonetheless

since 1970 almost half of the major judicial cases decided have resulted in an

overturn of a state's school finance system and many other states have

independently initiated reforms in response to these cases.5 The judicial

systems, however, have left it to the different states' legislatures to devise

alternative systems of financing public education,

        Although economic issues figure prominently in policy discussions

concerning educational finance and its reforms, formal economic analysis seems

to play little, if any, role in informing these debates.6 In view of the

importance of these issues, this is rather troubling, The interactions among

the uiyriads of variables involved in educational reforms are far from simple

to comprehend and, as the experience of California eloquently attests, well—

intentioned programs may have rather unfortunate and unintended consequences.

There, the combination of the Serrano decision and Proposition 13 left 91.1%

of students within a $100 expenditure band in 1985—1986. Between 1970 and

1989, however, California dropped from a tank of 23 to 46 among all states in


        3For a history of US school finance policy see Cuthrie (1983) and Berne
(1988).
     4The association between school quality and other variables has been a       -




topic of controversy since the Coleman report (Coleman et al. (1966)). In a
recent study, Card and Krueger (1992) find a significant positive effect of
school quality on mean earnings. See references therein for a discussion of
the related literature.

     5Since 1970 New Jersey, Kansas, Wisconsin, California, Connecticut,
Washington, West Virginia, Wyoming and Arkansas have had their school finance
system overturned in court rulings.
     6A notable exception is Inman (1978). He simulates the effect of diverse
educational reforms on agents' welfare within a complex multi—community model.
                                     —3—


terms of its expenditures on public elementary and secondary education as a

percentage of personal income,7

     The aim of this paper is to provide a theoretical analysis of the effects

of different reforms of the public education finance system. We take the

stand that an examination of the interactions among communities, income

distribution, individual preferences, and institutions is critical to

understanding the effects of these reforms. To this end we employ a multi—

community model in which individuals differ in their initial income and in

which education is publicly provided at the community level. Our work,

therefore, is in the tradition of the literature on multi—community models

with heterogeneous agents pioneered by Westhoff (1977), Epple, Filimon, and

Romer (1984), and Epple and Romer (1991). among others.

     In our model there are two communities, each characterized by a

proportional income tax rate and by a quality of public education.

Individuals are free to decide in which community they wish to reside.

Education is financed entirely by the local income tax. The amount that is

spent per student in a community determines the community's quality of

education and consequently the future earnings of individuals in that

community. The tax rate is determined by majority vote within the community.

     In all the stable equilibria of our model, individuals stratify

themselves into communities according to income. These equilibria are

characterized by the coexistence of a high tax—high quality of education

community peopled by those individuals with higher incomes, and a low tax—low

quality of education community where individuals with lower incomes reside.


     7See Benson, C. and O'Halloran, K. (1987). Serrano v Priest is the 1971
State Supreme Court case which ruled unconstitutional California's system of
financing public education. Fropositon 13 placed a limit on local tax rates.
Data is from various issues of the US Statistical Abstract,
                                      —4--



      We use the model described to assess the impact of several types of

reforms (directly and indirectly related to education finance) on the quality

of education in both communities and on individual welfare. Our analysis

focuses on three general types of policies: those that   attempt to legislate

quality directly, those that target primarily the composition of a particular

community and those that redistribute income through taxes.

     Our model generates several interesting results. We find that reforms

that attempt to directly affect the quality differential between the wealthy

and the poor community by capping the quality level in the wealthy

neighborhood lower the welfare of all individuals. The consequences of a

policy that mandates a higher quality of education in the poor community, on

the other hand, depend critically on the identity of the median voter in the

poor community, and accordingly may be either Pareto improving or worsening.

Furthermore, these policies may result in an increased difference in the

quality levels between communities.

     Policies that influence educational quality through attempts to change

the composition of a community (by offering, for example, subsidies to

individuals who choose to locate in a particular community) also have some

rather surprising consequences. We find that a subsidy that promotes the

location of middle—income individuals in the poor community is Pareto

improving under certain circumstances and can raise the quality of education

in both communities. A policy that subsidizes the residency of middle income

individuals in the wealthy community, on the other hand, makes all individuals

worse off (including those receiving the subsidyl) and decreases the quality

of education in both communities. If the subsidy policy is used solely to

assist the poorest individuals to locate in the wealthy community, however,

this poLicy is then potentially Pareto improving.
                                         —5—


      We also consider redistributive tax policies. In one variant only the

wealthiest individuals are taxed and the proceeds are distributed to the

poorest individuals. We find that this policy may be Pareto improving and can

increase the quality of education in both communities. In a different policy

variation taxes are levied on all individuals in the wealthiest community and

redistributed to all residents of the poor community. This policy tends to

make all individuals better off 1   to   increase the quality of education in both

communities, but also to increase the inequality in educational quality across

communities. Some of the theoretical results we obtain in this section are

ambiguous. A numerical example illustrates some possible outcomes of these

tax policies.

     The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 develops the model and the

equilibrium concept that will be employed. Section 3 analyzes several policy

reforms within the framework developed. Section 4 extends the analysis to a

continuous income distribution and section 5 concludes.



2.   The Model

     We wish to analyze a model that will help shed light on how different

policies affect both the quality of education across communities and welfare

among income groups. The essential features that such a model should possess

are (i) communities, (ii) individuals that differ with respect to income and

that are able to exercise some element of choice with respect to where they

wish to reside, (iii) technologies that transform expenditures on education

into a quality of education and quality of education into future income, and

(iv) a mechanism that translates individual preferences into a collective

choice.
                                       —6—


     To incorporate all the above characteristics into a model in a tractable

fashion is difficult. We choose to focus on an essentially static model in

which there are two communities, three income groups, public education is the

only option available to individuals, the quality of education is solely a

function of the level of expenditure per capita within a community, and

spending on education is determined by majority vote. While it is possible to

argue with each one of these assumptions and simplifications, they nonetheless

seem to possess enough richness to highlight many issues of concern in the

debate about education finance, while at the same time preserving sufficient

simplicity to permit an analysis within a multi—community model.8

     There is a continuum of two—period lived individuals with identical

preferences given by

                          u(cl) +   $u(c2)                   (I)
where c1 is period—one consumption and c2 is consumption in period two. We

assume that u is strictly concave and twice continuously differentiable.

Individuals differ in their initial (period one) income yj which takes on one

of three values indexed by i—l,2,3 with y1>y2>y3. The fraction of individuals

with initial income y1 is given by A. We assume Ai>O Vi and normalize the

mass of individuals to equal one.

     There are two communities. Each community is characterized by a

proportional tax rate on first—period income and by the quality of public

     8
        Models of this genre can easily become intractable and most of the
related literature either restricts their analysis to characterization of
equilibria and conditions for existence or resorts immediately to simulations.
For a discussion of the difficulties inherent in working with multi—community
models see, for examples Rose—Ackerman (1979), Rubinfeld (1987), Stiglitz
(1977) and Epple, Filimon, and Romer (1984). These types of models have been
used by, among others, Epple and Romer (1991) to study redistribution, by
Durlauf (1992) to sudy the dynamics of income distribution, and by de
Bartolome (1991) to examine efficency properties when peer effects exist.
                                        —7—


education that it provides.9 We assume that all residents of a given

community receive the same quality of public education and that, furthermore,

they cannot choose to supplement this education privately. All tax revenue is

assumed to be spent on education and the quality of public education is

determined solely by the amount of public spending per resident10. Education,

therefore, is a local publicly provided private good.

     An individual's period—one consumption is equal to her after—tax income,

Second—period consumption is given by second—period income, which is

determined by the quality of education.       In particular, we assume that second—

period income is an increasing, concave and differentiable function (f) of the

quality (q) of education received in the first period. Note that we rule out

both the existence of capital markets that allow individuals to borrow against

future earnings and of a technology (other than education) that allows

individuals to transfer period—one income into the future. 12

     We now     turn to a formal description of equilibrium. Define i    as the

fraction   of   those individuals with income yj that reside in community 1 and

   as the indirect utility of an individual with income yj that resides in

community j, i.e.,


     9Although in reality property taxes determine the level of spending on
local public goods in a community, we prefer not to introduce another market
(housing) and an additional source of distortionary taxation and to keep the
analysis more transparent instead. For multi—community models that explicitly
incorporate a land/housing market see, for example, Rose—Ackerman (1979),
Epple and Zelenitz (1981), Innan (1978), Epple, Filimon, and Romer (1984), and
Epple and Romer (1991). See, however, Henderson (1985) for a critique of the
literatures way of incorporating these markets.
     10Thus, unlike, for example, Benabou (1991) and de Bartolome (1990) we
are assuming there are no peer group effects.
     11The    extreme form of this assumption could easily be relaxed.
     12An equivalent formulation of our model is to commence with preferences
given by u(c)-*w(q) where c—y(l—t). This dispenses with dynamics and hence
with all assumptions about savings technologies.
                                      — a—




                       vj - u((l-tj)Yi)      + flu(f(q))       (2)

where tj and Sj are, respectively, the tax rate and quality level in community

j. Note that q is given by:

                               qj —   tjJtlP                    (3)

where    is the mean income in community j and thus equal to


                      r                                         (4)
                      b'2



     For a given profile of tax rates and educational quality across

communities, each individual is assumed to choose a community in which to live

taking as given the choices of all other individuals. Given each individual's

choice of residence, a community's tax rate t (and hence the quality of its

education) must correspond to that which would be chosen by its residents

through majority vote. That is, for t'e[O,l] to be the tax rate in a

community, there must be no tax rate te[0,l] which is preferred to t' by more

than 50% of the community's residentsj3

     An important issue in defining equilibrium is the nature of the

assumptions made by the voters upon choosing a tax rate. Here we assume that

communities are not "too strategic". That is, each individual's preferred tax

rate is chosen under the assumption that the composition of the community's

residents will not change as a result of the tax rate voted in, and taking as

given the other community's tax rate and quality of education. The equilibria

that these assumptions generate would also be subgame—perfect equilibria for a

two—stage extensive form game version of our model in which all individuals


           in all voting models with infinitesimal agents, there are always
equilibria generated by the fact that an agent's payoff is invariant to its
own voting action. We ignore these equilibria by assuming that agents vote
sincerely.
                                       —9—


simultaneously choose a community in the first stage, and the tax rate is

decided by majority vote in each community in the second stageJ4

     The preferred tax rate E(y;p) of an individual with income y in a

community with mean income p is implicitly defined by:15


                     u'(y(l—tfl—flf'(tp)u'(f(tp))p/y .               (5)

     If either i° or Pil Vi, then            we define the tax rate in the empty

community to be that given by (5) for y—y1—p (i.e. the preferred tax rate for

a y1 individual in a community with mean income equal to y1).

Definition 1: An equilibrium is an x*_(4,4,,c4,4,t4) such that:

(i) Taking x* as given, each individual chooses to reside in the community in

which her utility is highest, resulting at the aggregate level in

(ii) Taking all 4 and the tax rate in the other community as given, each

is a majority voting equilibrium for community j.

Lemma   1: In equilibrium no community is empty.
Vrpof: Suppose one community is empty. Then a y1 individual can always be

made strictly better off by relocating in this empty community where she

obtains her preferred tax rate at a higher mean income than in the other

community.
                                                                           *
     There is always a trivial equilibrium in this model given by p—.S for

all i and thus 4—4     (i.e.,   bothcommunities are identical). This is not,


     14With the notable exception of Epple and Romer (1991) , a similar version
of this extensive form is implicitly employed by the multi—community
literature. It would be of interest, but beyond the scope of this paper, to
also examine other extensive forms (i.e, alternative definitions of
equilibrium) that allow for mare strategic interactions between communities,
          are assuming an interior solution. u'(O)—" and f(O).0 are
sufficient conditions for this.
     16This is a mere technicality. There are many alternative definitions
that yield equivalent results.
                                        —10—


however, a particularly interesting equilibrium from the point of view of the

questions that we wish to pose. Furthermore, this equilibriun is unstablej7

There is, however, at this level of generality, a problem with obtaining the

existence of any other equilibrium. This problem is due to the tendency for

individuals to wish to reside with others that possess an income greater than

their own in order to obtain, for the same tax rate, a higher quality of

education than that obtained by living with individuals of the same or lower

income. In order to facilitate the existence and characterization of other

equilibria in this model, therefore, we impose the restriction on preferences

given by Assumption i).8

Assumption 1:

                    —
                        u"(c)c/u'(c)   > 1         V c               (6)

This assumption ensures that the increase in the income tax rate that an

individual is just willing to accept in return for any given increase in the

quality of education is an increasing function of the level of her period—one

income, for all quality—tax pairsj9

     In addition to (6), we assume the following joint condition on u and f:

Assumption 2:


                             82u(f(tp))        o         (t,p)   .   (7)


     17lnstability is discussed at greater length further on in the        paper.
     18westhoff (1977) provides the first use of this kind of condition to
obtain stratified equilibria. Similar versions of this condition have been
employed by Roberts (1977), Epple and Romer (1991) and Epple, Filimon and
Romer (1984).
     191n other words, the assumption implies that the slope of an
individual's indifference curves in q—t space increases with period—one income
for all (q,t).
                                          —11—


This condition implies that, when faced with an increase in p, the preferred

tax rate of an individual with a given income yields higher consumption in

both periods.20 The importance of Assumptions I and 2 will be made clear in

the following propositions.

ProDosition 1: Majority voting results in the preferred tax rate of the

individual with the median income within the community.

Proof: First note that, by (6), at/ôy>O (where E         is,   as defined in (5), the

preferred tax rate of an individual with income y in a community with mean

income es).       Next, by concavity of u, given a distribution of individuals

across communities each individual's preferences are single peaked with

respect to the tax rate in her community. Lastly, monotonicity and single

peakedness together imply that the preferences of the individual with the

median income in the community will be imposed as a result of majority vote.

      Essential to our analysis is the effect of changes in a community's mean

income on an individual's preferred tax rate and the implied quality of

education. Proposition 2 establishes these comparative statics results.

Prooosition 2: Let E be the preferred tax rate for an individual with income

y in a community with mean income p. Then E         is   decreasing in p and q—ts is

increasing in p.

Proof: Differentiation of (5) yields:


      dt —    —     fl(un(f(qflf2q+uf(f(qflfMq+ur(f(qflft)         C   0   (8)
                  u(y(l-Efly2+ flp2[u"(f(q))f'2+u'(f(qflf"]
and

                     flu'(f(gflf'-u"(y(l--EflEy2                  >        (9)
              u"(y(l-t))y2+   flp2[ua(f(q))fP2+ur(f(q))fu]



     20Given (6), a sufficient condition on technology to meet the requirement
specified by (7) is f'   (f/q) +        (f"f/q).
                                           This is satisfied, for example, if
f is log linear or quadratic (over the relevant region). Note that for the
alternative formulation of preferences given in footnote 12, Assumption 2 is —
                                             —12—




Note that (7) implies that the numerator in (8) is negative.

        As demonstrated in the following proposition Assumption 1 has strong

implications for the nature of the possible equilibria independently of the

mechanism chosen to translate individual preferences within a community into

tax rates.

Proposition 3: All equilibria in which communities have different qualities of

education must satisfy:

        Ci)
                  *   *     **
                (q1,t1)>>(q2,t2)

    (ii) The income of every individual in community one is at least as great

                as that of any individual in community two,

where community one has been defined arbitrarily as the community with the

highest quality of education.

Proof: (1.) If q1>q2 then necessarily t1>t2,         otherwise   all individuals prefer

community one to community two and, by Lemma          1, no community can be empty.
(ii) By (5) and (i), if an individual with income             prefers (q,4) to
              then so does every individual with income

        Thus,   in equilibrium, individuals are stratified into communities
according to initial income. One community (henceforth called Cl) will be
characterized by a higher tax rate, a higher quality education, and higher
income residents than the other (henceforth called G2). Note that

stratification is implied simply by Assumption 1 on preferences and by

individuals' ability to choose the community in which they wish to reside.

        We now establish that all non—stratified equilibria are unstable in the

sense    defined below.

w"(q)q/w'(q) >        1, i.e.   symmetric to Assumption 1.
                                    —13—


Definition 2: An equilibrium x*_(4,4ppp4,t) is locally stable if

there exists an (>0 such that for all      with ipç-4i<c

                          (pj_4)(V(r)_Vi(rfl0                  (10)

where r—(p1,p2p3) and Vj(r) is the utility enjoyed by an individual with

income Yj in community j given that the community's tax rate and quality of

education corresponds to that which would be chosen by majority vote within

the community for an allocation of the population specified by r.     If an

equilibrium is not locally stable, it is defined to be unstable.

     This definition states that for small perturbations of the equilibrium

distribution of individuals between communities at least some individuals

should wish to relocate to their original community.

Proposition 4: All locally stable equilibria are stratified.

Proof: Suppose not. Then there exists some stable equilibrium that is non—

stratified. Note first that all non—stratified equilibria must, by Propostion
         * *       * *
3, have q1—q2 and t1—t2. Thus, both communities have the same mean income

and the same median voter. Take the community with the greatest fraction of

   individuals (if both communities have equal fractions of y1 individuals,

arbitrarily choose a community). Call this community C2. Now perturb the

equilibrium by taking a small fraction of y1 individuals from C2 and

relocating them in Cl. Mean income in Cl now exceeds mean income in C2 and

the income of the median voter in Cl is now either the same or higher than

before, whereas that of the median voter in C2 is either the same or lower

than before. The possible change in median voter implies V(r)V(r).

Furthermore, by (8) and (9), the change in mean income implies Vi(r)>V(r).

Hence all non—stratified equilibria are unstable.II

     Proposition 4 establishes that all locally stable equilibria must be

stratified and hence are characterized by Proposition 3. Although (6) and (7)
                                     —14—


do not ensure the existence of a stratified equilibrium for all initial income

distributions and utility functions, we focus on those cases in which such an

equilibrium exists.21 The following proposition restricts the set of

equilibrium outcomes.

Proposition 5: Let x be a stratified equilibrium. Then,

    (1.) All y1 individuals reside in Cl.

   (ii) If 4(O,l) the median voter in Cl is &
                                                 y1 individual.
Proof: (i) Suppose not. Then C2 is inhabited by all three income groups and

Cl is inhabited only by y1 individuals. The median voter in Cl, therefore, is

necessarily a y1 individual. But then the utility of a y1 individual is

higher in Cl than in C2 since mean income is higher in the former and she is

obtaining her preferred tax rate there. (ii) Suppose not. Then a y2

individuaL must be the median voter in Cl. But then the utility of a

individual is higher in Cl than in C2 since mean income is higher in the

former and a y2 individual obtains her preferred tax rate there. Hence, no

individual would choose to locate in C2..Ij

     In view of Proposition 5 and Lemma 1, the two remaining candidates for

stable equilibrium are p3—O, p2c[O,l] and p3E[O,l), p2'-l.   The case we

consider to be of greatest interest and realism is that in which no community

is completely homogeneous.22 Consequently, we restrict our attention to

stable equilibria characterized by p3—O and p2E(O,1).

     In the heterogeneous community equilibrium just described, Proposition 5

implies that the median voter in Cl necessarily is a y1 individual. The


     211n fact, modifying the quality technology by adding a fixed cost of
producing education, it is easy to ensure the existence of a stratified
equilibrium for all non—degenerate income distributions and utility functions
(see ¶Jesthoff (1977).

     22furthermore, for any continuous income distribution (as considered in
Section 4) this is naturally the only possibility.
                                       —15—


median voter in C2, on the other hand, can be either a y2 or y3 individual.

Because most of our analysis is local, we will hold the identity of the median

voter fixed when we determine the effects of different policies on the

equilibrium. We will, however, examine the consequences for both possible

identities of the median voter in C2.

     The potential equilibria of the type specified above can be parametrized

by the fraction (p2) of the middle class that resides in the rich community,

Cl. To simplify notation we drop the subscript and call this fraction p.

Each choice of p determines the residents of the two communities and hence the

quality—tax pair for each community.          Let V(p) denote the utility of a

individual that resides in community j given that a fraction p of all y2

individuals reside in Cl. In equilibrium V(p) must equal V(p), i.e. an

individual with income y2 must be indifferent between residing in Cl and C2

given that a fraction p of     individuals reside in CI. Holding the

identities of the median voters fixed, a change in p affects the community

allocations solely through its effect on mean incomes. Thus, V3(p) is

decreasing in p.

     An equilibrium can be depicted graphically as an intersection of two

curves, 4(p) and V(p). There are two situations that may characterize a

point of intersection, depending upon which         curve is steeper at the

intersection. Figure 1 depicts both possibilities. It is easy to show that

the equilibrium depicted by point A in Figure 1 (and shown in isolation in

Figure 2) is locally stable whereas that depicted by point B is unstable.

     An equilibrium of the type depicted in Figure 2 exists if there exists a

p' and a p" such that for p">p' we have 4(p')>4(p') and

and the identity of the median voter is unchanged in the interval [p' ,p") .     In
the next section we examine the effects of various policies on an equilibrium
                                      —16—


of the type depicted in Figure 2. We consider solely marginal policies.

Consequently the identities of the median voters are kept constant throughout

the analysis. This implies that the      curves are continuous and downward

sloping in the neighborhood of the equilibrium, as shown in Figure 2. For

simplicity of exposition, much of the subsequent policy evaluation relies on

arguments using this diagram rather than on an algebraic analysis. The usual

problems of interpretation of comparative statics results in a model where

multiple equilibria may exist, however, remain.



3. Policy Analysis


(i) Subsidy Policies to Increase Residency in the Wealthy Community

     There are various policies in place in the US which attempt to increase

the exposure of lower—income individuals to the higher quality public services

provided by wealthier communities. This is arguably something that is

accomplished by policies that subsidize housing for low—income individuals in

richer communities, by the busing of school children across school districts,

etc.. We show that it matters very much which individuals are targeted by

these policies: subsidy policies that target y2 individuals make all

individuals in both communities worse off, whereas those that target
                                                                       y3
individuals are potentially Pareto improving.


(a). A Policy that Targets y2 Individuals

     Within the context of our model, a reasonable interpretation of the

policies described above is a subsidy to y2 individuals in Cl. We shall show

that this policy not only makes those individuals left residing in C2 worse

off which is not surprising in itself, but that it actually decreases the

utility of all individuals. On the other hand, as we show in section 3(U), a
                                      —17--



policy that subsidizes the residency of y2 individuals in the poorer community

may be Pareto improving.

     Consider, therefore, a marginal subsidy to those y2 individuals that

reside in Cl, postponing for now the issue of how to finance this policy. In

terms of Figure 2, this policy shifts the V curve upward and leaves the

curve unchanged since, for a given PS the utility of y2 individuals in C2 is

unaffected by such a policy. Consequently, the new equilibrium is

characterized by a higher p and a lower V2.

     The effect on V1 is not immediate from the induced shifts in the v4

curves. On the one hand, the subsidy to y2 individuals increases mean income

in Cl at the initial p (and therefore has a positive effect on V1). On the

other, however, the increased inflow of y2 individuals into Cl works to

decrease p   with   the opposite effect on V1. The net effect, nonetheless, is

unambiguous—p1 decreases. To see this, observe that had         increased or

remained constant, then the equilibrium V2 would also have increased since, by

Proposition 2, taxes would not have increased and quality would not have

decreased in Cl. In equilibrium V2 falls however, indicating that p must

also be lower and, therefore, that V1 also decreases.

     Independently, of whether a y7 or a      individual is the median voter in

C2, the decrease in the mean income in that community implies a higher tax

rate and a lower quality education. Consequently, V3 also decreases in

equilibrium. Thus, the new equilibrium is Pareto inferior to the zero subsidy

equilibrium and has higher tax rates and lower quality of education in both

communities than the original equilibrium. Given this outcome we do not

address the issue of how the subsidy is financed; in whatever way the needed

revenue is raised, it is clearly not beneficial to spend it on this type of

policy. The intuition underlying the above result is straightforward. The
                                       —18--



equilibrium prior to the reform is not efficient. Were it possible to simply

relocate y2 individuals from Cl to C2, all individuals would benefit. This

policy, however has the opposite effect on the allocation of y2 individuals

and consequently is Pareto worsening.


(b) .   A Policy that Targets y3 Individuals

        Consider next a policy that subsidizes the residency of y3 individuals in

Cl. The analysis of the effects of this policy cannot be conducted in terms

of the       curves since that diagram assumes that all of group y3 resides in

C2.

        Note first that the subsidy needed to induce any y3 individual to reside

in Cl (for any value of pe(O,l)) is less than y2—y3. To see this, note that

in equilibrium a y2 individual is indifferent between residing in either

community. Since a y3 individual's alternative to obtaining a subsidy by

residing in Cl is to remain with income y3 in C2, it follows that the subsidy

needed by a y3 individual to move to Cl is less than y2—y3. At the original

value of p, therefore, the effect of this policy is to decrease p1 (and hence

also '4 and Ill) and to increase '2 (and hence also '4 and V3). The induced

inequality in the level of utility enjoyed by y2 individuals across

communities implies that p must fall from its original level, which serves to

reverse the original decrease in      but further increases p2, 4, and V3.

The outflow of y2 individuals from Cl to C2, therefore, must be of a

sufficiently large magnitude that l in the new equilibrium exceeds that in

the original equilibrium (otherwise the inequality between the utilities of

individuals across communities would persist).23 In particular, the outflow


     23This discussion presupposes that an equilibrium with p*c(O,l) will
continue to exist with the policy intervention.
                                      —19—


of y2 individuals from Cl must exceed the inflow of y3 individuals. The new

equilibrium, therefore, is characterized by greater mean incomes in both

communities and, consequently, by an increase in the level of utility of all

individuals (irrespective of the identity of the median voter in C2).

     Before concluding that the above policy is Pareto improving, we must

discuss how this subsidy can be financed. One tax policy that serves to

reinforce the Pareto improving nature of the subsidy is a tax on

individuals in Cl.24 Such a policy increases the outflow of y2 individuals

from the wealthy community, thereby contributing to the positive effects of

the subsidy policy.25


(ii) A Policy to Increase Residency in the Poor Community

     We now consider instead a policy that subsidizes (marginally) the

residency of y2 individuals in C2.26 Assume, as in the previous subsection,

that the subsidy is financed by a tax on those y2 individuals that choose to

reside in Cl. In terms of Figure 2. this policy has the effect, for a given

p, of shifting the '4   curve down and the '4 curve up resulting in a decrease

in the equilibrium level of p and an increase in V2. This policy also

benefits y1 individuals since the fall in p increases mean income in Cl,

implying a lower equilibrium tax rate and a higher quality level there.

     If a y3 individual is the median voter in C2, the subsidy policy makes
                                                                              y3
individuals better off since, by Proposition 2, the increase in C2's mean

income implies a lower equilibrium tax rate and a higher quality of education


     24The tax imposed to finance education is assumed to be levied on the
pre—subsidy tax income.
     25Taxes levied on other groups have ambiguous welfare effects in general.
     26Similar to the analysis in 3ib, one can show that a subsidy to
individuals in C2 is Pareto improving.
                                     —20—


in C2 also. Consequently, in this case a policy that subsidizes the residency

of y2 individuals in C2 is Pareto improving.

      If, however, a y2 individual is the median voter in C2, the effect on V3

is ambiguous. On the one hand, for any given tax rate the increase in mean

income in C2 makes all individuals in that community better off. On the other

hand, the y2 median voter responds to the change in her income and in C2's

mean income by voting in a different tax rate. By (5), the sign of the change

in the tax rate depends on the magnitudes of the changes inboth y2's income

and in the community's mean income. A lower tax rate increases '13; a higher

tax rate decreases V3. In the latter case the net effect on V3 is ambiguous

since the increase in mean income works to increase y3 welfare but the greater

tax rate reduces it.

      The intuition behind the results of this policy is similar to that given

in 3(i).27 Now, however, the policy helps to allocate individuals more

efficiently since it increases the incentive for y2 individuals to locate in

C2.




(iii) A Cap on the Quality of Education in the Wealthy Community

      Some states have implemented policies that in effect place a cap on the

quality of public education of their richer communities. The effects of such

policies can be studied in our model by analyzing a restriction on the quality

of education in Cl to some level q1 (or, equivalently, a restriction on the

level of spending on education per student). This restriction is assumed to

be binding at the original equilibrium level of quality in Cl.


     27Note, however, that a subsidy to y2 individuals in C2 is not equivalent
to a tax on y2 individuals in Cl (see section 3ia).
                                       —21—


     In terms of Figure 2, a (marginally binding) cap on the quality of

education in Cl shifts the 4 curve up in the vicinity of the original

equilibrium. To see why, note that at the initial level of mean income Cl

must institute a lower tax rate than previously in order to reduce the
                                                                         quality
of education to its maximum allowed level. This decrease in the tax rate is

preferred by y2 individuals since, for the same mean income, they desire a

lower tax rate than y1 individuals. Thus, the new equilibrium is

characterized by a greater p and a decrease in V2. Note that in the new

equilibrium the quality cap must be binding. If it were not, the V curves

would be unchanged and would thus yield the original equilibrium.

     The consequences of the quality cap policy are somewhat surprising.

Although at the initial p the y2 individuals in Cl are better off than before,

the resulting outflow of y2 individuals from C2 lowers       and decreases mean

income in Cl. The decrease in p1 allows Cl's tax rate to increase which

serves to lower the utility of y2 individuals in Cl. Thus, the new

equilibrium is characterized by a higher p. a decrease in quality in both

communities (q—1), a higher tax rate in C2, and a decrease in
                                                                 V1. V2 and
V3.28 Note that this conclusion holds independently of the identity of the

median voter in CL Thus, this policy results in a Pareto inferior

equilibrium relative to the policy of zero cap.


(iv) A Floor on the Quality of Education in the Poor Community

     Next we consider a policy that mandates a (marginally) higher quality of

education, 2' in C2. We assume that at the original equilibrium q2<2 so

that at the initial p this policy requires a higher tax rate in C2. Note


     28The effect of this policy on
                                      t1
                                           is   ambiguous.
                                       —22--.




that, as in the previous policy analysis, the quality constraint must be

binding in the new equilibrium.

     The identity of the median voter in C2 determines the direction in which

the curves in Figure 2 shift in response to this policy. If y3 is the median

voter, the tax increase at the original p moves the tax rate in C2 closer to

one preferred by a y2 individual, thus increasing V at the initial p.      If,

however, y2 is the median voter, the forced tax increase decreases the utility

of a y2 individual in C2 at the initial p. Hence, the V curve shifts up in

the former case and down in the latter. We analyze each case separately.

     Given y3 as the median voter in C2, the new equilibrium is characterized

by a decrease in p, an increase in the quality of education of both

communities (q-'2), a lower tax rate in Cl, a higher tax rate in C2, and an

increase in V2. V1 is also greater (since mean income in Cl increases), but

the effect on V3 is ambiguous. Whereas the higher tax rate at the initial

mean income decreases their welfare, the increase in mean income in C2 makes

them better off.

     If, instead, y2 is the median voter in C2, the new equilibrium is

characterized by an increase in p and a decrease in V2. The increase in p

implies that       individuals are likewise worse off than before since mean

income in CL falls, As in the previous case, two factors affect V3. Now,

however, they both serve to decrease V3 since mean income falls and the tax

rate is increased. Consequently, when y2 is the median voter in C2 a policy

that mandates an increase in the quality of education in C2 makes all

individuals worse off.

     The above disparity in results stems entirely from the fact that the tax

increase has opposite effects on y2's utility in C2 (at the initial p)

depending on the identity of the median voter in that community. If y3 is the
                                       —23—


median voter, a y2 individual prefers a higher tax rate for the same mean

income than that chosen by the community. Consequently, a small tax increase

raises    relative to    and generates a y2 inflow into C2, thereby

increasing mean income in both communities with the attendant beneficial

effects. In the case of a       median voter, the move away from this group's

preferred tax rate causes a y2 outfow into Cl, thereby decreasing mean income

in both communities and all individuals' utilities.


(v) Redistributive Tax Policy

     We now explore the effects of some redistributive tax policies on the

equilibrium of the model. We consider two policies: one that redistributes

from the wealthiest to the poorest individuals (i.e. from       to )'3). and the

other that redistributes from the wealthiest to the poorest community (i.e.

from Cl to C2). Both policies are in place in many states.



(a). Redistribution From the Wealthiest to the Poorest Individuals

     We consider a policy that places a proportional tax r on the income of

individuals and distributes the proceeds in a lump—sum fashion to
                                                                     y3
individuals. We assume that 4    is   levied on y1, not on y1(l—r) but that t

is levied on y3+ry1(A1/A3). We analyze the two components of this

redistributive policy separately, beginning with the transfer of income to y3

individuals.

     Consider, therefore, a situation where y3 increases and y1 and y2 remain

unchanged. Independently of the identity of the median voter in C2, the

curve shifts upward and the     curve is left unchanged resulting, in

equilibrium, in a fall in p and an increase in V2. In the new equilibrium

mean income has increased in both communities. Thus, by Proposition 2, the
                                    —24—


utility of all three groups is higher as is the quality of education in both

communities.

     Next consider a proportional tax r solely on the income of y1

individuals, assuming for now that the resulting revenue is simply discarded.

At the original equilibrium tax rate y1 individuals have the same second—

period consumption but lower first—period consumption. Consequently1 they

prefer a lower tax rate which, at the initial level of p. is also closer to

the rate preferred by y2 individuals in Cl. Thus, the 4curve shifts up and

the V curve is left unchanged. The new equilibrium is characterized by a

higher p and a lower V2. Since mean income falls in both communities, so do

V1, V3 and the quality of education in both communities.

     Combining the two components of the redistributive tax policy suggests

that the net effect on utility and on the quality of education is ambiguous.

Two different effects are at work here. First, the community composition

effect given by changes in p affects all individuals' utilities in the same

direction (i.e. V increases (decreases) as p decreases (increases)). Second,

   individuals are worse off due to r and y3 individuals are better off

because of the transfer. Intuitively, for this tax policy to be Pareto

improving p must decrease by a sufficient amount to offset the negative effect

of r on y1 individuals. Although one can obtain analytic expressions for

changes in utilities and p, these expressions are not particularly

illuminating. A numerical example serves to illustrate some of the outcomes.

The specification and results are shown in Table 2.

     Panel A reports percent changes in utilities, in p. in total spending on

education (E), and in educational quality in each community. For higher

values of y2, this policy makes y1 individuals worse off but all other

individuals better off, whereas for lower values of y2 all individuals are
                                     —25—



made better off. The table shows that as y2 decreases, the responsiveness of

p increases1 resulting in a greater outflow of y2 individuals from the rich

community.

     Table 2 also indicates changes in spending on education. In this      example
when y1 individuals are made worse off, total spending on education increases

although quality increases in the poor community and decreases in the rich

community. When the policy is Pareto improving1 quality increases in both

communities and the ratio of quality in the poor to rich neighborhood

increases. Increases in quality for both communities need not imply that

total spending on education increases (since the poor community is becoming

relatively larger) and, in fact, in these examples it decreases.


(b). Redistribution From the Wealthy to the Poor Community

     We now consider a policy that taxes the income of all individuals in Cl

at rate r and distributes the proceeds lump sum   to   all individuals in C2.29
As indicated by our previous arguments (see also (3.ib)), the effect of this

policy on the equilibrium is ambiguous. Intuition suggests, however, that

this policy should have a larger impact on the movement of y2 individuals from

Cl into C2 since the tax directly affects their relative incomes in the two

communities.

     Panel B presents results for the same example used in panel A. In all

cases the tax is Pareto improving, lowers total spending on education, and

increases the quality of education in both communities. This is in accordance

with the intuition expressed above since the greater the p response, the more

likely it is that this policy is Pareto improving. One difference between


         policy that stipulates that the funds be used to finance education in
C2 produces the same qualitative results.
                                      —26—


this and the previous policy, however, is that in all cases the increase in

quality in the wealthy community exceeds that in the poor community in

percentage terms, implying that inequality as measured by the ratio of

qualities is increased by this policy.



4. Continuous Income Distributions

     While the assumption of only three income types is a useful

simplification, it is important to determine whether the results of the

preceding section are robust with respect to changes in this feature. This

section assumes a continuous distribution of income types and examines how the

effects of the policy reforms of section 3 carry over to this setting.

     Note that Propositions 1,3 and 4 do not depend on the 3—type discrete

income distribution; they are valid for any continuous income distribution.

A stratified equilibrium, therefore, is now characterized by an income level

y such that C2 contains all individuals with y4, and Cl contains all

individuals with y>. Individuals with income        reside in either community.

Each choice of ,   henceforth   called the boundary individual, implies tax

rates and education qualities for the two communities. If           is the

utility attained by the boundary individual conditional upon residing in

community j, equilibrium requires

     An important result in the earlier analysis was given by Proposition 2:

keeping the median voters constant, increases in p imply a higher tax rate and

a lower quality of education in both communities. This result reflected the

effect of a change in a community's mean income on allocations holding median

income constant, With a continuous income distribution the effect of the

induced change in the identity of the median individual within a community can

no longer be ignored even for marginal reforms. Letting y denote the median
                                             —27—


income in a community with mean income p and majority vote tax rate

differentiation of equation (5) yields:


    dt* A($/3) —         fl[u"(f(gflf'2q+u'(f(g))f"q+u'(f(q))f'](ap/a)
                         A   *a2
                    uTM(y(l—t ))y + fip
                                        2         2                               (1)
                                          [u"(f(qflf' +u'(f(qflf"
               A —                        A    *   *A2      —
         — pA(3y/ay) — (flu' (f(qflf'p—u"(y(l—t ))t y ](Bp/Oy)            >
     —               A       *A2    2                                            (12
    dy            u"(y(l—t fly + fiji   (u"(f(qflf' 2 +u'(f(qflf")
                      *A      *A         *A
where A. —     (u((l—t )y)(l—t )y+u'((l—t )y)]        C 0.

         Note that both mean and median income in each community are increasing in

.        The denominator in these expressions is identical to the one in (8) and

(9) and is negative. The numerators, however, now contain an additional term,

A, which by Assumption 1 is negative. Although expression (12) is therefore

always positive, the numerator of (11) cannot be signed without additional

assumptions. Previously condition (7) implied the effect on the tax rate of

a marginal increase in p was positive. Now a stronger condition is required

to ensure that the effect of the change in mean income on the tax rate

dominates the effect of a median voter with a greater income. Henceforth we

impose dt*/d so that, as in the previous section, an increase in mean income

brought about by a small change in the identity of the border individual

decreases a community's equilibrium tax rate.

         Given our above assumption, VgG) is an increasing function of j.               The

intersection of the V,() curves define an equilibrium. As before, we focus

only on stable equilibria as depicted in Figure 3. Two examples illustrate

how the policy reforms of section 3 carry over to this setting.

         First consider a cap on quality in the wealthy community. This shifts

the        curve up in the vicinity of        and leaves the         curve unchanged,

decreasing the equilibrium value of .               The quality of education falls in
                                     —28—


both communities (quality in Cl is equal to its capped level). The tax rate

in C2 is unambiguously higher. Hence, all individuals in C2 are made worse

off (i.e. those individuals with yj* , where a prime refer to the new

equilibrium value of the variable). The welfare effect for individuals in Cl,

however, is more complex. If t'e4      then   this policy, as before, is

unambiguously welfare worsening for all individuals in Cl. If, on the other
         *   *
hand, t1'<t1 (which is possible since the initial equilibrium tax rate was

lowered to meet the quality constraint) then although those individuals with

      are worse off, there may be individuals with y(* ,y1)        that    are

made better off due to a (t,q) bundle is now closer to their preferred one.

     Consider now the policy of the previous section that subsidized

individuals to locate in Cl. A similar policy in the present context would be

to subsidize those individuals in C2 with an income in a small neighborhood of

     Ignoring the financing of this subsidy, this policy induces a

discontinuity in the      curve, shifting it upward in the neighborhood of

Consequently, the new equilibrium is characterized by a lower value of ,

higher   taxes and a lower quality of education in both communities.

Obviously, all individuals that do not move as a result of this subsidy policy

are worse off than before. Some individuals that move to Cl and receive the

subsidy, however, may be better off. Although this last possibility indicates

a slight weakening of the result obtained in section 3 (where this policy was

Pareto dominated by a zero subsidy policy), it is at most a fraction of those

individuals who move that Day be made better off since one can show that the

boundary individual in the new equilibrium is strictly worse off and thus, by

continuity, so are individuals with incomes only slightly greater.
                                     —29—


S. Conclusion

    Making use of a simple multi—community model we obtain strong predictions

about the impact of several policies on community tax rates, qualities of

education, the allocation of individuals across communities, and welfare. We

summarize our main findings below.

     Policies that subsidize the location of particular individuals in

specific communities have very different effects depending both on the income

group and the community targeted. Whereas subsidizing middle income people to

locate in the wealthy community reduces the welfare of all individuals and

lowers the quality of education in both communities, a subsidy to locate

lowest income individuals in the wealthy community can make everyone better

off and raise the quality of education in both communities. A policy that

subsidizes the residency of middle income individuals in the poor community is

Pareto improving and increases the quality of education in both communities.

     Many states have attempted to deal with inequality in per pupil spending

across communities by requiring that rich communities spend less and/or poor

communities spend more. We find that a policy that limits spending in the

rich community has negative consequences: the quality of education in both

communities decreases and all individuals are made worse off, Interestingly,

the effects of a policy that mandates greater spending on education in the

poor community depend critically on the identity of the median voter in that

community. If the median voter is a middle income individual, then all

individuals are made worse off.   If, on the other hand, the median voter is a

poor individual, the policy may increase all individuals' utilities.

     A significant finding of our analysis is that a large number of policies

produce the same qualitative welfare effect for all individuals. This is

surprising since, given heterogeneity of individuals and the redistributive
                                    —30—


nature of the policies considered, one might have expected most policies to

generate both winners and losers. Community composition effects play a key

role in obtaining this consensus. The equilibrium distribution of individuals

between communities is inefficient in the absence of intervention; policies

that affect the equilibrium allocation of individuals, therefore, can make all

better off.

     The analysis was deliberately carried out in a simple framework in order

to facilitate an understanding of the interactions of some of the basic forces

at work. The model as is captures several important features of the context

in which expenditures on primary and secondary education are determined in the

US: individuals differ in income, decision—making on educational finance

occurs largely at the local level, and households are mobile across

communities, Of course, many factors were left out and would be of great

interest to examine in future analyses. Prominent among these are: (i) the

existence of a private alternative to public education,3° (ii) the ability of

communities to render themselves more impermeable to the inflow of low income

individuals (through zoning, for example),31 (iii) different strategic

interactions among communities, (iv) dynamic considerations,32 Cv) the

existence of a housing market, (vi) an endogenous determination of the number

of communities, and (vii) interactions between state (or federal) and local

policies.




     303ee Stiglitz (1974) and Clomm and Ravikumar (1992) for interesting
analyses although not in the context of a multi—community model.
     31'See Hamilton (1974).
     32See Durlauf (1992)
                                     —31—


                                   References




Benabou, R.  "Workings of a City: Location, Education, and Production," mimeo,
MIT, (1991).

Benson C. and O'Halloran K., "The Economic History of School Finance in the
              ,


United States," Journal of Education Finance 12 (Spring 1987), 495—515.

Berne, R., "Equity Issues in School Finance," Journal of Education Finance 14
(Fall 1988), 159—180.

Card, 0. and A. Krueger, "Does School Quality Matter? Returns to Education
and the Characteristics of Public Schools in the United States", Journal of
Political Economy 100 (1992), 1—40.

Coleman, J. et al, Equality of Educational Opportunity. Washington:
Goverrunent Printing Office, (1966).

de Bartolome, C., "Equilibrium and Inefficiency in a Community Model With Peer
Group Effects," Journal of Political Economy 98 (1990), 110—133.

Durlauf, S., "A Theory of Persistent Income Inequality", uiimeo, Stanford,
(1992).

Epple, 0., Filimon, R., and T. Romer, "Equilibrium Among Local Jurisdictions:
Toward an Integrated Treatment of Voting and Residential Choice," Journal of
Public Economics 24 (1984), 281—308.

Epple, 0. and T. Romer, "Mobility and Redistribution," Journal of Political
Economy 99 (1991), 828—858.

Epple, D. and A. Zelenitz, "The Implications of Competition Among
Jurisdictions: Does Tiebout Need Politics," Journal of Political Economy 89
(1981), 1197—1217.

Glcmm, C. and Ravikumar, "Public vs. Private Investment in Human Capital:
Endogenous Growth and Income Inequality," forthcoming, Journal of Political
Economy.

Guthrie, J.W. ,"United States School Finance Policy, 1955—1980," Educational
Evaluation and Policy Analysis 5 (Summer 1983), 207—230.

Hamilton, B., "Zoning and Property Taxation in a System of Local Governments,"
Urban Studies 12 (1975), 205—211.

Inman, R. ,"Optimal Fiscal Reform of Metropolitan Schools: Some Simulation
Results,", American Economic Review 68 (1978), 107—122.

Kozol, J., Savage Inequalities, New York: Crown   Publishers,   (1991).
                                    —32—


Roberts, K.W.S., "Voting Over Income Tax Schedules," Journal of Public
Economics 8 (1977), 329—40.

Rose—Ackerman, S., Beyond Tiebout: Modeling the Political Economy of Local
Government," in Zodrow, G.R. ad., Local Provision of Public Services: The
Tiebout Model After Twenty—five Years, (Academic Press), (1983), 55—83.

Rose—Ackerman, S., "Market Models of Local Government: Exit, Voting and the
Land Market," Journal of Urban Economy 6 (1979). 319—337.

               "The Economics of the Local Public Sector," in Ad, Auerbach
Rubinfeld, 1). •
and M. Feldstein, eds., Handbook of Public Economics, vol.2, (Elsevier Science
Publishers North Holland), (1987), 571—645.

Stiglitz, J.E., "The Demand for Education in Public and Private School
Systems," Journal of Public Economics 3 (1974), 349—385.

Stiglitz, J.E. , "The Theory of Local Public Goods," in Feldstein, H. and R.P.
Inman, eds. • The Economics of Public Services, (Macmillan, London), (1977),
274—333.

Westhoff, F., "Existence of Equilibria in Economies With a Local Public Good,"
Journal of Economic Theory 14 (1977), 84—112.

Wise, A.E. and T. Gendler, "Rich Schools, Poor Schools: The Resistance of
Unequal Education," The College 3oard Review 151 (Spring 1989), 12—17 36—37.
A




    3

                     a




              ,,2.
              VII—


        v:.
                         e

        2..
         'I' 7)




I
S




S




                  -S
                  >,
7*


     3
                                   Table One

               Expenditures Per Pupil in Several School Districts




  New Jersey, 1988—89    New York City Area,    1989—90   Chicago Area, 1988—89


 Princeton        7725    Great Neck           15594      Niles Township   9371
 Summit           7275    Marihasset           15084      New Trier        8823
 /est Orange      6505    Jericho              1435S      Glencoe          7363
 Cherry Hill      5981    Mount Vernon         9112       ¶4lnnetka        7059
 Jersey City      4566    Roosevelt            8349       Wilmette         6009
 East Orange      4457    New York City        7299       ChIcago          5265
 Paterson         4422
 Camden           3538




Source: Kozol (1991)
                              Table Two Simulation Results




A. Tax on        individuals


                                         7. change in
                                                    p         E
                        V1        V2       V3


          .2           -.62      .34      .65       .23       .04   —.06    .06

          .4           -.48      .48      .95     —.01        .04   —.04    .09

          .6            .04      .94     1.87     —.62    —.12       .01    .18




B. Tax on community one


                                         'A change in




                        1.0      .84      .85      —2.4      —.36    .12    .09

                        1.0      .84      .86      -2.0      —.35    .12    .09

                        1.7      1.5      1.5      -2.6      —.77    .19     14




Notes:


Specification in all cases is u(c)ca/a, i(q)=q. with y1l, y3=.95y2, —10.

(3=5,    A=L20, .35,   .45).Percent changes correspond to change from t=O to t.001.
