NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNCERTAINTY, INVESTMENT, AND
INDUSTRY EVOLUTION

Ricardo J. Caballero

Robert S. Pindyck

Working Paper No. 4160

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1992

This research was supported by M.I.T. 's Center for Energy Policy Research, and by the
National Science Foundation through Grant No. SES-8618502 to R. Pindyck and Grant No.
SES-9208896 to R. Caballero. Caballero also acknowledges financial support from the Sloan
Foundation and the National Bureau of Economic Research (through an Olin Fellowship). Our
thanks to Brian Sliker for making available his data set on U.S. manufacturing industries, and
to Yunyong Thaicharoen for his outstanding research assistance. This paper is part of NBER's
research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper# 4160
September 1992

UNCERTAINTY, INVESTMENT. AND INDUSTRY REVOLUTION

ABSTRACT

We study the effects of aggregate and idiosyncratic uncertainty on the entry of firms, total

investment, and prices in a competitive industry with irreversible investment. We first use
standard dynamic programming methods to determine firms' entry decisions, and we describe
the resulting industry equilibrium and its characteristics, emphasizing the effects of different

sources of uncertainty. We then show how the conditional distribution of prices can be used as
an alternative means of determining and understanding the behavior of firms and the resulting

industry equilibrium. Finally, we use four-digit U.S. manufacturing data to examine some
implications of the model.

Ricardo J. Caballero
Department of Economics
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER

Robert S. Pindyck
Sloan School of Management
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER

1 Introduction.
Most investment expenditures are at least in part irreversible, i.e., are sunk costs that cannot
be recovered should market conditions change adversely. As a result, the cost of making an

investment includes not only the expenditure itself, but also an opportunity cost associated

with comrniting resources rather than waiting for new information to arrive. A growing
literature has shown how this opportunity cost can be evaluated, and demonstrated that it is
highly sensitive to uncertainty over future project values, so that changing market conditions
that affect the riskiness of future cash flows can have a large impact on investment spending.

These results emphasize the role of uncertainty as a determinant of investment spending,
and suggest that policies that reduce volatility (over, say, exchange rates, prices, or interest

rates) may lower the required cost of capital.'
In most of the recent literature, the emphasis is on the investment decisions of an individual firm, rather than industry-wide investment and growth, and uncertainty is modelled
by introducing an exogenous state variable (e.g., a demand or cost shift parameter, the price

of the firm's output, or the interest rate) that follows some stochastic process. However,
similar effects of uncertainty on investment can be found at the industry level. The reasons
for these effects, however, may not be the same.
What always matters for investment are the distributions of future values of the marginal

revenue product of capital —

if these distributions are symmetric (and the firm is risk-

neutral), increasing uncertainty will not affect investment. For a monopolist, irreversibility

causes the distributions to be asymmetric because the firm cannot disinvest in the future
if negative shocks arrive; hence the firm invests less today to reduce the frequency of bad
outcomes in the future (i.e., the frequency of situations in which the firm has more capital

than desired). On the other hand, in a competitive industry with constant returns to scale,
1McDonald and Siegel (1986) were among the first to demonstrate the implications of irreversibility for
investment decisions. Other examples of this literature include Bertola and Caballero (1990) Dixit (1989b),
Maid and Pindyck (1987), and Pindyck (1988). For an overview, see Dixit (1992) and Pindyck (1991). The
earlier literature on investment under uncertainty, e.g., Hartman (1972) and Abel (1983), demonstrates how
uncertainty will increase the expected value of a marginal unit of capital if the marginal revenue product of
capital is a convex function of the stochastic variable (an implication of Jensen's inequality), and thereby
increase investment.

the distribution of future marginal revenue products is independent of the firm's current

investment. But this distribution is not independent of industry-wide investment if the
elasticity of demand faced by the industry is less than infinite.
As a result, when studying irreversible investment in an industry context, it is important
to distinguish between aggregate (i.e., industry-wide) and idiosyncratic (firm-level) shocks.

To see this, consider idiosyncratic and aggregate shocks to productivity that are both symmetrically distributed. Although either type of shock might affect the expected future market

price and hence the expected tharginal revenue product of capital, the idiosyncratic shocks

will lead to a symmetric probability distribution for the marginal revenue product.2 Aggregate shocks, however, will not; although negative shocks can reduce the market price,
positive shocks will be accompanied by the entry of new firms and/or expansion of existing

firms, which will limit any increases in price. As a result, the distribution of outcomes for
individual firms is truncated; negative shocks to productivity will reduce profits more than
positive shocks will increase them, and irreversible investment will be reduced accordingly.3
An important objective of this paper is therefore to clarify the different mechanisms through

aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks interact with irreversibility in a competitive industry.
Uncertainty affects irreversible investment in two ways — first, through the effect of the

firm's current investment on the expected path of its marginal revenue product of capital,
and second, through the effects of competitors' investment on the path of the firm's marginal

revenue product. Caballero (1991) has shown that with constant returns to scale, the importance of the first effect decreases as the demand curve facing the firm becomes more elastic,

as long as the uncertainty is firm-specific. However, this does not mean that industry-level
uncertainty will not affect industry investment and output in a competitive equilibrium. As
shown by Pindyck (1992), irreversibility will have the same type of effect on industry invest-

ment as it would for a monopolist once one allows for entry of new firms or the expansion of
existing ones. The reason for this is that irreversibility combined with the possibility of entry
2For simplicity, we sce ignoring the effect of uncertsinty through the convexity of the msrginsl revenue
product of cspitsl, as stressed by Hsrtmsn (1972).
3This is an example of the 'bad news principle" discussed by Bernanke (t983).

2

affects the distribution of marginal revenue products seen by each individual firm. Hence
another objective of this paper is to fully characterize the distribution of marginal revenue
product and its evolution, and show how that distribution affects entry, investment, and the
price level itself.

Our work extends and complements recent work by Dixit (1989a), Leahy (1991), and
others. Dixit characterizes industry evolution in the presence of aggregate uncertainty by
using dynamic programming methods to determine the entry and exit decisions of individual

firms of discrete size. Leahy models an industry equilibrium in which price is endogenous,

and shows that under reasonable assumptions, it is optimal for individual firms to make
their investment decisions under the myopic assumption that price follows an exogenous

lognormal random walk.4 In the first part of this paper we follow an approach similar
to that used by these authors, but emphasizing the effects on entry of different sources
of uncertainty. We then go on to show how the conditional distribution of prices can be

used as an alternative way to characterize the behavior of individual firms, and thereby
determine the industry equilibrium. This provides insight into the nature of an equilibrium
with irreversible investment.
We examine the different effects of idiosyncratic and aggregate uncertainty using a simple

model of a competitive market in which firms have constant returns to scale and there is
a sunk cost of entry. In the next section, we frame the model as a dynamic programming

problem, and we obtain a solution and examine its properties. In Section 3 we re-frame
the problem in terms of the conditional distribution of the marginal revenue product. We

calculate the time path for this distribution, and show how it provides additional insight
into the effects of uncertainty on investment and industry evolution. In Section 4 we use
four-digit U.S. manufacturing data to examine some of the implications of the model, and

to gauge the importance of uncertainty for industry investment. Section 5 concludes, and
discusses some possible extensions of our work.
41n related studies, Lippman and Rumelt (1985) model a competitive industry equilibrium with free
entry and exit, and Dixit (1991) characterizes the equilibrium for a cnmpetitive industry with irreversible
investment and a price ceiling.

3

2 A Stylized Model.
We begin by constructing a highly stylized model in which the value of a marginal unit of

capital is stochastic and exogenous. For simplicity, we formulate the model in a way that
eliminates the conventional positive Jensen's inequality effect of uncertainty on the value

of a marginal unit of capital that arises from the endogenous response of variable factors
to exogenous shocks. This lets us focus on the way in which the effects of uncertainty are
mediated through the equilibrium behavior of all firms.

We consider a market with a large number of "productive units." Each productive unit
might he a single firm, or individual firms might each own several productive units. These

productive units are industry specific, so that their installation involves a sunk cost. Entry

occurs when new productive units are added, either because new firms invest and enter

the market, or existing firms invest in new capacity. What matters is that idiosyncratic
shocks apply to these productive units individually, i.e., the units all have the same expected

productivity, but will have randomly differing realized productivities.5 To clarify the ways

in which uncertainty affects investment, we will assume that the owners and managers of
these units are risk-neutral.6

We will assume that these productive units are small enough and the number of them is

large enough so that we can represent them as a continuum whose mass at time

is N(.t).

Total industry output, Q(t), is given by:

Q(t) = j

NO)

A1(t)di

(1)

where A(t) is the output of productive unit i at time 1. The A1's are assumed to follow arbitrary and possibly correlated exogenous stochastic processes. We decompose these individual

productivity variables into two parts, their average (the aggregate) and the remainders:

A(t) = A(t)a1(i),

NO)

such that f

cs(i) ds = N(t).

could think of these productive units as coffee trees, where each firm can plant one or more trees.
While the expected productivity of each tree is the same, the realized productivity of each tree will differ.

6Then the investment rules we derive maximize firms' values in a competitive financial market, whether
or nut idiosyncratic or aggregate shocks are spanned by the set of traded assets in the economy.

Here A(t) is the average productivity of the industry, so that Q(t) = A(t)N(t), and a,(i) is
the productivity of unit i relative to that of the industry as a whole.
We allow for one idiosyncratic and two aggregate sources of uncertainty. First, we let a(t)

and A(t) follow separate stochastic processes, so that productivity has both an idiosyncratic
and an aggregate component. Second, we introduce another source of aggregate uncertainty

through the industry demand curve. Industry demand is taken to be isoelastic:

P(t) = M(t)Q(t),

(2)

where M(i) is an exogenous stochastic process that captures aggregate shocks. We will
assume that M(t) follows a diffusion.

The measure of industry size, N(t), increases with entry and decreases with "failures,"

i.e., the (involuntary) removal of productive units. We assume that the latter occurs at an

exogenous proportional rate y. At the level of an individual unit, a "failure" is a Poisson
arrival, and the intensity of the Poisson process is -y.7 Alternatively, we could have assumed

a deterministic depreciation rate -y that applies to all units; our results (from eqn. (4) below
onwards) would be the same.
To introduce irreversibility, we assume that entry of a productive unit requires a sunk cost

F. Free entry determines that there are no profits to be made by adding another productive

unit to the industry, so that:

F E {E0 [J°° P(i)A,(i)e6t dt] } ,

(3)

which holds with equality at all times in which there is entry. The parameter 5 is the discount

rate. Note that the expectation E is over all unit-specific uncertainty, which includes the
stochastic productivity process a,(t) as well as the Poisson failure process for each unit. The

expectation E0 is over the distribution of the future marginal revenue product of capital,

P(t)A1(), and therefore accounts for the possible (irreversible) entry of new productive
units. As will become evident, the ability to enter the industry reduces the probability of
71t would be more realistic, of course, to make the Poisson arrival rate depend on the age of the specific
unit. ifowever, that complicates the model but adds little additional insight.

5

good outcomes by truncating the upper part of the distribution for the aggregate component

of P(t)A(t), namely P(t)A(t).
By Fubini's theorem and the construction of A(t) we can pass the expectation operator
E, inside the integral in eqn. (3), so that it reduces to:

F E0 [j P(t)A(t)e5t dt] .

(4)

Note that the only idiosyncratic effect that remains in (4) is the failure rate y, and this
is now indistinguishable from an industry-wide depreciation rate. Because the value of the
output of each unit is linear in the output-specific stochastic state variable, we can eliminate

all other idiosyncratic elements from the right-hand side of eqn. (3). This is an extreme
result, and it holds because we have assumed that there is no selective entry; i.e. potential
entrants cannot choose the distribution for their idiosyncratic shock.

Since Q(t) = A(t)N(t), we can use the market demand equation to construct a measure
of the value of output for an average productive unit. Letting B(t) denote the average value
of output:

P(1)A(t) =

B(t)

M(t)A(t)N(t)*

(5)

Because the industry size N(1) is endogenous, B(t) will follow a regulated stochastic pro-

cess. where N(t) regulates B(t). Letting lower case letters represent the logarithm of the
corresponding variable, we can write:

diog B(t)

db(t) = dm(t)

l1I

+ (2---- da(t) — !dn(t).

(6)

7)

In order to obtain analytical results that can be used to illustrate the implications of

different sources of uncertainty, we will make the simplifying assumption that the aggregate

stochastic state variables follow geometric Brownian motions. Thus, we write the dynamics

of m(t) and a(t) as:
dns(i)

dt + mdzm(t)

(csm —

da(t) = (. —

dt +

odz(t)

(7)

(8)

We will also assume that the Wiener processes dzm(t) and dz(t) are uncorrelated. (It is easy

to relax this assumption.) Then B(t) will follow a particularly simple regulated geometric
6

Brownian motion. Specifically, B(i) will remain at or below a fixed upper boundary. This

fixed boundary, which we denote by U, is yet to be determined as part of an industry
equilibrium. Regulation is due to entry; when this is not occurring, n(t)

log(N(t)) will

follow:

dn(t) =
and b(i) is given by:

db(i) = f3di + odz(i),

(9)

where

9=
Ti

Ti

and

_______________

= sJ+ (2__)o.
This model is simple enough so that we can find a closed form solution for the optimal
investment rule, i.e., for the upper boundary U. (Later we will see how the entire problem

can be recast in terms of the conditional distribution of marginal revenue product.) Let
W(x) denote the value of entering the industry at t =
W(x) =

0

when b(0) = x, so that B(0) = ez:

j e''Eo[B(i)IB(O) = e] di.

(10)

By arbitrage, over an interval dt, the total expected return from being in the industry
must be equal to (6 + 'y)Wdi. This expected return has two components, an expected
capital gain, E0dW, and a flow of revenue B(0)dt =

exdt.

By Ito's Lemma, E0dW =

f3W'(x)dt + W"(x)di, so W(z) must satisfy the following differential equation:

oW"(x) + $W'(z) —(5 + 7)W(x) +? = 0.

(11)

In addition, W(z) must satisfy the following boundary conditions:

lirnW(z)=0,

(12)

and

W'(u)=0,
7

(13)

where u = logU. Boundary condition(12) follows from the fact that 0 is an absorbing
boundary for B. Condition (13) is the value matching/smooth pasting condition that holds
at the trigger point
The reader can check that eqn. (11) has the following simple solution that satisfies the
associated boundary conditions:

W(x) =

e
5+/2
2

where

—

eY/A

(14)

2
5+-——b/2

______________

(15)

o.2

A sufficient condition for the existence of this solution is that the discount rate be large

enough so that the value of a unit remains bounded even if entry into the industry were
prohibited throughout the future. Specifically, we require that 5 +

8> m + 1(a —

y)

—

— — o/2 > 0, i.e.,

This ensures that A> I.

We can now determine U, the upper boundary of B(t). If we had-solved this as a central

planning problem, we would determine U from the first-order ("super contact") condition

that W"(U) = 0. Instead, we will follow Leahy (1991) and use the free entry condition,
which in this case is F = W(u). Hence:

= --(S +

--.

(16)

Because of free entry, E0 j° B(t)e_(&4_h)tdt = F, where t = 0 is the time of entry. Since

U

E0[B(t)] for all t and U > E0[B(t)] for all t > 0, we know that E0fg° Ue&)tdt > F.

This is a result of irreversibility; there is an opportunity cost of investing now rather than

waiting for new information. If firms could "uninvest" and recoup the cost F, we would
instead have the standard Marshallian result that E0 f'° U&(o1)tdi = F.
For simplicity of exposition, in what follows we will assume that aggregate productivity

is constant, so that a, = = 0. (Note that then o = o,,.) Recall that am and o represent
the mean and the standard deviation of the rate of growth of revenue per productive unit
averaged over the industry when there is no entry. With tedious calculation, one can show

that 8(U/F)/dob > 0 and d(U/F)/dcrm < 0. A smaller value of am raises U/F because
S

given any value of U/F, it implies a lower expected price and therefore less entry is needed

to satisfy the zero profit condition. (This is discussed further below.) A higher value of o,
raises U/F by increasing the opportunity cost of investing, and thereby raising the threshold

required for a firm to commit the sunk cost F. But note that it is only aggregate uncertainty
that matters; U/F is unaffected by idiosyncratic shocks. Figure 1 shows this dependence of

U/F on cs,, and cb.

One can also show that ô(U/F)/ > 0, and ô(U/F)/ô6 > 0. An increase in the
elasticity of demand, q, implies that the potentially positive effect of the failing units on

the price is reduced. This lowers expected revenue flow and hence raises the threshold
required for investment. An increase in 5 likewise raises the threshold by directly lowering
the expected present value of returns and by increasing the opportunity cost of investing in

the unit now, rather than waiting and discounting the expenditure F, As for o(U/F)/o, the
discounting effect described above again holds (capital depreciates faster when 'y is larger).
However, there is an offsetting effect from the increased depreciation of the capital of other

firms, which tends to raise the expected industry price as seen from the time of entry. The
first effect dominates for most reasonable parameter values.

We can now describe the behavior of industry investment, output, and price in equilibrium. Suppose, for example, that aggregate demand increases. Then entry of new productive

units will occur, so that price will rise only to the point that P(t)A(t) = U. Figures 2A, 2B,

and 2C illustrate this by showing a particular sample path for industry'evolution for two

values of a,,,, .15 and .30. (In this simulation, the other parameters are i = 2, am

a, = 0',, = 0, y = .03, 5 = .06, and F = 100.)

.02,

The top graph shows the log of the stochastic

driving force, rn(t). (The realization for z(t) is the same for the two lines, but the values
of a are different.) Figure 2B shows the log of the number of productive units, n(t). Note
that when m(t) is falling (e.g., between t =

12

and 18), there is little or no investment, so

n(i) falls due to failures (or depreciation). For i > 18, in(t) is generally rising, and so entry
occurs and n(t) rises.
Figure 2C shows the realization for the log of price, p(L). Note that p(t) appears station-

ary; that is because we have set a = o, = 0 for all t, so that A(t) =
9

1

always. (Hence price

is equal to the average revenue per productive unit, which is the relevant state variable for
the decision-making unit. In the more general case, b(t) would follow the same pattern as in

Figure 20, and p(t) would be the sum of b(t) and a Brownian motion.) As the figure illustrates, during "recessions," i.e., when rn(t)

is

falling, price will also fall, and will fall farther

when Cb is larger. But during "good times," p(t) is generally higher when Ub is larger- The

reason is that with a larger c, there is a greater chance of deeper "recessions," so during
"good times" firms wait longer before entering, n is smaller, and p is higher.
Underlying all of these results is a forecast of future revenues by firms that are considering

entry. In fact, this forecast (which must take into account entry by other firms) completely

determines the decision to enter. Hence, looking directly at the expected value of future
revenues, and their dependence on the underlying parameters, helps to understand industry

evolution. We turn to this in the next section.

3 The Price Distribution and Entry.
In the previous section we found the optimal investment rule in the standard way — by
using dynamic programming to calculate the the firm's value function. In general, this
approach is useful in that studying the local (in time) behavior of the value function allows

one to fully characterize complex dynamic problems. Problems in which the optimal or
competitive outcome consists of regulating a Brownian motion, as in the model developed
in the previous section, are good examples of this. Value matching, smooth pasting and the
Bellman equation are all intuitive properties arising from this local analysis.

However, dynamic programming sometimes conceals the economic intuition as to how

changes in parameters affect optimal policies. For example, eqn. (10) defined the value

function, W(x), as the expected present value of the flow of marginal revenue product.
Thus, any effects of changes in the variance or drift parameters on the value function, and

therefore on the optimal investment rule, must come through their effects on either the
path of the expected marginal revenue product or the discount rate. Those effect, however,

remained somewhat hidden in our solution to the problem in the previous section. In this

10

section we look at the expected path of marginal revenue directly and show how it is affected

by the underlying parameters.8
To do this, we need to derive the conditional probability density for b, which we denote
by f(b, t). Since we know that a firm will enter only when b(t) = u, we can replace x by u in

eqn. (10). Hence f(b, t) is the probability density of Ii at a time t from the moment of entry,

conditional on b(0) = u. As mentioned above, any effects of parameters such as /9 and o
on the entry point u and hence on price will occur through their effects on the path of the
density f(b, t), and in particular on the function:

E[B()IB(0) = U) =

logU

L

c6f(b,t)db.

This expected value begins at the moment of entry at U, and then converges over time to
the ergodic mean (see below):

lirnE[B(t)B(0) = U] =

22flU•

(17)

If the discount and depreciation rates are small, we can accurately describe the impact of
drifts and uncertainty on the equilibrium entry point, U, by determining their impact on the

ergodic mean. It is straightforward to see that

rises with 9 and falls with c; thus, by

the free entry condition, U must fall with /9 and rise with o,.
If the discount and depreciation rates are large, the problem is more complicated because

we cannot use the ergodic density to construct the right-hand side of (10). Instead we need

to account for the whole path of f(b, t). (Intuitively, we know that f(b, t) must start as a
spike at u when t =

0,

and as i increases it must converge smoothly to the ergodic density.)

Because b(i) follows the diffusion equation (9), f(b,t) must satisfy the Kolmogorov forward
equation:

f(b, t) = ofo&(b, t) — /3fb(b, t)

(18)

(See Karlin and Taylor (1981).) Since b(t) is regulated at u, the solution to this equation
8The effects of the discount rate are straightforward. We are not proposing that dynamic programming
be replaced by the approach used in this section. Rather we are trying to explain more fully why irreversible
Investment is depressed by industry-wide uncertainty.
11

must satisfy the following boundary conditions for t > 0:

f(u, i) =

(19)

lirnf(b,t) =0,

(20)

as well as the initial condition:

jf(b,0)db

(21)

{

In Appendix A we derive the solution for f(b, t) and show that it implies the following path
for the expected marginal revenue product:

E[B(i)B(0) = U] = U

[2/3 + et/2 f A(z)et/2 dz],

(22)

where

(z)

z1/2

(/32/4)(/32/42/3/21)

(23)

We now substitute eqn. (22) back into eqn. (10) evaluated at x = ti, which yields:

o,
(5+y)
where
—

2/3

= +2fi +

2(8-i-y) i _________________
J

(24)

The first term in the expression for (.,.,.) summarizes the impact of the various parameters
on the ergodic mean, while the second term encompasses the the transition from the value of

marginal revenue product at entry and its unconditional (ergodic) mean. Clearly, the latter
will be relatively more important when firms give more weight to the short run, i.e. when

(8 + ) is large.
Given ( ), the value of U can be found, as before, from the free entry condition:

U=F

c,

.

(25)

One can check (numerically) that eqns. (16) and (25) are equivalent. We have again arrived

at an expression for U (and thus the optimal investment rule), but this time by deriving the
path for the expected marginal revenue product and utilizing the free entry condition.
12

Figure 3a shows E[B(t) B(0) = U]/U as a function of time for o1, = .10, .15, and .20. (As

before, the other parameter values are y =

.03,

am =

0.02,

= 0, O = 0, i

= 2, 5 = .06,

and F = 100.) Observe that with a higher value of o, E(B(t)IB(0) = U]/U falls farther.
Because of the irreversibility of investment, the boundary U rises, but larger fluctuations
in demand lead to periods of lower prices, so the ratio falls. Also, while the decline in this

variable is greater when o is large, it must fall farther, so that it takes longer to approach
its steady-state value.
Figure 3b shows E[B(t)IB(0) = U] for the same three values of . (Note that all of the

curves intersect the vertical axis at U.) If the discount rate S and depreciation rate were
zero, these curves would all converge to the same value, and would not cross each other.
The reason is that with no discounting, only the long-run steady-state matters, and not the

transition to that steady-state. Different values of o would result in different values of U
such that the resulting ergodic means for the marginal revenue product would be the same.
With discounting, however, the transition matters, so that the curves cross.

4 Investment in U.S. Manufacturing.
In this section we use data for two- and four-digit U.S. manufacturing industries to obtain

measures of the key variables in our model. We then use the cross-sectional variation of

these measures to examine the implications of the model, and to gauge the quantitative
importance of uncertainty and irreversibility for investment.

Two implications of our model are particularly important. First, if an industry is reasonably competitive, it is aggregate uncertainty that should have the greatest effect on the

trigger point U at which firms enter or expand their existing capacity. As shown earlier,
this is because when investment is irreversible, aggregate uncertainty affects the distribution

of prices faced by all firms, so that positive and negative shocks have an asymmetric effect

on each firm's profits; shocks that are specific to a single firm, on the other hand, have
symmetric effects on that firm's profits.9 Second, the effect of uncertainty on investment is
9Such shocks can still affect investment, whether or not It is irreversible, but only insofar as they alter

13

mediated through its effect on the trigger point U. Increased uncertainty will increase U, so

that firms require a higher marginal profitability of capital (and hence rate of return) before
they are willing to invest. Hence tests of models of irreversible investment, and attempts to
measure the effects of uncertainty, should be based on the behavior of U.
Unfortunately we cannot observe U directly. However, conditional on assumptions about

the production technology and market structure, we can estimate our marginal profitability
variable, 2(t), at least up to a scaling factor. As shown below, we can then use our estimates

of 2(2) over certain intervals as a proxy for U.
Assuming the industry is competitive and the production function is Cobb-Douglas with

constant returns to scale, we can express the output of a (price-taking) productive unit as:

Y(t)

A1K,aL_d)Ml_)(l_a)

(26)

where a is the share of capital, and is the share of labor in a labor-materials composite
which we will denote by H. Then, the marginal profitability of capital is given by:

a)' (HPu) p(I-a}/c
1/c

= a(1 —

(27)

where P1 is the price of output, and PH is the price of the labor-materials composite.

The marginal profitability of capital in this case is the value of output for an average

productive unit, i.e., 2(2). We will work with b(t) = log 2(1), which (again letting lower
case letters represent logs of the corresponding variables) is given by:
1

b(t) = log [a(l — a)1 —al/c] + —[in — (1 — a)hj — a/ct]

—

1—cs

—PH,t

1

+ —Pt.

(28)

We focus on investment and the marginal profitability of capital for 20 two-digit manu-

facturing industries. For each of these industries, we use data on the real value of output,
real inputs of capital, materials, and labor, and the corresponding price deflators to obtain
a time series for 1(1) over the 29 year period 1958—1986. We cannot measure b(t) for the
individual firms in these industries; instead we calculate a comparable series for b(t) for each

of 443 four-digit subsectors that make up the two-digit industries. We denote these series
the expected marginal revenue product of capital (as in the models of Hsrtman (1972) and Abel (1983)).

14

by b2(t) and b4(t) respectively. This approach is consistent with our model insofar as the

price elasticities of demand for the outputs of the four-digit industries are large relative to

those for the two-digit ones, and allows us to obtain measures of aggregate and idiosyncratic uncertainty and gauge their overall importance for investment with only moderate
data requirements. The data and the calculation of the b(t)'s are discussed in Appendix B.1°

Recall that b2(t) is a regulated process, but when it is below the boundary u = logU
it follows the Brownian motion of eqn. (9), which has a stochastic term ilbdz(i) that incorporates both demand and productivity shocks. We estimate

directly from our time

series for b2(t). Specifically, we calculate sample standard deviations of b2(i) for each of the

20 two-digit industries, which we denote by SDB2; this is our measure of aggregate uncertainty. Next, we calculate sample standard deviations of b4(t) for each of the 443 four-digit

industries, and then average them across those industries that make up the corresponding
two-digit industry. These numbers, denoted by SDB4, are the measures of total (aggregate
and idiosyncratic) uncertainty at the relatively disaggregated level of four-digit industries.11

These numbers are shown in Table 1. Observe that the average four-digit standard
deviation is typically two or three times as large as the corresponding two-digit standard
deviation; as we would expect, there is more idiosyncratic than aggregate uncertainty over

the marginal profitability of capital.'2 The two-digit standard deviations are on the order
of 10 percent per year (consistent, for example, with the annual standard deviation of real

returns on the New York Stock Exchange Index of 20 percent per year and an average
debt/equity ratio of one). Also shown are the cross-sectional sample standard deviations
of the four-digit SDB4's corresponding to each two-digit industry. Note that the standard
deviations vary considerably across both four-digit and two-digit industries. \Ve can exploit

this variation to determine the impacts of SDB2 and SDB4 on investment.
'°We used a data base assembled by Brian K. Sliker, who graciously made it available for our use. We
included only 443 of the 450 four-digit SIC industries because of missing data in seven of the industries.
UOur estimator SDB2 is biased downwards from the true standard deviation because b() is a regulated
process. Eqn. (9) applies when it is not regulated, but our sample standard deviations include periods of
regulation.

t2Let SDB1 denote the standard deviation of idiosyncratic shocks. Then SDB1 =
SDB4 = .2 and SDB2 = .1, SDB, = .17.

15

SDB22. If

Changes in the volatility of b3() should not affect investment directly; instead they should

affect the trigger point u. Although u is not observable, we can use extreme values of b2(t)

as a proxy; since u is the upper barrier for b3(i), b2(t) should be close to u when it is large

relative to its average value. We use three variables, all computed relative to the industry
mean of b(t), as measures of u at the two-digit level: (i) the maximum of b3(t) over the 29
years of data, denoted by DBMAX; (ii) the average of the top decile (three observations) of

the 29 annual values of b3(t), denoted by DBDEC; and (iii) the average of the top quintile
(six observations), denoted by DBQUINT. We average over several extreme values and use

DBDEC and DBQUINT rather than just DBMAX because b2(t) may in practice rise above
u temporarily if there are lags in investment, if there are predictable temporary increases in

or if firms do not always optimize. We compute these variables relative to the mean
because b(t) is identified only up to a constant, which may differ across sectors.'3

Table 2 shows cross-section regressions of DBMAX, DBDEC, and DBQUINT against
SDB2, SDB4, and a constant. These regressions are consistent with a basic prediction of the

model — that aggregate uncertainty should have the greatest effect on the trigger point u
(arid hence on investment). The coefficient of SDB2 is much larger than that of SDB4, and

is significant at the 5 percent level when DBDEC or DBQUINT is the dependent variable.

Also note that both the R2 and the t-statistic on SDB2 increase as we average over more
extreme values of b(t) when constructing our proxy for u.
One problem wtth these regressions is that a higher standard deviation in the distribution

of b's will by itself imply an increase in the extreme values of b even if the model were not

yalid. To deal with this possibility, we generate alternative measures of u based on the
behavior of investment itself. We calculate and order a series for iK(t), the change in the

real capital stock, and (for each industry) find the Ii for which iK(t)

is

a maximum. We

then take b(t,), subtract the mean of b(i), and use the resulting number as a proxy for u.
We denote this by DBKMAX. We then find the times t,, 12, and 13 corresponding to the
iSNote from eqn. (17) that u minus the mean oft is affected by uncertainty in the same qualitative way
as is u ,tself, because the mean is much less sensitive to uncertainty than is u. When the discount rate is
zero, the mean of I is unaffected by uncertainty.

16

three largest values of K(t), and again fiod and average the corresponding values of b(t);
the resulting variable is denoted DBKDEC. Finally, we generate DBKQUINT using those
b's corresponding to the top quintile of the AK's.
Table 2 shows regressions these investment-based measures of u on SDB2 and SDB4.
Neither volatility variable is significant when DBKMAX or DBKDEC is the dependent variable, but SDB2 is significant (and the 112 increases dramatically) when DBKQUINT is used.

This again supports the notion that aggregate uncertainty has the greatest effect on the
investment threshold.

We can use these results to gauge the effect of uncertainty on investment. We will
focus on the regressions in Table 2 in which DBQIJINT antI DBKQUINT are the dependent

variables, because these have the highest R2's, most significant coefficients on SDB2, and

are more robust (although downward biased) estimates of U. The coefficients on SDB2
provides measures of the semi-elasticity A log(U/F)/Au6. These two regressions put this
semi-elasticity in the range of 1.2 to 1.8. Thus an increase in the annual standard deviation
of the marginal profitability of capital at the two-digit level from, say, .1 to .2 should increase

the required return on investment by 12 to 18 percent (so that if the required return was 30

percent, it should rise to about 34 or 36 percent). This is a sizable but not overwhelming
effect of uncertainty. It is consistent with the simulated elasticities of the model illustrated

in Figure 1, but is less than predictions based on analyses of individual projects, e.g., by
McDooald and Siegel (1986), Majd and Piodyck (1987), and others.

5 Conclusions.
In a competitive equilibrium, uncertainty over market demand or average productivity affects

irreversible investment through the feedback of industry-wide capacity expansion and new

entry on the distribution of prices. If demand increases, existing firms will expand or new

firms will enter until the market clears. From the point of view of an individual firm, this

limits the amount that price can rise under good industry outcomes. But if investment is
irreversible, there is no similar mechanism to prevent price from falling under bad outcomes.

17

Each firm takes price as given, but knows that the distribution of future prices is affected
by the irreversibility of investment industry-wide, which leads it to raise the trigger point at

which it is willing to invest. Idiosyncratic shocks, which affect only an individual firm, do
not induce entry and thus should have less impact on the firm's willingness to invest.

We have tried to clarify these channels through which aggregate and idiosyncratic un-

certainty affect investment and industry evolution. Our model is simple enough so that it
can be solved using standard dynamic programming methods, but we have emphasized the

effects of uncertainty on the conditional distribution of prices, and shown how this distribution can be derived and used as an alternative means of determining and understanding

the behavior of firms and the resulting industry equilibrium. We have also seen that the
basic implications of the model are roughly consistent with the data for U.S. manufacturing

industries, and we have obtained estimates of the semi-elasticity A log(U/F)/Acs that are
moderate in size but plausible.
It is useful to compare our model with standard NPV models of investment based on the

CAPM. In those models, it is systematic (economy-wide), and not non-systematic uncertainty that affects the discount rate. In our model, aggregate uncertainty, which is related to

but not the same as systematic uncertainty, increases the trigger point, which corresponds
to a higher required rate of return. Thus the mechanisms are very different, but the effects
of different sources of uncertainty are similar as in NPV-CAPM models. We have ignored
CAPM effects; they will magnify the effects of aggregate uncertainty that we have derived.

Our model is highly stylized, and makes a number of simplying assumptions. Some of
them are important and should be kept in mind when interpreting our results. First, if there
is a flexible factor, or if the firm can costlessly and temporarily shut down when price falls

below variable cost, the marginal profit function will be convex in price and in exogenous
productivity. Then for an industry of fixed size, an increase in idiosyncratic uncertainty will

raise the present value of an additional unit of capital, and so to preserve the zero-profit
condition, the trigger point at which entry occurs must decline. In this case, idiosyncratic
uncertainty can lead to an increase in investment.

Second, we have ignored abandonment. Suppose a productive unit can be scrapped at
18

any time for some positive scrap value. This sets a floor on the value of the unit; once
the combination of price and the productivity of the unit (which includes an aggregate and
idiosyncratic component) reaches the point at which the unit's value equals this scrap value,

it will be scrapped. This possibility raises the value of the unit for any combination of price

and expected productivity, which lowers the entry point u, and hence reduces the effect of
aggregate uncertainty described by our model. Also, an increase in idiosyncratic uncertainty

will raise the value of the unit. The reason is that potential entrants cannot know what their

relative productivity will be until they enter. However, exit is done selectively, i.e., when
idiosyncratic productivity is low ex post. Selective exit raises the value of a unit, lowering

the critical cutoff point for entry. Hence a scrap value alters the effects of both aggregate

and idiosyncratic uncertainty. It reduces the negative effect of aggregate uncertainty and
creates a positive effect of idiosyncratic uncertainty. Also, the combination of faster entry
and the incentive to exit when conditions are bad tends to reduce the variability of price.'4
A price floor will have an effect similar to that of a scrap value, but only for aggregate
uncertainty. It also reduces the negative effect of aggregate uncertainty on entry by limiting

one of the two possible reasons for bad aggregate outcomes. (Bad aggregate outcomes that

are due to a decline in average industry productivity are still possible.) However, a price
floor will not alter the effect (or lack thereof) of idiosyncratic uncertainty.

'4This is strictly correct only when A(t) is stationary (possibly around a deterministic trend) since other.
wise the variance of price becomes infinite. But even if A(t) had a stochastic trend component, the statement
would hold for finite intervals.
19

Table 1 — Basic Statistics for Two- and Four-Digit Industries
SIC

NOB

SDB2

MEAN of SDB4

SD of SDB4

20
21
22
23
24

47
4
30
33

0.058
0.104
0.118

0.246

0.162
0.567

0.076
0.168
0.125
0.113

0.304

25

17
13

26
27
28
29
30

17
17

28

0.088

5

0.201

6

31

11

32
33
34
35
36
37
38

27
26
32
44
39
15
12

0.127
0.093
0.099
0.250
0.123
0.160
0.147
0.184
0.105

39

20

0.109

0.451

0.366
0.327
0.258
0.217
0.192
0.224
0.256
0.242
0.231
0.236
0.506
0.277
0.301
0.264
0.403

0.061

0.220
0.255

0.192
0.124
0.091
0.144
0.075
0.135
0.110
0.063
0.134
0.084
0.124
0.385
0.121
0.097
0.095
0.135
0.076
0.079

Note: NOB is the number of 4-digit industries in each 2-digit industry; "MEAN of SDB4"
is the cross-sectional sample mean of the 4-digit sample standard deviations of b(t) corresponding to the 2-digit industry; and "SD of SDB4" is the cross-sectional sample standard

deviation of the 4-digit sample standard deviations of b(i) corresponding to the 2-digit
industry.

20

Table 2 — Cross-Section Regression Results
Dependent Var.

Const.

SDB2

SDB4

R2

DBMAX

-.0070
(.0913)

1.864
(1.078)

0.454
(0.611)

.264

DBDEC

-.0073
(.0675)

2.269
(0.881)

0.091
(0.419)

.296

DBQUINT

.0041
(.0488)

1.873
(0.615)

0.019
(0.294)

.359

DBKMAX

.0794
(.1173)

.4420
(1.087)

-.0019
(.6055)

.025

DBKDEC

.0569
(.1097)

.6310

-.0105
(.4979)

.083

(.9229)

1.2147
(.3934)

.0962
(.2324)

.469

DBKQUINT

-.0478

(.0765)

Note: SDB2 is the sample standard deviation of b(t) = log B(t) for each 2-digit industry,
and SDB4 is the average sample standard deviation of b(t) for the 4-digit industries that
comprise the 2-digit industry. Standard errors corrected for héteroscedasticity are shown in
parentheses. A denotes significance at the 5 percent level.

21

Appendix
A. The Density Function and Conditional Expectation of B(t).
Let

i

b — u,

and g(y, t) be the density of , at time t, so that f(b, t) = g(b — u, t). In this

setup, finding the path of the conditional density of b(t) amounts to solving the problem
defined below by (Al) to (A.6):

g(y, t) = gyy(y, t) — 9gy(y, t),
g(0,1) =

(A.1)
(A.2)

g5(0,t),

lirng(y,t) = 0,

(A.3)

g(y,t)0

(A.4)

jg(y,t)dy = I

Vt 0,

fo x<0

J9(y,0)dy = 1 i x=o

(A.5)

(A.6)

A solution to a similar problem, although with a different initial condition, can be found
in Bertola and Caballero (1990). Here we only outline the basic steps of the solution, which

is obtained by the method of Separation of Variables.

Writing the solutions of the homogeneous problem as: g(y,t) = T(t)Y(y), decomposes
the problem into two ordinary differential equations:

T'(t) + AT(t) =
Y"(y) —

4Y'(y) +

0,

(A.7)

= 0,

(A.8)

subject to the boundary conditions above, with \ a constant. The solution method has the
following steps: First, find the values of \ for which the homogenous problem has a solution.

Second, characterize each of these solutions. And third, combine these solution to satisfy
the in-homogenous initial condition.

22

The characteristic equation of (A.8) has real solutions for .X

98/4, where 9 2$/o. It

is easy to verify that the only real solution that satisfies the homogenous boundary conditions

occurs when ) = 0, which yields the particular solution:

Y(y;.\ = 0) = 0e°.

(A.9)

On the other hand, there is a continuum of solutions for values of \ > 0f3/4, which take the
form:

Y(y;) = B(')e"

(A.10)

(cosi' + sini)Y)

where
—

faA

02

4

The coefficients B() are identified by the initial condition, yielding:

B() =

(All)

2432

Combining (A.9), (A.1O) and (All) we obtain the solution for g(y,t):

g(y, t) 0e +

j

(

cos

y + sin

d.

(A.12)

The expression for the conditional expectation shown in the text is is now easily obtained

by solving the integral in the expression:

E[B(t)IB(0) = Uj =

uf

e5g(y,t)dy.

B. The Data and Calculation of b(t).
Our raw database was originally developed by Brian K. Sliker at M.I.T., and is used with his

permission. We calculate b(t) based on eqn. (28) using two- and four-digit SIC data for the

real value of output (ROUTPUT), real inputs of capital (RIo, materials (RMAT), and labor hours (TOTHRS), and the corresponding price deflators. TOTHRS is the sum of hours

for production workers (PWHRS) and and non-production workers (NPWHRS), where
the latter is estimated as the product of non-production worker employment (NPWEMP)
and average hours per employee for production workers (the mean of PWHRS/PWEMP).
23

We calculate the labor and materials shares by setting aj. and M equal to the mean
values of TLC/N OUTPUT and NMAT/NOUTPUT respectively, where TLC is total labor
costs, NMAT is the nominal value of materials inputs, and NOUTPUT is the nominal value

of output. Letting = UL/(aL + OM), we then compute the Solow residual:
at

where y = log(ROUTPUT), h

= — (1 — QK)ht — OK/Ct,

= + (1 — )mt, 1, = log(TOTHRS), mt = log(RMAT),

and k = log(RK). Finally, b(s) is given by:

b(t) =

log [ci —
K
—

+ (1/aK)at
[(log TLC — 1) + (1 —

24

)log PMAT — log POUTPUT].

References
Abel, Andrew B., "Optimal Investment Under Uncertainty," American Economic Review,
March 1983, 73, 228—33.

Bernanke, Ben S., "Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Cyclical Investment," Quarterly Journal
of Economics, Feb. 1983, 98, 85-106.

Bertola, Ciuseppe, and Ricardo Caballero "Irreversibility and Aggregate Investment," unpublished, Princeton University, 1990.
Caballero, Ricardo J., "Competition and the Non-Robustness of the Investment-Uncertainty
Relationship," Amencan Economic Review, March 1991.

Dixit, Avinash, "Hysteresis, Import Penetration, and Exchange-Rate Pass-Through," Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1989a, 104, 205-228.
Dixit, Avinssh, "Entry and Exit Decisions under Uncertainty," Journal of Political Economy,
June 1989b, 97, 620-638.

Dixit, Avinash, "Irreversible Investment with Price Ceilings," Journal of Political Economy,
June 1991, 99.

Dixit, Avinash, "Investment and Hysteresis," Journal of Economic Perspectives, Winter
1992, 6, 107-132.

Hartman, Richard, "The Effects of Price and Cost Uncertainty on Investment," Journal of
Economic Theory, Oct. 1972, 5, 258-266.
Karlin, Samuel, and Howard M. Taylor, A Second Course in Stochastic Processes, New York:
Academic Press, 1981.

Leahy, John, "The Optimality of Myopic Behavior in a Competitive Model of Entry and
Exit," Discussion Paper No. 1566, Harvard University, August 1991.
Lippman, Steven A., and R. P. Rumelt, "Industry.Specific Capital and Uncertainty," unpublished, UCLA, Sept. 1985.
Majd, Saman, and Robert S. Pindyck, "Time to Build, Option Value, and Investment Decisions," Journal of Financial Economics, March 1987, 18, 7—27.

McDonald, Robert, and Daniel R. Siegel, "The Value of Waiting to Invest," Quarterly Journol of Economics, Nov. 1986, 101, 707-728.

Pindyck, Robert S., "Irreversible Investment, Capacity Choice, and the Value of the Firm,"
American Economic Review, Dec. 1988.
25

Pindyck, Robert S., "Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Investment," Journal of Economic
Literature, September 1991.

Pindyck, Robert S., "A Note on Competitive Investment Under Uncertainty," American
Economic Review, forthcoming, 1992.

26

FIG 1: DEFENDENCE OF u/F ON ob AND m
0.22
fl

0. S

fl1

0. 2
0.10

0.0. 0.08 0.12 0.16 0.20 0.24 0.28 0,32 0.36 0.40
Cb

6.0

6.4

7.2
6.8

8.0
7.6

8.4

8.4

8.8

9.2

2 10.0
9.6

1O.4
a'

11.2
10.8

4

4

8

8
16
time

20

12

FIG.

20:

16

time

LOG

OF PRICE

time

...

=

20

FIG. 28: LOG OF NUMBER OF PRODUCTIVE UNITS

12

FIG. 2A: LOG DRIVtNG FORCE

S.

24

•.•

24

:
28

28

Gb

= 15

= .30

32

2

0

0.096

0.108
0.104

0.112

0.116

0.120

0.70

0.74

0.78

20.82

0.86

1.02

\

2

4

6

8
10

time

E(B[t]I8(0)=U)

time

—

3A: E(BCtJIB[O)=1J)/IJ

FIG. 3B:

FIG.

12

—

—

_

14

—

abO.15
a=O.2O
16

