NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONSPICUOUS CONSUMPTION, PURE
PROFITS, AND THE LUXURY TAX

Laurie Simon Bagwell
B. Douglas Berheim

Working Paper No. 4163

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1992

The work reported here was supported by the National Science Foundation through Grant # SES9110211. The first author would also like to acknowledge the support of the Hoover Institution.
The authors would like to thank Kyle Bagwell and Scott Brandwein for helpful discussions. A
previous draft of this paper was circulated under the title Conspicuous Consumption, Pure Profits,
and the Luxury Tax: Some Surprising Consequences of Perfect Competition." This paper is part

of NBER's research program in Public Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4 163
September 1992
CONSPICUOUS CONSUMPTION, PURE
PROFITS AND THE LUXURY TAX

ABSTRACT

We examine a model of conspicuous consumption and explore the nature of competition in
markets for conspicuous goods. We assume that, in addition to intrinsic utility, individuals seek

status, and that perceptions of wealth affect status. Under identifiable conditions, the model
generates Veblen effects: utility is positively related to the price of the good consumed. Equilibria

are then characterized by the existence of "budget' brands (which are sold at a price equal to
marginal cost), as well as 'luxury" brands (which are sold at a price above marginal cost, despite
the fact that producers are perfectly competitive). Luxury brands are not intrinsically superior to

budget brands but are purchased by consumers who seek to signal high levels of wealth. Within
the context of this model, an appropriately designed luxury tax is a non-distortionary tax on pure
profits.

Laurie Simon Bagwell
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208

B. Douglas Bernheim
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER

1. Introduction
In his celebrated treatise on the "leisure class," Thorstein Veblen [1899] argued that
wealthy individuals often consume highly conspicuous goods and services in order to advertise

their wealth, thereby achieving greater social status.

Veblen's writings have spawned a

significant body of research on "prestige" or "status" goods.' It is readily apparent that the

desire for prestige continues to influence the demand for certain consumer products. The
automobile industry provides several examples. A recent article in the Wall Street Journal noted

that "a BMW in every driveway might thrill investors in the short run but ultimately could

dissipate the prestige that lures buyers to these luxury cars" (Aeppel [1992]). In contrast,
Suburu attempts to combat the prestige factor; its recent advertisements suggest that "if your car

improves your standing with your neighbors then you live among snobs."
Recent incarnations of Veblen's theories often proceed from the premise that the utility

derived from a good is positively related to its price (see e.g. Leibenstein [1950], Braun and
Wicklund [1989], or Creedy and Slottje [1991]). Indeed, a positive relationship between utility

and price is often equated with the notion of conspicuous consumption, and is commonly
referred to as a "Veblen effect. "2 This strikes us as an inappropriate starting point for a theory

'See for example Leibenstein [1950], and more recently Frank [1985], Basu [1987], Ng
[1987], Basmann, Molina, and Slottje [1988], Braun and Wicklund [1989], Creedy and Slottje
[1991], and Ireland [1992]. More generally, other recent studies, including Akerlof [1980],
Jones [1984], Besley and Coate [1990], Bernheim [1991b], Cole, Mailath, and Posteiwaite

[1991], and Fershtman and Weiss [1992], explore the impact of status-consciousness on
economic behavior.

2The following passage typifies modern discussions of prestige goods: "Conspicuous
consumption, or Veblen effects, are said to occur when individuals increase their demand for
a good simply because it has a higher price" (Creedy and Slottje [1991]).

of conspicuous consumption. It is hard to imagine circumstances in which the price of an object
would affect utility directly. Veblen proposed that individuals crave status, not that they seek

to pay high prices for the sheer pleasure of being overcharged. Thus, utility should be defined
over consumption and status, rather than over consumption and prices. Although the prices that

one pays for goods may affect status in equilibrium, this relationship should be derived, not
assumed.

Once the need to derive an equilibrium relation between price and utility is
acknowledged, one must determine whether or not any plausible model of conspicuous
consumption would generate Veblen effects. It is not at all obvious that, in such an equilibrium,

higher price would enhance utility. Suppose for example that individuals care about status and

that status is positively related to the public perception of an individual's wealth. Then, as
Veblen suggested, individuals might attempt to enhance their status by displaying their wealth.

However, there is no particular reason to believe that this is most effectively accomplished by

paying higher prices. Instead, one might prefer to purchase a larger quantity of conspicuous
goods at a lower price, or a higher quality conspicuous good at a higher price.3

This paper examines a model in which each individual's status depends upon public
perceptions of his wealth. Consumers have private information about the value of their assets,

and attempt to signal their wealth by consuming a conspicuous good. The producers of this

3Certain social customs in Thailand illustrate the practice of advertising wealth through
quantity, rather than price. According to Shenon [1991], "It is considered acceptable, even by
some Western-educated Thai women who would otherwise describe themselves as feminists, for
a man to take one or more mistresses and even to be seen with them in public, so long as all of
the women and their children are provided for financially... Mistresses are to some degree a
demonstration of wealth, and as a rule, the more mistresses, the wealthier the man. A handful
of Bangkok's flashier millionaires are said to have 10 or more extramarital companions."
2

good compete under conditions that would ordinarily produce a perfectly competitive outcome
(price equal to marginal cost). The good is completely homogeneous across firms, except that

producers visibly label their products (labelling does

affect utility directly).

We show that, under identifiable conditions, the equilibria of this model are characterized

by the existence of "budget brands (sold at a price equal to marginal cost), as well as luxury"
brands (sold at a price above marginal cost). Luxury brands are purchased by consumers who
seek to signal high levels of wealth. It is important to bear in mind that the luxury brands are

not intrinsically superior to the budget brands -- they are simply sold at a higher price. The

manufacturers of these brands earn strictly vositive economic profits, despite the highly
competitive nature of the market. Thus, the model explains the observation that brand-name

producers apparently charge high premia on many status goods, even when these goods are
easily imitated.4 Moreover, our model implies that firms will not ordinarily dissipate excess
profits through rent seeking activities, such as advertising. Thus, evidence of high profitability

among the manufacturers of luxury goods does not necessarily support the inference that
competition is less than perfect.

The model does not constrain consumers to signal wealth by purchasing the expensive

luxury brands; it is also possible to signal by consuming large quantities of less expensive
brands. Thus, a positive reduced form relation between utility and price (a Veblen effect) is
generated from more primitive assumptions on the structure of consumer preferences.
It should be emphasized that the existence of Veblen effects depends critically upon the

4lreland [1992] describes an interesting case of this involving a very expensive brand-named

basketball shoe: "The shoes became so much a passport to social success among poor urban
teenagers that a campaign to limit their commercial promotion and advertising was initiated."
3

fact that the model incorporates a personal bankruptcy constraint. In particular, by purchasing

expensive, conspicuous goods, an individual may increase the risk of bankruptcy. This
assumption captures two empirical regularities: first, many wealthy individuals are at significant

risk of bankruptcy (see for example Allen [1991]); second, this risk is often associated with the

acquisition of costly, conspicuous possessions.5 In the absence of a bankruptcy constraint, the
model would

produce Veblen effects; consumers would signal wealth by consuming large

amounts of budget brands, rather than by purchasing smaller amounts of luxury brands.
Why does the risk of personal bankruptcy give rise to conditions under which individuals

may choose to signal their wealth by overpaying for luxury brands? Consumption of
conspicuous goods reduces expenditures on other goods. With declining marginal rates of
substitution, this would ordinarily imply that conspicuous consumption is more costly for low

income households. Personal bankruptcy protection, however, establishes a lower bound on
consumption. As the probability of bankruptcy rises, a unit increase in conspicuous consumption

leads to a smaller decline in the expected consumption of other goods. At high levels of
conspicuous consumption, the marginal cost of conspicuous spending is actually lower for low

income households. As a result, it is less expensive for high income households to deter
imitation by overpaying for a smaller quantity of goods, rather than by paying a lower price (and

spending more in total) for a larger quantity of goods. In the abstract, this argument resembles
Milgrom and Roberts' [1986] analysis of advertising as a signal of product quality.

5One reporter recently summarized this relationship as foUows: "In the 1980s, people lived
out their materialistic dreams, overspending on BMWs, huge boats, Caribbean vacations and
dream condos, bankruptcy lawyers say. Then came the real estate crash and the job layoffs.
Now, lawyers say, their clients are using their credit cards for basic necessities, including food
and children's clothes" (Carton [1991]).
4

Our model of conspicuous consumption also has some provocative implications for tax

policy. The fact that pure profits survive vigorous competition among suppliers suggests that
the equilibrium prices of luxury brands are demand-driven, rather than supply-driven -- that is,

luxury brands are sold at the consumers preferred price. Within our model, this preferred price

is tax-inclusive, and does not vary with the tax rate. Thus, as long as the tax per unit does not
exceed the difference between the consumer's preferred price and marginal cost, an excise tax
on luxury brands amounts to a non-distortionary tax on pure profits.
This observation is of particular interest in light of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation

Act of 1990, which established substantial federal taxes on the sale of various conspicuous
goods, including expensive automobiles, yachts, jewehy, and aircraft. One should not conclude

from our analysis that these taxes are non-distortionary; whether the demand for luxury items
is best described by our model or some alternative is a question that can be settled only through

empirical analysis. However, a central prediction of our model -- that the tax-inclusive price
will be unaffected by the luxury tax -- is supported by some anecdotal evidence. Specifically,

Rolls Royce, Jaguar, and BMW have each run promotional campaigns in which they have
offered to reimburse customers for the full amount of the luxury tax.°

recent advertisement for Rolls Royce reads: "If the luxury tax is all that separates us, it's

time to talk. From today through December 31, 1991, Rolls-Royce Motor Cars Inc. will
reimburse you for the full amount of the federal luxury excise tax incurred when you purchase
or lease a new Rolls-Royce or Bentley." Similar, Jaguar advertised: "Now you can have Jaguar
luxury, fr of the luxury tax... Just buy or lease a new 1990 or 1991 Sovereign, Vanden Plas
or XI-S from your Jaguar dealer and we'll send you a reimbursement check equal to the luxury
tax based on the manufacturer's suggested retail price." It is particularly interesting to note that
Jaguar did i offer this deal on the XJ-6, which is its least expensive automobile. Finally, an
advertisement for BMW reads: "We will pay the luxury tax on any new BMW purchased and
delivered by December 31, 1991."
5

The paper is organized as follows. We describe the model in section 2. Section 3
contains the central results on equilibrium prices and profits. Section 4 considers the possibility
that firms might dissipate positive profits (specifically, through advertising), and concludes that

this will not occur. Implications for tax policy are described in section 5. We examine some
critical assumptions in section 6. Section 7 concludes.

2. The Model
2.1 Households
Consider a household that must allocate resources over two consumption goods. One
good is "conspicuous, in the sense that its characteristics, as well as the quantity consumed, are

publicly observed. The second good is inconspicuous, in the sense that it is consumed
privately, and not observed by others. Because of our assumptions about observability, only

conspicuous consumption can potentially serve as a signal of wealth. We will use the
inconspicuous good as the numeraire.

The household is endowed with resources, A. It first allocates a portion of these
resources to purchase the conspicuous good; let s and x denote, respectively, total conspicuous

expenditures and the quantity purchased.

Next, the household receives income, which is

uncertain. Since conspicuous consumption has already been chosen, consumption of the
inconspicuous good, z, is determined as a residual. These assumptions about the sequence of

decision-making, though highly stylized, are appropriate for modeling situations in which
conspicuous goods are durable and not easily sold in second-hand markets. See section 6 for
further discussion.

Households differ according their expected level of income, Y. There are two types of
households. Some expect their income to be higher (YF.), while others expect it to be lower (YL,

where YL < Y.). The associated population frequencies are y and (l—y), respectively. Each
6

household knows its own type, but cannot observe the type of any other household. A higher
income household ultimately receives

income household receives Y +

H+

where

. Let F()

associated with , and let f() be the associated

where Y

+

is a mean-zero random variable; a lower

denote the cumulative distribution function

density function.' We do not rule out the case

< 0 for K = L, H; that is, liabilities may arise. Income is measured in units

of the inconspicuous good.
In addition to conspicuous consumption, x, and inconspicuous consumption, z, each
household also cares about status. Status depends upon public perceptions of the household's

total expected wealth, R = A + Y.& Since R is not publicly observable, other households will
form inferences about a particular household's wealth based upon its actions. Knowing this,
each household may alter

its actions in order to create the impression that it has greater wealth.

This gives rise to a signaling problem. We will simplify this problem by assuming that all
uninformed parties form identical inferences about a household's total wealth, and by focusing

on separating equilibria. Public perceptions of a household's total wealth can then be described
by a single number, R. Household preferences over x,z, and

are summarized by the

following utility function:

U(x,z,R) = u(x) + v(z) +
where X > 0 is a parameter. We refer to u(x) and v(z) as "intrinsic utility." We assume that

7The distribution of is identical across types.

3Note that status depends upon perceptions of expected wealth, R, rather than realized
wealth, R+E. In other words, esteem is based upon perceptions of a household's capacity for
generating income, and not upon chance events, unrelated to innate characteristics, that might
have affected a particular realization of income. The analysis would be unchanged if status
depends upon perceptions of realized wealth, as long as personal bankruptcy (discussed later)

is unobservable. If status is related to perceived realizations and if personal bankruptcy is
observable, then analytical complexities arise; however, it does not appear that this would
qualitatively alter our conclusions.
7

u and v are concave functions, that

Urn u(x) = — , lim u(x) =

x-0

x-

, urn

v(z) = — , lim v(z) =

z—.O

and that, for any i > 0, u"(t) and v"(t) are bounded for t

i.

We assume that consumption of the inconspicuous good is bounded below by some >
0.

If exceeds (R - s + ), the residual resources available to the household at the point in time

when it arranges its inconspicuous consumption, the household declares bankruptcy. This allows

it to renege on some portion of its liabilities, and to keep the amount z. Thus, the actual level
of inconspicuous consumption is given by

z = max{z,R

—

s +

We assume that the household's conspicuous consumption, x, is unaffected by a

declaration of bankruptcy. In other words, the conspicuous good cannot be repossessed. This

assumption requires some justification. In practice, significant time may pass between the
acquisition of a conspicuous good and a declaration of bankruptcy, during which the conspicuous

good may be partially or completely consumed. Moreover, bankruptcy courts often allow

individuals to retain expensive automobiles, yachts, large houses, and other conspicuous
possessions)° One could, at the cost of introducing considerable analytic complexity, assume
that, in the event of bankruptcy, a household consumes some fraction

(0 < i < 1) of its

conspicuous possessions, while the remainder, (l-)x, is repossessed. It does not appear that
this would disturb the qualitative features of our analysis.

Once a household has spent s to purchase x units of the conspicuous good, its expected

9Alternatively, the government might supplement the income of this household, providing
it with inconspicuous consumption of z through some social insurance or welfare program.

'°See for example Downey [1991) or Hylton [1991].
S

intrinsic utility is given by

(R,x,s) = u(x) + '(R—s)
where

= F(-t)v(ZJ

+

Jv(t+€)f()de.

4'(t) measures the expected intrinsic utility derived from consumption of the inconspicuous good

when the individual's expected residual resources after expenditures on the conspicuous good

are t. Its properties are critical to the analysis.
Note that 'P(t) is bounded below by v(z). In the absence of additional assumptions, this

can give rise to perverse outcomes. Suppose for the moment that the conspicuous good is
available at some price p, so that s = px. Then clearly E(R,x,s) is maximized for x =
This suggests that households should optimize by consuming an infinite amount of the

conspicuous good and then declaring bankruptcy (which would leave them with z units of the

inconspicuous good). One could rule this strategy out by modeling credit markets explicitly.

Instead, we simply impose the constraint s A + B for some finite number B, thereby
implicitly ruling out borrowing beyond the level B. We will also take A + B to be sufficiently

large so that liquidity is not an issue.

Increasing the expected residual resources t available after conspicuous consumption
clearly increases expected intrinsic utility from the inconspicuous good, since
=

0.

The curvature of '4'(t), however, depends on the relative importance of two countervailing
effects. The first is associated with decreasing marginal utility, and the second results from
bankruptcy protection. These separate effects are evident in the following expression:

9

= JvhI(t + ) f() d + v'&) f( t).
—

The first term of '(t) captures the effect of decreasing marginal utility. As expenditure
on the inconspicuous good increases, the marginal utility of inconspicuous consumption declines,

since v') < 0. In the absence of bankruptcy protection (i.e. z = — ), this would make
4'(t) concave. Because of this effect, the sacrifice of inconspicuous consumption is more costly

to lower income households. Higher income households can therefore deter imitation by
consuming the conspicuous good.

The second term of '(t) captures the effect of bankruptcy protection. As residual
resources fall, an individual is more likely to declare bankruptcy and consume .

expected consumption becomes less sensitive to his resources.

Thus, his

This makes conspicuous

consumption less costly for lower income individuals. By itself (for example if v') = 0, so
that this component of utility is linear), this effect would render ''(t) convex. Because of this
effect, lower income households may be more inclined to mimic conspicuous consumption.
We make two assumptions that influence the relative importance of these two effects, and

guarantee that T(t) is initially convex, and ultimately concave.

ASSUMPTION 1. 'l"(R1) <

ASSUMPTION 2. lim

f()

=

1 -F()

Assumption 1 ensures that the first unit of conspicuous consumption is more costly for
lower income households. It requires the effect of diminishing marginal utility to dominate the

personal bankruptcy effect ('(t) < 0) when residual resources are high (for t belonging to
some sufficiently large subset of [RL, RJ). Note that Assumption 1 does

imply the standard

"single crossing property" commonly used in signaling models, since it only applies when s=0.
The following conditions are, in combination, sufficient to guarantee that Assumption 1

is satisfied: (i) v() is either a CARA or CRRA utility function, (ii) f(S) is a normal density
10

function, and (lii) RL is large." In the context of this analysis, condition (iii) is entirely
appropriate: we are envisioning a pool of cx ante identical individuals whose observable
characteristics do not rule out the possibility that they have substantial total wealth. Assumption

1 sets the stage for signaling: unless the marginal costs of conspicuous consumption are higher
for the lower income individuals over some range, no signaling is possible.

Assumption 2 guarantees that, at sufficiently high levels of conspicuous consumption,
incremental consumption is more costiy for hiJii income households. Equivalently, it ensures
that the effect of bankruptcy protection dominates the effect of diminishing marginal utility when

is sufficiently small (possibly negative), so that '"(t) > 0. This assumption is satisfied by

the normal distribution, as well as other common distribution functions. It is essential for
producing our conclusion that higher income individuals will prefer to signal by overpaying for

a small quantity of luxury goods.
Hence, 'P(t) is initially convex, and ultimately concave. In Figure 1, we graph''(R — s)
and 'P(RH - s) as functions of s for a typical ''(). Note that ''(RL — s) starts out steeper (by
assumption 1), but eventually becomes flatter (by assumption 2). This constitutes a violation of
the "single crossing property"; due to the reversal of marginal costs, indifference curves defined

over x and

-- using the budget constraint to determine s --

cross

twice, rather than once.

From Figure 1 it is clear that, under our assumptions, there exists a finite, positive level

of conspicuous expenditure, s, that maximizes the difference between the expected utilities
derived from the inconspicuous good by the two types of households. This property is critical
to our analysis of competitive behavior. We therefore state it as a lemma, and provide a formal
proof.

"Together, conditions (i) and (ii) imply that, for all d, v"(t+d)/f(t) approaches - as t goes
To understand the importance of this observation, consult the expression for '(t).

to .

Assumption 1 is in fact much less demanding; it merely requires that the limit of v"(t+d)ff(t)
is less than v).
11

LEMMA 1. There exists some finite s > 0 that solves

-

max

PROOF. Recall that

Jv(t + e) f(s) de +

=

v'() f( — t).

By our assumption on v(), v11(t+e) is bounded for e E (z

- t,).

Let D denote its

lower bound. Then

*"(t) [1 —F(—t)JD v)f(—t).
But, by assumption 2, this is positive for -t sufficiently large. We conclude that there exists an

such that if s > ,

— s)

> 0.

Next, note that for s' > ,

- I'(RL-s
=

['l'(RH-l)

=

[''(RH-) -

- ''(RL-)] -

RL-)1

-

J1'[(RH_s)

'I"(t)dt)ds

- "(RL - s)]ds

< '(R-)

The final inequality follows from the fact that for all s E [ ,s'], ''"(t) is positive on
[RL - s, RH - s], given the definition of . Thus, increasing s beyond

reduces the value of

the objective function.

Since [0, fl is compact and since '(t) is continuous, the objective function reaches a
maximum somewhere on [O,]. By assumption 1, the maximum cannot occur at s = 0. The
lemma therefore is proven. Q.E.D.
It is worth emphasizing that this result depends upon the failure of the single-crossing

property. If the diminishing marginal utility effect always dominated, guaranteeing that the
12

marginal cost of the potential signal was always higher for low income households (as in more

standard models), then maximization of Y(R - s)

- Y(R - s) would be accomplished through

infinite conspicuous expenditure (s' would not be finite).

For analytic convenience, in what follows we will assume that s is unique. One can
easily dispense with this simplification at the cost of some additional notation and analysis.

2.2
The conspicuous good can be produced by a large number of firms.'2 These firms are

divided into two groups. The first group consists of incumbents. There are F incumbents,
indexed f C (1

F]. The rest of the firms are potential entrants. All firms produce the same

homogenous conspicuous good, at the same constant marginal cost c. The production technology

exhibits constant returns to scale (average cost equals marginal cost).

Each firm's product is "branded or "labeled, so that anyone can easily identify which
firm produced it. Branding does not affect utility directly, and in any ordinary (inconspicuous)

context, branding would be irrelevant. We assume that all firms brand their products.
Alternatively, one could allow the firms to choose between labeling and not labeling. In
equilibrium, some would label, and the outcome would be the same as described here.
All consumers observe the prices announced by all firms. Since consumers also observe

brand labels, they can infer any household's expenditure on conspicuous products. We endow
incumbents with the following minor advantage over entrants: consumers will buy the product
from an incumbent, unless they can

jçfly improve their utility by buying from an entrant. In

the context of conspicuous goods, this assumption is natural and appealing. It should be noted
that this structure necessarily yields zero profits under standard assumptions about demand.

'2We have assumed that both households' initial resources and income consist of the
inconspicuous good. Consequently, we abstract from the processes by which that good is
produced and allocated.
13

2.3 Timinz

The game unfolds as follows. First, each incumbent f announces a price, p, for the
conspicuous good. Second, potential competitors observe these prices, and then decide whether

to enter. If a firm chooses to enter, it announces a price for the conspicuous good.'3 Third,
consumers observe all announced prices, and determine the amount of conspicuous good to be

purchased from each firm. Each consumer carries out these transactions, spending in total the
amount s and acquiring in total the amount x. Fourth, consumers observe each others' branded
conspicuous consumption bundles, and form inferences about each others' wealth. Fifth, income

is realized, and residual resources are used for inconspicuous consumption. The payoff to each
consumer is given by U(x,z,), where x is the amount of the conspicuous good consumed in the
third stage,

is the inference that others draw about the consumer's utility in stage 4, and z

is the amount of the inconspicuous good consumed in stage 5. Firm's payoffs are given by
profits (revenues minus costs).

2.3 Equilibrium

Our game is divided into two main phases. In the first phase (stages 1 and 2), firms
compete by naming prices.

In the second phase (stages 3 through 5), individuals select

consumption bundles and draw inferences about each others' characteristics. The second phase

is a signaling game. We reduce the set of equilibria through the use of a refinement that is
similar in spirit to subgame perfection: for any outcome of the first phase, actions and inferences
constitute a separating equilibrium in the second phase, and this equilibrium satisfies the intuitive

criterion (see Cho and Kreps [19871 for a discussion of the intuitive criterion, which is

'3Since one can take F, the number of incumbents, to be large, allowing for further entry
in the second stage may seem superfluous. One might therefore be inclined to delete this stage.
We do not believe that this would alter our results. However, it would render the analysis more
complex, as the current structure allows us to ignore problematic subgames (e.g. if all firms
name a very low or very high price). The reader should bear in mind that potential entry in the
second stage only serves to strengthen competitive pressures.
14

equivalent to equilibrium dominance).'4 Given this behavior, we look for Bertrand-style
equilibria in the first phase.
It is useful to describe the second phase equilibria in a bit more detail. Let P denote the

set of prices announced by firms in the first and second stages. Define p = minP, and
= znaxP.

Note that, unless p = , and individual's conspicuous consumption, x, does not

uniquely determine his total conspicuous expenditure, s. Depending upon which brands he

selects, he may spend as little as px, or as much as x. In fact, for any s satisfying
pa < s

<

x, it is possible to purchase x units of the conspicuous good for exactly s.'5

No rational consumer would ever spend more than the minimal amount needed to acquire

a given quantity of the inconspicuous good. However, a consumer may be willing to spend
more than pa to acquire x units of the conspicuous good. Since others can observe his level of
consumption, x, his selection of brands, and brand prices, they can infer his total expenditure,
s. By spending extravagantly on expensive brands, an individual with higher wealth may be able

to convince others of his opulence, thereby enhancing his status."

'4Equilibrium with complete pooling can be ruled out with the intuitive criterion. There do

exist equilibria with imperfect separation which survive the intuitive criterion and stronger
refinements. These equilibria also give rise to the kinds of results developed here, so for
simplicity we focus exclusively on separation.

'5Specificafly, the individual could purchase x units at

(! p)/ x

and (l-,j)x units at p, where

p).

"Implicit in our notion of equilibrium is the assumption that others will actually choose to
compute an individual's conspicuous expenditures from his observed purchases, and that they
will use this information to draw inferences about his wealth. Technically speaking, since an
individual's inferences about others do not affect his own utility, no one has any incentive to
draw correct inferences. We have, in effect, endowed each individual with a strict preference
for drawing accurate inferences about each others' characteristics. There are many ways to
justify this assumption. For example, in some later period individuals may receive more utility
from interacting with others of higher status; consequently they may be willing to expend effort
in order to determine the status of potential acquaintances.
15

Formally, a separating equilibrium consists of total conspicuous quantity and expenditure

choices (S,x,5,Xg) satisfying incentive compatibility,
RL,XL,SL) +

XRL

(RL,XH,SH) +

+

XRH

+

and feasibility,

p SH/Xfl
p SL/XL

.

Moreover, these choices must be optimal given the relationship between inferences and actions

that are not taken in equilibrium.
Our description of a separating equilibrium is incomplete in the following sense: although

we have specified total conspicuous consumption (XL and x) as well as total conspicuous
expenditure (5L and s, we have not indicated which brands are purchased. There may well be

an infinite number of conspicuous consumption bundles containing XK units, and requiring an

expenditure of exactly sx (K = L,H).'7 Fortunately this is immaterial, since consumers do not

care about brand selection, except insofar as it affects total cost. Indeed, consumers are
completely indifferent between all conspicuous consumption bundles containing the same total

number of units, and requiring the same total expenditures. We resolve this indifference in
favor of incumbent brands: consumers will not purchase the conspicuous good from entrants
unless this fljçjj,y improves their utility. In the context of conspicuous goods, this assumption

is natural and appealing (there are recognized brand names). The resulting advantage for

'Suppose, for example, that there are three brands, A, B, and C, sold at three prices, PA
< PB < P and suppose that PA < 5K/XK < p. Then there is an infinite number of bundles,
(XA,xB,xc), satisfying pAxA+pBxB+pcxc = 5K, XA+XB+XC = XK, and

16

x 0 (j=A,B,C).

incumbents is minor, and would not suffice to protect positive profits if the good in question was

inconspicuous. Although this assumption does not tie down consumer choice completely (e.g.

there may still be indifference across conspicuous consumption bundles containing only
incumbent brands), our results are not sensitive to the manner in which residual indifference is
resolved.
One final condition is needed to guarantee that an interesting signaling problem arises.

Let x denote the amount of conspicuous good that an individual of type K would purchase if

he was not concerned about status, and if goods were priced at marginal cost. Formally,x
solves

max &R,x,cx).

x

We will assume that

(RL,xH,cxH) +

XRH

> E(RL,x,cx) +

This condition states that, with marginal cost pricing, individuals with lower wealth would be

willing to mimic the firstbest conspicuous consumption choices of wealthier individuals if, by
doing so, they could achieve the status of those with higher wealth.

3. Resutts
In this section, we characterize the separating equilibria of this model. We begin by
arguing that, in the third stage, the type Ls will always choose conspicuous quantity (x 0) and
brand (equivalently, expenditure 5) to satisfy
max E(RL,x,s)

x's
subject to

x
17

The argument here is standard. In equilibrium, the Ls are correctly identified. Therefore, they
cannot reduce

x

0

by deviating from their prescribed choice. Consequently, if there is another.

and feasible p that raises the value of E(), it must make them better off. This

contradicts the supposition that an equilibrium prevails.

The free entry assumption, combined with the usual Bertrand-style argument,
immediately implies that some firm (either incumbent or entrant) must, in equilibrium, sell its

product at price c. Moreover, all type Ls will buy from such firms. Thus, in equilibrium, we

have (xL,s) = (x,s1), where s =

cx.

What will the type Hs do? The intuitive criterion implies that the type H choice (xH,sp)
must solve

max (RH,x,s)
x's
subject to
x

and
E(RL,x,s) + XRH

(RL,x,cx)

+ XRL.

That is, the type Hs maximize their expected intrinsic utility, buying from a combination of

different firms offering prices between

and

,

subject to the constraint that the types Ls must

choose not to mimic them.

To see that this is indeed an implication of the intuitive criterion, suppose that the type

H choice, (xH,s), does not solve this problem. Then there is some other feasible (x, s) such
that
+

>

and
18

+

+ >RL.

+

Recall that for any quantity x consumers can achieve any expenditure level between x andx
simply by purchasing x from more than one firm. Moreover, one can always make the second
inequality strict by finding the solution to the optimization problem, and taking x slightly below

the optimal value. Thus, by the intuitive criterion, agents must infer H when they observe

(x,s). But then type Hs have an incentive to deviate. Consequently, the equilibrium does
not pass the intuitive criterion. '
For the moment, ignore the first constraint, and consider the case where
=

=

0 and

. In that case, it is easy to see that the second constraint (incentive compatibility) ini

bind: increasing XH raises the value of the objective function, and can never make the first

constraint bind, so the household increases x until the second constraint binds. We can
therefore substitute the constraint (algebraically manipulated using the definition of ()) into the
objective function to obtain

max ['l'(RH-s) — 4'Ok—s)] +

x's

[(L,x,cx)

+ X(RL-RH)].

The second bracketed term is invariant with respect to x and s. The first term is maximized at

= s', which was defined in lemma 1 (section 2.1). The associated value of x is determined
by the binding incentive compatibility constraint:
=

Given

U

(E(RL,xL,cxlj +

X(RL RH) —

our assumptions on u(), f always exists. Define

Note that this argument does

apply when (xH,s) solves the programming problem.
19

p.=.
Under our

assumptions, x > 0 and s > 0, so p > 0.

Now reintroduce the first constraint. As long as p , (x,s) is still a solution
to the optimization problem. Consequently, the type H agents will choose x = x and SH =
Our central result concerns cases in which p > c. Note that since p does not depend

on c (and exceeds zero), one can satisfy this inequality simply by choosing c small.
Alternatively, since"

lim P =
one could also obtain p > c by taking X large.2° When p > c, we automatically have p <

p (this follows from a previous argument, since some firm will set price equal to c for the type

Ls). Next we argue that, in equilibrium, we also have p.
Suppose that < p. Then an entrant could name exactly p. The intuitive criterion
implies that all type Hs would purchase exactly x from that firm at p. The entrant would earn

positive profits, so we could not have been in equilibrium. By the same reasoning, one can

show that at least one incumbent must select p p. It follows that type H agents only
purchase the conspicuous good from incumbents.
We conclude that, in equilibrium, type H agents necessarily buy Xff

"This follows from two facts: lim u(x) =

-

= f from incumbent

(which implies that f goes to 0 as X goes

to infinity), and s is independent of X.
2'The fact that x goes to 0 as X goes to infinity gives rise to the curious result that, for large
X, high income households actually consume less of the conspicuous good, even though they

spend more on it. Luxury automobiles may provide an example: it is arguable that more
expensive cars do not necessarily provide more valuable services.

20

s'. Their total profits (per capita) are (s-xc), recalling that y is

firms, at a cost of sx

defined to be the frequency of higher income households. Since s •

—x

c = (p

-c)x > 0,

profits are strictly positive.

It is useful to summarize our results for the case where p > c in the form of a
proposition. Define the effective (or average) prices p =

- and L =

pRoposmoN. If p> c, then in eouilibrium
PH = P

1k =

C.

In these cases: (i type H consumers ourchase the conspicuous good only from the incumbents

who, in total, earn strictly positive orofits. and (ii) effective prices. (p,p), and agzregate
profits are independent of F (the number of incumbents).

Thus, positive profits are, in this model, consistent with perfect competition, in that we have

assumed homogenous goods, free entry, constant returns to scale technology, and Bertrand
pricing.

For completeness, we will briefly treat the case of p < c. Suppose first thar4"(t) > 0

for all t < RH - s' (guaranteeing that this inequality is satisfied over this range requires
stronger assumptions than those made in the preceding sections). Assume provisionally that the

equilibrium satisfies .! > c. Then
XH

21

>
Consequently,

we can find some (x,,s) with s <

sH

such that2'

u(x,) + 4'(RH SH) + XRH > u(xH) + '"(RHSH) + XRH

u(x + ''(RL-s4) +

< u(x1) + '(RL5H) + XR,

(R,,x,cx,) + XRL.
By the intuitive criterion, agents must infer H upon observing (x, s). But the choice (x, s)
is feasible (since agents can buy from several firms); consequently, type Hs would choose it.

Thus, one cannot have an equilibrium where any agent pays an effective (or average) price
greater than c. On the other hand, it can be shown that marginal cost pricing is an equilibrium

when p <

c.

Now consider relaxing the assumption that '11(t) > 0 for all t < RH - s . In that case,

maximization of type H utility subject to non-imitation as well as S4IXff

c may imply that

higher income households should pay a price strictly greater than c (even though the
unconstrained optimum entails an effective price, s/x, strictly less than c). It is therefore
possible that non-convexities could give rise to a price above marginal cost even when p < c.

2'Consider some x <

XH

with XH

- x < and s < s,, such that type Ls are indifferent

between (x,s) and (xH,s,). For small, type Hs strictly prefer (x,s) to (xH,s,l.). Choose

(x,s,)

such that s = s and x, is slightly less than x. By construction, the Ls strictly prefer (xM,sH.)
to (x,s). As long as x - x is sufficiently small, the Hs strictly prefer (x,s) to (xM,s,J.

Thus, the first two inequalities are satisfied. The third inequality is simply an equilibrium
condition.
22

4. An Extension: Advertisin2
Whenever equilibria entail positive profits, it is natural to think that competitors might

dissipate these profits through other channels. There is, however, no reason to believe that
firms will dissipate the profits described in section 3.

To illustrate this point, consider a more elaborate model in which finns can advertise.

Technically, there are many ways to introduce advertising into the model. Our strategy is to
assume that X is an increasing function of advertising (marketing), M. This can be justified as

follows. Thus far, we have not modeled households whose observable characteristics rule Out
the

possibility that they are of type H. Although these households have no incentive to signal,

their opinions may affect the status achieved by other members of the community. The effect

of advertising is to increase the number of these people who know the price of a good, and
consequently what the good signifies about the consumer's income. That is, upon observing the
consumption of a conspicuous product, more people infer RH when the brand in question is more

heavily advertised.
All else equal, individuals will prefer to purchase the conspicuous good from the firm
that advertises more heavily. One might think that this would cause firms to dissipate profits--if

there were positive profits, another firm could set the same price and advertise slightly more to

attract customers. But this proves not to be the case, for the same reason that firms do not
dissipate profits by reducing price. Although increased advertising makes the product more
attractive, it has the same effect on both Hs and Ls. As a result, advertising makes imitation
by Ls more likely.

Formally, we illustrate this point as follows. For simplicity, we define the scale of
wealth so that RL = 0. This is not simply a normalization. In the current context, it implies

Although we have assumed that esteem enters utility additively, this is not essential to the
results of this section. There are many alternative ways to model esteem under which the
analysis also goes through; we use the additive form to illustrate.

23

that there is no gain to purchasing an advertised brand rather than an unadvertised brand as long

as one is perceived as type L.
If type H agents were free to choose x, s, and M, they would select values that solve the
following maximization problem:

max u(x) + ''(RH - s) + X(M)RH
x,s,M

st. u(x) +

4'(—s) + X(M)RK

u(x)

+

Assuming that the non-imitation constraint binds, this is equivalent to maximizing
[4'(RH—s) — 'P(—s)] +

E(O,x,cx).

Note that the objective function does not depend on x or M. The solution is s =

s. Any values

of x and M satisfying

u(x) + X(M)RH

=

(O,x,cx) —'P(—s) G

are then equivalent from the point of view of type H agents. In other words, firms are free to
trade off x against M, but not in a way that affects total utility.

It is interesting that when firms advertise more, they sell less at a higher price. The
model therefore predicts that firms should continue to advertise even when advertising conveys

no information about product quality (for example, when products have well-established track
records).

Incumbents would like to choose the levels of x and M that maximize profits (subject,
of course, to the restriction that they provide consumers with an efficient vehicle for signaling).

Mathematically, these are the values of x and M that solve

24

max y(s'
x,M

-cx) - M

s.t. u(x) + X(M)RH

= G.

Whether or not these choices necessarily prevail in equilibrium depends in part upon our
assumptions about the resolution of consumer indifference. It seems natural to assume that
incumbents can vary x and M without loosing customers as long as their customers do not
sacrifice utility. Under this assumption, the equilibrium values of x and MH

solve

the

maximization problem described above. The solution is characterized by the two equations
u'(xH) =

X'(M)Rcy

and

u(x,) + X(MH)RK

= G

(here we have assumed that X"(M) < 0).
Thus, allowing X to depend on M does not result in dissipation of profits. Rather, it
simply creates a new dimension over which incumbents maximize joint profits.

5. Imilications for Tax Policy
The implications of our analysis for antitrust and regulatory policy are straightforward:

one cannot infer either product market failure or market power simply from the existence of
positive profits in markets for conspicuous luxury goods. The implications for tax policy are
equally provocative.
Suppose that the government imposes a tax on the conspicuous good, and that the per-unit

levy is related to the sales price, according to the function r(,p). Without loss of generality,

assume that the producer pays the tax, so that p is the consumer's price, and p - r(p) is the
producer's price. For the moment, consider tax-price relationships of the form
25

r(p) = max{ 0, t(p - k) },
wheretheparameterstandksatisfy

0< t <1 and kc. Ifsuchataxscheduleis

imposed, then the arguments of section 3 require only minor modifications. Assuming that p
> c, equilibria have the following properties: PL = c,

p = p, and XH = x'.

Moreover, in the

case where k = c, aggregate profits (per capita) are equal to 7(s - cx)(1 - t), and total
government revenue is G y(s - cxDt. More generally, for other values of k c, profits
and revenues are indeterminant within bounds (recall that consumers may expend s to buy x
units in a variety of different ways, such as paying p for each unit, or by paying more than p

for some units, and c for other units). However, as long as k < p, total revenues are
bounded below by y(s' - cx)tQ - k)/(p - c).n The sum of revenues and profits must equal

- cxD.

Thus, in the context of our model, an appropriately designed luxury tax amounts

to a non-distortionary tax on pure profits.

The intuition for this result is fairly simple. The price of luxury brands is determined

almost entirely by demand conditions. Assuming that p > c, cost only enters through the
incentive compatibility condition. It appears there only because it determines the price of the
budget brand. Thus, as long as the tax does not affect the equilibrium price of the budget brand

(which is the case as long as r(c) = 0), and as long as tax-inclusive costs are less than p, a
change in the tax-inclusive cost of producing the luxury brand cannot affect behavior. Instead,
it simply redistributes pure rents from firms to the government.

It is worth emphasizing that traditional modes of analysis would produce highly
misleading conclusions within the current context. Suppose that the inconspicuous good, z, is

nAssuming that all units were actually purchased at p, aggregate production would be yx,

and government tax revenues would be yxt(p - k). It is easy to verify that any other
combination of prices and quantities that yield total quantity x' and total expenditure s' generates
at least as much tax revenue; therefore 7xt(p - k) is a lower bound. Since (s' - cx)I(p - c)
= we can rewrite this bound as y(s - cx')t(p - k)/(p' - c). This expression reveals that the
government ends up with at least the fraction t(p - k)I(p - c) of total surplus.

f,

26

non-taxable. Assuming that the objective is efficiency, rather than distribution, what tax rates

should be selected for the various brands of the conspicuous good? As long as revenue
requirements are not too high, the preceding analysis implies that only luxury brands should be

taxed. This conclusion follows from the fact that a tax on the luxury brands is equivalent to a

lump sum tax, while a tax on the budget brands is distortionary. In contrast, the traditional
approach suggests that the government should raise a significant fraction of its revenue by taxing

budget brands.
Since all goods in this model are produced in competitive industries with constant-returns-

to-scale, traditional reasoning suggests that Ramsey-style optimal tax formulas are applicable.
As an approximation, one might assume, counterfactually, that demand reflects separable, quasi-

linear preferences, in order to exploit the weLl known "inverse elasticity' rule (which states that

the desirability of taxing any given good depends inversely on the good's compensated price
elasticity of demand). From this starting point, the traditionalist would argue that it is optimal
to raise all revenue by taxing a single good only if the price elasticity for that good is zero. But

in our model, the demand for the luxury good is highly price elastic.
To see this, suppose that budget brands are sold at positive price p. <

p, and that luxury

brands are sold at some other price p. p" (as indicated earlier, when p >

c these

conditions are satisfied in equilibrium). Let x denote the quantity of the luxury brand
purchased by a type H consumer. Since this consumer purchases x" units of the conspicuous
good for a total of s', it necessarily follows that

px + p.(x' - x) = px".
Rearranging this equation, one obtains

x = x'(p' - p)/(p - p).
Using this expression, one can easily verify that

27

= p+/(p+ - p.) > 1,
where

denotes the (negative of the) own price elasticity of demand for the luxury brand.

Note that this is both a compensated elasticity and an uncompensated elasticity, since a change
in quantity does not affect the utility of a type H consumer (in total, he spends the same amount

of money for the same quantity and quality, and conveys the same signal).
The magnitude of €. (defined similarly) depends upon the curvature of u() and v(). It

is possible to select functional forms so that this elasticity is small in comparison to . Thus,
the traditionalist could well reach the false conclusion that it is desirable to raise the bulk of
government revenue by taxing budget brands, rather than luxury brands.

A more sophisticated traditionalist might object that the demand system described in
preceding sections would exhibit substantial cross-price elasticities, thereby invalidating the
simple inverse elasticity rule. This observation suggests that the more general form of Ramsey's

optimal commodity tax formulas should be used. For the case at hand, these formulas can be
written as follows:

r+E÷+/p÷ + r.€ip. = C

r+/p÷ + r_/p. = C
where r. and r are per-unit taxes on the budget and luxury brands, respectively, ÷. is the
compensated cross elasticity of demand for the luxury brands with respect to the price of budget

brands (similarly for &+), and C is some constant. Is it possible to have a solution to this
0? Since the expressions on the left hand sides of these two equations

system for which r.

must be equal, r. =

0

implies that (r/p÷)(E - &+) = 0. Since

signs, it follows that r =

and

are

of opposite

0. Consequently, if one wishes to raise positive revenue, one cannot

possibly have a solution to the Ramsey equations with r. = 0. Thus, even the sophisticated
traditionalist is led to an erroneous conclusion.

28

There is, however, one sense in which one can partially reconcile traditional thinking on

optimal taxation with the analysis of this paper. Note that IQIal demand for fl brands of the
conspicuous good (x) is completely inelastic with respect to the price of luxury brands, but
sensitive to the price of budget brands. Since these brands all provide the same intrinsic utility,
and since (with separation) esteem is invariant with respect to changes in prices, it makes sense

to tax the luxury brands.
A related point concerns the elasticity of government revenues with respect to the tax

rate, en,. When k = c, it is trivial to verify that €, = 1. This is the same formula that one
would obtain for the revenue elasticity of an ad valorem tax when the demand for the taxed good

is completely inelastic. Note also that revenues increase with the tax rate. This is particularly
interesting in light of the results of Bernheim [1991a], who used a related signaling model to

describe corporate dividend policy. In that model, government revenues were invariant with
respect to the dividend tax rate (as long as the rate was positive).

So far, we have confined our remarks to a very specific family of tax schedules. This
family is of particular interest, since it includes the federal luxury taxes created by the Omnibus

Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990. In particular, this Act imposed a 10% excise tax (I = 0.1)
on the portion of the retail price of certain items that exceeds a product-specific threshold (k).

The thresholds are: $30,000 for automobiles, $100,000 for boats and yachts, $250,000 for
aircraft, and $10,000 for jewelry and furs.

It is nevertheless worth noting that the results of this section do not depend to any
significant extent on the particular form of the luxury tax assumed here. The analysis proceeds
similarly, and generates identical conclusions, as long as r(c) = 0,

p > c + r(p) for p slightly

greater than c as well as for some p p, and r(q) 0 for all q.
The analysis has also presupposed that there is only one inconspicuous good, and one
conspicuous good (of which there are, of course, many brands). The extension to an arbitrary

number of inconspicuous goods is thvial. It is only slightly more difficult to introduce other

29

conspicuous goods. The conclusions are essentially unchanged, except that the distribution of
profits across conspicuous good markets is indeterminant. This implies that the response to an

increase in the luxury tax rate on some specific conspicuous good is also indeterminant. It is
possible, for example, that prices could simply adjust so that profits shift to a more lightly taxed

industry (with sidepayments among firms, one might even expect this to occur). Thus, there
may be advantages to adopting a reasonably broad-based luxury tax, such as the one envisioned

in recent legislation.
In a related paper, Ng [1987] studied optimal taxation of a special class of commodities,
which he labelled "diamond goods". The distinguishing characteristic of a diamond good is that

consumers' preferences are defined over the amount of money spent to acquire it, rather than
over the amount consumed. A change in the price of a diamond good does not alter the utility
received by consumers — in response to a price change, consumers simply adjust purchases to

keep total expenditures fixed. Consequently, the optimal rate of taxation for a diamond good
is infinite. In contrast, our analysis is not predicated on the assumption that consumers enjoy

spending money. Consumers benefit from purchasing overpriced goods only because, in
equilibrium, conspicuous consumption serves as a signal of wealth, thereby enhancing status.

Our analysis also describes the nature of competition among producers of luxury goods, and
demonstrates that there is a maximum non-distortionary tax.

6. Discussion of Assumotions
Throughout this paper, we have maintained two important implicit assumptions. Our
objective in this section is to make these assumptions explicit, and to evaluate their validity.

The first assumption is that firms cannot make a secret price concession to any given
buyer. If secret concessions are possible, then the equilibrium described in section 3 will break
down: type H agents prefer to buy the conspicuous luxury good at a lower price, as long as they

30

still get credit for purchasing it at the higher price?'
There is a solution to this problem. Each luxury brand producer clearly has an incentive

to commit himself to a policy of making no secret concessions. Indeed, the argument in the
preceding paragraph implies that the signaling value of conspicuous consumption is present only

if the producer has made a credible commitment of this sort. One approach is to rely on
intermediaries. By selling products to intermediaries (e.g. car dealerships) at publicly observable

prices that exceed marginal cost, the manufacturer places a lower bound on secret price
concessions (equilibrium prices cannot be less than "dealer invoice"). Another possibility is that
manufacturers will rely on reputations. Once a luxury brand acquires a reputation for being sold

at heavy discounts, the "snob value" associated with its purchase may be eroded.
A second implicit assumption concerns the resolution of indeterminacy (a point alluded

to at the end of the preceding section). It is well recognized (e.g. in the literature on signaling
in financial markets) that equilibria such as those considered in this paper are characterized by

"money burning." (By money burning, we mean an action that imposes the same cost on all

agents regardless of type). Agents must waste a certain amount of money to sustain the
equilibrium, but, as a formal matter, they are indifferent between overpaying for conspicuous

goods and other dissipative activities, such as literally burning money. We recognize that
individuals throw money away in a variety of forms -- witness, for example, the phenomenon

of heavy tipping by "high rollers." Even so, we would argue that, in practice, most methods
of burning money are inferior to conspicuous consumption.
To effectively signal wealth, the act of burning money must be observed readily by large

numbers of people, even if these people make little or no attempt to observe it. Thus, burning
dollar bills on one's front lawn is an excellent way to destroy one's resources, but relatively few

people will observe the spectacle and make the desired inference. This is true for two reasons:

'This also motivates manufacturers to thwart the distribution of imitations of their products,
such as fake Rolex watches and Polo shirts.
31

first, only immediate neighbors will have the opportunity to observe this activity during the
ordinary course of social activity, and second, the activity itself is rather brief, and therefore

provides a rather small window for observation. In contrast, one's automobile, jewelry, and
clothing are all observed regularly by numerous other individuals during the normal course of
social interaction. In addition, expensive durable goods provide durable emblems of resource
dissipation, thereby providing large windows for observation.
Consumers probably seek durable emblems of resource dissipation for another, separate

reason. It is possible to burn resources almost continually during the normal course of social

interaction, e.g. by tipping excessively at every opportunity. However, other individuals
observe this behavior only at isolated moments. For tipping to function as an effective signal,
others must believe that substantial resources are being consumed, which can only be the case
if current behavior is representative. If excessive tipping was interpreted as indicative of high
wealth, then individuals would have an incentive to falsely signal any time they were more than

usually anxious to impress their current company. We may therefore entertain serious doubts

about the wealth of an individual who is observed tipping heavily on any given evening. In
contrast, by purchasing an expensive car, one obtains a durable emblem of an activity that, in

one shot, has dissipated large amounts of resources. When others observe the car, they have
no reason to wonder whether it is representative of automobiles that the individual drives at other

points in time (this, of course, assumes that rental vehicles are readily identifiable).

On the basis of these arguments, it seems to us that the ideal candidates for resource
dissipation are durable goods that many others will readily observe during the normal course of
social interaction (i.e., that are conspicuous) and believe to be representative. Clearly, this does

not completely resolve the issue of indeterminacy, nor does it rule out all possible alternatives.
One might wonder, for example, why households do not simply publish tax returns or audited

asset statements.

If one takes our theory literally, it is also difficult to understand why

consumers remove price tags from their conspicuous possessions. Obviously there are other
32

important considerations that influence the choice of a signal; completely transparent exhibitions

of wealth seem socially unacceptable.
Our theory does not explain why people should dissipate resources through the purchase

of expensive automobiles, rather than through jewelry, clothing, or yachts. Consequently, as
mentioned in the preceding section, the distribution of profits across conspicuous good industries

is indeterminant. Given the diversity of actual behavior, we regard the fact that the theory
allows for many methods of dissipation as a virtue, rather than a difficulty.
The observation that agents can burn money in a variety of different ways is much more

troublesome in other contexts than it is in the current paper. Consider for example the literature
on financial market signaling. Investors have strong incentives to learn all relevant information

about stocks. Consequently, the firm does not need to undertake dissipative activities that
investors will observe with little or no effort; rather, they can assume that investors will take
the trouble to observe the signal. Similarly, they need not seek durable emblems of dissipation,

since potential investors can always review financial records (an investor need not wonder
whether the current dividend is representative -- he can simply look it up). Thus, one can
entertain general doubts about models with money burning without being skeptical about the
specific model examined in this paper.

Our analysis is also based on some highly restrictive explicit assumptions, but most of

these are adopted only for the sake of analytic and expositional simplicity. We have already

mentioned that the extension to cases with many different types of conspicuous and
inconspicuous goods is relatively straightforward.

It is somewhat more difficult to derive

equilibria for models in which there are more than two types of agents. However, it can be
shown that our results survive this modification. We refer the reader to Bernheim [1991a1 for
an analysis of a related model; the arguments here would be similar.

33

7. Conclusions
We have presented a formal model of conspicuous consumption, and have examined the

characteristics of equilibria when conspicuous goods are produced by a competitive industry.

We have found that these characteristics differ fundamentally from those obtained in more
standard models. Several characteristics have intriguing potential implications for public policy.

First, the existence of positive profits does not necessarily imply that competition is in any way

imperfect. Second, within the context of our model, a properly designed luxury tax amounts
to a tax on pure profits, and is therefore non-distortionary. Both conclusions contrast sharply
with traditional thinking based on more standard models.

34

References

Aeppel, Timothy, "BMW, Despite Success, Is Acting Like It's Under Siege," Wall Street
Journal, February 19, 1992, p. B4.
Akerlof, George A., "A Theory of Social Custom, of which Unemployment may be One
Consequence," Ouarterly Journal of Economics, 1980, 95, pp. 749-775.
Allen, Michael, "Personal Bankniptcy Claims New Victims: Wealthier Americans," Wall Street

Journal, June 26, 1991, p. Al.
Basmann, R.L., D.J. Molina, and D. J. Slottje, "A Note on Measuring Veblen's Theory of
Conspicuous Consumption," Review of Economics and Statistics, 1988, 70, pp.535-540.

Basu, Kaushik, "Monopoly, Quality Uncertainty and 'Status' Goods," International Journal of
Industrial Organization, 1987, 5, pp. 435-446.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, "Tax Policy and the Dividend Puzzle," Rand Journal of Economics,
1991a, 22, pp. 455-476.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, "A Theory of Conformity," mimeo, Princeton University, 199 lb.
Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate, "Understanding Welfare Stigma: Resentment and Statistical
Discrimination," mimeo, Princeton University, 1990.

Braun, Ottmar L. and Robert A. Wicklund, "Psychological Antecedents of Conspicuous
COnsumption," Journal of Economic Psycholory, 1989, 10, pp. 161-187.
Carton, Barbara, "Bankruptcy Gets Personal," Boston Globe, August 28, 1991, p. 41.
Cho, In-Koo and David M. Kreps, "Signaling Games and Stable Equilibria," Ouarterlv Journal
of Economics, 1987, 102, pp. 179-221.
Cole, H., G. Mailath, and A. Postelwaite, "Social Norms, Saving Behavior, and Growth," 1991,
CARESS, Working Paper No. 91-14.

Creedy, John and D.J. Slottje, "Conspicuous Consumption in Australia," June 1991, Research
Paper Number 307, University of Melbourne.
Downey, Kirstin, "Antonelli's Lifestyle Survives Bankruptcy," Washington Post, December 14,
1991, p. A12.

Frank, Robert H., "The Demand for Unobservable and Other Nonpositional Goods," American
Economic Review, March 1985, 75, 101-116.

Fershtman, Chaim and Yoram Weiss, "Social Status, Culture and Economic Performance,"
1992, Tel-Aviv University.

Hylton, Richard, "Sometimes Those Bare Necessities Include Yacht Docking," New York

Iim, August 25, 1991, Section 4, p. 5.

35

heland, Norman, "On Limiting the Market for Status Signals," February 1992, University of
Warwick.
Jones, Stephen R. G., The Economics of Conformism, 1984, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Leibenstein, Harvey, "Bandwagon, Snob, and Veblen Effects in the Theoiy of Consumers'
Demand," Ouarterly Journal of Economics, May 1950, PP. 183-207.
Milgrom, Paul and John Roberts, "Prices and Advertising Signals of Product Quality," Journal
of Political Economy, 1986, 94, pp. 796-821.

Ng, Yew-Kwang, "Diamonds are a Government's Best Friend: Burden-Free Taxes on Goods
Valued for their Values," American Economic Review, 1987, 77, pp. 186-191.
Shenon, Philip, "Irate Wife, Talky Mistress, Shellshocked General," New York Times, August

1,1991.

Veblen, Thorstein, The Theory of the Leisure Class: An Economic Study of Institutions, 1899
(1970 edition), London: Unwin Books.

36

C,)

E

h$ —
U)

u)

C

0(/,

LIJ

C')

LL

>

