NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GREENBACK RESUMPTION AND SILVER RISK:
THE ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF MONETARY REGIME CHANGE
IN THE UNITED STATES. 1862-1900

Charles W. Calomiris

Working Paper No. 4166

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1992

I thank Jeremy Atack, Michael Bordo, Karen Lewis, Larry Neal, Hugh Rockoff, and seminar
participants at the Wharton School, the University of Illinois, and the NBER Summer Institute
on the Development of the American Economy for helpful comments. This paper is part of
NBER's research programs in Development of the American Economy and Monetary Economics.

Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4166
September 1992
GREENBACK RESUMPTION AND SILVER RISK: THE
ECONOMICS AND POLITICS OF MONETARY REGIME
CHANGE IN THE UNITED STATES, 1862-1900

ABSTRACT

This paper begins by developing a framework for price and interest rate determination

under suspension of convertibility during the national banking period. The model is applied
to interpret unanticipated price level shocks and expected deflation during the period of
greenback inconvertibility(1862-l879), and to explain forward discounts on the dollar during

the 1890s, which saw substantial risk of a return to suspension of convertibility. Special
features of dollar value risk during the 1890s, including an endogenous supply of governmentlicensed money (national bank notes), and a time-varying probability of a long-run switch to
silver, require a different model of speculative attack from the standard approach which
assumes a government-controlled supply of money.

The salient empirical findings of the paper are: (1) Ex ante real interest rates were
higher than nominal interest rates during the 1870s, and lower than nominal interest rates

during the silver-risk episodes of the mid-1890s. (2) Runs on the dollar in the 1890s mainly
reflected concerns about short-run convertibility, and small depreciation of the dollar
contingent on suspension, rather than a likely immediate switch from gold to a permanently

depreciated silver standard. (3) Expected deflation in the l870s accounts for the apparent
weakness of the procyclicality of prices, using annual data for the national banking period.
Once one takes account of shifting expectations of inflation, unanticipated movements in
prices and output are much more closely related.

Charles W. Calomiris
Department of Finance
University of Illinois
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER

I, INTRODUCTION
An enduring contribution of macroeconomic theory in the 1970s and 1980s was its emphasis
on the role of expectations of future behavior in causing current movements in asset and commodity

prices. While this approach had been applied to the valuation of stocks and bonds, the contribution of
recent macroeconomics has been to translate the asset-pricing approach to the problems of

understanding movements in exchange rates and price levels by taking explicit account of policy
processes and agents' expectations (Muth, 1961, Sargent, 1973, Dornbusch, 1976, Krugman, 1979,

Sargent and Wallace, 1981, Flood and Garber, 1983, 1984, Obstfeld and Rogoff, 1983, Obstfeld,

1986, Grilli, 1986, 1990). In particular, these models showed that a complete analysis of the price
and exchange rate processes requires an explicit description of the money-supply process, and explicit

modeling of anticipations of possible switches in monetary regimes. In a fixed-exchange-rate regime,

promises of convertibility will only be convincing if government reserve holdings and long-run fiscal
policy make those promises credible.

Uncertainty regarding future monetary regimes was a central feature of American political and
economic life in the second half of the nineteenth century. From 1862 to 1879 the U.S. operated on
a greenback standard with no convertibility maintained between the greenback and gold. Following a
decade of bitter political struggle over resumption of convertibility, the greenback became convertible

into gold in January 1879. But after resumption of convertibility, a new threat to the dollar emerged

in the form of the free-silver" movement. The goal of this movement was to re-establish a
bimetallic standard, which would have led to a de facto switch to a depreciated silver dollar standard.
These struggles were the defining characteristics of party platforms and national political campaigns.

The soft- and hard-money wings of the Democratic party were described in terms of their positions on
Greenback resumption in the I 870s and free coining of silver during the years of silver controversy

from 1876 to 1896. President Grant's most controversial actions included his resistance to greenback
supply increases, and his veto of inflationist legislation in 1874 (Unger, 1964). William J. Bryan's

famous speech at the Democratic convention in 1896 decried the cross of gold that threatened the
crucifixion of America. Massive outflows of gold from the Treasury in the mid-1890s threatened to
exhaust Treasury gold holdings and led President Cleveland to call Congress back into session to deal
with the problem.
Economists and historians have emphasized the potential depressive effects of currency risk

through its effects on interest rates and international capital flows during the 1890s. Friedman and

Schwartz (1963, 1982) and Garber (1986) argue that silver risk increased g_ costs of borrowing,
because anticipated possible increases in the price level (reflected in high nominal interest rates g

jg) were not realized (that is, the United States stayed on the gold standard). Conversely, other
research has stressed how the credibility of the maintenance of, or likely return to, the gold standard
at other times has been beneficial in lowering the costs of private and public finance (Bordo and

Kydland, 1989, Calomiris, 1988a, 1988b, 1991).
Despite the importance of greenback and silver regime risks for American financial history,

there have been only a few attempts to quantify the importance of the political events of this period
using the tools of the recent rational-expectations literature. In this article, I will analyse the role that
anticipations of possible regime switches played in determining nominal variables during the

greenback suspension of convertibility and the silver crisis; use financial data to provide evidence of
regime-specific inflation expectations; and argue that accounting for monetary regime expectations and

risk are important for measuring ex ante real interest rates and for understanding some apparent
departures from the normal procyclicality of the price level during this period.
With respect to the era of greenback suspension, in section 11, I argue that anticipations of
future resumption set current prices and exchange rates, and that nominal money was endogenous to
these expectations. Moreover, institutional constraints on the money-supply process imposed

important dynamic restrictions on the price process. While the supply of greenbacks was restricted,

national bank notes were the marginal component of the supply of paper currency. The real supply of
national bank notes was an increasing function of expected inflation. In equilibrium, the zero profit
condition for national bank currency issues required expected deflation. Thus current prices reflected
not only long-run expectations of the price level, but also expected deflation.

In section III, I analyse the struggle over silver during the last decades of the nineteenth
century. Silver risk ultimately concerned the maintenance of the token status of silver currency,

which was threatened by the (unlikely) possibility of a return to "free silver" after 1878. Building on
the model developed in section II, I argue that the run on the dollar in 1893 reflected a relatively high
probability of a return to a suspension of convertibility. This, rather than the possibility of immediate
conversion to a silver standard, was the main risk underlying forward premia and depletions of the

Treasury gold reserve. I provide evidence that the probability of a switch to silver was never

substantial in the 1890s, even though it caused large increases in nominal interest rates and g.jtj
real interest rates.
The analysis in sections II and Ill suggests possible pitfalls for econometric studies of the
nrneteenth century U.S. economy that fail to take account of regime changes and regime risk, which

are explored in section IV. The nineteenth-century U.S. experience included episodes of substantial
expected deflation and inflation. These expectations were sometimes realized, and sometimes not.
Average expected inflation varied importantly over time, as did the relationship between money and

price, and the autocorrelations of either series. Nominal interest rates provide an underestimate of g
real rates of return during the greenback suspension, and an overestimate of

real rates of

return for some episodes in the early 1890s. At the same time, gjg real interest rates were
higher than gjjj rates during the early 1890s because of unrealized expected inflation. Ironically,
debtors, who had led the free-silver movement, suffered most from the uncertainty and high costs of
credit it created.

3

Macroeconometric models that assume unchanging money and price processes over the

nineteenth century are misspecified. Financial returns data from sections II and III can be useful to
distinguish between periods of expected and unexpected price change. To illustrate the potential
importance of taking account of regime change, I show that controlling for expected deflation during

the 1870s helps to explain the weak procyclicality of prices during the late nineteenth century. Once
one adjusts for shifts in expectations of price level change, prices and output exhibit much stronger
comovement.

II. GREENBACK ISSUES AND THEIR VALUATION UNDER SUSPENSION

The laws authorizing the creation of legal-tender notes (or greenbacks') beginning April
1862 were novel in three important respects. First, prior to this date no treasury securities had been
given private legal-tender status, although treasury notes were sometimes receivable in payment of

government dues. Second, unlike previous federal currency issues (the treasury notes of 1814 and the
demand notes of 1861), the legal-tender notes were neither convertible into gold upon demand, nor
useful for extinguishing gold-denominated liabilities like tariffs. Third, in contrast to earlier treasury
issues, vast amounts of greenbacks were issued, and the Treasury had authority (and later would be
required) to reissue any greenbacks it received. This made greenbacks an important permanent
component of the money supply. The 1862 legislation thus marked three important precedents of
lasting importance for U.S. monetary history: government encroachment in determining the numeraire
for private debts; a departure from specie-based government note issues; and a permanent government

role in providing a medium of exchange.'
During the greenback suspension domestic transactions were performed almost exclusively in

paper currency and paper-denominated deposits, and gold was driven from domestic circulation. The
exceptions to this rule were the Pacific states, where specific provisions were made to remain on a

4

gold standard (Lester, 1939). Until January 1875, there was no legislation establishing a timetable

for returning to convertibility into gold on demand. Convertibility was achieved, as promised, on
January 1, 1879, at which point specie and paper currencies once again circulated side by side.

Price and Exchanee Rate Determination

The value of greenbacks relative to gold (or other commodities) varied greatly from 1862

until the resumption of convertibility in January 1879. At their nadir, in July 1864, greenbacks were
valued in the New York gold market at less than 37 percent of their face value. Calomiris (1988b)
reviews the literature on the valuation of greenbacks. The primary controversy in this literature has

been whether the current supply of greenbacks, or news relevant for future government policy in
support of greenbacks, was the most important determinant of their value. I argue that the latter view

(espoused by Mitchell, 1903, 1908) seems to conform better to economic theory and available
empirical evidence.

There are three central components in my model of the price process under greenback
suspension. The first is expectation formation about the long-run future greenback value of gold (and
price level). The second is the institutional arrangement whereby the government licensed national
banks to provide money, along with related regulations relevant for the money-supply process. The

third is a money-demand equation.

The U.S. was on an inconvertible paper-money (greenback) standard from 1862 through the
end of 1878. Throughout that period the government promised eventual resumption of convertibility
at the gold-parity exchange rate, but it was not until 1875 that the Resumption Act made the timing of
that commitment explicit. That is not to say that expectations of resumption were constant prior to,
or after, the Resumption Act. Throughout the period other actions by the government influenced the

perceived probability of resumption. In particular, the greater the government's reliance on

5

greenback—denominated (as opposed to specie-denominated) debt, the less credible its commitment to

resumption was perceived to be (as shown in Calomiris, 1988b). And after the Resumption Act,
markets reacted during the 1876 election to the risk of a reversal of the commitment to resume on
January 1, 1879.
Resumption was a policy that would not have happened suddenly. Thus resumption
expectations concerned the price level at a distant point in the future. The relationship between
resumption expectations and the future price level can be summarized by the following expression
(which assumes, for convenience, an equivalence between the greenback price of gold and the price
level):2

(2.1)

E, P, =

a,(l) + (1-a), (P')

where a is the probability of resumption having occurred by time t+u, and P'> 1 is the expected

price level at t+u contingent on resumption not having occurred. For simplicity, I will think of P' as
predetermined.

The second ingredient in the model is the money-supply process, which was set, in part, by
government regulation. I assume that demand fixed the ratios of deposits and gold holdings relative

to paper currency. Gold was used primarily for foreign trade and for domestic transactions on the
West Coast (Lester, 1939). With regard to deposits, there were no legal restrictions or greenback
reserve requirements, and the assumption of a fixed ratio of paper money to deposits is defensible
empirically for this period.2 Under these assumptions it is sufficient to model the demand and supply
for paper currency to determine the equilibrium timepath of prices.
Paper currency consisted of two components, which were perfect substitutes: greenbacks and

national bank notes.4 The supply of greenbacks was exogenously set by policy, and was

6

unresponsive to changes in prices (see Calomiris, 1988b, for a detailed discussion). National bank
notes were issued by national banks, but were fully backed and guaranteed by the federal government.
National banks, in essence, were licensed to issue government paper money under strict regulations.
National banks held greenbacks and government bonds as required reserves against notes issued.
National bank notes were the marginal (endogenous) component of the paper money supply, and were

issued according to their profitability for national banks.6 In essence, national bank note issues were

a separable activity from the rest of banking. On the margin banks equated the profit from diverting
capital toward the creation of notes, or toward commercial lending (and deposit creation).
The costs of issuing notes consisted of the opportunity cost from diverting capital to (possibly)
lower-interest required government bond investments and zero-interest required greenback reserves,6

and a one-percent tax on notes issued. Calomiris (1988b, pp. 218-19) shows that, for a given iggi
marginal profit rate on alternative use of bank capital (s), we can write the zero-profit condition of
national bank note supply as:

(2.2)

s = L{ib - F(0.9q)i - 0.009J} - ii'

where L> 1 is Cagans (1965) leverage ratio on the use of bank capital for the creation of national

bank notes, 1b and i1 are the nominal interest rates on government bonds and loans (for the marginal

bank), q is the marginal bank's greenback reserve ratio (which varied by location), 0.009 reflects the

simple tax on bank note issues, and n is expected inflation.
Under risk-neutrality and fully integrated capital markets, s and the real rates of return on
government bonds and all banks' loans are equal, and expected inflation (deflation) is determined by
rearranging the terms in equation (2.2). This solution for expected inflation implies constant expected
deflation in equilibrium. Intuitively, the potential profitability of issuing national bank notes limits the

7

equilibrium rate of seigniorage (or inflation tax) and hence requires a negative rate of expected
inflation.

More generally, bank loan interest rates can vary across regions due to limitations on capital
mobility, and there is much evidence to suggest that such variation was important in the U.S. Unit

banking system (for reviews see Binder and Brown, 1991, Calomiris, 1992). James (1976) argued
that regional composition of national bank note issUes reflected such differences in bank lending

opportunity costs. Under the assumption of different given real lending rates across banks, the supply
of notes will be an increasing function of the rate of inflation, and the equilibrium rate of inflation
will be determined jointly by (2.2) and the demand function for currency,

(2.3)

(B/P), = b(Y, r + n') ,

b1

> 0, b2 < 0

where B is nominal paper currency (greenbacks plus national bank notes during the suspension), P is

the price level, b is the money-demand function, Y is real output, and r is the real rate of interest on
alternative assets.7 For simplicity, I follow the classical assumptions of predetermined real output

and real interest rates. The note-supply function is determined by summing across all banks. Banks
with high loan interest rate opportunities will be the last to devote capital to note issuing.
Conditions (2.2) and (2.3) solve for the equilbrium values of the rate of inflation (deflation),

the real stock of currency, and its components. We derive the time path of the expected price process
by beginning with F,

from (2.1), and solving recursively for the previous periods' prices using

the equilibrium rate of inflation (deflation). Given solutions for expected inflation (deflation), real
currency, and the price level over time, the money-demand equation implies the equilibrium nominal

amount of paper money holdings of the public, which consists of a predetermined amount of
greenbacks and an endogenous supply of national bank notes.

Figure 1 depicts the equilbrium in the currency market under two alternative specifications of

national bank note supply. Under integrated capital markets, all rates of return are equal and the
supply schedule is flat at the equilibrium rate of deflation. Under imperfectly integrated capital
markets, 1b < i1 and lb

< s+n', and the supply schedule will be upward sloping in expected inflation.

The kinks in the supply functions reflect the real value of predetermined greenback balances. If the
supply schedule is sufficiently steep, it is possible for the equilibrium to entail expected inflation

rather than deflation. Positive equilibrium expected inflation requires sufficiently large rates of return
on bank stock and loans relative to government bonds for the marginal bank, and is unlikely if there
are substantial additional costs associated with note issue (in addition to the 1 percent tax), as argued

by Champ, Wallace, and Weber (1992). For this reason, and because of empirical evidence for
expected deflation discussed below, it seems reasonable to characterize equilibrium price expectations
as deflationary during the suspension.
We can also use this model to understand the determination of the equilibrium amount of real

national bank notes issued under the post-1879 specie standard. In this case, either the supply of
government-issued currency in the hands of the public or gold will be the marginal component of
currency supply. In practice after 1879, gold coin and certificates were the marginal component, as

the supply of greenbacks remained fixed by law. Under the gold standard, the rate of inflation
mainly was determined exogenously by world markets for gold and other commodities, and the
expected rate of inflation under the gold standard was essentially zero (Klein, 1975, Shiller and

Siegel, 1975, Rockoff, 1984, Barsky, 1987). Now the zero-profit condition (2.2) alone will
determine the amount of national bank notes issued, such that the marginal issuer earns zero profits
when the expected inflation rate is zero. Thus the amount of national bank note issues should rise,
ceteris paribus, when moving from a regime with expected deflation to a regime with a zero expected
inflation rate.

9

Our model of money and prices under the greenback suspension has some interesting testable

implications. The price of gold (and price level) processes should have followed a random walk with
negative drift; individuals should have expected predictable deflation; news about the probability and
timing of resumption should have beers an important determinant of innovations in the price of gold
and price level; and (contrary to Friedman and Schwartz, 1963) the supply of greenbacks — an inframarginal component of the money supply — should have been relatively unimportant for price

Calomiris (1988b) provides evidence supporting each of these implications of the model,
including evidence of deflationary expectations, of the importance of fiscal-policy news, and of the
differential pricing of greenbacks and demand notes9, which is consistent with the asset-pricing

approach. On the causal role of greenbacks in determining other variables I presented results from a
vector autoregression among monetary aggregates, commodity prices, the price of gold, output, fiscalnews proxies and the interest rate which supported the statistical irrelevance of greenbacks for gold
and commodity price determination. News regarding the government's choice of numeraire for its
debt, however, was an important determinant of gold price movements — presumably because it
contained information about future government resumption policy.

For present purposes I wish to stress the empirical findings in favor of expected deflation, and
the measures of anticipated movements in prices. For mid-1869 through 1878 data are available on
gold- and greenback-denominated securities from which one can extract precise measures of expected

deflation only if one knows each period's default risk premium on railroad bonds. Column 4 of
Table I compares the actual annual rate of greenback appreciation at each point in time to the implied

forecast of the rate of appreciation assuming no variation in the risk premium. At each date shown in
the table I compare the actual rate of appreciation of greenbacks from that date to 1881 with the

10

forecasted rate of appreciation implied by the yield differential between greenback- and gold-

denominated bonds with that maturity.

There is clearly positive serial correlation in the measured forecast errors, which may reflect
either time-variation in the risk premium, or coincidentally serially correlated news. Positive
measured forecast errors suggest a time-varying risk premium, since it is not reasonable to suppose
that people expected resumption at greater than the parity level. The measured forecast errors are
consistent with the view that agents had been sanguine of timely resumption in the early 1870s. The
positive values of the forecast errors for the period prior to 1873 probably reflect a rising default
premium on railroad bonds after the Panic of 1873.'° Column 5 provides an alternative rough
measure of the appreciation forecast error under the assumption that the risk premium doubled (rose

from 1.1 to 2.2) after the Panic of 1873.
The estimated forecast errors in column 5 indicate that there were changes in expectations
regarding timely resumption. Times of relative pessimism include 1871, 1873-early 1874, and early
1876. In all three cases qualitative historical accounts support the view that these were times when
resumption policy was questioned. 1871 saw a change in Treasury policy which was perceived as a
signal of a possible significant increase in the supply of greenbacks and was regarded as a threat to
timely resumption. This policy was promptly reversed to restore confidence (see Dewey, 1903, pp.

360-361). The controversy wore on until Grant's veto of April 1874, which Dewey (1903, p. 361)
describes as 'a turning point in the agitation for an increased volume of treasury legal tender notes.
The estimates in column 5 support the view that resumption expectations rose after the veto.

The brief pessimism regarding resumption in early 1876 coincided with the political struggle

over resumption prior to the election of 1876. The Democrats were divided between "hard- and
soft'- money advocates. The desire to maintain unity and to attract soft-money independents led to a
tolerance of the soft-money minority in the Democrat-controlled Congress, and the possibility of a

11

swing toward repeal of the Resumption Act. Repeated attempts by soft-money Democrats to force
consideration of the repeal of the Act prior to the election were thwarted by procedural rules and then
finally by the nomination of the hard-money candidate, Tilden, in July. The repeal movement failed

to force the issue prior to the election in an attempt to extract a price for party unity. Tilden's empty
promises to postpone resumption and a party platform pledging the same were not viewed as credible

commitments. The nomination of Tilden in July had effectively put to rest any true threat of a
postponement of resumption. Even the House bill calling for postponement which passed August 5,
1876 was nothing more than a political ploy; it was kept vague deliberately and passed with a vote of

106 to 86, with 93 abstentions.
In summary, Table 1 indicates that much of the deflation of the l870s was anticipated.
Furthermore, changes in estimated resumption expectations coincide with some political events that
historians have pointed to as turning points in resumption expectations, particularly the election of
1876.

III. MODELING SILVER-STANDARD RISK AND EXPECTED INFLATION

Legislation demonetizing silver (the "Crime of '73') occurred in the midst of the controversy

over resumption of greenback convertibility. In response to fears of a decline in the value of silver
due to new silver discoveries, Congress discontinued the free coining of silver, and thereby prevented

a de facto inflation in the dollar numeraire (i.e., a change from a gold standard to a silver standard).
The "Crime' was first identified by the Greenbackers during the election of 1876 as evidence
of a creditor conspiracy to lower prices. The demise of the greenback inflationist movement after
1876 ushered in the free-silver movement as a substitute means for inflationist debtors (especially

farmers) to achieve an increase in the price level. Until that time, complaints about the end of free
coining of silver in 1873 were absent, and there was no political movement to speak of favoring the

12

free coining of silver (see Laughlin, 1896, Pp. 209-14, and Russell, 1898, PP. 150-91). According to
Russell (1898), worried Congressmen during the election of 1876 even claimed (disingenuously) to be

unaware of the abrogation in 1873 of free silver coining. From that point on, gold-standard
conservatives and inflationist pro-silver advocates struggled intermittently for 20 years over the

possible conversion from a gold standard to a silver standard.
The only pro-silver legislation to pass Congress during this period were two compromise
measures, the Bland-Allison Act of 1878 and the Sherman Purchase Act of 1890. Both provided for
the limited issue (not free coining) of silver coins or silver-related paper currency (i.e., currency
issued for government purchase of silver bullion). These acts were viewed as temporary measures by

silver advocates. The central goal of the pro-silver lobby remained the return to free silver. To
mitigate the inflationary consequences of a return to free silver (and thus make it more politically
attractive to hard-money advocates) Congress sponsored several international conferences from 1878

to 1892 (see Russell, 1898, for detailed discussion of each), which were designed to pursuade all

countries to adopt a uniform bimetallic standard. It was argued that if this could be achieved, then
the value of silver would be increased, and the return to free coining of silver could be accomplished

with little effect on prices. All of these conferences were unsuccessful, owing in part to the lack of
agreement over the form of the new bimetallic standard (limited or unlimited coining of silver) and
which silver-gold ratio should be adopted (Russell, 1898).

Beginning in the spring and summer of 1893, there was growing apprehension that the
continuing minting of silver in compliance with the Sherman Act, along with continuing net outflows

of resources from the Treasury owing to the decline in tariff revenues relative to expenditures, might
lead to a cessation of gold convertibility at the Treasury. These fears produced additional strain on
the Treasury through a dramatic increase in demands for conversion of paper currency (as shown in

Table 2). The continuing decline in the Treasury's reserves led to the repeal of the Sherman Act in

13

November 1893, which halted the increase in paper currency supply and helped the Treasury shore up
its stock of gold.

Free-silver advocates continued to call for a repeal of the Crime of '73. William Jennings
Bryan's Presidential campaign in 1896 saw a resurgence of a movement to permit the free coining of

silver, but Bryan's defeat marked the end of the pro-silver movement. The Gold Standard Act of
1900, and the gold price inflation of the late 1890s (which reduced debt burdens of pro-silver
farmers) ensured that the pro-silver platform would never return."
The risk of a return to free silver associated with Bryan's election campaign is easy to
understand, but the potenital risk to the gold standard in the aftermath of the Sherman Act, and the
emergence of a perceived increase in numeraire risk in 1893 can only be understood within the

context of the specific political struggle that gave rise to the minting of silver coins and the issuing of
silver certificates from 1878 to 1893, and the economic constraints that affected the value of these
token currencies.

Leeislative History

Several pieces of silver-coining legislation were proposed and struck down in Congress. The
Act of 1878 was a compromise between the inflationist forces who advocated free coining of silver,

and those who fought any potential threat to the gold standard. According to the provisions of the
Act, the Treasury would purchase between $2 million and $4 million worth of silver (in market value)

on the open market. Thus as the gold price of silver declined, more silver dollars would be coined
for any given value of silver purchased. The silver would be coined and placed into circulation by

the Treasury through government purchases. Silver coin would be returned to the Treasury in one of
two ways: either in payment of any dues to the government, for which the coins would be received at
their face (not intrinsic) value; or through exchanges of coins for silver certificates, which would be

14

backed 100 percent by the silver so deposited with the Treasury. In addition to new issues of coins

and certificates, coins and silver certificates previously returned to the government in payment of
taxes, tariffs, or other dues could be returned to circulation through the regular course of government
purchases.

Under the Bland-Allison Act, silver coins were not convertible directly into gold. Yet silver
currency issued under the Bland-Allison Act always traded at its face value. As Laughlin (1896)
recognized, and as discussed in detail below, tax payment parity can be as good as a convertibility
option for maintaining a token's value if tax payments are large enough relative to token currency.'2
The Sherman Act of 1890 essentially was a continuation of the Bland-Allison Act, but

required larger monthly purchases of silver -- $4.5 million (in coin produced). The Sherman Act

differed from the Bland-Allison Act in three other respects. First, the amount purchased each month
was not a fixed amount of silver in dollar units of bullion purchased, but a fixed amount of silver in

face value of currency produced. Thus the amount minted did not fluctuate with the gold value of
silver, as before. Second, rather than issue silver coin which was convertible into silver certificates,
the Treasury would use newly authorized Treasury notes to buy the silver bullion. Third, the policy
of the Secretary of the Treasury was to redeem these notes on demand in gold.'3 The only
substantive differences between the Sherman Act and the Bland-Allison Act were the amount of token

currency issued, and the Treasury's voluntary commitment to redeem Treasury notes in gold on

demand. The other differences were neutral with respect to their effect on the currency issued and
the potential threat to the gold standard.

Modeline the Potential Collanse of the Gold Standard

The possible collapse of the gold standard did not occur in the lS9Os, although I will show
that the discussion of contemporaries and evidence from market indicators are consistent with

15

significant moments of concern regarding short-run convertibility, and a small implied probability of a

long-run switch to silver. Modeling the risk of dollar depreciation entails imagining a possible, but
unrealized (counterfactual) world. The goal is to construct a coherent model of the possible
suspension or collapse of the gold standard for the 1890s which is consistent with a variety of
observed data, and with the fears voiced by sophisticated financial observers of the time.
Perhaps surprisingly, despite the importance of the silver crisis years of the 1890s for
American financial history, there has been only one attempt to construct a formal model of the

potential threat to the gold standard posed by silver, namely Grilli (1990). Grilli (1990) proposes a
'speculative-attack model in which the amount of gold currently in the treasury is positively related,
and the amount of outstanding paper currency negatively related, to the probability of maintaining the

gold standard. Short-run reductions in the gold reserve, or increases in the currency supply, increase
the risk of a collapse of the gold standard because, by assumption, the long-run money-supply growth

process is assumed to be an extrapolation of the short-run process. Not surprisingly, the period of
recession and low tariff revenues (partly due to the revised schedule of duties under the McKinley
Tariff) was one of high deficits, short-run decumulation of gold in the Treasury, and -- under the
provisions of the Sherman Act — increase in outstanding silver-related currency. These facts,

combined with Grilli's method for estimating the long-run money supply, explain the run on the
dollar in 1893 as a rational expectation of an inconsistency between the pledge to maintain the gold
standard and the long-run expected money supply.
Despite some attractive features of this model, the treatment of the money-supply and deficit

processes is an important weakness. As Grilli's framework recognizes, what matters most for fixedexchange rate credibility is the long-run viability of the gold standard. One necessary condition for
maintenance of the gold standard is the transversa1ity condition" for the government's ability to
maintain gold convertibility in the future, which he argues depends on the long-run factors governing

16

deficits and the supply of currency. But government credibility, and post-suspension dollar prices, do
not always depend exclusively on predetermined changes in the government supply of money, or on
government deficits.

Consider what would have happened to the price level if during the l890s çjgt gold
convertibility had been suspended, but it remained a certainty that the government would eventually

control deficit-driven expansion of money and return to gold convertibility. The post-suspension price
level would be determined using the model developed in section 11 above. Dollar depreciation at the
time of suspension would be a function of the expected duration of the suspension and the equilibrium
expected deflation implied by the zero-profit condition governing the marginal supply of money

(national bank notes), as in equation 2.2. As in section Il, the money supply would be endogenous to
the price level. Suspensions anticipated to be short-lived would have little effect on the price level.
If the government's ultimate commitment to gold were uncertain, and if the only other
possibility were the adoption of a silver standard (by act of Congress), then the price level at the time
of the suspension of convertibility would be determined by the expected duration of suspension and

the equilibrium rate of deflation, and by the probability-weighted future price levels under either the
gold or silver standard (as in equation 2.1 above).

Grilli's model of the l890s differs from mine in three important respects. First, he envisions
a range of long-run outcomes for the value of the dollar other than the two alternative specie
standards (silver or gold) that were at the focal point of the debates in the I 890s. Second, he views
the money-supply process as the driving force of long-run price determination. In contrast, my model
stresses the endogeneity of money supply through national bank note issues, and stresses long-mn

expectations of government support for gold. Third, Grilli argues that short-run increases in deficits
in the l890s threatened the long-run viability of the gold standard.

I am convinced by Bohn's (1991)

evidence that short-run deficits never constituted a long-run threat to gold during this period.

17

Bohn's (1991) study of deficit processes in the U.S. from 1792 to 1988 argues that increases
in deficits elicited reductions in expenditures and increases in taxes that prevented deficits from

threatening the money-supply process. Bohn employs an error-correction framework to show that the
government responded to deficits as if it were preventing the violation of its intertemporal budget

constraint. Deficits eventually hit 'reflecting barriers' and triggered government policies to prevent
continuing deficits and monetization of debt. Thus the high deficits of the l890s (see Table 4) likely
were not expected to persist, and thus they would not be expected to influence long-run money-supply
growth.

Grilli's model also equates a change in government currency with a change in total currency
outstanding, ignoring the important role of national bank notes as the marginal component of currency

supply under suspension of convertibility. As noted above, the presence of national bank notes has
important implications for the determination of the price process. Consider, for example, what would
happen if the government credibly announced a future switch to a silver standard and an immediate
suspension of greenback convertibility, but constrained the growth of greenbacks to zero and refused

to mint silver freely in the interim. The money supply would adjust immediately to the new policy
through an increase in national bank notes, and the dollar would depreciate immediately to a level

consistent with long-run establishment of free silver minting and interim expected deflation. This
example illustrates the pitfalls of viewing the money supply as predetermined, and the importance of
incorporating long-run expectations of silver conversion and the supply function for national bank

notes into a model of price determination and speculative attack during the period of silver risk.

Token Silver Issues and the Maintenance of the Gold Standard

If, as Bohn (1991) argues, the short-run deficits of the 1890s posed no significant threat to the
long-run maintenance of the gold standard, what about the token currency acts themselves? Did the

18

Bland-Allison or Sherman Acts, ig, threaten the gold standard through their effects on the money
supply, or in some other way? An investigation of the possible role of the silver acts requires a
detailed analysis of the various components of currency and the factors governing their supply during
the 1890s.

By the l890s the supply of currency in the United States consisted of full-valued gold coins
and gold certificates, paper currency in the form of greenbacks and national bank notes (direct and

indirect obligations of the government to redeem in

gold or silver on demand, depending on

which served as the specie numeraire for the monetary system), and silver token currency (silver

coins, silver certificates, and Treasury notes of 1890).

Assume for simplicity that all forms of token and full-valued currency trading at par are
perfect substitutes in a physical sense for transactions and storage purposes, and that there is an

exogenous (growing) real demand for currency, M, (expressed in gold units). Furthermore, consistent
with the provisions in both silver acts, assume silver currency is receivable in payment of taxes at par

with gold.
The silver-token-currency supply process implied by the two Acts can be summarized by:

(3.1)

S,=xt-E CF.-G,),

where 5, is the stock of silver token currency in circulation at time t, x is the constant amount of new
token currency issued per year (roughly $2 million per month under the Bland-Allison Act and $4.5
million per month under the Sherman Act), T, are the annual tax payments made in silver, and G, are

19

the government purchases made with token currency previously received in taxes)4 The S process
is bounded from above by xt because, by definition, the sum of the G, terms must be less than or
equal to the sum of the T, terms.

An attack on the currency could have occurred as a result of token currency issues if either of
two conditions regarding expectations of the long run were violated. First, if people believed that the
supply of government-issued token currency in the hands of the public (silver tokens plus greenbacks)

expected to prevail in the future would eventually overtake the total real demand for currency, then
gold would disappear and token currency would cease to be an inframarginal component of the money

supply. In this case, the tax transversality condition would be violated. The prices of gold and
commodities eventually would be determined by the intrinsic value of the silver dollar. Given the
real demand for money and the exogenous-supply component of money (greenbacks, a limited supply
of token silver and Treasury notes), national bank notes would increase endogenously to equalize total

supply and demand of currency at a depreciated value of the dollar. Expected deflation would
characterize the transition to the long-run establishment of free coining in silver.
A second possible violation of the tax transversality condition might occur even if the total

stock of token money were not expected to overtake the total real demand for money. If the ratio of
the stock of token currency to the flow of tax payments were expected to become sufficiently high
permanently, then individuals eventually would be able to avoid using gold for tax payments forever.
In this case, the tax transversality condition would again be violated, and tax receivability would not

ensure current parity of the two currencies.0 If this were expected to occur and the government
were not expected to act to support the currency through maintenance of convertibility into gold on
demand, then there would be an immediate collapse of the gold standard.

In both these scenarios, the collapse of the gold standard is immediate. An expectation of a
future violation of a transversality condition leads to an immediate run because there can be no

20

forecastable excessive capital losses on token currency in equilibrium, and because the supply of
national bank notes is endogenous (thus nominal government currency does not determine the current

value of the dollar).
These theoretical possibilities of a collapse of the gold standard through expectations of the

increasing supply of the exogenous component of token currency, however, do not appear to be
relevant empirically. One cannot reasonably argue that a permanent continuation of the Sherman Act,
and other government policies in place in the l890s, would have led to token currency overtaking

total currency demand, either in terms of money stock holdings or tax payment flows. Under existing
law, the supply of greenbacks was fixed at $346.7 million)6 Thus any indefinite continued
expansion of token currency under existing law would have had to come from the silver acts
themselves. Money-demand and taxes are both tied to the real economy, would be reasonably
expected to grow at some rate over time, and could never be permanently overtaken by a linear
function like ax. That is, in comparing the long-run growth of money demand and token currency,

(3.2)

lim (M0e")/(xz +

where g is the rate of increase of money demand, and N is the constant ceiling on other paper

currency supplied.
Empirical evidence suggests that the exogenous component of nominal token currency would

never have exceeded the total demand for currency in gold units, and thus there was no real risk of
token currency displacing gold. The total amount of currency in circulation (currency outside the

Treasury) grew at roughly 4 percent from 1878 to 1898, from $729 million to $1,840. These were
not extraodinary years with respect to the business cycle, and therefore serve as useful benchmarks

21

for long-run money-demand growth. From 1878 to 1890 $351 million in silver currency was created
under the Bland-Allison Act, while total money demand increased by $702 million. Gold in
circulation rose substantially (by $350 million), while national bank notes fell $129 million, as Table

3 shows.7 Clearly, an indefinite continuation of the Bland-Allison Act could not have displaced
full-valued currency at any time.

By mid-1890 total currency in circulation was $1,431 million. The Sherman Act implied an

annual issue of $54 million in Treasury notes. An expected four percent annual growth rate for
money demand, however, implies that total money demand would be expected to increase each year

by upwards of $56 million. In fact, from 1890 to 1893 gold in circulation actually increased $33
million, while total currency holdings increased $165 million (consistent with a roughly 4 percent

growth rate))i Thus even the larger increases in silver currency due to the Sherman Act never
threatened to displace gold by overtaking total money demand (see the related discussion in Friedman

and Schwartz, 1963, pp. 128-34).
In summary, I have argued that absent some other change in policy affecting the long-run
credibility of the gold standard, the currency emissions from the Sherman Act of 1890 could not have
threatened the gold standard.

Free-Silver Risk and the Run on the Dollar
Notwithstanding the above arguments regarding the irrelevance of deficits and token currency
supply for long-run maintenance of the gold standard and the token status of silver and paper

currency, clearly there was substantial concern in 1893 and thereafter regarding the maintenance of

the gold standard, which is visible in the financial press, the actions of Congress and President
Cleveland, and the data on redemptions of paper currency at the Treasury (see Table 2).

22

Moreover, the focus of much of this concern was the Treasury's gold holdings, and the threat

deficits and silver currency issues posed for the short-term maintenance of the reserve)9 How can
this evidence be reconciled with the above arguments regarding the irrelevance of token currency
growth and deficits for the long-run viability of the gold standard?

Irrelevance of token currency and deficits for the lpn-run viability of the gold standard does
imply their irrelevance for short-run convertibility. In the model presented in section II, even
departures from convertibility that are known to be temporary may still result in depreciation of the
dollar (and expected appreciation during the suspension, which returns the currency to par).
Moreover, return to gold after suspension would not have been certain since there remained a strong
constituency for free silver until Bryan's defeat in 1896. Even though suspending itself would have

no obvious effect on the probability of victory for free silver, suspension of convertibility implied
that current and subsequent perceptions of free-silver risk would be reflected in varying rates of
discount of the currency during suspension rather than a contraction of its supply (which, under
convertibility, would have maintained parity).
An additional necessary condition for suspension to result in depreciation is that tax

receivability would not provide an alternative form of short-run backing for the currency. Imagine,
contingent on suspension, that the public were able to return all paper currency to the government

(say, at the beginning of each month) in partial payment of tax obligations. That is, each period the
public pays in paper currency and gold, and the government immediately spends the currency it

receives. In this case, there would be virtually no depreciation in the currency, since it would

effectively be redeemed" each period at par in gold. This is only true, however, if the public must
pay some taxes each period in gold as well as in paper. If it were feasible to pay all taxes in token
currency, then taxes would not provide short-run support to the currency. Figure 2 plots the
proportion of tax payments made in gold (or gold certificates). These data indicate that at several

23

times from 1878 to 1896, and practically for the entire interval from 1892 to 1897, taxes were paid
almost exclusively in token currency. It seems reasonable to suppose that if suspension had
occurred — increasing the incentive to pay taxes in tokens -- people would have been able in the short

run to avoid paying taxes in gold, and therefore, tax receivability would not have provided an
alternative means of short-run support for the currency.

To sum up, it seems that the main threat to the gold standard in the 1890s was a temporary
suspension of convertibility that would have allowed the dollar to fall to a small discount. This
discount would have reflected three separate influences: the probability of the passage of free-silver

legislation during the period of expected suspension, the relative value of silver and gold in the

market, and the duration of the expected suspension. The higher the risk of free silver, the lower the
value of silver, and the higher the duration of suspension, the greater the potential post-suspension
depreciation of the currency.
The discount would not be influenced by the (inframarginal) supply of greenbacks and

Treasury notes. Unlike models of speculative attack in fiat-money regimes (e.g., Grilli, 1990), the
money supply would not be the exogenous forcing process determining the dollar's value in a postcollapse state. As during the greenback suspension, national bank notes would have become the
marginal component of currency supply, and the total nominal supply of money would have been

endogenous along with the price level. While the probability of an attack would be influenced by
short-run paper (and other token) currency outstanding relative to reserves, the post-collapse value of
the dollar would be determined by the combined influence of the risk of free-silver victory, the
relative value of silver, the equilibrium rate of inflation/deflation, and the expected duration of the
suspension.

The following informal model captures the essence of the problem. Consider a holder of
government paper currency. Assuming a shoe-leather cost to redeeming currency in gold

24

(alternatively, a convenience service to paper as opposed to gold currency) the currency holder will

run" the Treasury only if the expected capital loss of not doing so is sufficiently large. Depreciation

will only occur if reserves at the Treasury are eithausted (i.e., if there is a successful "attack). The
holder of greenbacks contemplating whether to run the Treasury must determine: (1) whether his
information sources indicate that the depreciation contingent on an attack is large enough to provide
an incentive for running the Treasury; (2) whether suspension is likely — that is whether other holders

of government currency are likely to agree with his assessment of the possibility of a run on the
Treasury; and (3) whether his decision to run the Treasury today, rather than postpone his decision

until tomorrow, will result in a change in the chance of his receiving gold if he does run (i.e.,
whether he will he is likely to be one of the first in line today but not tomorrow). Given that
individuals may disagree on the fundamental risks affecting the long-run value of the currency, they

will try to infer each other's decisions by observing the depletion in the governments reserve.
Furthermore, they will have incentive to act quickly as that depletion accelerates in order to avoid

being last in line. Thus as reserves fall, the possibility of a run increases for any given amount of
expected post-attack depreciation. Furthermore, for given levels of currency outstanding and reserves
in the Treasury, increases in expected post-attack depreciation will prompt action by increasing
numbers of currency holders (with diverse views regarding fundamental risk and possibly diverse
shoe-leather costs).2

One can write the probability of an attack as:

(3.3)

= v(R, N+S, P's, a, u), v1 < 0, v2, v3, v4, v5 >

0,

where R is the level of reserves, N+S is the supply of outstanding paper (and other token) currency,

P' is the silver price of gold, a is the probability of victory for free-silver at time t+u, and u is the

25

expected duration of the suspension (and delay in legislative decision-making regarding free silver

conditional on suspension). For simplicity, assume that suspension is expected to last for a fixed

duration, and let P' follow a random walk (thus at any time the value of P' is expected to remain
constant)

If suspension did occur, then the price level would be determined by:

(3.4)

e, = z(n, Q,, a,, u), a,, a,, a,, a, >

0.

As in Section II, n' would be determined by equations (2.2) and (2.3). The expected future price
level at t+u is determined by P' and a (as in condition 2.1), and the current price level is determined
by the expected future price level and the rate of expected deflation.

The unconditional expectation of the one-period ahead future price of gold at any time prior to
the occurrence of suspension is given by:

(3.5)

E,. e, =

(1

-

A,.)l + A1 z(xf, P'1, a,.).

Each period agents construct estimates of a, observe R, P', and N+S, and decide whether to
expend resources to demand redemption of their paper currency from the government. If enough
agents demand redemption, suspension of convertibility will occur.
Once suspension has occurred, agents know that suspension will end u periods after it begins.

At that time, either the government will successfully return to par convertibility in gold, or it will

announce a policy of 'free silver" coining, implying that the dollar price of gold will be equal to P'
a is the probability of the success of free silver. At the time of suspension, the price level expected

26

for u periods later is (l-a)1 + aP'. The current price level is derived from the price level at t+u and
the expected rate of dollar appreciation, which is given by equations (2.2) and (2.3).
Each period agents form expectations of the probability a suspension will occur, based in part
on their expectation of the "shadow exchange rate" -- the price of gold that would prevail immediately

after a suspension. The shadow exchange rate is an increasing function of P' and a, and A is an
increasing function of the shadow exchange rate.
The discounts on the demand notes of 1861 after the suspension of convertibility in December
1861 provide an example of the counterfactual small depreciation that could have occurred in the

1890s if the Treasury had suspended convertibility. As already noted, the demand notes were useful
for extinguishing tax liabilities denominated in gold. From December 1861 to March 1863 the

demand notes circulated at a discount relative to gold, and a premium relative to greenbacks. By
March 1863 they had disappeared from circulation, having been redeemed" in the interim through
tariff payments. The average discount rate on demand notes was roughly 4 percent during this
period, and discounts ranged from 0.5 percent (in late February 1863) to 9.2 percent (in late July
1862). By late February 1863 the comparable discount rate on greenbacks had risen to greater than
40 percent. Clearly, the difference between the gold value of greenbacks and demand notes reflected
the duration of their effective suspension periods, and the different risks associated with their long-run

convertibility. For demand notes, the risk was that tariff receivability would be discontinued prior to
the paying in of all demand notes. For greenbacks, the risk was that the promised long-run return to
gold would not occur.

Evidence on Depreciation Expectations Due to Silver Risk

How can one verify that silver risk during the l890s involved expectations of a small

depreciation, rather than the possibility of an immediate move to a silver standard? Abstracting from

27

risk premia, the interest rate differential between otherwise identical dollar- and gold-denominated

securities provides an estimate of the expected rate of currency depreciation. Short-term interest rate
data for choice two-name commercial paper in New York provide a short-run nominal interest rate

series for a default-risk-free instrument. Greef (1938, p. 56) claims that one New York bank's losses
on commercial paper during the troubled years 189 1-1895 amounted to a trivial 0.05 percent. A
riskiess gold-denominated interest rate for New York can be derived from prices of hills of exchange
(of New York banks) on London banks under the assumption that the pound faced no exchange rate

risk during this period. There were no references in the Economist to imminent collapse of the pound
or British exchange rate risk during this period, despite British promotion of the international
conferences on bimetallism. Indeed, British investors repatriated their capital investments in America

in response to silver risk, especially in 1g93n
Data from the National Monetary Commission (1910) on 60-day and 'sight" bills of exchange
prices can be used to construct a measure of the gold-denonominated interest rate in New York as

follows. Assuming "sight" bills were redeemable in 10 days (i.e., that it took 10 days to travel to
London from New York), then the ratio of the price of sight and 60-day bills traded in New York
today implies an interest rate in gold units over the 50-day period beginning 10 days hence. This can
be converted into a rough measure of the 60-day rate by multiplying by 6/5.
Table 5 reports 60-day nominal and real interest rates for the last week and day, respectively,

of each month from 1893 through 1896, and calculates expected depreciation (n') as the difference
between the two rates. These data indicate that at no point during the period did markets anticipate
any significant risk of a change from a gold to a silver standard in the near term, which is consistent

with the political history of the silver movement's uphill battle. Moreover, even a successful
campaign in Congress to switch to a silver standard would have taken much longer than sixty days to
complete. Rather than view the 2 percent sixty-day expected depreciation of the dollar in June 1893

28

as a 2.7 percent chance of an imminent conversion to the silver standard (using P. as the post-attack

price level, given in Table 5), one should view expected depreciation as the product of the
probabilities of a temporary suspension of convertibility and the expected immediate depreciation

contingent on suspension. For example, a 2 percent expected depreciation is consistent with a 20
percent chance of suspension and a 10 percent post-attack expected depreciation. Of course, there is
a wide range of probabilities whose product equals 2 percent, so it is not possible to estimate
separately the probability of suspension or the expected depreciation of the currency contingent on

suspension. If, as argued before, the depreciation of the demand notes in 1862 and 1863 is an
indication of the likely post-attack depreciation of the dollar in the l890s, then the range of reasonable
estimates of the probability of suspension in June 1893 can be narrowed to, say, 10 to 30 percent.
The estimates of expected depreciation reported in Table 5 should be viewed as upper bounds

on true expected depreciation for two reasons. First, 1 assume a zero depreciation risk premium;
second, I use the highest rate quoted for choice commercial paper as the definition of the nominal

interest rate.
The timing of the run on the dollar in 1893, evident both in the high interest rate differentials
observed for March through September and the redemptions of greenbacks and Treasury notes during

the same period, can be understood within the context of the model developed above. Two important
events increased currency risk during late 1892 and early 1893: the election of Cleveland and the
failure of the international conference on bimetallism. While Cleveland's hard-money views figured
prominently in his inaugural speech in March 1893, his plan for supporting the gold standard and
issuing debt remained unclear, and there was fear that he would wait too long to raise the necessary

resources (see the Economist, March 4, 1893, pp. 265-66, and March 11, pp. 289-90), making
suspension more likely. There was also concern that, as a Democrat, Cleveland might be more prone
to compromise with the soft-money wing of his party.

29

The increasing pessimism over the adoption of an international bimetallic currency policy

during 1892, and the indefinite recess of the international monetary conference in December 1892 -which would never reconvene -- led to a fall in the value of silver relative to gold, as people became

pessimistic of any future monetary role for silver as an international currency (see the Economist

December 10, p. 1544, December 17, p. 1577, and December 24, p. 1615). From January 1892 to
July 1893 the gold value of silver (l/Q) fell some 30 percent (Laughlin, 1896, p. 294). The collapse
of the convention also led to renewed pressure from the pro-silver lobby in Washington, as there was
no more reason to postpone unilateral action by the United States in anticipation of a joint

international bimetallic policy. While Grilli (1990) is correct to point to increased pressure on the
gold standard from increased currency supply and declining reserves, prior political news may have
precipitated much of the subsequent decline in the reserve position through its effect on expecations

and silver's value (i.e., an increase in a and P').
Cleveland's vigorous opposition to the Sherman Act, his success in convincing commercial

banks to help shore up the Treasury's reserve, and increasing Congressional support for his views -culminating in the repeal of the Sherman Act on October 30 — signalled Cleveland's commitment to

maintain parity and his skill in protecting the gold standard. Furthermore, the repeal of the Sherman
Act removed a major source of short-term pressure on the reserve.
One interesting feature of the data in Table 5 is the absence of any significant short-term

depreciation risk from November 1893 until late 1895. In particular, the data provide ltttle support
for Garber and Grilli's (1986) and Grilli's (1990) view that the Belmont-Morgan syndicate (of
February 1895) saved the gold standard. Instead they indicate that Bryan's candidacy was the only

substantial threat to the gold standard after the crisis of 1893. Weekly data on interest rates reported
in National Monetary Commission (1910, pp. 123-24) do not alter this conclusion. Indeed, from
November 1894 through February 1895 interest rates on top-quality two-name paper in New York

30

never exceeded 4 percent and did not vary much from week to week. There is no evidence from

interest rate differentials of any significant expected depreciation in the dollar during this period.
Garber and Grilli (1986) and Grilli (1990) echoed earlier historians

of the Belmont-Morgan

syndicate (Burke, 1899) in arguing that there was substantial concern over the Treasury gold reserve

in 1894 and 1895. The Resumption Act of 1875 gave the Treasury the power to raise funds through
any of the bonds authorized in the Refunding Act of 1870 so long as the bonds were sold at a price
greater than or equal to par. Effectively, this meant that bonds could be sold at yields less than or
equal to 5 percent. The Secretary of the Treasury used this power in January and November

1894.

But, as shown in Table 2, the depletion of the gold reserve accelerated in late 1894 and early 1895.
Garber and Grilli (1986) describe this as a run on the dollar, and argue that the Belmont-Morgan
syndicate of February 1895 ended the run.

The agreement with the syndicate gave the government an option to buy gold with bonds in

the future on demand, and required that at least half of the gold would be shipped from Europe. The
reason for this latter provision was that preceding bond issues were not deemed entirely successful in
shoring up the government's reserve, in part because domestic bondholders (who were required to
purchase bonds with gold) obtained much of their gold by redeeming paper currency at the Treasury

(Burke, 1899, p. 27). Alternatively, bond purchasers who used their own gold holdings to buy bonds
replenished their gold holdings by converting domestic currency into gold after buying the bonds.
Banks continued to provide gold to the Treasury in exchange for paper currency in 1894. but could
not compensate for the large private withdrawals by bond purchasers (Burke, 1899, pp. 27-9).
While the gold-purchase option clearly was of use to the government in 1895, it is not clear

that it was crucial to maintaining convertibility. On the one hand, it does seem that the very rapid
daily withdrawals of gold from the Treasury in late January (averaging more than $3 million per day
for the last seven days of the month) represented a lack of confidence in the gold standard.

31

Furthermore, this was reversed after the deal with the syndicate was announced in February. On the
other hand, however, the withdrawals in January seemed to reflect concern over the Administration's

willingness to continue to use its powers of bond issue. Burke (1899, p. 28) writes of the period
prior to the government's resort to the banking syndicate:
The first indications of a general withdrawal of gold for hoarding seems
to have been noticed on January 17. Eight days after the movement
culminated in the total withdrawal of over seven million in a single
day. Three days later the President sent his special message to
Congress and as nothing was done to allay public fears, withdrawals
continued to be heavy. Negotiations [with Congress] for a new bond
issue [in a form other than that allowed by the Act of 1870, which the
Administration viewed as desirable] were begun on January 30th and
withdrawals at once fell off and reached a minimum of $63,374 on
February 4th. Delay and rumors over some difficulty in negotiations
caused the withdrawals to increase to $390,302 on February 5th and to
$729,479 on the next day. Denial of the rumor again caused a falling
off in the withdrawals.
Once these plans failed, withdrawals began anew, and the government was forced to resort to the

syndicate as a backup measure. Thus absent the collapse of the earlier negotiations, and the fears that
Congress or the Administration might not act swiftly enough to issue bonds to protect the gold
standard, the syndicate may have been entirely unnecessary.
How can one reconcile the large withdrawals from the Treasury in December through

February of 1895 and the concern over the Treasury's reserve with the small interest rate differential
in Table 5? One possible explanation is that the procrastination of the Administration in issuing
bonds in early 1895 raised the possibility of a very brief suspension of convertibility, which would
have been expected to prompt immediate large issues of government bonds to replenish the reserve
(bonds could have been placed in foreign markets to avoid reserve depletion by domestic
bondholders).27 One can imagine that importers and exporters anticipating the possibility of a brief
suspension may have feared a postponement of immediate access to gold for international transactions.

32

This would explain the hoarding of gold from December 1894 through February 1895 without
implying a significant expectation of currency depreciation.

IV. INFLATION EXPECTATIONS AND THE PROCYCLICALITY OF PRICES
The preceding sections indicate that the 1870s and the 1890s saw periods of unusual regimespecific inflation expectations, due in the first case to expectations of resumption, and in the second

instance, to the perceived possibility of the collapse of the gold standard. One important implication
of these findings is that 'Phillips-Curve modeling of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries as a
single epoch, which implicitly assumes unchanging expected and actual price processes, may
introduce error into the measured relationship between output and price movements.

Since the seminal work of Friedman (1968), Phelps (1968), Phelps et al. (1970), and Lucas
(1972, 1973), researchers have emphasized the importance of expectations in modeling the

relationship between price and output co-movements. Interpretations of the price-output relationship
can be usefully grouped into three categories: models of wage and price rigidity (as in Blanchard,

1987, Fischer, 1977, Gordon, 1980, 1982, and 1990, Lucas, 1990, and Taylor, 1980), models of
imperfect information about monetary disturbances (Lucas 1972, 1973), or models of the allocative
effects of unanticipated price changes under nominal financial contracting (Bernanke, 1983, Bernanke

and Gertler, 1990, Calomiris, Hubbard, and Stock, 1986, Calomiris and Hubbard, l989a, 1990, and
Fisher, 1933). Despite important differences, these three modeling strategies agree that anticipated

and unanticipated changes in prices will be associated differently with output movements. In
particular, anticipated inflationary (or deflationary) disturbances will not be as strongly associated
with output growth (or decline) as unanticipated inflationary (or deflationary) disturbances.
The evidence for expected deflation in the 1870s and expected inflation in the 1890s, leads
one to expect weak or perverse association between output and price movements during these periods.

33

The predictions are clearer for the 1870s. During the 1870s expected deflation should not have been
associated with decline in output.

The effect of silver risk on the relationship between price and output in 1893 and 1896 is

harder to predict. On the one hand, the realized flat time path of prices was deflationary compared to
the expected price level (which incorporated the possibility of a switch to silver), and thus little
deflation could be consistent with large output declines. On the other hand, devaluation expectations
led to a flight to gold, which was deflationary (given some domestic autonomy in price
determination). For example, mid-1893 witnessed large declines in prices (see Calomiris and
Hubbard, 1989a). Furthermore, because expectations of devaluation were not uniform within 1893 or
1896, annual data on GNP and the GNP deflator (used below) may mask important short-run effects.
Any discussion of the pattern of association between price and output must acknowledge the

disagreement that currently exists over the proper measures of these variables for the mid-to-late
nineteenth century. Three commonly used annual series now exist: the Gailman-Kendrick series

(Gallman, 1966), the Balke-Gordon (1989) series, and the Romer (1989) series. Table 6 provides
annual data for real output and the price level from the two most recent sources.
Visual inspection of Table 6 shows that during the 1870s and 1890s the normal procyclical
pattern of association between growth in real output and growth in the price level is not immediately

visible. Nor does it seem to be consistent across sub-periods? The distinction between expected
and unexpected price change seems to be relevant for the pattern of association between output and
price. During the 1870s substantial deflation was associated with positive growth, particularly from

1875 to 1879. From 1892 to 1896 prices were essentially flat (in annual data), while output growth
was exceptionally slow. The output-price correlation (in log differences) increases substantially when

the 1870s are excluded from the sample. Using Romer's data the correlation rises from 0.056 to

0.387. Using Balke and Gordon's data the correlation rises from 0.103 to 0.231.

34

Table 7 provides a rough

means

for quantifying the importance of expected price changes in

modeling the association between output and price. I regress price growth on output growth, with
and without separate dummies for the 1870s and 1893/1896? These dummies should be thought of
as price-expectations-shift variables. The R-squared in the regressions rises markedly when the
dummies are included (from 0.011 and 0.003 to 0.327 and 0.239, respectively for the Balke-Gordon
and Romer datasets). The size of the coefficient linking price and output movements increases by a

factor of two using Balke and Gordon's data, and a factor of three using Romer's data. Consistent
with Klein (1975) and Barsky (1987), the constant term is essentially zero in all the regressions.
The dummy variable for the 1870s is of the predicted sign and large in both regressions, and
is statistically significant. It is also interesting to note that the Durbin-Watson statistic improves in

both cases in the presence of the dummy variables. As! have argued, the 1870s were unusual in that
there was persistent predictable deflation. This accounts for the reduction in serial correlation of
inflation disturbances once the mean rate of deflation in the l870s is controlled for.
The sign of the dummy for 1893/1896 is different in the two regressions, its size is small, and
it is statistically insignificant. As noted above, the marginal effects of anticipated inflation on prices
in the 1890s are difficult to predict, and difficult to measure in annual data.
This evidence suggests that future work on cyclical patterns in price change for other times
and places in which monetary regime changes occurred, or might have occurred, could benefit by
using financial returns data to distinguish between anticipated and unanticipated changes in the price

level. The importance of taking account of regime switching in analysing the procyclicality of prices
is supportive of Lucas' (1976) exhortation that econometricians take account of changes in

individuals' decision rules that follow from changes in policy regimes?

35

V. CONCLUSION
This paper has argued that modeling the money-supply process and the effects of expectations

of monetary regime changes yields important insights for macroeconomic historians. During the
expected deflation of the I 870s, nominal rates were lower than real rates, and substantial expected

deflation was accompanied by modest economic growth. During episodes of suspension risk during

the silver controversy of the mid-1890s, nominal rates were much greater than real rates. At their
maximum, in June 1893, annualized nominal rates were more than 12 percentage points above real

rates. The effect of silver risk on dollar depreciation expectations and nominal interest rates was due
in large part to the effect of long-term silver risk and short-term silver currency issues on the
depletion of the gold reserve of the Treasury, which increased the possibility of an attack on the
dollar and a suspension of convertibility.
In addition to the implications of our results for measuring

and

real costs of

borrowing, and for the debate over the Phillips Curve and the procyclicality of prices, these results
have implications for the international integration of capital markets and the operation of the "Atlantic

economy." In particular, real rates of interest between London and New York were much closer than
nominal interest rate differentials would suggest. Comparisons of long-term government bond yields
in Calomiris (1991) -- possible only after the elimination of numeraire risk on U.S. specie bonds in
1869 — and comparisons of short-term real interest rates (Calomiris and Hubbard, l989b) show that

real interest rate differentials between London and New York were small. Interest rate differentials
typically were less than 2 percent, and remained within a bandwidth of 3 percent.

36

NOTES

1. The perceived need for an inconvertible paper currency in early 1862 must be understood within
the context of policies and events of 1861. The first government currency issue of the Civil War was
the demand notes of 1861. These were convertible into gold upon demand, and useful for
extinguishing government tariff liabilities at par with gold. Like the treasury notes issued during the
War of 1812, these notes retained nearly their entire par value by virtue of their receivability for
duties even when, at the end of 1861, they were made inconvertible into gold on demand. The
government suspension of convertibility followed the suspension of the banking system in the face of
adverse news about government finances in December 1861 (the surprisingly bleak annual report of
the Secretary of the Treasury, and the threat of war with Britain over the Trent Affair).
Banks held large amounts of government securities in December 1861, and were unusually at
risk of a deterioration in government credit. When government credibility declined, banks were
threatened with insolvency, and were forced to suspend. Indeed, Hammond (1970) argues that
private legal-tender authority for a depreciated paper currency in 1862 was a disguised means for
bailing Out troubled banks, which had suffered from the decline in the value of government securities.
By linking all bank liabilities as well as assets to the government-currency numeraire, the government
insulated banks from the declining value of their holdings of government debt.

2. Calomiris (1988b) shows that, in fact, the price level and exchange rate were closely related at
short and long frequencies during the years of greenback suspension.

3. See Calomiris (1988b), Table I and footnote 2.
4. National bank notes were backed 111 percent by government bonds deposited at the Treasury, and
redundantly, by the full faith and credit of the federal government.

5. All national banks had an incentive to issue some national bank notes, because they were required
to hold a minimum amount of government bonds, which were used as collateral for the notes
(Hetherington, 1990). On the margin, however, national banks chose whether to buy bonds in order
to supply notes. Changes in the real supply of national bank notes reflected changes in bank
opportunity costs and changes in the price of government bonds, and were limited by a variety of
possible ceilings. See Calomiris (1988b, footnotes 3, 5, and 9), Friedman and Schwartz (1963, p.
23), Cagan (1965), James (1976), and Laughlin (1896, p. 249).
6. For simplicity, I assume risk-neutrality, so there is no partially offsetting benefit to holding
government bonds, and in equilbrium real rates of return on bonds and loans are equal.
7. I assume that the demands for currency and bank deposits are in fixed proportions, and hence
bank deposits can be excluded from the model. Calomiris (1988b) argues that, empirically, the
demand for currency is quite stable as a function of interest rates and income, Bordo (1989, p. 51)
correctly points out that there is much evidence for money-multiplier stability (and hence stability of
the currency-to-deposit ratio), but he incorrectly criticizes my model for assuming that the money
multiplier was unstable.

37

8. The predetermined supply of greenbacks might still matter for prices for two reasons: first, as a
signal of government resumption intentions, and second, if the supply function for bank notes is
upward sloping, through its effect on the location of the kink in Figure 1. A higher predetermined
supply of greenbacks will lower equilibrium expected inflation and increase the price level at each
date prior to expected resumption. Such an effect only would be significant economically if the
supply schedule were implausibly steep.
9. Demand notes were redeemable at par in payment of duties, but not convertible on demand into
gold. Expected continuing parity in tax payments kept demand notes trading nearly at par relative to
gold, until all demand notes were replaced by greenbacks. See Mitchell (1903) for a detailed
discussion.
10. In footnote 18 of Calomiris (1988b) I incorrectly argued against Fels' (1959) conjecture that
railroad risk had risen after 1873. I miscalculated that a rise in railroad risk implied an increase over
time in the numbers in column 4. In fact, the opposite is true, and the data provide some support for
Fels' position.
11. For a discussion of the link between agrarian unrest and financial distress during this period see
Stock (1984).
12. Laughlin later ignored the potential importance of gross tax backing in his discussion of the
threat to silver (pp. 272-3), and focused instead on the level of gold reserves, arguing 'to mean
anything, redemption must redeem on any and all occasions. Anything short of that is a sham' (p.
277). While this statement is not correct as a general proposition, my subsequent discussion will be
in agreement with Laughlin's emphasis on the gold reserve during this period, given that taxes
provide little means of immediate redemption for token currency after 1890.

13. The notes were redeemable in either gold or silver, at the discretion of the Treasury. But the
Treasury was charged in the Act with maintaining the various currencies on a parity with each other
in accordance with their legally defined ratio.
In this analysis, I treat the silver acts of 1878 and 1890 as expected to be permanent changes.
14.
This is not to say there was no possibility of repeal. Clearly, from the beginning there was a
possibility of repeal, especially if the acts would be found to threaten the gold standard. Ultimately,
repeal occurred in 1893 in response to just such a threat. Nevertheless, for purposes of argument, it
is useful to ask whether a permanent continuation of the acts by themselves could have threatened the
gold standard.

15. This 'tax transversality condition' was well understood by contemporaries as an important source
of support for token (or paper) currencies, and was employed to explain different relative prices
between token currencies with different tax backing. For example, Laughlin (1896, pp. 238, 253-8)
emphasized the role that tax arbitrage played in maintaining the currency issued under the 1878 Act at
par:
This [tax receivability] is a species of daily redemption of the silver dollar; for as gold has
hitherto been required.. .in payment of customs, now that silver dollars are receivable equally
with gold for that purpose, they must remain at par with gold until there is forced upon the
circulation more than is necessary for such uses.. In brief we have unconsciously created a

38

system of quasi-redemption of silver in gold by accepting silver at the customs when
otherwise gold would be demanded. (p. 253)

Laughlin also noted that the silver trade dollar, created by the Act of 1873, which was not receivable
in payment of taxes after its value fell in 1876, circulated at its intrinsic value and below the value of
the silver dollars created under the 1878 Act. The trade dollar continued to trade at a discount until
legislation in 1887 provided for its redemption at par in order to remove it from circulation.
Mitchell (1903) had referred to the tax parity constraint to explain the relative price of greenbacks
and the old demand notes of 1861. Demand notes were receivable at par with gold for customs,
while greenbacks were not. Otherwise they were equivalent — neither was redeemable on demand in
gold, and the two were physically similar. Demand notes maintained nearly their entire face value
while greenbacks fell to two-thirds of their face value. By early 1863 all demand notes had
disappeared from circulation, having been used in the interim almost exclusively to pay for customs
duties (Mitchell, 1903, p. 196). During 1862 and early 1863 demand notes received a higher
valuation because of their exoected usefulness for redeeming tariff obligations in future months.

16. The Act of May 31, 1878 forbade further retirement of greenbacks; thus all greenbacks
redeemed at the currency had to be reissued to maintain a fixed amount in circulation. National bank
notes were demand-determined under the gold standard. Unlike the pre-1879 period, expected long.
run inflation was near zero (see Barsky, 1987).
17. Data are from National Monetary Commission (1910), pp. 157-8.

18. Ibid.
19. For examples, see Ford (1895), Warner (1895), Burke (1899), and the following entries in the
Economist: December 10, 1892, p. 1544; March 4, 1893, pp. 265-66; March 11, 1893, pp. 289-90;
April 15, 1893, pp. 441-42; June 3, 1893, p. 656; June 10, 1893, pp. 690-91; July 22, 1893, p. 873;
September 9, 1893, pp. 1081-82; October 14, 1893, pp. 1225-26; October 28, 1893, pp. 1281-82.
20. Some observers argued that President Cleveland deliberately postponed shoring up the gold
reserve in 1893 to create an atmosphere of crisis to galvanize anti-silver support (the Economist, June
3, 1893, p. 656). Similarly, one can argue that allowing suspension might have worked against the
passage of free-silver legislation.
21. This model shares common features with information-based models of bank runs (Jacklin and
Bhattacharya, 1988, Charm and Jagannathan, 1988, Calomiris and Kahn, 1991, Calomiris, Kahn, and
Krasa, 1992).
22. See Roll (1972) and Calomiris (1988b) for supporting evidence during the greenback suspension.

23. Evidence for this view that capital was scarce during the early-mid 1890s comes from Wilkins
(1989, pp. 151-52, 580-81) and from contemporary chroniclers. The Economist of London provided
weekly analysis of U.S. capital markets, which often took the form of lengthy discussions of
problems of capital flight, which it linked to the risk of the switch to silver. See especially the
columns of March 4, 1893 (p. 265), March 11, 1893 (p. 289-90), April 15, 1893 (p. 442), and June
3, 1893 (p. 656). In the March 11 issue, for example, the foreign correspondent writes: 'it would

39

appear, therefore, that for some time longer doubts as to the ability of the Treasury to maintain the
parity of silver and gold will continue to act as a drag upon business in the States, to depreciate the
value of American securities, and to cause a certain uneasiness and want of stability in the European
money market" (p. 290).
24. In modern data for fiat-currency regimes the observed risk premium may be large, and the
forward rate may not be closely linked to the expected future spot rate. In the lS9Os, however, the
risk premium was likely a much smaller part of the forward premium. If potential depreciation over
short intervals was bounded by, say, 10 percent, then exchange rate risk would be relatively small
compared to the exchange rate risk in a fiat-money regime where money follows a random walk. My
model of potential depreciation, and the data in Table 5, imply small depreciation conditional on a
collapse of fixed parity.
25. The January and November issues of 5 percent coupon bonds were sold at substantial premia,
with respective yields to maturity of 3 and 2.88 percent (Burke, 1899, p. 32).
26. In February 1893 the Secretary had received assistance from New York banks. Six banks
voluntarily exchanged $8.25 million in gold for legal tender notes to support the gold reserve.
27. According to the Economist (March 11, 1893, p. 290): "Some doubts have been expressed as to
the possibility of placing any large amount of such bonds here, because of the possible disturbance to
the money market which would result from the shipment of gold to the States in payment for them.
No consideration of that kind, however, would deter investors from subscribing if reasonable terms
were offered. If they thought about the money market at all, they would leave it to take care of
itself, and a Government of the high credit of that of the United States is about as independent of the
goodwill of intermediaries as is our own. The ability of the States to borrow here, and, as a
consequence, to draw gold hence, need not, therefore, be questioned."
28. Of course, the formulation of the price-output relation varies, and need not take the form of a
consistent contemporaneous association between output and price growth. For example, Gordon
(1990) associates price and wage change with deviations of output from its potential level, which is
calculated using peak-to-peak benchmarks. It is beyond my current scope to join the ongoing debate
over the form of the Phillips Curve, or to provide new estimates of the Phillips Curve. Instead, I am
interested in pointing out the relevance of expectations for simple correlations between output and
price growth.
29. There is no good reason to treat prices an endogenous to output changes, as these regressions
(and most similar regressions in the Phillips Curve literature) assume. Indeed, Calomiris and
Hubbard (l989a, l989b) show that, in monthly data, price growth predicts output growth in Granger
causality tests and not vice versa. Furthermore, chroniclers of business cycle conditions tended to
view prices as leading indicators and economic causes of boom or decline, which is consistent with
the debt-deflation view of the procyclicality of prices.

30. In a related vein, in a recent study of wage adjustment in the U.S. and the U.K., Alogoskoufis
and Smith (1991) find important differences in Phillips Curves (the response of wages to cyclical
changes in employment and inflation) between the post-World War II and the pre-World War I
periods, and relate these to the different exchange rate regimes (price processes) governing these eras.

40

REFERENCES

Alogoskoufis, George S. and Ron Smith (1991). 'The Phillips Curve, the Persistence of Inflation,
and the Lucas Critique: Evidence from Exchange Rate Regimes,' American Economic Review
(December), 1254-75.

Balke, Nathan and Robert J. Gordon (1989). 'The Estimation of Prewar GNP: Methodology and
New Results,' Journal of Political Economy (February), 38-92.
Barsky, Robert B. (1987). 'The Fisher Hypothesis and the Forecastibility and Persistence of
Inflation,' Journal of Monetary Economics (January), 3-24.
Bernanke, Ben S. (1983). 'Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the
Great Depression,' American Economic Review (June), 257-76.

Bernanke, Ben S. and Mark Gertler (1990). 'Financial Fragility and Economic Performance,'
Ouarterly Journal of Economics (February), 87-114.
Binder, John J. and Anthony T. Brown (1991). 'Bank Rates of Return and Entry Restrictions, 18691914,' Journal of Economic History (March), 47-66.
Blanchard, Olivier J. (1987). 'Aggregate and Individual Price Adjustment,' Brookines Papers on
Economic Activity (1), 57-122.
Bohn, Henning (1991). 'Budget Balance through Revenue or Spending Adjustments? Some
Historical Evidence for the United States,' Journal of Monetary Economics (June), 333-60.

Bordo, Michael D. (1989). 'The Contribution of A Monetary History of the United States. 1867-

1.2Q to Monetary History,' in Michael D. Bordo, ed., Money. History, and International Finance:
Essays in Honor of Anna J. Schwartz (University of Chicago Press), 15-78.

Bordo, Michael and Finn Kydland (1989). 'The Gold Standard As a Rule, 'mimeo.

Burke, W. M. (1899). 'Bond Issues and the Gold Reserve,' Sound Currency (February), 17-32.
Cagan, Phillip (1965). Determinants and Effects of Chanees in the Stock of Money. 1875-1960
(Columbia University Press).

Calomiris, Charles W. (1988a). 'Institutional Failure, Monetary Scarcity, and the Depreciation of the
Continental,' Journal of Economic History (March), 47.68.
Calomiris, Charles W. (198gb). 'Price and Exchange Rate Determination During the Greenback
Suspension,' Oxford Economic Papers (December), 189-220.

Calomiris, Charles W. (1991). 'The Motives of U.S. Debt Management Policy, 1790-1880,"
Research in Economic History, Volume 13, 67-105.

41

Calomiris, Charles W. and R. Glenn Hubbard (1989a). 'Price Flexibility, Credit Availability, and
Economic Fluctuations: Evidence from the United States, 1894-1909,' quarterly Journal of
Economics (August), 430-452.
Calomiris, Charles W. and R. Glenn Hubbard (1989b). 'International Adjustment Under the Classical
Gold Standard: Evidence for the U.S. and Britain, 1879-1914, mimeograph.

Calomiris, Charles W. and R. Glenn Hubbard (1990). 'Firm Heterogeneity, Internal Finance, and
'Credit Rationing,'' The Economic Journal (March), 90-104.
Calomiris, Charles W., R. Glenn Hubbard, and James Stock (1986). 'The Farm Debt Crisis and
Public Policy,' Brookines Paners on Economic Activity (2), 441479.
Calomiris, Charles W. and Charles M. Kahn (1991). 'The Role of Demandable Debt in Structuring
Optimal Banking Arrangements," American Economic Review (June), 497-5 13.

Calomiris, Charles W., Charles M. Kahn, and Stefan Krasa (1992). 'Optimal Contingent Bank
Liquidation Under Moral Hazard,' mimeograph.
Champ, Bruce, Neil Wallace, and Warren E. Weber (1992). 'Resolving the National Bank Note
Paradox,' quarterly Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis (Spring), 13-21.
Chari, V.V., and Ravi Jagannathan (1988). 'Banking Panics, Information, and Rational Expectations
Equilibrium, Journal of Finance (July), 749-63.
Dewey, Davis R. (1903). Financial History of the United States (Longmans, Green, and Co.).
Dornbusch, Rudiger (1976). 'Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics,' Journal of Political
Economy (December), 1161-76.
Fels, Rendigs (1959). American Business Cycles. 1865-1897 (University of
North Carolina Press).
Fischer, Stanley (1977). 'Long-Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the Optimal Money
Supply Rule,' Journal of Political Economy (February), 191-206.

Fisher, Irving (1933). 'The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions,' Econometrica (October),
337-57.
Flood, Robert and Peter M. Garber (1983). 'A Model of Stochastic Process Switching,'
Econometrica (May), 537-51.
FlOOd, Robert and Peter M. Garber (1984). 'Collapsing Exchange Rate Regimes: Some Linear
Examples,' Journal of International Economics (August), 1-13.

Ford, Worthington C. (1895). 'Foreign Exchanges and Gold Movement in 1894 and 1895,'
Currency (October), 421-36.

42

Friedman, Milton (1968). 'The Role of Monetary Policy," American Economic Review (March), 117.

Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz (1963). A Monetary History of the United States. 1867-

19Q (Princeton University Press).
Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz (1982). Monetary Trends in the United States and the
United Kinedom (University of Chicago Press).

Galiman, Robert E. (1966). 'Gross National Product in the United States, 1834-1909,' in Output.
Employment, and Productivity in the United States after 1800 (Columbia University Press).
Garber, Peter M. (1986). "Nominal Contracts in a Bimetallic Standard, American Economic Review
(December), 1012-1030.
Garber, Peter M. and Vittorio Grilli (1986). 'The Belmont-Morgan Syndicate As an Optimal
Investment Banking Contract,' Eurooean Economic Review (June), 649-77.
Gordon, Robert J. (1980). "A Consistent Characterization of a Near-Century of Price Behavior,'
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedines (May), 243-249.
Gordon, Robert 1. (1982). "Price Inertia and Policy Ineffectiveness in the United States, 1890-1980,'
Journal of Political Economy (December), 1087-1117.

Gordon, Robert J. (1990). 'What Is New-Keynesian Economics?,' Journal of Economic Literature
(September), 1115-71.
Greef, Albert 0. (1938). The Commercial Paper House in the United States (Harvard University
Press).

Grilli, Vittorio U. (1986). 'Buying and Selling Attacks on Fixed Rate Systems,' Journal of
International Economics (February), 143-56.
Grilli, Vittorio U. (1990). 'Managing Exchange Rate Crises: Evidence from the l890s," Journal of
International Money and Finance ( ), 258-75.
Hammond, Bray (1970). Soverelanty and an Empty Purse: Banks and Politics in the Civil War
(Princeton University Press).
Hetherington, Bruce W. (1990). 'Bank Entry and the Low Issue of National Bank Notes: A Reexamination,' Journal of Economic History (September), 669-76.
Jacklin, Charles J. and Sudipto Bhattacharya (1988). 'Distinguishing Panics and Information-Based
Bank Runs: Welfare and Policy Implications,' Journal of Political Economy (June), 568-92.

James, John A. (1976). 'The Conundrum of the Low Issue of National Bank Notes,' Journal of
Political Economy (April), 359-67.

43

James, John A. (1985). "Shifts in the Nineteenth-Century Phillips Curve Relationship, National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 1587.
Klein, Benjamin (1975). 'Our New Monetary Standard: The Measurement and Effects of Price
Uncertainty," Economic inquiry, 461483.

Krugman, Paul (1979). "A Model of Balance of Payment Crises," Journal of Money. Credit and
Bankine (August), 311-25.
Laughlin, J. Laurence (1896). The History of Bimetallism in the United States (D. Appleton and
Company).

Lester, Richard A. (1939). "Retention of the Gold Standard in California and Oregon during the
Greenback Inflation,' Chapter 7, Monetary Experiments: Early American and Recent Scandinavian
(Princeton University Press), 161-174.

Lucas, Robert E. (1972). 'Expectations and the Neutrality of Money," Journal of Economic Theory
(April), 103-124.
Lucas, Robert E. (1973). 'Some International Evidence on the Output-Inflation Tradeoff,' American
Economic Review (June), 326-334.
Lucas, Robert E. (1976). "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique," in The Phillips Curve and
Labor Markets, eds. K. Brunner and A. Meltzer, Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public Policy, 19-46.
Lucas, Robert E. (1990). "The Effect of Monetary Shocks when Price Is Set in Advance,'
mimeograph.

Mitchell, Wesley Clair (1903). A History of the Greenbacks (University of Chicago Press).

Mitchell, Wesley Clair (1908). Gold. Prices and Waees Under the Greenback Standard (University
of California--Berkeley).
Muth, John F. (1961). "Rational Expectations and the Theory of Price Movements," Econometrics
(July), 3 15-35.

National Monetary Commission (1910). Statistics for the United States. 1867-1909 (Government
Printing Office).

Obstfeld, Maurice (1986). "Rational and Self-Fulfilling Balance of Payments Crises,' American
Economic Review (March), 72-81.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff (1983). 'Speculative Hyperinflations in Maximizing Models:
Can We Rule Them Out?," Journal of Political Economy (August), 675-89.

Phelps, Edmund S. (1968). "Money Wage Dynamics and Labor Market Equilibrium," Journal of
Political Economy (August), 678-711.

44

Phelps, Edmund S., et al. (1970). The New Microeconomics in Emnlovment and Inflation Theory
(Norton).
Rockoff, Hugh (1984). "Some Evidence on the Real Price of Gold, Its Cost of Production, and
Commodity Prices," in A Retrospective on the Classical Gold Standard. 1821-1931, eds., Michael D.
Bordo and Anna J. Schwartz (University of Chicago Press), 613-50.

Roll, Richard (1972). 'Interest Rates and Price Expectations During the Civil War," Journal of
Economic History (June), 476-98.
Romer, Christina D. (1989). 'The Prewar Business Cycle Reconsidered: New Estimates of Gross
National Product, 1869-1908," Journal of Political Economy (February), 1-37.
Russell, Henry B. (1898). International Monetarv Conferences: Their Purooses. Character, and
(Harper and Brothers).
Sargent, Thomas J. (1973). "Rational Expectations, the Real Rate of Interest, and the Natural Rate of
Unemployment," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (2), 429-80.

Sargent, Thomas J. and Neil Wallace (1981). 'Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic,' quarterly
gyjg, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis (Fall), 1-17.
Shiller, Robert and Jeremy J. Siegel (1976). "The Gibson Paradox and Historical Movements in Real
Interest Rates," Journal of Political Economy (August), 89 1-907.
Stock, James H. (1984). "Real Estate Mortgages, Foreclosures, and Midwestern Agrarian Unrest,
1865-1920," Journal of Economic History (March), 89-106.
Taylor, John (1980). 'Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts,' Journal of Political Economy
(February), 1-24.
Unger, Irwin (1964). The Greenback Era (Princeton University Press).

Warner, John D. (1895). 'The Currency Famine of 1893,' Sound Currency (February), 337-45.
Wilkins, Mira (1989). The History of Foreign Investment in the United States to 1914 (Harvard
University Press).

45

Table 1
Bond Yield Differantiala and Long—Run
(1)

(2)

AvereSe
Differential

Arecistion

Eeta.een GoLd

(Current

ad

Gree,-diacks

Yield

Jara.iary-Ji.r,e 1869

(3)

Expected

Differential Lesa

Differential for

u1y-0ecer

1878)

Aver,e Actual
Rate of

Greer6acks

Aççreciation

to

1881'

1.33
0.49
-0.52
-0.42

3.53
2.69

2.00
1.85

1.68

0.93
0.93

J,Ca.ary-JUe 1871

-1.01

JuLy-Deceter 1871

-0.95
-0.02

1.19
1.25

.)uly-Oecaer 1869

Jara.ary-Juie 1870

Ju(y-0ece,er- 1870

1.78

1.09

0.01

2.18
2.21

1.10
1.26
1.40

Jarooary-JLzae 1873

-0.09

2.11

-0.26

Jara.ary-Jis,e 1874

-0.65
-0.45

1.94
1.55
1.75

JanJary-JLrbe 1872
July-Eeceter 1872

JuLy-Eecr 1873

JuLy-0ecer 1874
Jasxary-.0.ne 1875
JuLy-Decether 1875

Ja,,.iary-Ju-,e 1876

July-0ecater 1876

arsary-Jue 1877

July-Dece,ter 1877
Jaraary-Juie 1878

Jxty-Deceer 1878

0.07
0.09
-1.19
-1.07
-1.22
-1.21
-1.32
-2.20

(4)

(5)

Açrectco

Areciation
Forecast

Error

(2)-(3)

forrcaot
Error

ALLo,Lr,s

Tiree-Varyire
Risk Preeii.aeA

1.53

0.43

0.84
0.75
0.85
0.10
0.15
0.92

-0.26
-0.35

-0.15

-1.00
-0.95

0.81

-0.18
-0.29

1.90

0.21

-0.89

1.39
1.60

0.55

-0.55

1.50
2.36
2.30
2.50
1.76
1.36
0.84
0.40
0.10

2.27
2.29
1.01
1.13
0.98
0.99
0.88
0.00

Appreciation

-0.05
0.25

-0.05

-0.09

-0.09

-0.01

-1.49
-0.63
-0.38
0.15

0.48
0.10

0.25

-0.01
-1.49

-063

-0.38
0.15
0.48
0.10

r(J)) =d.
'The average of monthly exchange rate closings for the period was used to
measure the current gold price of greenbacks. The 6e of 1881 were redeemable
June 1, 1881.
°Thia calculation sets the risk premiuxo
for 1074—1878.

Source Calomiris (1988b),

equal

to 1.10 for 1869—1873, and 2.20

Table 3
Gold ltedosnptions and the Gold $teaerve
(Thousand.)
Redemptions in Gold daring Each Month

January,
February

United Staino
Notes
$152
206

1693

476

March

438

Apnl
May

June
July
August
September
October

January, 1853
February
March
April

517

176,156
$356
19,193
3,461
7,566
26,541
22,170
13,923
4,741
937
3,048
7,800

636

.

October

2.543
7,035

August
September
October
Nnveenber
December

January, 1896
February
Marnh
April
May

June
July
August
September
October
Nooember
December

January, 1897
February
March

April
May

June
July

August
September
October
Nooember
December

30,820
3123,941
...

4,926
25,052
16,54.6
4,251
1,038
2,348

222

August

January, 1895 .

$11,497
13,821

332,063

13,368
4,210

November
December

698

.J2a!
356,261

344,494
3119

10,933
2,266
6,072
25,131
20,708
.

4,471
1,178
264

599

1,158
197
433
217

July
.

4,53.8

9,235

1,190
144
263
299
296

June

July

4,088

316
292

7,483

May

June

6,141

1,824

12,569
12,017

December

February
March
April
May

2,423

5,091

3,285

September
October
Nurember

September .

287

1,042

August

..

$312
476
733
697
622

1,654
5,149

520,297
$5,137
3,017

July

T°

168

3,073
772

.

$160
270
256
25$

$15,954
$6,359
5,811

May
June

January, 1894 .
February
March
April

nO 1690

335

4,036
1,049
2,264
283
406
5.700

Nonentber
December

Treasury Notne

343,415

4,785
609
734

735
545
3,123
15,219
17,120
1,849
15,616
19,738
3124,337
315,636
21,081
6.381
6,755
21,727
7.964
15,275
11,389
3,437
9,907
3,137

858
3124,597
3594
521
679
6,935
8.045
6,555
5,072
2,879
2,596
2,505
1,787
1.815
340,023

Source: Burhe (1899), p. 24.

$238
8,211
1,191

1594
1,410
1,461

556
532
300
555
715
1,038
317,803
51,702
776
280

234
432
402
704
345
258
318
418

425
36,344
3762
656

341
695
116

_aL!21
3141,744
345,118
5,561
1,089

1,018
1,166
1,046
3,627

16,564
17,377
2,167
16,035
20,213

316,449
21,737
6,857
7,131
22,040
8,261

1,510

17,285

581

12,370

5,225
2,167
925

12,074

273

567
838
519
203
241
144
191
324
204
34,554

$119,575
122,122
121,815
119,910
114,232
114,342
110,444
114,156
119,396
124,006
124,410
121,267

$108,182
103,284
106,892
97,011
95,049
95,485
99,203

96,009
93,582
64,361
62,955
60,392

565,650
106,527
106,149
109,202
78,693
64,873
04,976

55,217
08,870

61,362
105,425
36,244

344,706
87,086
90,643

91,247
99,151
507,512
107,236
100,335
92,912
92,943
79,334
63,262

3131,181

475
376
313
297

39,461
3352
403
570

Net Gold in
Treasury, Coin
and Bollion

4,661
4.562

__._U2!
3134,058
3945
924
1,249
7,102
8,883
7.113
5,275
3,116
2,742
2,695
2,110
,,3J9Jj

144,577

349,846
123,963
128,546
125,394
108,345
101,700
100,719
100,958
124,030
117,127
131,510
137,317

3144,855
148,659

151,786
153,341
544,320
140,791
140,858
144,216
547,553
153,573
157,304
150,912

Table 3
Currency in Circulatinn, lB7Gl9OO
(5 aillinn)

Treasury

GaLd

1876

1877
1878
1879
1880

1881
1882
1883
1884
1885
1886
1887
1888
1889
1890

Silver

Silver

dollars

certif.

25.0
25.0
25.0

337.9
320.9
301.6
315.8
319.8
314.7
313.2
307.9
296.3
306.4
315.9
300.5
302.7
326.9
327.3
318.5

0.4
38.8

347.1

36.0
40.4
39.3
52.9
55.4
56.5
54.8

71.7

1892
1893
1894
1895
1896
1897
1898
1899
1900

408.9
407.9
496.0
483.8
455.9
520.2
649.6
724.3
618.6

316.1
321.3

331.4

0
0

NA
18.9

1891

Ilational
Bank notes

0

28.4
32.2

342.8
360.4
377.8
396.4
377.0
375.2
406.7

U.S. notes

(Oreettacks)

NA
NA

312.6
355.9

340.7

of

1890

NA

220.6

110.5

notes

6.0
57.2

97.4
105.1
89.2

139.1
196.6

56.5

59.9
57.1
58.1
52.0

52.8
52.7
53.0
57.6

63.4
67.6

.

255.5
294.7
310.5
327.3
322.1

330.0
321.6
336.3
362.8
391.2
401.3
408.5

38.1
87.1
132.5
140.1

118.0

98.1
86.6
100.2

93.1
70.6

319.0
270.6
266.9
225.6
248.8
290.2

311.1
322.8

Other6

TotaL

311.7

55.1
58.1
71.5

727.6
722.3
729.1

321.4

8.4.7

336.2

75.9
79.8
69.0

818.6
973.4
1 ¶15.8
1,182.3
1,241.9

346.4
352.5

349.8
333.5
309.1

24.1
116.5

198.6

306.9

140.3

278.4
249.1
210.8
183.3
164.0
167.4
171.9
199.7

148.6

206.6
215.3
224.8
224.6
230.1
294.1

172.3

196.7
194.6
197.8

253.7
154.7
186.5
156.5
137.7
163.5
126.5
124.2
20.4.5

1,23.6.4

1,291.2

1256.1
1,315.2
1,371.4
1,397.5
1,431.2

1504.3
1,620.0
1,596.2
1,675.7

1606.2
1521.6
1,659.7
1,839.9
1,955.5
2,074.7

°Dates are for June.
6lncludes gold certificates, subsidiary silver and currency certificates of
1872.
Source: National Monetary Cocsoieaion (1910), pp. 158—163.

Table 4
Gcvernaent

Receipts

and Outstanding Debt, 1876—1900

Ordinary Receipts

TotaL (8 miLLion)

Per Capita (8)

1876

281

6.2

1877
1878

279
262

1879

292

6.0
5.5
6.0

1880
1881
1882
1883
1884
1885
1886
1887

357

7.1

382

7.5

Pttlic

Debt Less Cssh in Treasury

(stat (S

siotise,)

2,061

2,019
1,999

1,996
1,919

Per Capita (8)

45.7

43.6
42.0
48.9

38.3

1,675

35.5
31.9

6.9

1,539

28.7

6.1

1,439
1,375

24.5

1,820

409

7.8

370
334

337
351

383
378

1889
1890

6.0
6.1
6.5
6.3

391

6.4

420

6.7

1891

356
374

5.6

5.7

852
842

1894

343
336

839
899

1895

5.2
4.5

322

4.7

18%

902

13.3
13.1

315

4.5

13.6

1897
1898
1899

399

5.6

955
987

13.8

4.42

6.1

1,027

14.1

555

7.5

15.6

1900

574

7.5

1,155

1,108

14.5

1888

1892
1893

(ource: NationaL None tary

Conniosion (1910), pp. 253-255.

1,282
1,175
1,063
976
891

26.2
22.3
20.0
17.7
15.9
14.2
13.3
12.9
12.6

Table 5

Expectations of Depreciation

1893

1

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

1894

1
2
3
4
5
6

7
8
9
10
11

12
1895

1

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

1896

1
2
3
4
5
6

7
8
9

10
11
12

Nominal 60-Day Rate,
Two-Name Choice 60-Day
Commercial Paper
in New York

Gold 60-Day Rate,
Derived from Exchan8e
Markets in New York

0.75

0.49
0.49
0.49
0.74
0.86
0.49
0.62
1.12
0.49
0.74
0.62
0.62
0.62
0.49
0.37
0.37
0.37
0.37
0.25
0,37
0.37

0.92

1.33
1.00
1.33
2.50
2.50
2.50
1.33

0.92
0.80
0.63
0.58
0.58
0.50
0.50
0.50

0.50
0.50
0.54
0.58
0.46

0.50
0.50
0.50
0.67
0.67
0.63
0.46
0.46
0.50
0.63
0.83
0.83
0,67
1.00
1(X)

0.83
0.92
0.83
0.75
0,75
1.00
1.67
1.17
1.67
0.92

0.67

on London

0.25

0.37
0.25
0.25

0.37
0.37
0.37
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.37
0.37
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.50
0.62
0.75
0.81
0.62

0.26
0.43
0.84
0.26
0.47
2.01

1.88
1.33
0.84
0.18
0.18
0.01
—0.04

0.09
0.13
0.13
0.13
0.13
0.25

1.54
1.54
1.55

1.54
1.55
1.70
1.76
1.74
1.72
1.79
1.84
1.89
2.02
2.15
2.01
2.05
2.05
2.04
1.99

0.17

1.98

0.21
0.21

2.01
2.04
2.12
2.15

0.13
0.25
0.25
0.30
0.30
0.26
0.19
0.19
0.25
0.38
0.58
0.58
0.30
0.63
0.75
0.58
0.67
0.58
0.50
0.50
0,75

2.14
2.05
1.94

1.17

1.94
1.91
1.87
1.86
1.86

0.55
0.92
0.11
0.05

Two-name, choice conu'nercial paper is the highest rate reported for the last week of each month,
as given in National Monetary Commission (1910), pp. 122—25. The gold rate is constructed from
60-day and sight bills of exchange traded on the Lot day of each month, from National Monetary
Commission (1910). pp. 192—95. P', the silver price of gold, is from Laughlin (1896), Appendix II,
Tables F and 0, arid (or 1896. the continuation of the same series in the Ecosomul.

1.93
1.94
1.94
1.94
1.93
1.90
1.91
1.94
1.91

1.93
1.96
1.94
1,94
1.94
1.96

1.96

Table 6
Real

Gfl and the ONP Deflator,

Rwer (1989) Estimates
0*19

Veer

(sltLisns of 1982
Oo(tars)

lsçtlcit

Price Deflator
100)
(1982

75.609
75.464
76.952

10.246
9.661

1872
18Th
1874

89.605
94.863

1875

97.684

1876
1877

¶04.628
110.797

1878
1879

118.906
127.675
139.990

9.423
9.329
9.169
8.945
8.539
8.207
7.627
7.378
8.166
7.998
8.267
8.14)
7.730
7.260
7.173
7.240
7.352
7.402
7.256
7.166
6.893

1869
1870
1871

1880
1881
1882
1883
1884
1885
1886
1887
1888
1889
1890
1891

1892
1893
1894

1895
1896
1897
¶898
1899
1900
1901
1902
1903
1904
1905
1906
1907
1908
1909
1910
1911
1912
1913

96.205

143.580
149.307
152.097
155.684
157.789
164.375
169.433
168.940
175.030
182.964
191.757
204.279
202.616
200.819
215.668
221.438
233.655
241.459
254.708
264.540
284.908
291.572
306.239
307.127
323.162
351.499
361.920
346.800
368.870
383.888
391.858
407.112
424.492

9.769

7.036

6.603
6.513
6.342
6.383
6.572
6.799
7.136
7.086
7.335
7.420
7.502
7.676
7.8Th
8.206
8.145

8.422
8.645
8.603
8.944
9.009

1869—1913

BaLks and Gordon (1989) Estimates
Rest 0*9
(Bitt ions of
1982 Dot tars)

78.2

84.2
88.)
91.7
96.3
95.7
100.7
101.9
105.2

(09.6

liepticit DIP

DefLator
(1982 • 100)

10.49
9.98
9.86
9.60
9.51
9.25
8.85
8.51

8.38
7.87

123.1

7.64

137.6
142.5
151.6
155.3
158.1
159.3
164.1
171.5

8.03
7.99
8.16
7.88
7.53
7.35
7.35
7.35
7.47
7.48
7.30
7.30

170.7
181.3
183.9
189.9
198.8
198.7
192.9

215.5
210.6
227.8
233.2
260.3
265.4
297.9
303.0
311.7
323.5

353.2
367.7
362.0
342.2
382.1
383.8
396.0
418.9
435.4

7.21

7.23
6.85

6.74
6.76
6.66
6.75

6.86
7.00
7.04
7.14
7.33
7.39

7.40
7.64
7.98
7.81
7.82
8.14
8.12
8.32
8.40

Tabi• 7
Prics Changs Rsgrsssions, 1869—1913

Oepe.tent

Ysriebte

d to (5*9 defLator)

Outs

Constant'

Source

Coefficient
d in (rest 059)'

siLk.

•O.0077

0.0671

s-o

(0.0056)

(0.1002)

1870*

18931%

dowry1

ô.neiy'

82

Durbin-

Watson

0.011

1.33

0.327

1.70

0.003

1.54

0.239

1.85

Gordon

(1989)
to (059 defLator)

5a(ke

-0.0016

0.1069

iS

(0.0053)

(0.0883)

RaTer

-0.0053

(1989)

(0.0086)

0.0611
(0.1693)

Ra,er

-0.0001
(0.0082)

0.1777
(0.1581)

-0.0349
(0.0082)

0.0063
(0.0171)

Gordon
(1989)

d In (099 deflator)

d In (089

defistor)

(1989)

istandard errors in parentheses.

--0.0420
C0.0119)

--

-0.0045
(0.0239)

Equilibrium in the Currency Market

Demand

0

Supply

(B/P)0
Figure 1

CusXoins Receipts and Means of Payment

I

I

I

- 100

80
U

C-

0

E0

C

3:

V

-40

d

Li

-20

dl
Li

-0

z
di
I-i

=di
g

o

C.
C.

t

(0

0.

nn

di

t
cm

0.
4.

15

C
V

13

U
C-

V
C-

7
5
3

1687

i689

1691

jgj

F±gure 2

1695

187

