                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      RELATIVE-PRICE CHANGES AS AGGREGATE
                                 SUPPLY SHOCKS




                                          Laurence Ball

                                      N. Gregory Mankiw




                                    Working Paper No. 4168




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 1992




We are grateful for research assistance from John Driscoll, Antonio Fatas, Stefan Opers, and Boris
Simkovich, and for suggestions from Ben Bernanke, Alan Blinder, David Romer, and Richard
Starts. Financial support was provided by the NBER, NSF, and Sloan Foundation. This paper is
part of NBER's research programs in Economic Fluctuations and Monetary Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                              NBER Working Paper #4168
                                                              September 1992


                        RELATIVE-PRICE CHANGES AS AGGREGATE
                                   SUPPLY SHOCKS

                                            ABSTRACT



    This paper proposes a theory of supply shocks, or shifts in the short-run Phillips curve, based

on relative-price changes and frictions in nominal price adjustment. When price adjustment is

costly, firms adjust to large shocks but not to small shocks, and so large shocks have
disproportionate effects on the price level.      Therefore, aggregate inflation depends on the

distribution of relative-price changes: inflation rises when the distribution is skewed to the right,

and falls when the distribution is skewed to the left. We show that this theoretical result explains

a large fraction of movements in postwar U.S. inflation. Moreover, our model suggests measures

of supply shocks that perform better than uaditional measures, such as the relative prices of food

and energy.



Professor Laurence M. Ball                                  N. Gregory Mankiw
Department of Economics                                     Department of Economics
Fisher Hall                                                 Littauer 223
Princeton University                                        Harvard University
Princeton, NJ 08544                                         Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                                    and NBER
I. INTRODUCTION

     What determines the rate of inflation? Most macroeconomists agree that,

in the long run, the primary determinant of inflation is growth in the money

supply. The short—run behavior of inflation, however, is more controversial.

Certainly monetary policy and other determinants of aggregate demand have

important roles. Yet, since the l970s, many economists have also emphasized

the role of 'supply" or "price" shocks. The purpose of this paper is to

propose and test a new theory of supply shocks.

     Fundamentally, supply shocks are changes in certain relative prices. For

example, the famous supply shocks of the l970s were increases in the relative

prices of food and energy. As a theoretical matter, it is not obvious why

such relative—price changes are inflationary. According to classical theory,

real factors determine relative prices, and the money supply determines the

price level. For a given money stock, adjustments in relative prices are

accomplished through increases in some nominal prices and decreases in others.

Writing after the first OPEC shock, Milton Friedman (1975) applied this logic

to argue that this event should not be inflationary:

     It is essential to distinguish changes in relative prices
     from changes in absolute prices. The special conditions
     that drove up the price of oil and food required purchasers
     to spend more on them, leaving them less to spend on other
     items. Did that not force other prices to go down or to
     rise less rapidly than otherwise? Why should the averaoe
     level of prices be affected significantly by changes in the
     price of some things relative to others?

    This paper proposes an answer to Friedman's question. Friedmans

analysis implicitly assumes that nominal prices are perfectly flexible. By

contrast, we work with a model in which firms face menu costs when they adjust

                                      1
their prices and, therefore, have a range of inaction in response to shocks.

We apply this model to the question of how the economy responds to shifts in

relative prices that, in the absence of frictions, would leave the price level

unchanged. When a firm experiences a shock to its desired relative price, it

ohanges its actual price only if the desired adjustment is large enough to

warrant paying the menu cost. That is, firms respond to large shocks but not

to small shocks. Therefore, large shocks have a disproportionately large

impact on the price level in the short run.

     In this setting, shifts in relative prices g affect the price level.

Specifically, the model has the novel implication that changes in the price

level are positively related to the skewness of relative—price changes.

Suppose, for example, that the distribution of desired changes in relative

prices is skewed to the right. In this case, a few firma desire large price

increases, which are balanced by small desired decreases by most firms. Since

firms respond more quickly to large shocks than to small shocks, the desired

increases occur more quickly than the desired decreases. Thus the average

price level rises in the short run. Conversely, if the distribution of

desired adjustments is skewed to the left, the decreases occur more quickly

than the increases, and the price level falls.

     This point is more than a theoretical curiosity: it explains a large

fraction of the variation in inflation in the postwar United States. Using

four—digit PPI data, we examine the cross—sectional distribution of price

changes in each year from 1949 to 1989. We find substantial variation in the

third moment of this dietribution: in some years the distribution is fairly

symmetric, whereas in others it is skewed sharply to the left or right. As

our model predicts, innovations in aggregate inflation are associated with the
skewness in relative—price changee. The OPEC oil shocks are episodee that fit

our theory: the large increasee in the prices of oil—intensive goods generated

positive skewness, and aggregate inflation rose. Our empirical finding is,

however, quite general: skewness and inflation are related throughout our

sample, including the pre—OPEc era of the 1950's and 1960's.

     After this introduction, the paper contains seven sections. Sections II

and III present our theoretical model. Our theoretical results illustrate the

ability of menu—cost models of price adjustment to generate novel empirical

predictions. We also compare our model to previous theories of supply shocks.

     Section IV describes our data and documents the variation in the cross—

sectional distribution of price ohanges. Section V establishes the

relationship between the first and third moments of price changes. We also

briefly review previous studies of inflation and relative prices. Previous

authors sometimes note a positive relation between the first and third

moments, but generally they do not emphasize it. Instead, previous work

focuses on the relationship between the first and second moments——that is, on

the relationship between inflation and the variability of relative prices. We

show that the inflation—skewness relationship is in fact stronger than the

inflation—variance relationship.

       Section VI explores the idea that asymmetric relative—price changes

represent aggregate supply shocks——that is, shifts in the short—run Phillips

curve. We experiment with alternative measures of supply shocks in simple

Phillips—curve equations that relate innovations in inflation to detrended

unemployment. We find that measures of asymmetries in price changes capture a

large fraction of the shifts in the short—run Phillips curve. Most important,

these variables outperform traditional measures of supply shocks, such as the
changes in the relative prices of food and energy.

      Section VII turns from time—series regressions to an examination of

several historical episodes. Our model provides a theoretical foundation for

traditional accounts of episodes such as the OPEC oil shocks. More important,

our approach explains episodes that have previously been viewed as puzzling.

One example is the sharp decrease in inflation between 1951 and 1952. Arthur

Okun (1975) wrote that "inflation screeched to a halt in 1951——s development

that still stands out in retrospect as an intriguing fortuitous mystery." Our

model helps solve this mystery, because the fall in inflation coincided with

substantial negative skewness in relative—price changes.

     Finally, Section VIII offers concluding remarks.



II. THEORY: AN INFORMAL OISCUSSION

     To build intuition, this section presents a heuristic discussion of our

basic theoretical points. The next section shows how our theory can be

formalized.

     A. The Intuition

     Our basic idea is illustrated in Figure 1, where we ask what happens when

firms are hit with a distribution of shocks to their desired prices. We

assume that the mean of the desired changes is zero; thus, if all prices were

adjusted, the average price level would stay the seine.    We assume, however,

that it is costly to adjust prices, so a firm adjusts only if its desired

change exceeds a cutoff. That is, firms have a range of inaction in response

to shocks. We assume that this range is symmetric around zero.

     Figure 1 shows how the skewness of the distribution of desired price

changes influences the price level. In Panel A, the distribution is


                                        4
 symmetric. In this case, firms with desired changes in the upper tail of the

 distribution——those above the cutoff——raise their prices, and those in the

 lower tail lower their prices. Because the tails are symmetric, the net

 effect is zero. In Panel B, the distribution of prices is skewed to the right

 (but etill has mean zero). In this case, the upper tail is larger than the

 lower tail. Thus more prices rise than fall, implying an increase in the

 overall price level. Finally, in Panel C, the distribution of shocks is

 skewed to the left, and the price level falls.

     Our model also implies a relation between inflation and the variance of

price changes, which is illustrated in Figure 2. If the distribution of

shocks is symmetric, an increase in the variance of shocks magnifies the two

tails proportionately, leaving the price level the same. If the distribution

is skewed, a larger variance magnifies the asymmetry in the tails, and thus

increases the change in the price level. That is, the variance has no

independent effect on inflation, but it interacts poeitively with skewness: a

larger variance is inflationary when the distribution is skewed to the right,

and deflationary when it is skewed to the left. Thus our model has a rich set

of implications about the interactions of the first, second, and third moments

of price changes.

     This argument takes shifts in the skewness of shocks as an exogenous

feature of the economy. This approach distinguishes our analysis from recent

theories in which asymmetries in the behavior of prices arise endogenously in

the presence of menu costs, despite symmetry in the underlying environment.

(For example, see Ball and Mankiw, 1992, or Caballero and Engel, 1992). A

natural question is what might cause the distribution of shocks to be skewed.

Most often, the answer is unusually large shocks to certain sectors. An OPEC
shock, for example, can raise the relative prices of oil—intensive products by

50 or 100 percent. These increases are generally not balanced by equally

large price decreases in particular sectors; instead, all other relative

prices fall by small amounts. This pattern implies a skewed distribution     of


relative—price changes.

    One limitation of this heuristic argument is that it concerns the

relationship between inflation and the unobserved distribution of shocks.

Empirically, one can only examine the relationship between inflation and

actual changes in relative prices. Yet, our formal model in Section III shows

that the relationship between first and third moments carries over to actual

price changes under reasonable conditions.

     B. Previous Theories of Suooly Shocks

     Informal Oiscussions: Although this theory of supply ehocke is novel, we

believe that it captures the spirit of some previous discussions. For

example, in arguing that food and energy shocks explain the inflation of the

1970s, Blinder (1982) confronts the classical argument that these 'special

factors" are irrelevant and that inflation is a monetary phenomenon. He

summarizes the argument as follows:

      There are "special factors' every year. In every year, some components
      of any price index are rising faster than the average. Thus, would it
      not be possible to use this methodology to brand all inflation as
      'special factor" inflation?

Blinder's answer is that the food and energy shocks of the 197Cc were

unusually large. He writes,

      The greatest year—to—year change in the energy index (between 1957 and
      1973] was 4.5% in 1970. By contrast, the annual rate of inorease of CPI
      energy prices from December 1972 to December 1979 was 15.2%.... Energy
      prices rose 21.6% during 1974 and 37.4% during 1979. The 1970s really
      were different, and I fail to see why a theory of inflation is more
      "scientific' if it ignores this fact.


                                       6
      At first glance, Blinder's argument seems weak, for the classical

 distinction between relative and aggregate price changes applies with     equal
 force to large and small changes. Our theory, however, suggests that Blinder

 is right in emphasizing the size of the energy shocks. Unusually large

 increases in prices are inflationary, because they occur more quickly than the

 smaller offsetting decreases.

      Models with Nominal Rioidities: A number of previous authors have

 presented models of the inflationary effects of supply shocks based on

 frictions in nominal price adjustment. A typical approach is to assume that

 some nominal prices are flexible and others rigid. Some authors assume that

oil or food prices are flexible and other prices rigid (for example,
                                                                         Gordon,

1975); others assume that nominal wages are rigid and output prices are

flexible (for example, Phelps, 1978; Oornbuech and Fischer, 1990, p. 496). In

these models, as in ours, a shift in relative prices can be inflationary.      For
example, if oil prices are flexible and other prices sticky, then an increase

in the relative price of oil causes oil prices to rise while other prices

remain constant, thereby raising the average price level.

     This approach is similar to our model in including a combination of

flexible and rigid prices. Indeed, one can view our model as providing     a

foundation for these earlier theories: oil prices often adjust flexibly

because the oil industry has a history of large shocks. Our model modifies

this approach in one important way, however. Rather than assuming that

certain prices are always flexible and others always rigid, our model allows

the flexibility of prices to be endogenoue and to vary acroes periods as

different industries receive large shocks.

      The two approaches, therefore, suggest different ways to measure supply


                                      7
shocks. If certain goods have particularly flexible prices, then inflation

depends on the changes in the relative prices of these goods. For this

reason, it ia common practice to include the relative prices of   food and

energy in Phillips—curve equations. (See, for example, Gordon, 1985).        By

contrast, in our model, particular relative prices matter only to the extent

that they create skewness in the overall distribution of price changes; for

example, moderate increases in oil prices are not inflationary. In our

empirical work, we test between particular relative prices and overall

skewness as measures of supply shocks.

     Theories of sectoral Shifts: The large literature on sectoral shifts

provides an alternative way to explain how changes in relative prices

influence the aggregate economy (for example, Lilien, 1982). These theories

posit that workers require a period of unemployment when moving among sectors.

Therefore, periods of high sectoral dispersion should tend to be periods of

high unemployment and low output. A corollary of the fall in output (which        is

usually not emphasized) is that the price level rises for given aggregate

demand.

       In this paper we do not directly test between labor—reallocation and

nominal—rigidity theories of the effects of sectoral shocks. Note, however,

that the driving force in the labor—reallocation theories is the extent of

 labor reallocation——that is, the variance of sectoral disturbances. This

 variance seems well proxied by the variance of price changes across

 industries. By contrast, our theory gives a special role to the skewness of

 price changes, which has no obvious role in the labor—reallocation theories.

 We present evidence below on the relative importance of the second and      third




                                         8
moments of price changes for explaining aggregate inflation.1



 III. THEORY: A FORMAL MODEL

      This section formalizes our theoretical ideas. Here, we emphaeize the

relationehipe among the momenta of actual price changea rather than those of

unobservable shocks. In addition, since our data are industry price indices

rather than individual prices, our model focuses on price behavior at the

industry level. We account for the fact that, within an industry, some

individual prices change in a given period and others do not.

     A. The Model

     Our basic framework ia a one—period model. The economy contains a

continuum of industries, each with a continuum of imperfectly competitive

firms. Within an industry, all firms have the same desired price. Initially,

all nominal prices are set at the desired level, which, in logs, is normalized

to zero for all industries. Then each industry experiences a shock: the

desired nominal price for the industry changes to 6. One can interpret the

shock as a shift in the industry demand or cost function. The shock 6 has a

density function f(') across industries. The mean of 0 is zero; that is, the

shocks are sectoral disturbances and would leave the average price level




     1 A full survey of previous theories of supply shocks is beyond the scope
of this paper, but we should mention one other theory. A common approach is
simply to assume that a shock such as higher oil prices reduces full—employment
output by acting like an adverse shift in the production function.      If actual
output equals full—employment output, then the price level rises for given
aggregate demand.    Our model is complementary with this simple theory.       In
particular, our model (and previous ones, such as Phelps's) seeks to explain why
the increase in prices can be greater in the short run than the increase implied
by the fall in full—employment output.
unchanged if all prices adjusted.2

      A firm that adjusts its price must pay a menu cost C. If it doss not

adjuat, its desired and actual prices differ by 0; we asaume that the firms

lose from this divergence is 82.3 This implies that a firm adjusts its price

only if 01 exceeds .        Within   an iodustry, firms are heterogeneous in menu

costs:       is distributed across firms with distribution function G().

Heterogeneity in menu costs implies that some firms within an industry adjust

to a shock and others do not. If G() is well—behaved, the average price for

the industry is a smooth function of 0.

      we define an industry price change as the mean of the change in

individual prices, and inflation as the mean of the industry changes (with all

variables in logs(. It is easy to see that the distribution of industry

shocks influences inflation. For an industry with shock 0, the proportion of

firms that adjust——those with VF'c101——is G(l0I(. Since these firms adjust

their prices by 0, the industry price index changes by °(I°I( Inflation it

is   the average of these price changes over industries:




     2 The menu—cost literature provides foundations for our model.     (See, for
example, Blanchard and Kiyotaki, 1987(. Starting from tastes and technology, one
can derive a firm's desired price as 0+vm+(l—v(p, where 0 is a relative shock,
m is the log of the money stock, and p is the log of the aggregats price level.
Our assumption that the desired price is simply 0 is a special case in which the
parameter v equals one and the money stock is constant. The assumption that vl
means that we ignore interactions among price adjustments by different firms; the
constancy of m means that we rule out aggregate shocks.

       This aesumption is equivalent to taking a second—order approximation to
a general profit function. See, for example, Ball and Homer (1989(.

                                          10
                                      - f OG( 101) f(0)dO
                                      -
                                                  (f (0) —-0) )dO.
                                          0G(0)

If the density of shocks, f)0), is symmetric sround zero, then f)0)f(—0), and

inflation is zero. If f)0) is asymmetric, then it        is   generally non—zero.

     B. Numerical Analysis

     Here we present some calculations to show how inflation varies with the

second and third moments of industry price changes. We first specify

distributions for industry shocks and for menu costs.

     For the distribution of V' we choose an exponential distribution,
        = 1 —   exp(—aV'E).    For all our calculations, we set the parameter a

equal to seven. This value implies that the mean of               —— the maximum

deviation between desired and actual prices that the average firm will

tolerate ——   is   1/7   15 percent. A 15 percent inaction range is consistent

with microeconomic evidence on the frequency of price adjustment )Cecchetti,

1986; Blinder, 1991).

     For the shock 0, we need a distribution f)0) that permits either symmetry

or skewness. A natural choice is the skew—normal distribution, which

generalizes the normal distribution with a third parameter to capture

skewness. As discussed by Azzalini (1985), the skew—normal distribution

reduces to the normal when skewness is zero, and it approaches a half—normal

when skewness approaches an upper bound of .995 or lower bound of —.995.

    We continue to assume that the mean of 0 is zero, and examine the effects

of varying the standard deviation and skewness, which we denote by 00 and Ice.

For gi.ven values of these parameters, we numerically generate the distribution

                                           11
of industry price changes, OG)IOI), and calculate the mean, standard

deviation, and skewness of this distribution; these moments of actual price

changes are denoted Pp'     and k. Table I presents the results. The table

includes only positive values of k0; for the corresponding negative values,

is the same, and Pp and k are negative and the same size.

    We can see the effects of varying k0 by looking down a column of the

table. As emphasized in our informal discussion, average inflation Pp rises

monotonically with the skewness of 0. Equally important, the skewness of

industry price changes,     rises monotonically with the skewness of 0. That

is, a large tail of desired price adjustments produces a large tail of actual

adjustments, even though desired and actual prices can differ. These results

imply that, as k0 varies, the first and third moments of industry price

changes move in the same direction. Finally, note that the standard deviation

of price changes, or,, remains almost constant as k0 varies: movements in k0 do

not induce a significant relationship between the first and second moments of

price changes.

     Looking across a row of Table I shows the effects of the standard

deviation of shocks, o0. Not surprisingly, a larger o0 implies a larger c.

The effect of o on Pp has the same sign as k0. Thus, as o0 varies, a larger

   is associated with a larger Pp if skewness is positive and a smaller Pp if

skewness is negative. Moreover, as suggested in our informal discussion, a

larger standard deviation magnifies the aggregate price change arising from

skewness.4



        Table I considers values of o that imply cv's of the same order of
magnitude as the standard deviations in our data (see Table II below).      For
larger ofl's, the effect of 00 on    becomes non—monotonic. As o—'°, all firms
adjust prices; with fully flexible prices, inflation is zero regardless of k0.

                                       12
      C. Sketch of Extensions

      Although this model has the virtue of simplicity, it leaves out several

 important aspects of the short—run behavior of inflation. Here we briefly

 discuss three extensions of the model, which might be pursued in future

 research, and the additional results we expect to arise.

      Dynamics: Our one—period model assumes that all prices are initially

 optimal. In a dynamic setting, initial prices for any period may differ from

 optimal prices, because firms have not adjusted fully to past shocks. Future

research might consider a dynamic version of our model. In such a model,

current price changes would depend on both the current distribution of shocks

and the distribution of initial prices; in turn, the distribution of initial

prices would depend on previous distributions of shocks. Hence, a dynamic

model would likely yield a relationship between current inflation and the

moments of past distributions, in addition to the contemporaneous relationship

that we test here.

     Trend Inflation and Asymmetric Adjustment: In an earlier paper (Ball and

Mankiw, 1992), we examine the effects of sectoral disturbances in the presence

of trend inflation. We show that an increase in the variance of shocks raises

aggregate inflation, even with a symmetric distribution. The explanation is

that, with trend inflation, price adjustment becomes asymmetric: the upper

bound on a firms range of inaction is smaller in absolute value than the

lower bound. With asymmetric adjustment, greater dispersion in shocks raises

prices on average, because the firms receiving positive shocks adjust more

qtickly than those receiving negative shocks.

    A more general model could combine the asymmetric adjustment of our

earlier paper with the asymmetries in shocks emphasized here. The results of


                                      13
both models would carry over: the skewness of shocks influences inflation, but

there is also a direct effect of the variance. In our empirical work below,

we test for a direct effect of variance.

     Monetary Shocks: Finally, one could introduce monetary shocks, which

would shift the mean of desired nominal prices over time. A positive monetary

shock would raise aggregate inflation, as actual prices adjustsd partially.

In general, such a shock would also influence the skewness of price changes as

some firms are pushed outside their range of inaction and others are not.

Thus causality could run from monetary shocks to skewness, as well as from

exogenous skewness to aggregate inflation.

     In principle, this point suggests caution in interpreting our empirical

finding that inflation and skewness move together: the direction of causality

is unclear. In practice, however, reverse causality is not a serious problem.

As detailed below, an examination of episodes with significant skewness makes

clear that the driving force is exogenous asymmetries.



IV. THE OISTRIBUTIOH OF PRICE CHAX4GES

     We now turn to our empirical analysis. We begin by documenting the

asymmetries in the distributions of relative—price changes in the postwar

United States.

     Our sample consists of the annual Producer Price Index for each year from

1949 to 1989. We examine the PPI because it is available with a high degree

of disaggregation.   We use FF1 components at the four—digit level: examples

of four—digit industries are "cattle," wheat," "cigars," and lighting

fixtures." This level of disaggregation is highly detailed yet is also

reasonably complete and consistent over time. The number of four—digit


                                         14
industries in our cross—section is 213 in 1949 and is 343 in 1989. For each

year, our summary statistics concern the distribution of the changes in these

several hundred prices.

        To give an initial sense of asymmetries, Figure 3 presents histograms of

log industry price changes for several years. In constructing these

histograms, each industry is weighted as in the official PPI.       (Specifically,

each industry price change is weighted by the "relative importance" of the

industry in 1987).

         The figure shows that there is considerable variation in the

distribution of price changes. In 1987, the distribution is fairly symmetric.

In 1973, it is skewed sharply to the right, and in 1986 it is skewed sharply

to the left. These last two years correspond to OPEC shocks: oil prices rose

in 1973 and fell in 1986. Substantial skewness also occurs in some pre—OPEC

years, however, such as 1967.

        Table XI preeents the standard deviation and skewness of the log industry

price changes for each year in our sample. We compute these moments both with

equal   weighting   of all prices and with the industry weights described above.

The table also includes the inflation rate, measured as the change in the log

of the PPI for all commodities.

        The table shows that the basic empirical prediction of our model is

apparent in the data. The skewness of price changes varies substantially over

time, and it varies together with the inflation rate. Years of substantial

negative skewness (1949, 1952, 1953, 1960, 1967, 1985, 1986) tend to be years

of falling inflation, whereas years of substantial positive skewness (1950,

1965, 1970, 1972, 1973, 1977) tend to be years of rising inflation. A

relationship between inflation and the standard deviation of price changes is


                                          15
less apparent.



V. BASIC STATISTICAL EVIDENCE

      We now turn to a more systematic investigation of the data to see

whether they confirm the informal impressions given by Table II. In all our

regressions, the left—hand—side variable is the PPI inflation rate in Table

II. On the right—hand side of the equstions sre variables describing the

distribution of relative—price changee. All the regressions also include

lagged inflation to capture persistence.

      A. Inflation and the Momenta

     Table III teats our models basic predictions about the inflationary

effects of variance and skewness in relative—price changes. Table lilA

presents results using unweighted moments of relative—price changes, and Table

1115 uses weighted moments. In both tables, column (1) is a benchmark

equation that uses only lagged inflation to explain current inflation.

Columns (2) to (4) introduce the standard deviation of relative—price changes,

the skewness, and both variables together.

     These regressions confirm the relation between skewness and inflation.

Skewness is always significant and contributes substantially to the A2; in

the weighted case, the 2 is .265 when only lagged inflation is included, but

rises to .584 when skewness is added. By contrast, the standard deviation is

insignificant in the unweighted regressions. It is significant in the

weighted regressions, but its contributions to 2 are modest, both when it is

the only moment in the regression and when skewness is also included. Thus

our results provide strong evidence that inflation is related to the skewness

of relative—price changes, as predicted by our model, and somewhat weaker


                                       16
evidence that it is related to the etandard deviation, as predicted by the

model of asymmetric price adjustment in Ball and Mankiw (1992).

     Finally, columns (5) and (6) of Tables lilA and Ills add the interaction

between the standard deviation and skewness. Again, the data are consistent

with the theory: the two moments interact positively. A large standard

deviation magnifies the effect of skewness. Remarkably, when both weighted

moments and their interaction are included, the R2 rises to .809. The

moments of relative—price changes explain a large fraction of postwar

innovations in inflation.

     8. Alternative Measures of Asymmetry

     Fundamentally, the theory says that inflation depends on the sizes of the

tails of the distribution of changes in relative prices. It would be more

parsimonious to measure the relevant asymmetry with a single variable——one

that captures both the direct effect of skewness and the magnifying effect of

variance. Here we experiment with such alternative variables.

      The first variable that we consider is motivated by Figure 1.

Specifically, for some cutoff X, define Asymx as



                               AsymX -             +
                                         Lrhrdr        1rh(r)dr,
where r is an industry relative—price change (that is, an industry inflation

rate minus the mean of industry inflation rates), and h(r) is the density of

r, including the weighting for industry size. This variable measures the mass

in the upper tail of the distribution of price changes minus the mass in the

lower tail. The tails are defined as relative—price changes greater than X

percent or smaller than —x percent. Note that AsymX is zero for a symmetric

distribution of relative—price changes, positive when the right tail is larger

                                         17
than the left tail, and negative when the left tail is larger. Moreover, for

any given skewness, AsymX rises in absolute value when a larger variance

magnifies the tails.

     The choice of the cutoff X is arbitrary, and so we experiment with a

range of values between 5 percent and 50 percent. Our gualitative results are

similar for all cutoffs. Table IX presents the annual series for AsymlO.

     Table IV examines whether these asymmetry variables explain movements in

inflation by regressing inflation on lagged inflation and AsymX for X=10

percent and X=25 percent. In both cases, the asymmetry variable is

statistically significant. With AsymlO, the        is .765, close to the level

in the earlier regression that includes skewness, standard deviation, and

their interaction.

     We consider one final variation on our explanatory variable. The Asym

variables capture the idea that large shocks have disproportionate effects by

giving full weight to price changes above a cutoff and zero weight to other

price changes. An alternative is to increase the weights linearly with the

size of the adjustments. This approach yields


                                        -      rh(r)dr.

That is, Q averages the product of each relative—price change and its own

absolute value. Like AsymX, Q is zero for a symmetric distribution, moves

positively with skewness, and is magnified by a larger variance. Table IV

shows that this variable, too, has considerable explanatory power for

inflation. When inflation is regressed on lagged inflation and Q, the B2 is

.777.

        To summarize, there are various ways to measure the asymmetry in

                                         18
relative—price changes, and no strong grounds for choosing among them. Our

results, however, ars robust across the different measures.

       C. Previous Evidence

       One can gauge the robustness of our empirical findings by reexamining

prsvious evidence on inflation and relative—price changes. A particularly

useful study is that by Vining and Elwertowski (1976), who also compute

unweighted moments of the distribution of industry price changes. Although

their basic apprnach is similar to ours, there are important differences:

their sample is mainly from the pre—OPEC era (1948—74); they use CPI as well

as PPI data; and they use the 8—digit rather than 4—digit level of

disaggregation. Nonetheless, running our basic regressions with Vining and

Elwertowski's moments produces results similar to those reported in Table

lilA. As in our data, inflation is closely related to the skewness of

relative—price changes.

       Indeed, a review of the literature reveals that a number of authors have

noted the wide variation in skewness and its relation to inflation. In

addition to Vining and Elwertowski, examples include Batchelor (1981), Blejer

(1983), Marquez and Vining (1984), and Mizon, Safford, and Thomas (1990).

Thus the literature contains considerable support for our basic empirical

results.

      Given the strength of the relationship between inflation and skewness——

and   the fact that many authors have reported it——one might be surprised that
it has received so little attention. More attention has been paid to the
weaker relationship between inflation and the variance of price changes.

(See, for example, Fischer's (1981] well—known study.) The apparent

explanation for this emphasis is that the relationship between inflation and


                                        19
variance has fit more comfortably into the theoretical frameworks of past

researchers. The inflation—skewness relationship has been an empirical oddity

without an interesting interpretation. One contribution of menu—cost models

of price adjustment is that they provide a theoretical framework in which this

fact can be understood.




VI. WHAT SHIFTS THE PHILLIPS CURVE?

     A. A Hew Measure of Suooly Shocks

     A large literature on the dynamics of inflation takes the Phillips curve

as the starting point of analysis. In this literature, inflation depends on

past inflation (which perhaps proxies for expected inflation), a measure of

the business cycle, and supply shocks. From this perspective, our regressions

above are like estimated Phillips curves, with the omission of a business—

cycle variable. Moreover, they include an unusual measure of supply shocks,

rather than the more traditional variables, such as the relative prices of

food and energy.

      To relate our regressions to this literature, we turn our inflation

eguations into Phillips curves by including detrended unemployment.

Unemployment is dstrended using the Hodrick—Prescott filter. Regression (1)

in Table V presents a simple specification that yields the standard results:

inflation is positively related to lagged inflation and negatively related to

unemployment.

      Regressions (2) and (3) add our new measures of supply shocks——the

asymmetry variables. Regression (2) includes only AsymlO. Regression (3)

includes the full set of weighted moments-—standard deviation, skewness, and

their interaction. We interpret the coefficients on the asymmetry variables


                                         20
as showng how these variables shift the short—run inflation—unemployment

relation.

      Once again, the results support our model. Although unemployment is

significant, both by itself and when asymmetries are included, the

coefficients on our measures of asymmetry are close to the coefficients in the

earlier :egressions without unemployment. Thus, one can interpret our

asymmetry variables as representing shifts in the short—run Phillips curve.

     Finally, for completeness we include Gordon's (1990) dummy variable for

the Nixon price controls in regressions (4), (5), and (6). The effect of the

Nixon controls s negative, as expected. The coefficients on the other

variables, however, are almost unchanged. The         rise as high as .898: our

Phillips curves explain most postwar movements in inflation.

     8. Comparison to Traditional Measures of Supply Shocks

     In previous Phillips—curve studies, notably the work of Gordon (1985,

1990), the most common measures of supply shocks are the changes in the

relative prices of food and energy. These measures are empirically plausible,

since the best—known shifts in the Phillips curve coincided with food and

energy shocks. In addition, as discussed in Section II, these variables are

theoretically correct measures of supply shocks if the nominal prices of food

and energy are particularly flexible. We now compare our measures of supply

shocks to these traditional measures. In addition to food and energy, we

consider the change in the relative price of all raw materials.5

     We first examine the relationships among the alternative variables. Our


       We measure food prices with the PPI for farm products, processed food and
feed; energy prices with the PPI for fuels and related products; raw materials
prices with the PPI for crude materials for further processing. All of these
var.ables are divided by the PPI for all commodities to construct relative
prices, and they enter the equations as log differences.

                                       21
measures of asymmetry have fairly high correlations with traditional measures

of supply shocks. For the period 1949 to 1989, the correlation of AsymlO with

the changes in the prices of energy, food, and raw materials are .61, .21, and

.61. Regressing AsymlO on both the food and energy variables yields an R2 of

.71. These results are not surprising, since large food and energy shocks

induce skewness in the distribution of price changes. To a large extent, our

variables and traditional ones capture the same shocks.

     Since the various measures of supply shocks have considerable comovement,

it is not obvious which variables ars responsible for innovations in

inflation. To investigate this issue, we run horseracss, which are reported

in Table VT. Regression (1) is a Phillips—curve equation including changes in

the relative prices of food and energy. As in previous studies, these

variables are highly significant. Regression (4) includes the change in the

relative price of raw materials; this variable also performs well. The other

regressions in this table are horseraces; in each, we include one version of

our asymmetry measures (either AsymlO or the moments( and one version of the

traditional variables (either food and energy, or raw materials). The results

are striking. When our asymmetry measures are included, the coefficients on

food and energy prices are close to zero, and are statistically insignificant.

The coefficient on raw materials prices falls substantially, and is

insignificant in one of two cases. In contrast, the inclusion of the

traditional measures of supply shocks has little effect on the size or

significance of the asymmetry variables.

     These results suggest that the asymmetry variables are better measures of

supply shocks than are the traditional variables. Particular prices such as

food and energy matter only because they induce asymmetry in the distribution


                                      22
of price changes; they perform well in previous studies because they are

proxies for aBymmetries. Holding constant the overall distribution, rises in

the relative prices of food and energy are not inflationary.

     Another way that we compare measures of supply shocks is by examining

subsample stability. In Tables VII and VIII, we split our sample into two

periods, 1949—1969 and 1970—1989; these correspond roughly to the pre—OPEC and

OPEC eras. For each subsample, we estimate Phillips curves using our

asymmetry measures and using traditional measures. The coefficients on our

variables are fairly stable. Thus our results do not depend on the special

circumstances in the 1970s and 1980s. One of the traditional measures of

supply shocks, the price of raw materials, also has a fairly stable

coefficient. The equation with food and energy prices, however, is unstable.

In particular, the effect of energy prices, which is significantly positive

for the combined sample, is significantly negative for 1949—1969. This result

appears to arise largely from the observations for 1949—1952, which exhibit

the largest inflation movements of the pre—OPEC period. Inflation fell in

1949, rose in 1950 and 1951, and fell in 1952; in each case, the relative

price of energy moved in the opposite direction.

     These results suggest that the relationship between asymmetries and

inflation holds across varying economic circumstances. In contrast, food and

energy prices influence inflation only when they have a major effect on

asymmetries, which is sometimes but not always the case.



VII. SOME HISTORICAL EPISODES

     In this section, we examine some of the historical episodes that lie

behind our statistical results. In doing this, we have two goals. First, we


                                      23
want to learn about the direction of causation between skewness and inflation.

Our theory assumes that skewness in relative—price changes is an exogenous

variable causing changes in inflation. As noted above, however, inflation

could in principle generate skewness. Examining historical episodes with

substantial skewness can shed light on which way causality runs.

     Second, historical episodes are of interest in themselves. The goal of

macroeconomics is to explain the evolution of the economy. In this section,

we see which postwar developments our theory can illuminate.

     To help choose the most significant years, Figure 4 presents a

scatterplot with our AsymlO variable on the horizontal axis and innovations in

inflation on the vertical axis. Innovations in inflation are generated using

an AR(l) process for inflation. The figure confirms the strong relation

between inflation and the asymmetry variable, and shows that the association

is not driven by only a few years.

     Several years stand out in this figure as being especially important in

driving this relationship. Before examining these episodes, however, we look

at two years in which the relationship doss not hold.

      The Two Big Recessions: Two observations that our theory cannot explain

are 1975 and 1982. In 1975, inflation fell, even though AsymlO was positive.

In 1982, inflation fell substantially, even though there was almost no

asymmetry at all.

     It is not surprising that our theory of supply shocks does not explain

these two years. In both years, the economy experienced deep recessions that

are usually attributed to tight monetary policy. The 1975 recession is

attributed to the Fed's delayed reaction to the OPEC—induced inflation that

began in 1973, and the 1982 recession to Paul Volcker's determination to


                                      24
disinflate at any cost. (See, for example, Romer and Romer, 1989.( These

years are not outliers in our Phillips—curve regressions, in which inflation

is explained by unemployment as well as asymmetries in relative—price changes.

Indeed, these years can be viewed as evidence in favor of our interpretation

of the asymmetry—inflation relationship. The failure of AsymlO to turn

negative in these two disinflatione suggests that causality does not run from

inflation to skewness.

      The Oil—Shock Years: The largest absolute values of AsymlO arise in

1973, 1974, 1979, 1980, and 1986; in each case, inflation also moves

substantially. The explanation for these episodes is obvious: OPEC. In the

first four of the years, OPEC caused large increases in the world price of

oil. In 1986, political turmoil among OPEC members caused the price of oil to

collapse. The direction of causality is clear: exogenous events in the Middle

East induced skewness in the distribution of relative prices, which led to

changes in the U.S. inflation rate.

      The Mystery of 1952: As we noted in Section I, Arthur Okun called the

sudden halt to inflation in the early l950s "an intriguing fortuitous

mystery." It is easy to see why this event appeared mysterious. Inflation

fell from 10.7 percent in 1951 to —2.7 percent in 1952. The cause was not a

demand contraction, for unemployment fell slightly. And traditional measures

of supply chocks do not suggest that inflation should have fallen

substantially: the relative price of food fell by only 1.3 percent, and the

relative price of energy      by 2.6 percent. The relative price of raw

materials did fall 5.8 percent, but even this change is too small to explain a

12 point change in aggregate inflation.

     From the standpoint of our theory, by contrast, the fall in inflation in


                                      25
1952 is not at all mysterious. As Figure 4 ehowe, AsymlO was negative and

substantial in 1952, indicating a significant, beneficial supply shock. And

by other measures, the shock was even larger: the absolute value of weighted

skewness, 6.78, is the largest in our sample. The product of the skewness and

standard deviation is also the largest. By these measures, there was a larger

supply shock in 1952 than, for example, in 1974, when the relative price of

energy rose 26 percent.

      The disaggregated data for 1952 reveal that the asymmetry in relative—

price changes is attributable to various industries that exhibited large

relative—price decreases, whereas almost no industries exhibited similarly

sized increases. Cattle and hog prices fell over 10 percent. The prices of

drugs and soft—surface floor coverings fell over 15 percent. The prices of

crude vegetable oil and vegetable—oil end products fell over 20 percent.

Crude rubber prices fell over 30 percent, and wastepaper priceB fell over 60

percent. Moreover, each of these industries contributes substantially to the

measured asymmetry. One cannot look to a single industry to identify the

supply shock; instead, one must look to the overall distribution of relative—

price changes.



VIII. CONCLUSION

    Over the past decade, a large literature has studied menu—cost modele of

price adjustment.6 The goal of this literature has been to explain

rigorously the short—run effects of aggregate demand. In the most basic



     6 Some of the papers representative of this literature are the following:
Mankiw, 1985; Akerlof and Yellen, 1985; Parkiri, 1986; Blanchard and Kiyotaki,
1987; Caplin and Spulber, 1987; Rotemberg, 1987; Ball, Mankiw, and Romer, 1988;
Ball and Romer, 1990; Caplin and Leahy, 1991; Caballero and Engel, 1992.

                                      26
terms, this work has sought to explain why the short—run aggregate supply

curve elopes upward.

     This paper extends this theoretical framework to explain what causes the

short—run aggregate supply curve to shift. We show that, when menu costs

create a range of inaction in response to shocks, the distribution of

relative—price changes influences the overall price level. When the

distribution is skewed to the right, the economy experiences an adverse shift

in aggregate supply: the price level rises for given aggregate demand.

conversely, when the distribution of shocks is skewed to the left, the economy

experiences a beneficial supply shock. Our model shows that the menu—cost

paradigm can provide a unified interpretation of short—run fluctuations, in

which frictions in price adjustment explain the effects of both demand and

supply shocks.

     The results in this paper are significant for three reasons. First, we

both document and explain an important stylized fact: the correlation between

the first and third moments of industry price changes. This correlation is a

robust feature of the data: other researchers have noticed it, and we confirm

it using four—digit PPI data. Previously, this fact has not been widely

emphasized, for it lacked a theoretical explanation. Our theory suggests that

the fact is central to understanding the short—run dynamics of inflation.

     Second, the empirical validation of our theory provides evidence for

menu—cost models of price adjustment. A scientific theory gains credibility

when it explains facts that it was not designed to explain. Menu—cost models

were developed to explain monetary non—neutrality; they gain credibility from

their ability to fit the fects regarding inflation and relative—price changes.

     Third, and most important, our results provide an explanation for shifts


                                      27
in the short—run aggregate supply curve, or equivalently the short—run

Phillips curve. Since the simple Phillips curve broke down in the early

l970s, many economists have sought to explain how food prices, oil prices, and

other microeconomic factors influence the tradeoff between inflation and

unemployment. This paper shows that menu—cost models offer a coherent

explanation. Moreover, this approach suggests measures of supply shocks that

perform better empirically than standard measures. These new measures fit

better in sample, they exhibit grester stability across subsamples, and they

can more easily explain various historical episodes.




                                     28
REFERENCES

Akerlof, George, and Janet Yellen, "A Near—Rational Model of the Business
      Cycle, with Wage and Price Inertia," Quarterly Journal of Economics 100,
      Supplement 1985, 823—838.

Azzalini, A., "A Class of Distributions which Includes the Normal Ones,"
      Scandanavian Journal of Statistics 12, 1985, 171—178.

Ball, Laurence, and N. Gregory Mankiw, "Asymmetric Price Adjustment and
      Economic Fluctuations," NBER Working Paper #4089, 1992.

Ball, Laurence, N. Gregory Mankiw, and David Romer, "The New Keynesian
      Economics and the Output—Inflation Trade—off," Brookincis Papers on
      Economic Activity 1988, no.1, 1—65.

Ball, Laurence, and David Romer, "The Equilibrium and Optimal Timing of
      Price Changes," Review of Economic Studies 56, April 1989, 179—
      198.

Ball, Laurence, and David Romer, "Real Rigidities and the Nonneutrality of
      Money," Review of Economic Studies 57, April 1990, 183—203.

Batchelor, R.A., "Aggregate Expectations Under the Stable Laws," Journal of
      Econometrics 16, 1981, 199—210.

Blanchard, Olivier J., and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, "Monopolistic Competition and
      the Effects of Aggregate Demand," American Economic Review 77, September
      1987, 647—666.

Blejer, Mario I., "On the Anatomy of Inflation: The Variability of Relative
      Commodity Prices in Argentina," Journal of Money. Credit, and Bankino
      15, November 1983, 469—482.

Blinder, Alan S., "The Anatomy of Double—Digit Inflation," in Robert E.
      Hall, Inflation: Causes and Effects, University of Chicago Press,
      1982.

Blinder, Alan S., "Why are Prices Sticky? Preliminary Evidence from an
      Interview Survey," American Economic Review 81, May 1991, 89—56.

Caballero, Ricardo J., and Eduardo Engel, "The Output-Inflation Tradeoff
      Revisited," MIT, 1992.

Caplin, Andrew S., and John Leahy, "State—Dependent Pricing and the
      Dynamics of Money and Output," quarterly Journal of Economics 106,
      August 1991, 683—708.

Caplin, Andrew S., and Daniel F. Spulber, "Menu Costs and the Neutrality
      of Money," Quarterly Journal of Economics 102, November 1987, 703—

                                      29
      725.

Cecchetti, Stephen G., "The Frequency of Price Adjustment: A Study of the
      Newsstand Prices of Magazines, 1953—1979,' Journal of Econometrics 20,
      April 1986, 258—274.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Stanley Fischer, Macroeconomics, 5th ed., New York:
      McGraw—Hill, 1990.

Fischer, Stanley, "Relative Shocks, Relative Price Variability, and
      Inflation," Broekinos Papers on Economic Activity 1981:2, 381—431.

Friedman, Milton, "Perspectives on Inflation," Newsweek, June 24, 1975,
      73.

Gordon, Robert J., "Alternative Responses of Policy to External Supply
      Shocks," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1975:1, 183—206.

Gordon, Robert J., "Understanding Inflation in the 1980s," Brookins Papers on
      Economic Activity, 1985:1, 263—300.

Gordon, Robert J., "What is New—Keynesian Economics?" Journal of Economic
      Literature 28, September 1990, 1115—1171.

Lilien, David M., "Sectoral Shocks and Cyclical Unemployment," Journal
      of Political Economy 90, August 1982, 777—793.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, "Small Menu Costs and Large Business Cycles: A
      Macroeconomic Model of Monopoly," Quarterly Journal of Economics
      100, May 1985, 529—537.

Marquez, Jaime, and Daniel Vining, "Inflation and Relative Price
      Behavior: A Survey of the Literature," in Maurice B. Ballabon
      (ed.), Economic Perspectives: An Annual Survey of Economics, vol.
      3, Chur, Switzerland: Narwood Academic Publishers, 1984.

Mizon, Graham E., J. Claire Safford, and Stephen H. Thomas, "The Distribution
      of Consumer Price Changes in the United Kingdom," Economica 57, May
      1990, 249—262.

Okun, Arthur M., "Inflation: Its Mechanics and Welfare Costs," Brookings
      Papers on Economic Activity 1975:2, 351—390.

Parkin, Michael, "The Output—Inflation Trade—off When Prices Are Costly to
      Change," Journal of Political Economy 94, February 1986, 200—224.

Phelps, Edmund S., "Commodity—Supply Shock and Full—Employment Monetary
      Policy," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 10, May 1978, 206—
      221.

Romer, Christina, and David Romer, "Does Monetary Policy Matter? A New Test in
      the Spirit of Friedman and Schwartz," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1989.

                                      30
Rotemberg, Julio, "The New Keynesian Nicrofoundations," NBER Macroeconomics
      Annual, 1987, 69—114.

Vining, Daniel R., and Thomas C. Elwertoweki, "The Relationship Between
      Relative Prices and the General Price Level,' American Economic
      Review 66, September 1976, 699—708.




                                      31
   Table I: Moments of Industry Price Chanes




                                      a
 k6           0.05     0.10         0.15     0.20     0.25
0.00   jo    0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000
             0.0217 0.0657 0.1171 0.1708 0.2247
       k 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000
0.20   j. 0.0005 0.0011 0.0015 0.0017 0.0017
       a 0.0218 0.0659 0.1174 0.1709 0.2248
       k 0.6414 0.4445 0.3454 0.2912 0.2596
0.40   p..
             0.0010   0.0023       0.0031   0.0035   0.0035
       a     0.0220   0.0662       0.1175   0.1710   0.2249

0.60   j
       k
       a
       k
             1.2296        0.6792 0.5762
                      0.8651
             0.0016 0.0036 0.0049 0.0055
             0.0222 0.0664 0.1176 0.1709
             1.7668 1.2653 1.0046 0.8576
                                                     0.5156
                                                     0.0055
                                                     0.2247
                                                     0.7701
0.80   p,    0.0021   0.0050       0.0067   0.0075   0.0076
       a     0.0224   0.0664       0.1174   0.1705   0.2241
       k     2.2625   1.6545       1.3302   1.1431   1.0294
0.99         0.0027   0.0062       0.0084   0.0094   0.0094
       ap    0.0226   0.0663       0.1169   0.1697   0.2233
       k     2.7068   2.0271       1.6532   1.4303   1.2906




                              32
                  Table II; Summary Statistics

                    Unweighted             Weighted
Year Inflation SD      Skewness        SD Skewness     AsyinlO

1948   0.0792 0.0964 —1.4168 0.0834 0.9413    0.008819
1949 —0.0509 0.1363 —1.9395 0.0934 —2.3891 —0.006000
1950   0.0385 0.0932 2.4456 0.0598 4.0738     0.004732
1951   0.1068 0.0770 —1.4957 0.0671 1.0843    0.003053
1952 —0.0275 0.1448 —2.9792 0.0620 —6.7753 —0.004370
1953 —0.0145 0.0845 —1.0656 0.0671 —2.8336 —0.005970
1954   0.0028 0.0762 —1.0980 0.0492 —1.5973 —0.002260
1955   0.0034 0.0817 —0.9428 0.0576 —1.6329 —0.001520
1956   0.0310 0.0607 —0.8482 0.0442 —0.2715   0.001885
1957   0.0290 0.0674 —1.5779 0.0503 —0.8251   0.003169
1958   0.0132 0.0698 0.2961 0.0518 1.5182     0.002733
1959   0.0023 0.0836 1.5174 0.0450 —1.3057 —0.003730
1960   0.0005 0.0625 —2.2801 0.0368 —2.1893 —0.001060
1961 —0.0034 0.0543 —0.2714 0.0338 —0.0987 —0.001310
1962   0.0023 0.0460 0.2393 0.0264 —1.5641    0.000287
1963 —0.0023 0.0660 —2.0541 0.0288 1.2287 —0.001930
1964   0.0018 0.0499 0.5542 0.0307 1.7726 —0.000092
1965   0.0198 0.0602 1.0144 0.0414 2.9306     0.004364
1966   0.0317 0.0520 1.6282 0.0336 1.9459     0.002626
1967   0.0274 0.0793 —3.6261 0.0369 —3.6282 —0.002540
1968   0.0246 0.0565 1.2269 0.0328 1.0439     0.000290
1969   0.0389 0.0512 1.4171 0.0380 1.3762     0.002547
1970   0.0361 0.0738 —2.3093 0.0500 2.3581    0.003011
1971   0.0322 0.0653 —1.2299 0.0482 0.0263    0.004274
1972   0.0432 0.0998 4.1443 0.0476 4.7456     0.005519
1973   0.1235 0.1517 2.0122 0.1123 2.9204     0.013661
1974   0.1721 0.1648 0.1646 0.1606 1.1848     0.009228
1975   0.0882 0.1548 —1.9980 0.1141 —0.7301   0.004681
1976   0.0454 0.1153 1.2631 0.0797 1.1117     0.001966
1977   0.0594 0.0753 1.2805 0.0776 2.1775     0.004240
1978   0.0751 0.0616 —0.9992 0.0614 0.7859    0.003342
1979   0.1182 0.0808 0.5507 0.0860 1.1513     0.008178
1980  0.1317 0.1193 —0.6348 0.1140 1.4271     0.009898
1981  0.0876 0.0748 —1.4884 0.0829 0.7054     0.005560
1982  0.0200 0.0782 —2.1894 0.0715 —1.0549    0.000173
1983  0.0122 0.0510 0.7041 0.0482 0.0272 —0.001780
1984  0.0236 0.0525 1.3320 0.0416 1.0955      0.001500
1985 —0.0050 0.0619 —3.1010 0.0500 —2.8140 —0.003550
1986 —0.0293 0.0871 —4.2430 0.1255 —3.1192 —0.013740
1987  0.0260 0.0548 1.1056 0.0548 0.1472      0.003082
1988  0.0394 0.0696 1.7304 0.0724 0.8086      0.000176
1989  0.0483 0.0449 0.8508 0.0415 1.0659      0.002397
Mean   0.0352 0.0807 —0.3407 0.0622 0.1625            0.001561
SD     0.0468 0.0312 1.8204 0.0296 2.1997             0.004910

                                  33
   Table 11Th: Inflation and the Distribution of Price changes

                     Dependent Variable: Inflation

                   Unweighted Measures of Dispersion

                       (1)      (2)          (3)      (4)       (5)      (6)

Constant              .016     .010         .016   .012       .013     .012
                     (.008)   (.019)       (.007) (.017)     (.006)   (.015)


Lagged Inflation      .527     .490         .619     .597    .736      .728
                     (.134)   (.176)       (.121)   (.158) (.110)     (.142)


Standard                       .087                  .053              .019
Deviation                     (.264)                (.233)            (.202)

Skewness                                    .011    .011 —.020        —.020
                                           (.003)   (.003) (.009)     (.009)

Skew*SD                                                       .357     .356
                                                             (.097)   (.098)


                     .265     .248         .428     .414      .571    .559


D.W.                 1.56      1.57        1.78     1.79       1.68    1.68


s.e.e.               .040     .041         .036     .036       .031    .031

Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                      34
   Table 1118: Inflation and the Distribution of Price Chanes
                    Dependent Variable: Inflation

                   Weighted Measures of Dispersion

                      (1)      (2)          (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)

Constant             .016    —.014         .013    —.014     .016    —.010
                    (.008)   (.014)       (.006)   (.010)   (.005)   (.008)


Lagged Inflation     .527     .293         .569     .352     .480     .274
                    (.134)   (.161)       (.101)   (.117)   (.083)   (.088)


Standard                      .609                  .559              .537
Deviation                    (.256)                (.185)            (.138)


Skewness                                   .012     .012    —.009    —.009
                                          (.002)   (.002)   (.005)   (.004)


Skew*SD                                                      .332     .326
                                                            (.069)   (.059)


                    .265     .343         .584     .657     .737     .809


D.W.                1.56     1.53         1.55     1.64     1.53      1.58


s.e.e.              .040     .038         .030     .028      .024     .021

Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                     35
           Table IV: Alternative Measures of Asymmetry
                   Dependent Variable: Inflation

                     (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)

Constant            .016       .015        .018      .018
                   (.008)     (.004)      (.006)    (.004)


Lagged Inflation    .527       .252        .235      .246
                   (.134)     (.082)      (.109)    (.080)


AsymlO                        7.33
                              (.80)


Asym2S                                    4.85
                                          (.82)


Q                                                  10.0
                                                   (1.1)


                   .265       .765        .609       .777


D.W.                1.56       2.01        1.91      1.80


s.e.e.              .040       .023        .029      .022


Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                 36
                Table V: PhilliDs—Curve Equations

                   Dependent Variable: Inflation

                     (1)      (2)            (3)      (4)      (5)          (6)



Constant            .015   .015           —.009     .015     .017    —.005
                   (.007) (.004)          (.007)   (.008)   (.004)   (.006)

Lagged Inflation    .551     .283          .327     .559     .209     .260
                   (.124)   (.077)        (.075)   (.136)   (.082)   (.068)

Nixon Dummy                                         .006    —.047    —.058
                                                   (.041)   (.023)   (.017)

tJnenployment      —2.10    —1.15         —1.49    —2.06    —1.35    —1.78
                    (.75)   (.44)          (.36)    (.79)    (.43)    (.33)

AsymlO                       6.84                            7.22
                             (.77)                           (.76)

Standard                                   .491                       .471
Deviation                                 (.116)                     (.102)

Skewness                                  —.004                      —.004
                                          (.003)                     (.003)


Skewness*SD                                .260                       .277
                                          (.052)                     (.046)


                   .376     .796          .884     .360     .812     .898

D.W.                1.70     2.12          1.98     1.71     2.18    1.85

s.e.e.              .037     .021          .017     .038     .020    .015

Standard errors are in parentheses. "Unemployment" stands for the
Hodrick—Prescott filtered unemployment rate, and "Nixon Dummy"
for Robert Gordon's dummy variable for the Nixon Administration's
wage and price controls (.5 for 1972 and 1973, —.3 for 1974,
and -.7 for 1975)




                                     37
                          Table VI: Korseraces

                   Dependent Variable: Inflation

                     (1)       (2)           (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)

Constant            .026    .016           —.004     .020     .018    —.004
                   (.006) (.005)           (.006)   (.005)   (.004)   (.005)

Lagged Inflation    .322      .236          .284     .574     .257     .280
                   (.125)    (.091)        (.077)   (.096)   (.096)   (.063)

Nixon Dummy        —.042     —.052         —.069    —.110    —.062    —.082
                   (.035)    (.025)        (.019)   (.034)   (.028)   (.018)

Unemployment       —1.08     —1.44         —1.74    —1.57    —1.35    —1.60
                    (.64)     (.46)         (.35)    (.56)    (.43)    (.31)

Food                .660     —.019          .117
                   (.160)    (.162)        (.101)

Energy              .381     —.061         —.001
                   (.083)    (.096)        (.066)

Raw Materials                                        .681     .133     .218
                                                    (.111)   (.136)   (.081)

AsymlO                        7.74                            6.29
                             (1.31)                          (1.22)

Standard                                    .459                       .475
Deviation                                  (.102)                     (.094)

Skewness                                   —.005                      —.005
                                           (.003)                     (.003)

Skewness*SD                                 .284                       .245
                                           (.062)                     (.044)


                   .617       .805         .899     .679     .812     .914

D.W.                1.82      2.21          1.74     2.36     2.25     1.81

s.e.e.              .029      .021          .015     .026     .020     .014

Standard errors are in parentheses. "Unemployment" stands for the
Rodrick—Prescott filtered unemployment rate, "Food", "Energy" and
"Raw Materials" for the relative inflation rates for the prices
of those goods, and "Nixon Dummy" for Robert Gordon's dummy
variable for the Nixon Administration's wage and price controls
(.5 for 1972 and 1973, —.3 for 1974, and —.7 for 1975).
                                      38
               Table VII: SusamDle Stability. Part I
                   Dependent Variable: Inflation

                     (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)

Sample              49—69      70—89      49—69         70—89

Constant            .014       .021       —.014        —.002
                   (.005)     (.006)      (.011)       (.009)

Lagged Inflation —.046         .382        .328         .337
                   (.135)     (.112)      (.132)       (.102)

Nixon Dummy                   -.032                    —.043
                              (.021)                   (.020)

Unemployment       —1.15      —2.22       —2.06        —1.82
                    (.57)      (.51)       (.45)        (.49)

AsymlO              6.97       5.12
                   (1.40)      (.90)

Standard                                   .642         .419
Deviation                                 (.239)       (.127)

Skewness                                  —.017        —.003
                                          (.006)       (.005)

Skewness*SD                                .531         .218
                                          (.110)       (.057)

                    .608      .902        .775         .925


D.W.                2.26       2.32        2.02         1.90


s.e.e.              .019       .016        .015         .014


Standard errors are in parentheses. "Unemployment" stands for the
Hodrick—Prescott filtered unemployment rate, and "Nixon Dummy"
for Robert Gordon's dummy variable for the Nixon Administration's
wage and price controls (.5 for 1972 and 1973, -.3 for 1974,
and —.7 for 1975)




                                 39
               Table VIII: Subsamnle Stability. Part II

                    Dependent Variable: Inflation
                      (1)        (2)          (3)           (4)

sample               49—69     70—89        49—69         70—89

Constant             .012       .031         .019          .016
                    (.005)     (.005)       (.005)        (.008)

Lagged Inflation    —.185       .407         .052          .762
                    (.114)     (.081)       (.142)        (.120)

Nixon Dummy                    —.028                  —.052
                               (.015)                     (.036)

Unemployment        —2.11      —1.64       —1.27      —2. 67
                     (.52)     (.38)        (.56)          (.70)

Food                 .249       .540
                    (.146)     (.084)

Energy              —.728       .354
                    (.171)     (.040)

Raw Materials                               .645          .397
                                           (.130)         (.134)

                     .698       .953        .608          .804


D.W.                 2.02       1.89        2.02          2.53


s.e.e.               .017       .011        .019          .022


Standard errors are in parentheses. "Unemployment" stands for the
Hodrick—Prescott filtered unemployment rate, "Food", "Energy" and
"Raw Materials" for the relative inflation rates for the prices
of those goods, and "Nixon Dummy" for Robert Gordon's dummy
variable for the Nixon Administration's wage and price controls
(.5 for 1972 and 1973, —.3 for 1974, and —.7 for 1975).




                                  40
                                      Figure 1

A. SymmetxiC Distribution of Shocks

  Net Effect = 0


                                                     Firms
    Firms
                                                     raise
    lower
                                                     prices
    prices



                                         0
                                      Range of

                     H                Inaction
                                                 H

B. Skewed to Right

  Net Effect> 0




C. Skewed to Left

  Net Effect < 0
                                    Figure 2

A. Symmetric Distribution
  Net eftect = 0
  for any variance.




                                         0
                         ___________ Range of ___________
                                      Inaction




B. Skewed Distribution

  Greater variance
  magnifies effect
  of asymmetry.
                                                                                FIGURE 3

45
                                                                                     41,1
                                                                                                  1973
                                                                                     35
40

                                                                                     30
15

                                                                                     15

10
                                                                                     10




                                                                                      04Jrn40
                                                                                     :m




     -60   -.50   -40   -.30   -.20   -.10   0   .10   .20   .30   .40   .50   .60          -60    -50 -.40   -.30   -.20   -.10   0   .10   .20   .30   .40   .50   .60
                                                     —S


     C.)
                                                     p
     -4



                                                    -a
                                                    0
-4
                                                    o



                              8 (71
           CO
           -4


                                                    (71

                              -                     p



                                                    I0
                                                      C,)

                               (71(0
                                                    8
                                               Co
                             ('I




  2
  00 -
(71   I
    (71 0 I     p
                    Innovations in Inflation
                                                    -'
                                                    0



                                                    (71
