NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COMPLEMENTARITY AND INCREASING
RETURNS IN INTERMEDIATE INPUTS:

A THEORETICAL AND APPLIED
GENERAL-EQUILIBRIUM ANALYSIS

Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes

James R. Markusen
Thomas F. Rutherford

Working Paper No. 4179

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1992

This paper was written when Markusen was a visitor at the Institute for
International Economic Studies, Stockholm and he thanks the Institute for their
generous hospitality. Markusen's and Rutherford's initial research was
financed by NSF grant SES-9022898 and NSERC grant T306A1 respectively,
with further funding for this specific project from the World Bank. This paper

is part of NBER's research program in International Trade and Investment.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4 179
October 1992

COMPLEMENTARITY AND INCREASING
RETURNS IN INTERMEDIATE INPUTS:

A THEORETICAL AND APPLIED
GENERAL-EQUILIBRIUM ANALYSIS

ABSTRACT
Conventional analysis in the trade-industrial-organization literature

suggests that, when a country has some market power over an imported

good, some small level of protection must be welfare improving. This is
essentially a terms-of-trade argument that is reinforced if the imported goods
are substitutes for domestic goods produced with increasing returns to scale,

goods that are initially underproduced in free-trade equilibrium. This paper
notes that this result may not hold when (1) the imports are intermediates
used in a domestic increasing-returns industry, and/or (2) the intermediates

are complements for domestic inputs produced with increasing returns. We
then demonstrate such an outcome with respect to Mexican protection

against imported auto parts using an applied general-equilibrium model of
the North American auto industry.
Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138

Thomas F. Rutherford
Department of Economics
University of Colorado
Boulder, CO 80309-02565

James R. Markusen
Department of Economics
University of Colorado
Boulder, CO 80309-02565
and NBER

1. Introduction
A number of papers in the trade-industrial-organization literature,
particularly those exploiting monopolistic- competition models, derive results
that support protectionist arguments in import-competing sectors. These policy

prescriptions rely on two reinforcing welfare effects. First, since products are

differentiated, countries have some measure of monopoly power in trade no

matter how small they are. Thus there is the usual terms-of-trade argument
for protection. Second, the imported products are (usually implicitly) assumed

to be substitutes for domestic products produced with increasing returns. The

latter goods are undersupplied in free trade equilibrium insofar as prices
exceed marginal costs. Import protection thus switches expenditure from the
foreign goods to the domestic goods which creates a secondary benefit due to

the existing distortion. Much of the analysis is found in Flam and Helpman
(1987), Venables (1987) and discussed at length in Helpman (1990).

To

the best of our knowledge, the only papers that present an alternative
conclusion within the same class of models are Markusen (1989, 1990).

Markusen uses Ethier (1982) as a point of departure, assuming that the
differentiated goods produced with increasing returns are intermediate goods,

used as inputs into final production. Within this framework, it is reasonable

to suggest that imported and domestic differentiated intermediates may be
complementary.

In many developing countries, for example, imported

machinery, high-tech and/or capital-intensive components, and the services of

engineering consultants may be complements for domestic inputs.

When the relationship between domestic and imported intermediates is
complementary, a tariff or other barrier against the foreign goods/services may

be welfare reducing. The terms-of-trade argument remains valid, but a tariff
may now switch expenditure away from the domestic intermediates. Higher

prices for the imported intermediates reduce the output of the final good(s)
and, because the domestic intermediates are complementary, the effect of the
—1-

reduced output on domestic intermediate demand dominates any expenditure

switching from the foreign to the domestic intermediates. This generates a
negative welfare effect due to the difference between price and marginal cost

noted above. If this "derationalization" effect dominates the terms-of-trade

effect, then even a small level of import protection is welfare reducing
(Markusen 1990).

The possibility of welfare-reducing protection in spite of a favorable
terms-of-trade effect is more likely if the intermediates are in turn an input
into a final good produced with increasing returns. Again, due to an excess

of price over marginal cost, such an industry is under-producing for the
domestic market. It may also be under-exporting (if indeed it is an export
industry), although this is much less obvious.

The purpose of this paper is to develop these ideas and apply them to a
particular case study. Section 2 below develops a simple model to exposit the

theoretical possibility of welfare-reducing protection. Section 3 outlines the
details of the applied general-equilibrium model, which further develops the
North American auto model of Hunter, Markusen, and Rutherford (1992) by

adding an auto parts sector.'

Section 4 presents results of several

counter-factual experiments, and shows that Mexico achieves a welfare gain
by unilaterally removing its protection on auto parts. Mexican auto production
and exports significantly expand following the removal of parts protection, and

Mexican auto parts production also experiences an increased output. This last

result is an illustration of the "derationalization" effect: protection on parts

generates a scale effect that dominates the expenditure switching effect.

1The purposes of the Hunter, Markusen, and Rutherford paper are very

different from the objectives of the present paper. The former paper is
concerned with the effects of multinational price and output coordination on
trade liberalization scenarios, and with the ability of producers to segment
markets (free trade for producers versus free trade for consumers).
-2-

Finally, zero protection on parts is shown to be the optimal (non-negative)
protection level for Mexico.

2.

The Theoretical Argument

In this section, we will outline the principal theoretical argument of

the paper. We will attempt to keep the analysis simple and stylized, since
some of the points have previously appeared in print. A fully analysis of the

technology and markup formulae etc. in the auto sector (sector X below) is
given in Hunter, Markusen, and Rutherford.

Suppose that an economy has two final goods X and Y, and an
intermediate good Z (parts). Foreign Z is differentiated from domestic Z and

so the former is denoted Z. Throughout the paper, foreign variables are
superscripted with a 'i'. We will think of Mexico as the domestic (home)

economy and the US as the foreign country throughout.

Domestic

consumption of X and Y are denoted C and C, and domestic welfare is given

by
(1)

U = U(C,C)

Good X (autos) is produced using domestic labor, L and domestic and
imported Z.
(2)

X = F(L,Z,Z*)

Good Y is produced with constant returns to scale by a competitive industry
using labor and a sector-specific factor R.
(3)

Y=

G(L,R)

Z is produced from labor alone.
-3-

Z = H(L)

(4)

Let Y be numeraire and let p (p denote the home and export price

of X in terms of Y respectively (p is the foreign price net of foreign
protection). Assume for simplicity that Z is not exported (and therefore non-

traded). p (p) will denote the home price of Z and the foreign (import)
price of Z respectively. The balance-of-payments constraint for the economy

is given by
(5)

where

E_=X-C EY-C,

p:E+E_p:z*=o,

E and E are domestic excess supplies of X and Y respectively. We

assume no tariffs or export taxes initially, so p gives the domestic price of Z
as well as the import price. X is an export good by assumption and exporters
of X may be able to price discriminate between markets, so p, and p need not
be equal. In our applied model developed in the following section, auto firms

are foreign owned, but free entry drives profits to zero so that there is no
repatriation term in (5).

We assume that a unit of exports of X requires a shipping cost of s

units of labor, so total labor devoted to exporting is L = sEx. The overall
labor constraint (L) on the domestic economy is given by
(6)

Through a process of differentiation and substitution, equations (1)

through (6) can be transformed into a welfare differential useful for policy
analysis.

Differentiating (1), we obtain an expression for the change in

welfare measured in terms of good Y.

-4-

(7)

dU=U—dc+dc
dW= —
y

y

Now differentiate the production function X in (2), and replace dX with dC

÷

dEs.

(8)

dX = dC + dE

FIdLX + FdZ +

F. dZ *

X and Z are assumed to be produced with increasing returns by
imperfectly competitive industries. Let m and m be the markups (wedge
between price and marginal cost) applied to domestic and foreign sales of X

respectively, and let w denote the home (Mexican) wage rate in terms of Y.

If the US market is served by plants in both the US and Mexico, optimal
pricing implies that the MNE equates delivered marginal cost from Mexico to

the US marginal cost. Specifically, US marginal cost (mc) is equated to
delivered marginal cost from Mexico inclusive of the US tariff (t*) levied on

Mexican marginal cost (mc,) plus shipping cost (ws): mc = (1

+ t)(mc +

ws). The firm's pricing equations for thee foreign (US) and domestic
(Mexico) economies are given by
(9)

p'(1 —mj,') = mc = (1 ÷t*)(mc +ws),

p(l —mi) = mc

where p is the foreign (US) domestic price of autos: p = p(l + t*). Noting
this last relationship, divide the first equation of (9) through by (1 + t') and

replace p(l + t with p. The two equations of (9) together then imply
(10)

p;(1 —m') —ws = p(1 —mi) = mc

Factors of production used in the X industry are paid their marginal revenue

products (marginal revenue times physical marginal products), so we can
-5-

multiply (8) through by marginal revenue
- m,)

= p(l - ni) - ws given in (10) to get

(11)

dE - wsdE = wdL + pdZ + p

(1 - m) dC + p (1 -

dZ *

The second equality of (11) follows from the fact that marginal revenue

products of factors equal factor prices; e.g., p(l - ni,)F1 = w. Differentiate
(4) and multiply through by marginal revenue

p(l - m) where m is the domestic markup on parts.
(12)

dZ = H'dL;

'(1 —m)dZ = wdL

The second equality follows from the fact that the marginal-revenue product

of labor, p(i - m)H', equals the wage, w. Differentiate (3) recalling that Y
is numeraire (implying w = G').
(13)

dY =

GI'dL

=

wdL

Rearrange (11) with only wdL + wsdE on the right-hand side. Sum (11),
(12), and (13) noting that the sum of the right-hand sides equals zero: w(dLA

+ dL + dL + sdE) =

0.

(14)

p (1 - m)dC

+

p (1 - m) dE - pdZ -

dZ

+

p (1 - m) dZ + dY

Subtract (14) from the welfare differential (7).
(15)

dW = pJndC

- p'(l - ,n)dE +

Differentiate equation (5).

-6-

n/JZ +

pdZ* - dE

(16)

pdE + Edp *

+ dE

- pdZ - Z *.J,: =
*

Add (16) to (15)
(17)

dW = pJndC + [pmdE

+

Edpfl

+

{p,nz Z*dp]

Now assume that the domestic economy institutes a small import tariff

on Z*. Assume also without further analysis that this tariff has the 'expected"
effects of (A) reducing imports of Z* and driving down the import price of Z,

dp < 0; (B) reducing the domestic consumption and exports of the final good

X and thereby driving up the world price of X, [dCx, dEJ < 0,

dp > 0.

The first term in (17) results from the distortion between price and

marginal cost on domestic sales of X. This first term in (17) has a negative

sign: the tariff on Z reduces domestic consumption of X, which is priced
above marginal cost, thus there is a loss of the consumption change times the

difference between price and marginal cost, (p, - mcj = p,(m,.2
Trade economists will recognize the first term in square brackets in
(17) as a volume-of-trade effect and a terms-of-trade effect on exports of X.

The optimal export tax is simply the value of m that sets this expression to

zero. In the present case, the auto firms pick m, and the markup may
therefore be greater than or less than its optimal value. With dE < 0 and dp

2Although the auto firms are foreign owned, the difference between price
and marginal cost (mc) is captured by the Mexican economy in our model.
Free entry drives profits to zero, and (p - mc) accrues to the Mexican
economy as lower average cost (ac) (higher productivity). Denote total cost
as c, so c, = ac*X. We then have mc = dc/dX = X(dac/dX) + ac. (p
- mc,) then equals (p,- ac) - X(dacIdX). The first term accrues to the
multinational but is zero in our model due to free entry. The second term
including the minus sign is positive (decreasing average cost) and accrues to
the Mexican economy as higher real wages.

-7-

> 0 due to the tariff on Z, this expression in the first set of square brackets
in (17) contributes negatively to welfare if

E dp"

> ----—--- > 0.
dE,

(18)

Most readers will recognize the right-hand side of (18) as the (inverse) price

elasticity of foreign import demand for X. This inequality will hold if the
actual markup applied by the exporters of X (m) is greater than the "optimal"

export tax given by the right-hand side of (18). In other words, (18) holds jf

the country is under exporting" X initially. This question has been much
discussed in the trade industrial-organization literature, with Brander and
Spencer (1985) showing that a single domestic Cournot firm under exports (the

markup is too high), and Eaton and Grossman (1985) showing that a single

Bertrand firm (or several Cournot firms) over export (the markup is too
low) .

optimal export tax formula takes into account a production

The

response in the foreign country, implying that a given increase in domestic
exports is larger than the resulting increase in the foreign consumption level
since some foreign production is displaced: dC/dB < 1. This in turn implies

that -[dpIdCJ > -[dp/dEj.

We can rewrite this last expression as

=

(19)
Cx

pdC
x
x

a

>

dE
x

cx

The term in brackets on the left-hand side of (19) is the (inverse) Marshallian

3See also Brown (1989) and Hertel (1992) for more general discussions
concerning alternative pricing rules.
-8-

price elasticity of demand, denoted o. The left-hand side of (19) is thus, in
the context of the model to follow, the share of Mexican exports of autos in
US auto consumption, denoted s,,,, divided by the Marshallian price elasticity

of demand in the US.

In our model to follow, US multinational firms coordinate their
exports from Mexico (and Canada) to the US with their US production and
sales. These firms complete with one another according to a Cournot markup

rule time a calibrated parameter that is very close to 1.0, so let's ignore the
later. The markup m applied to Mexican exports is then given by the share

of one US multinational in the US market, denoted s., divided by the
Marshallian price elasticity of demand: m = slii. From (18) and (19), a
sufficient condition for (18) to hold is thus that s > s,,: the share of one US
multinational car producer in the US market must be larger than the share of

all Mexican auto exports in the US market. In our data, s. is just over 10%
(averaged over large and small firms) while s,, is just over 1 %. Thus in our

data and theoretical model formulation, the inequality in (18) holds. Mexico

is under exporting autos initially to the US (i.e., the initial markup is too
high), and this in turn implies that the reduction in exports caused by the
import tariff on Z contributes negatively to Mexican welfare according to the

first bracketed term in (17).

The seconed term in square brackets in (17) consists of a term
resulting from the distortion between price and marginal cost on domestic parts

sales, and a terms-of-trade effect on imported parts. The sum of these two
terms (the entire expression in the second set of square brackets) is analyzed

by Markusen (1990). (-Zdp) >

0 due to the fact that the import tariff on Z

drives down the import price of Z. This is the usual favorable terms-of-trade

effect discussed earlier. In the conventional analysis of differentiated final
goods (Flam and Helpman (1987), Venables (1987)), the first term p1nidZ is

-9-

also positive, since the import tariff switches expenditure from the foreign
goods to the domestic goods. Markusen (1990) shows that this effect can be
reverse when the Z's are complementary intermediate inputs such that pmdZ

<

0, and indeed the strength of this effect can outweigh the favorable terms-

of-trade effect. Markusen shows that this perverse' outcome is more likely
as (A) the elasticity of substitution between Z and Z is low, and (B) the price

elasticity of demand for X is high (in the present case, the domestic price
elasticity). The latter effect strengthens the expenditure switching away from
X when the price of Z increases, making it more likely that the negative scale

effect on demand for Z outweighs the substitution effect in favor of Z.
This analysis establishes the theoretical plausibility that all three terms

in (17) might be negative, or at least the plausibility that the entire expression

is negative. Considering certain aspects of the Mexican auto (X) and auto
parts industry (Z) that we have referred to and will expand upon below, there
is then a prima facia case that Mexico's optimal (non-negative) protection level

in that industry might be zero.

3.

The Applied General-Equilibrium Model
The model consists of four regions: Canada (CAN), the United States

(USA), Mexico (MEX), and the rest of the world (ROW). There are two final

goods in the model and two primary factors, immobile between countries.
Good Y is a homogeneous product produced by a competitive industry with

constant returns to scale. Y is produced with a composite factor which we
will refer to as "labor" (although it bears no relationship to empirical labor)
and a sector-specific factor R. Y is numeraire, and the existence of R implies
that labor must be drawn into the auto sector at increasing cost in terms of Y.

X is finished autos, which we have modelled as a homogeneous good.

-10-

There is clearly product differentiation by firm, but not by country per se (US

consumers generally do not know if their US car is made in the US, Canada,

or Mexico), so we have simply modelled cars as homogeneous. Cars are
produced with 'labor" and parts (Z) which are assumed to be differentiated by

firm. Empirically, the types of parts produced and exported by firms in
Mexico are quite different from the parts that are imported.
There are two types of auto firms in the model, North American (NA)

and rest-of-world (R). Each NA firm is assumed to have plants in each of
CAN, USA, and ROW initially, and to coordinate production, pricing, and
shipments among the three markets to maximize firm profits. NA firms are
assumed to be able to segment markets (consumer price arbitrage constraints

do not bind) which is consistent with our evidence on prices in the three

countries. R firms export to North American, but do not produce within
North American.

Production cost for a typej firm (j = NA,R) in market i (CD is given
by a constant marginal cost (for a given price of labor) (meD times output plus

a fixed cost (also a function of the price of labor) (fc).
(20)

acf = Cf ixf = mcI + fcfjxf

Cf = mcf * xf + ftf,

where ae is average cost and X is output of a j-type firm in market i. The
elasticity of scale (e), which we get from engineering data combined with
output data, is defined as the ratio of average to marginal cost.

(21)

ac'
E—-1+

ft1

mcf

mcf*xf

Note that the elasticity of scale is a variable, and falls with firm output.

Firm typej sets a markup m in market i, and if it is a NA firm that
-11—

also ships to market i from market k, joint maximization across plants requires

that the marginal cost in i is equated to the delivered marginal cost from
market k. Let r1 denote the shipping cost from market k to market i, and t
the ad valorem tariff rate from k to i. We assume that the tariff rate is applied

to marginal cost plus transport cost. The pricing equations are thus

(22) p(l — me')

= mcf = (1 +

t)(mc +

We assume free entry and exit of firms such that profits equal zero.

We make this operational by assuming zero profits at the plant level for NA
firms. That is, no copy of an additional plant (same output, shipments, prices,

and markups as existing plants) can make positive profits. For a NA plant
located in market k and shipping to some or all of the three NA countries, this

condition is given by

p,'mfX,

(23)

=

fc

I=

(CAN,USA,MEX),

j = NA

For the multi-plant firms (j = NA), equations (21), (22) (first

equality), and (23) give us nine equations in nine unknown (i =
CAN,TJSA,MEX).

Variables p, , Xj, X, are known, and our preliminary

calibration program then solves this system for the nine unknowns m, mci, and

fej. The estimates of the elasticity of scale and the free entry assumption are
thus allowed to determine the initial markups.

These markups are then used to calculate a 'conjecture parameter" ti
which reconciles the calibrated markup with a Cournot pricing rule.

(24)

mf

=

-12-

where s is the share of a j-type firm in the sales of cars in market i, and

is

the Marshallian price elasticity of demand in market i. The term in brackets
is the Coumot pricing rule for a homogeneous product, market share divided

by the Marshallian price elasticity of demand. Markups are thus Cournot if

U=

1.

Our calibration indicates that the US is somewhat more competitive

than Cournot (0 =

0.88), while Canada and Mexico are much more

collusive than Cournot (1 = 2.45,

( = 2.49). The I's are held constant

in subsequent analysis while the market shares are allowed to vary. Finally,
the transport cost parameters r are calibrated using (22).

The parts sector Z is assumed to be monopolistically competitive,
with product differentiation by firm. While the multinational car producers

certainly have significant parts production, there are a great many small
producers as well (about 500 in Mexico, 2300 in the US). We thus make the

modelling choice that parts producers are treated as small, independent,
national firms. We will exposit just a two-region example to show how the

parts sector works. In the notation of the previous section of this paper,
domestic and foreign composite parts Z and Z* are composed of the individual

underlying parts from each country, and these are in turn aggregated into a
single composite Z in a Cobb-Douglas nest.
(25)
1

z

=

z

=

, zt

Let p denote the domestic price of the domestic parts composite Z.

Any part produced will be produced in the same amount and priced the same,

so we can deal with a representative part. It is assumed that the small parts
producers cannot segment markets, so arbitrage constraints hold and we need

-13-

only consider the domestic price received on both domestic and export sales.

The price received by an individual domestic parts firms, p, is the marginal
product of Z1 in producing Z. The revenue of the producer is then pZ,.
These are given by

(26)

-'
=
p, p(l/13) Z' - PZt

R =1Z = [pAZ' -

We make the usual monopolistic-competition assumption that each parts

producer views itself as small in the market, so that Z and p2 are viewed as
constant. Hence the bracketed term in the second equation of (26) is viewed
as constant. Marginal revenue for an individual parts producer is thus given

by
(27)

MR =

dR/dZ1

=

[p2Z' - P] f3Z,

-' =

13

Price is a constant markup over marginal cost. We assume the same type of

cost function that we did for auto producers: a fixed cost plus a constant
marginal cost. Free entry produces zero profits: price equals average cost.
Together these give us
(28)
where

=

acjmc =

,nc, "i, = ac2]

1/13

is the elasticity of scale in parts production. Our data estimates of

these elasticities give us estimates for the substitution parameter f3 for each
country's parts composite (i.e., these vary across countries).

Note that (28) implies that Z1 and Z7 are constants; since parts are

produced using only the composite factor "labor', ac/mc is independent of
factor prices and depends only on Z1. If ac/mc is constant, so is 4 The parts
industry expands through the addition of new firms (Helpman and Krugman
(1985) provide extensive discussions of this type of model). The production
-14-

functions for the parts composites can be written as
(29)

Z = nZ1,

Z4 =

where Z1 and Z are constants. We thus have convenient 'industry" production

functions for the parts composite of each country in (29), with that production

function homogeneous of degree 1/j3 >

1

in country i. We use this

simplification in computing the solution to the model.

-15-

4.

Data. Results, Interpretations

Tables 1 through S present some of the data used in the model and
several key calibrated parameters. Table 1 gives GNP, the elasticities of scale

in autos and parts production, the number of firms operating in the country,
relative prices of cars and parts in terms of the composite commodity, and the

share of North American firms in total auto sales in each country. Note that

the number of firms producing in the US is not the same as the number of
those in Canada and Mexico, so we made a modelling simplification in this
regard when we assumed that all NA firms operate in all three countries.4
Table 2 gives protection levels and includes conversion of non-tariff

barriers to tariff equivalents. We regard this as appropriate for present
purposes, which is assess the effects of protection when we have intermediate

goods of this type, rather than to predict the effect of a free trade area per se.

In a later paper, we will attempt to model the various non-tariff barriers on
content protection, balance of payments, ownership, etc.
Table 3 gives flows of finished autos in billions of US dollars. Since

autos are treated as a homogeneous good, we list net trade flows (exports
minus imports) in this table. Table 3 also gives parts flows, where two-way
flows are listed since parts are assumed differentiated by firm. Parts include
engines, but parts used in the production of parts are netted out (our figure for

this intermediate use is 20%). Note that Mexico is a net exporter of cars to
the US and a net importer of parts from the US.
Table 5 gives some calibrated parameters and "guesstimates. PS is

the share of purchased parts in car production, while PC is the share of parts

sold directly to final consumption (spares). We don't have good figures for

4The five firms in Canada are not the same five as those in Mexico. Six

of the eight US firms produce in either Canada or Mexico. See Hunter,
Markusen, and Rutherford (1992) for more details and a discussion of our
modelling assumption.
-16-

PS, but PC is between 20 and 30%, so by setting PC in this range we infer
values for PS. The lower value in the US than Canada and Mexico suggests
more integrated plants in the US. The figures for ROW seem, inaccurate; the
ROW parts industry should be much larger, but this likely has a trivial effect

on our results for NA liberalization. m' and (1NA are the calibrated values of
the markup and "conjecture" parameters respectively. The latter are much
higher for Canada and Mexico relative to the US (more collusive pricing in the
-

smaller economies) and, while they take on similar values in Canada and

Mexico, Canada has a much smaller markup due to the fact that firms in
Canada have individually smaller market sizes. iis the elasticity of the wage

rate" (marginal cost of production) with respect to auto sector production.
0.20 indicates that a doubling of auto production would increase marginal cost

by 20%, a simple guess on our part. This elasticity is used to calibrate the
share of the specific factor in the composite sector (see Hunter, Markusen, and

Rutherford). a is the elasticity of substitution in consumption between the
composite commodity and autos. This elasticity plays little role given the way

we have constructed the model; increasing it would just be compensated for
by an increase in the conjecture parameters.

-17-

TABLE 1: DATA PARAMETERS

CAN
USA
MEX
ROW

GNP
543.63
5166.09
211.97
17495.40

1.15
1.1

1.2

1.7
1.1

1.5

N
5
8
5
12

1.1
1.1

p
1.15
1.0
1.4
1.0

p

5NA(%)

lOS

49.53
83.79
100.00

1.00
1.20
1.05

TABLE 2: PROTECTION LEVELS

CAN.CARS USA.CARS MEX.CARS ROW.CARS
.335
.335

CAN

USA
MEX
ROW

CAN

USA
MEX
ROW

0.038
0.038

0.095
0.095

.125
.125
.125

.335

CAN .PARTS USA.PARTSMEX.PARTS ROW.PARTS
0.17
0.065
0.17
0.065
0.092
0.040
0.065
0.092
0.034
0.16

TABLE 3: TRADE FLOWS: CARS (NET) AND PARTS (CROSS)

CAN.CARS USA.CARS MEX.CARS ROW.CARS
CAN
USA
MEX
ROW

CAN
USA
MEX
ROW

3.347

11.970
140.345
1.989
32.027

3.496

4.430

0.243
400.199

CAN.PARTS USA.PARTSMEX.PARTS ROW.PARTS
2.680
6.392
0.072
0.152
9.669
71.267
2.664
3.532
0.285
0.870
3.505
0.587
1.929
11.564
0.427
149.167

TABLE 4: CALIBRATED AND SELECTED PARAMETERS

CAN
USA
MEX
ROW

PS
0.70
0.50
0.70
0.35

,

0.20
0.20
0.20
0.20

PC

1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

0.27
0.22
0.23
0.01

-18-

m QNA
.240
.091

.499

2.45
0.88
2.49
1.00

Table 5 gives the effects of a North American free trade area (NAFTA)

in autos and parts, removing all protection on autos and parts within North
America. All variables are in percentage changes except the last two. Mexico

is a major gainer from this liberalization, gaining 0.9%. This is impressive
since the sector is less than 3 % of GNP and since US protection is initially
very low. The US and Canada suffer trivial losses. Mexico has a large gain
in auto output (147%) along with a strong rationalization effect on output per

firm (114%). Parts output increases by 24% despite the fact that it is a net
import industry (exports decrease, imports increase). The US experiences
essentially a zero change in parts production, as increased exports to Mexico

are balanced by the loss of domestic sales. The Mexican price of autos falls
significantly (11%) generating a further consumer surplus gain to complement

the industrial organization gains.

Table 6 analyzes a unilateral Mexican policy of removing protection
against US and Canadian auto parts. The resulting Mexican welfare gain is

highly significant given the size of the sector, and given that it has some
monopoly power over the inputs as noted above. Here we see some of the
effects identified in the theoretical section of the paper. Output per firm in
autos

-19-

TABLE 5: NAFFA, ALL PROTECTION REMOVED WITHIN
NORTH AMERICA
CAN

(% change in)
WELFARE

-0.01

NUMBER OF AUTO FIRMS 0.54
AUTO OUTPUT
-2.97
AUTOS PER FIRM
-3.48
PARTS OUTPUT
-2.12
AUTO EXPORTS
AUTO IMPORTS
PARTS EXPORTS
PARTS IMPORTS

-4.18
-1.12
-2.72
-1.59

PRICE OF AUTOS
-0.20
NA FIRM MARKUPS (level) 0.24
ROW FIRM MARKUPS (level) 0.10

USA
-0.01
-1.76
-4.91
-3.21
-0.15

MEX
0.90
15.24
146.54
113.93
23.73
408.51

15.35

14.27
-3.76

-2.02
86.87

-0.13
0.09
0.01

-11.15
0.43

ROW

-0.32
-0.33

-0.36
-5.18
-100.00
-1.52
-0.35
-0.05

0.08

TABLE 6: MEXICAN PROTECTION AGAINST US AND
CANADIAN PARTS REMOVED
CAN
(% change in)
WELFARE
NUMBER OF AUTO FIRMS -0.75
AUTO OUTPUT
-2.38
AUTOS PER FIRM
-1.63
PARTS OUTPUT
-0.98
AUTO EXPORTS
AUTO IMPORTS
PARTS EXPORTS
PARTS IMPORTS

USA

MEX

ROW

0.40
-0.99

6.95

-0.31

-2.20
-1.22

81.91

-0.30

70.08
12.43

-0.30

0.24

-2.96
0.14

6.88

-1.01
-1.51

8.26

-2.61

-0.47
558.32
-0.64

-1,74

51.56

-0.35

PRICE OF AUTOS
NA FIRM MARKUPS (level) 0.24
ROW FIRM MARKUPS (level) 0.10

-0.05
0.09
0.01

-8.02

-0.05

226.01

0.47
0.08

TABLE 7: MEXICAN PROTECTION ON US AND CANADIAN
PARTS LOWERED TO 1%

CAN
(% change in)
WELFARE
NUMBER OF AUTO FIRMS -0.70
AUTO OUTPUT
-2.23
AUTOSPERFIRM
-1.54
PARTS OUTPUT
-0.92

USA

MEX

ROW

0.39
-0.93
-2.07
-1.15
0.22

-20-

6.54
77.38
66.49
11.88

-0.30
-0.29
-0.28

expands significantly (70%) (footnote 2, section 2) so the Mexican economy

captures the benefits of decreasing average cost (increasing productivity).
Auto exports from Mexico expand significantly (226%), and we argued earlier

that they are under exported initially. Parts production expands in Mexico
(12%) as do parts imports (52%) which help fuel the auto sector expansion.

As discussed in section 2, domestic Mexican auto parts are under supplied

initially, so this expansion in the Mexican parts sector confers a welfare
benefit to Mexico.

The welfare increase in Table 6 from Mexico's unilateral elimination of
its 17% protection against US and Canadian parts does not imply that there

might not be some optimal protection level between zero and 17 % which
increases welfare above either extreme. Simulations in between these values
convinces us that welfare is monotonically decreasing with protection on parts,

and we report partial results for lowering protection to 1 % in Table 7.
Welfare for Mexico increases by 0.39%, less than the 0.40% increase under
full removal of protection. Relative to free trade in parts, the 1 % protection

on parts reduces domestic production, consumption and export of autos and
reduces the domestic production of auto parts. Domestic and foreign parts are

indeed general-equilibrium complements in our model. The theory in section

two above thus helps explain the result that this small level of protection is
welfare reducing despite the existence of some monopoly power in trade for
Mexico.

-21-

5. Summary and Conclusions

Existing analyses of increasing-returns, differentiated products have
generally focused on final consumer goods, and have made the natural

assumption in this context that domestic and foreign varieties are better
substitutes for one another than for other classes of commodities. Since the

domestic goods are undersupplied in initial free-trade equilibrium (price

exceeds marginal cost), protection has the beneficial effect of shifting
expenditure to the domestic goods, thereby creating a welfare benefit to the
domestic economy in addition to the normal terms-of-trade effect.

Markusen (1989, 1990) focuses on differentiated intermediate inputs
following Ethier (1982), and raises the possibility of complementarity between

domestic and foreign inputs. This then reverses the above argument about

protection. The present paper reviews this point and then adds a further
consideration. If the intermediates are in turn used as inputs into a good(s)
produced with increasing returns, and therefore also undersupplied initially,
we have a further argument against protection.

After developing the theoretical argument, the paper extends the earlier

auto model of Hunter, Markusen, and Rutherford by adding a parts sector.

The earlier paper focussed on the effects of multinational price and output
coordination, and on the consequence of market segmentation. In this paper,

the extended model is used to evaluate trade policy for the differentiated
intermediates. We find that the welfare-maximizing unilateral, non-negative

protection policy for Mexico is zero protection on parts. Protection reduces
the output and exports of the increasing- returns auto sector, and also reduces

the output of the increasing-returns domestic Mexican parts sector. These
generate negative welfare effects that dominate whatever small terms-of-trade

benefit such protection might generate for Mexico. Given the large share of
producer intermediate goods in total imports of many developing countries,
these results may have some general applicability.
-22-

REFERENCES
Brander, James A. and Barbara K. Spencer (1985) "Export Subsidies and
International Market Share Rivalry', Journal of International Economics
18, 83-100.
Brown, Drusilla K. (1989), "Market Structure, the Exchange Rate and Pricing
Behavior by Firms: Some Evidence from Computable General Equilibrium
Trade Models", Weltwirtschafthiches Archiv 125, 441-463.

Eaton, Jonathan, and Gene Grossman (1985), "Optimal Trade and Industrial
Policy under Oligopoly", Quarterly Journal of Economics 101, 383-406.
Ethier, Wilfred J. (1982), 'National and International Returns to Scale in the
Modern Theory of International Trade", American Economic Review 72,
389-405.

Flam, Harry, and Elhanan Helpman (1987), 'Industrial Policy under
Monopolistic Competition", Journal of International Economics 22, 79102.

Helpman, Elhanan (1990), Monopolistic Competition in Trade Theory, Special
Papers in International Finance No. 16, Princeton, New Jersey.

Helpman, Elhanan, and Paul Krugman (1985), Market Structure and Foreign
Trade (Cambridge: MIT Press).

Hertel, Thomas W. (1992), "The 'Procompetitive Effects of Trade Policy
Reform in a Small, Open Economy", Purdue University Working Paper.

Hunter, Linda, James R. Markusen, and Thomas F. Rutherford (1992),
"Trade Liberalization in a Multinational Dominated Industry", NBER and
University of Colorado working paper.

Markusen, James R. (1989), "Trade in Producer Services and in Other
Specialized, Intermediate Inputs", American Economic Review 85, 85-95.

Markusen, James R. (1990), "Derationalizing Tariffs with Specialized

Intermediate Inputs and Differentiated Final Goods", Journal of
International Economics 28, 375-384.

-23-

Venables, Anthony (1982), "Optimal Tariffs for Trade in Monopolistically
Competitive Commodities", Journal of International Economics 12, 225242.

Venables, Anthony (1987), "Trade and Trade Policy with Differentiated
Products: A Chamberlinian-Ricardian Model", Economic Journal 97, 700717.

(Data sources are listed in Hunter, Markusen, and Rutherford)

-24-

