NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HYPERfl'-ZFLATION WITH CURRENCY
SUBSTITUTION: INTRODUCING AN
INDEXED CURRENCY

Federico Sturzenegger

Working Paper No. 4184

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1992

Department of Economics, University of California, Los Angeles and National Bureau of

Economic Research. Mailing Address: 405 Hilgard Ave., Los Angeles, CA 90024-1477.
stunene@sscnet.econ.ucla.edu. I would like to thank Rudiger Dombusch, Andy Neumeyer, Peter

Temin, Holger Wolf and two anonymous referees for useful suggestions. The usual caveat
applies. This paper is part of NBER's research programs in International Finance and
Macroeconomics and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4 184
October 1992

Hyperinflation with Currency
Substitution: Introducing an
Indexed Currency

ABSTRACT

Currency substitution (CS) and financial adaptation are in general believed to increase the
equilibrium rate of inflation. This result derives from a setup in which the government finances
a certain amount of real resources through money printing and where CS reduces the base of the
inflation tax. This paper shows this intuition wrong for those situations where the hyperinflation
is expectations-driven. Incorporating CS in an Obstfeld-Rogoff (1983) framework I show reduces

the inflation rates along the hyperinflationary equilibrium. The intuition is simple: ifagents have

an easy way of substituting away from domestic currency then the required inflation rates to
sustain a path where real balances disappears is necessarily lower. The implications of the model

are then tested empirically.

Federico Sturzenegger
Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles
405 Hilgard Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90024-1477
and NBER

1 Introduction
Several countries have experienced monetary systems in which two currencies issued by the

same government serve as legal tender at the same time. The best known cases are those
of the Soviet Union between November 1922 and March 1924 and Hungary immediately
after World War II. In the Soviet Union, depreciating Soviet rubles circulated side by side

with the stable chervonets. In Hungary, the tax pengö, an indexed currency, was used as

a means of payment together with the regular pengö. But the experience with indexed
currencies belongs not only to history. Beginning in August 1990, the new córdoba is

circulating together with the gold córdoba in Nicaragua and starting in January 1992,
Ukranian coupons go side by side with Soviet rubles.'

During the 1980s, Latin America has experienced an increase in the phenomenon of
dollarization by which US dollars become used for transactions purposes. The process of

dollarization is similar to that of introducing an indexed currency, as it also provides an
alternative means of transacting. The main difference between the establishment of indexed

currencies and dollarization lies in the financing of the monetary stock. The process of
dollarization entails the need to run current account surpluses in order to "purchase" the
stock of monetary balances.
Usually, in the dual currencies experiences, one of the two currencies maintained stable

parity, while the other depreciated very quickly. The conventional wisdom is that it is the
introduction of a stable currency that it accelerates the rate of depreciation of the original
one.2 The argument is that introducing a second currency decreases the demand for the old
'Other examples are the issue ci provincial currency in Argentina in the 1980s and the issues of private
money during the German hyperinRation, which seems to have amounted to about six times the official
money supply. See Keller (1958).
2Tc see this approach applied to the Hungarian experience, see Bomberger and Makinen (1980) and

I

money. The excess supply of currency increases the inflation rate as people try to reduce
their holdings of currency.

This paper tries to challenge this interpretation on both theoretical and empirical
grounds. First, I develop a theoretical model in which the inflation rate is a bubble on
the price level. My basic framework fotlows previous work by Sidrauski (1967) on mod.

els of money in the utility function and Obstfeld and Rogoff (1983) for its extension to

hyperinflations. I show that if an alternative monetary asset is introduced, the rate at
which inflation accelerates declines. Although initially, the rate of inflation may increase or
decrease, depending upon how strong a decline in monetary balances is induced by the cur-

rency substitution process, the rate of inflaLion under currency substitution will eventually

be smaller than that without currency substitution along the hyperinflation path.
I then test the prediction of the model for two historical episodes. First, I consider the

case of the introduction of indexed currency in the Soviet Union in the 1920s. Second, I
discuss the case of dollarization in the Argentine hyperinflations of 1989 and 1990. Both
experiences are shown to be consistent with my model.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the basic Obstfeld-Rogoff frame-

work. Section 3 derives the appropriate properties of a utility function that includes two

monies in its argument. Section 4 presents a model with two fiat currencies. Section 5
discusses the empirical testing of the model. Finally, Section 6 contains some policy and
welfare implications.
(1983), Kaldor (1946a) and (194Gb), and Nogaro (1948).

2

2 The Basic Framework
Consider the Sidrauski (1067) model with no capital; the problem is:

Max V = j

u(ct, mde_Stdt,

(1)

subject to

dm
(2)

where Ct IS the agent's consumption in peziod t, m is his holding of real monetary

balances, y is the agent's fixed endowment, lrc is the inflation rate, and x is government
transfers. The first-order conditions for this problem are

u(c,rn) = A,

(3)

dA/dt = + r —
Um(C, m)/A,

(4)

lim Ae_ötmg = 0,

(5)

where I have dropped the time subscripts for convenience. Furthermore, we have that

;h/m=a—?r

(6)

and

(7)

3

where c is the rate of growth of the nominal stock of money.
Substitute equations (6) and (7) into (2) to obtain the equilibrium level of consumption,
Ct = y. Ill assume that the utility function is separable in consumption and real
money

balances, the fact that c = y (where y is constant) implies that the marginal utility of

= o. I

consumption must be constant, or that .A
A=

can therefore normalize c such that

= 1. Equation (4) then becomes

(8)

So, substituting (6) into (8) gives

=

(5

+ 1)m — um(m)m.

(9)

Equation (9) is a differential equation in in. By taking the derivative with respect to

in near the steady state (urnmm > 0), 1 immediately get that the equation is unstable.
This ties down the price level by determining a unique steady state level of real money
balances. But the steady state is not the unique equilibrium. Obstfeld and Rogoff (1983)
have shown that in this model, while hyperdeflations can be ruled out (because they violate

the transversality condition), the same is not true of hyperinflations. As long as

lim mu_(m) = 0,

(10)

—0

a rational hyperinfiation may take place even with constant money growth.

Figure 1 shows the dynamics of equation (9). The full line corresponds to the case

in which condition (10) is satisfied. A is the steady state. At A, Urn =

5

+C=

6

+ 1T,

which is the traditional money demand obtained in these models. The hyperdeflationary

4

solutions are located to the right of the steady state and generate an unbounded growth of
real monetary balances.

The solutions to the left of the steady state generate a fall in real money and therefore
correspond to hyperinflationary paths. Given that for these paths, th = 0 when m = 0, the
origin is an alternative steady state and corresponds to a nonmonetary equilibrium.

Figure 1: Monetary Dynamics in the Obstfeld-Rogoff Model

I
I

I
I
m

S

•1

4,

Alternatively, we may have that

limmum(m) > 0.

(11)

This case is represented by the dashed line in Figure 1. A is still a steady state, and the

hyperinfiationary paths are still to the left of A. On the hyperinfiationary solution path
the economy eventually reaches point B, at which point money holdings become negative

(th < 0). These paths are infeasible, and therefore must be ruled out.
5

It is interesting to note that the assumption that eliminates hyperinflations impli that

money has to be essential, in the sense that its marginal utility must increase laster than

the rate at which money balances converge to zero. In particular urn —.

is a necessary

condition to rule out hyperinflations. This condition is likely to be false when alternative
currencies are available, making it more difficult to rule out hyperinflations in those settings.

3 The Properties of the Utility Function
To extend the previous setup to one in which currency substitution occurs, it is important to

characterize the proper utility function to be used. This is particularly important because
we know from previous literature that the results depend critically on the assumptions on
the cross-partial derivatives between the two monetary assets. Liviatan (1981) showed that

using traditional utility functions with positive cross partials, i.e. in which

Um1m2

> 0,

generated results that were counter intuitive.3

While the consensus in the literature is that the appropriate utility function should be
characterized by negative cross partials (i.e., u,,,_3 < 0), to date no utility function that

exhibits these properties has been constructed. In this paper, I proceed to derive such a
utility (unction explicitly from a Baumol.Tobin.l3arro transactions model.

The traditional Baumol.Tobin-Barro setup starts by postulating a model in which individuals require monetary holdings to purchase a constant flow of consumption, c. If agents

run short of domestic currency then they must incur a cost in order to obtain additional
currency. These costs are usually associated with the costs of going to the bank or the costs
associated with converting illiquid assets into currency. Holding domestic currency entails
3Possibte solutions were suggested by Ca!vo (1985) and Engel (1989).

6

a loss in terms of foregone interest. To reduce the amount of money held, the individual can

increase the number of conversions from indexed assets to currency. In addition, this model

allows the individual to have the option to commit a certain amount of his assets to be
held as foreign or indexed currency. This renders the interest rate and the liquidity at the

same time but entails a cost associated with transacting through this more sophisticated
transactions mechanism.
For simplicity I will assume that the agent commits to use a certain amount of indexed
currency (in2) each time he obtains domestic currency (in1) and that the costs associated

with using this indexed currency are quadratic in in2. The agent minimizes transactions
costs, L, equal to

=

(c

2') i

+ Nk1 + Nk2m,

(12)

where N is the number of conversions or trips to the bank and k1 and k2 are constants

that determine the real cost of both kind of transactions. i is the nominal interest rate.
Total liquidity costs are equal to the foregone interest on domestic currency holdings plus

transactions costs that equal the cost of "going to the bank" plus the cost of operating
through sophisticated financial instruments. Minimization of (12) with respect to N and
in2 gives the demand functions for both currencies. Average domestic monetary holding
will equal to

c—Nm2
2N
equivalently,

7

13

(14)

2m1 + in2

Feenscra (19S6) showed that if we define C as "gross consumption" ie. as including "net

consumption" (c) and transactions costs, then there is an equivalence between the problem

(1)-(2) defined over c and an analogous intertemporal maximization problem in which the

agent maximizes a utility function that depends only on c subject to a budget constraint
containing a liquidity cost or transactions cost. My objective is to find the corresponding
utility function that makes these two problems analogous in this extended setup.
From above, I get that

tf='c+kcN+Nk2rn.

(15)

Now, to have an appropriate money in the utility function, it must be that V(c, in1, in2) =

u(c), where u(c) is the original utility function of the liquidity cost prob!em. Substituting
for N from (14), I obtain

Cs

*

V(c ,rni,m2) = u(

1 -'- ________ .-

2m1+m2

3

3m2

).

(16)

2m1+m2

In particular, if u(c) = log(c), then the utility function takes the form

ini, in2) = log(c) — log [1 +
2

in2

+ 2rn3+m2]

(17)

i.e., the utility function is separable in both consumption and liquidity services.
Now, consider the properties regarding the relation between both monetary assets given

by equation (17). For V to be well defined, we require that V > 0 and that Vu < 0, where

S

= {c, rn1, rn2}. The two conditions are obviously satisfied for c and rn1 as can be seen
by simple differentiation of (17). For rn2 I obtain

DV
Dm2

1

1+2k2rn2

2rn1+rn2 2rnj+rn2+k1+k2yn >0,

(18)

which will only be positive ilk2 is small enough. Equation (18) states that the marginal
benefit from holding indexed currency which is

the savings of transactions costs, must

exceed the marginal costs induced by using more of this currency.4

I now compute the cross-partial derivative which equais

—

______ —
—
8rn10rn2

1

—

(2rn1 + rn2)2

1+2k7rn2
(2rn1 + rn2 + k1 + k2rn)2

19

It is easy to show that if (18) is satisfied, the right hand side of (19) will also be positive.

To see this result, multiply both denominators of (18) by (2m1 + rn2 + Ic1 + k2rn). Notice
that the resulting positive expression is smaller than that in (19), which therefore is positive

as well. This proves that under the necessary conditions for (17) to be a well-defined utility
function, the cross partials between currencies have to be negative.

In what follows, I work with a utility function that satisfies the properties shown for
(17), i.e., separability in both consumption and liquidity services and negative cross partials

for both monies.

4

The Two Fiat Currency Model

Let the representative agent model solve the problem (where again I drop time subscripts
when no confusion arises)
'The second order derivatives are again negative for c' and ri,1 and form2 far small enough k,

9

Max V = j

[u(c) + I(mj,m2)Je_Stdt

(20)

subject to

(21)

where the utility function satisfies the properties outlined in Section 3.

The agent can accumulate both kinds of monies or consume. His income is a fixed

endowment, y, plus government transfers in both monies. The first-order conditions for
this problem are

= A,

(22)

(23)

Urn2 —Aiir3—/4.=O,

(24)

—A+6A=p,

(25)

and

(in1

+ m2)Ae6' =

0.

(26)

Aho, I get that

nij/m1 =
10

a1 —

r1

(27)

and

iii2/rn2 =

O'2 — 1r2.

(28)

Substituting (27) and (28) into the budget constraint (and using conditions analogous
to (7) for government transfers in each currency) gives y = c as before. I again normalize in

such a way that A =

1.

Substituting (23) and (24) into (27) and (28) gives two differential

equations in both real money balances:

ni1 = (a1 +t—u_jrni

(29)

th2 = (a2 + 6 — um3)m2.

(30)

and

Equations (29) and (30) describe the evolution of a dynamic system in two variables.5

Notice that in the steady state, a1 =

r1

and a2 =

r2

and that therefore the relative

money holdings will be a function of the relative nominal interest rates quoted in each
currency. Linearizing this system around the steady state generates a dynamic system with
two positive eigenvalues.6

This system is completely unstable with the unique convergent path being the steady

state. In addition if the condition analogous to (10) is satisfied, the economy presents a
3The slopes ol th, = 0 and th2 = 0 are given by LLflLm,/ILTflLrflL and lL,n3m2/1S,n1m. The concavity of
u allows me to determine that the equation for fit3 = 0 has a higher siope in absolute value.
'The trace equals —(m,um,,n, + m3u,fl,m3) > 0 indicating the presence of at least one positive root.
Furthermore the determinant has the sign of U,njm1 U,n3rn3 — U?7.Lm, which by coLicavity is assumed to be

positive. This indicates that both roots have the same sign, i.e. positive.

LI

multiplicity of equilibria, described by the hyperinflatiori paths converging on the single
currency equilibria.

Figure 2: Monetary Dynamics in the Two Fiat Currency Model

LI

dmilt=O

t.
A

I

4EF/dt=O

C

The phase diagram for the linearized system is given in Figure 2. Points A and C represent the one-currency equilibria. Along the branch denoted I, m1 suffers a hyperinflation.

Along II, it is in2 that asymptotically disappear. As both variables are jump-variables, the
economy can move to any point along this path (II) and still satisfy the dynamic equations
that describe the evolution of the monetary equilibrium.

It is interesting to do comparative statics on this model under the assumption that we

begin at the steady state without hyperinilation (point A). Suppose I introduce a new
currency, say in2. This moves the equilibrium from point A to point B. Because the cross
marginal utilities are negative, the introduction of in2 induces a decrease in the equilibrium

holdings of in1. This is achieved by a jump in the price level of the original currency.
12

Suppose now I increase the rate of money growth for in1. This shifts the ru1 =
downwards to rh'1 =

0.

0 locus

The final equilibrium entails lower real holdings of in1 and
greater

holdings of in2, i.e.1 a price level jump in terms of the "worsened" currency and a fall of the

price level measured in terms of the "new" or more stable one. The relative price level shift
implies lower real holdings of the original money in steady state. Therefore, the steady state

implications of the model are the expected ones and to some extent work as a Gresham's
Law in reverse: across steady states, good money displaces bad.

Now return to the initial steady state (point A). Assume now that while one currency is

evolving through a hyperinflationary path, another currency "backed" by the government

is introduced.7 Furthermore, suppose it is in2 that is backed. I now examine how the
introduction of this second currency affects the dynamic process for the initial one, in1
(using the transversality condition) will evolve according to

nti(t) = e(0+ëLmi (mLm,flt

(31)

For the hyperinflationary paths we are considering, the coefficient of the exponent is

negative; as we are to the left of the steady state (A in Figure 1), real money holdings
approach zero.

The rate of the depreciation of real money balances is given by the exponent a + 6 —

u1(mi,m2). So, the effect on the rate of decline of monetary balances will be given by
the net effect on the marginal utility of money. There are two effects at work. On the one
hand the increase in holdings of in2 will push the marginal utility downward. On the other

hand, the fall in the holdings of in1 will have the opposite effect. I discuss the net effect
with the help of Figure 3.
'In this context, "backing' means forcing condition (11) to hold in the monetary equilibrium.
13

Figure 3 integrates Figures I and 2. The outer equation for th (th1(m2 = 0) = 0)
is constructed for the case iii which in2 =

0

and corresponds to that in Figure 1 Now,

consider a point along the hyperinflationary path for currency in1 say, point C. The inner

curve for th1 is constructed for the corresponding value of m2. To know if the inflation

rate of the original currency increases or decreases, we have to see if th/m increases or
decreases upon moving to the new equilibrium point. Along a hyperinflationary solution
the initial money balances for in1 are bounded below by

the amount of real money

balances corresponding to the new equilibrium, and above by in1, the maximum possible
holding of money balances before the introduction of the alternative currency. It can now
be seen from Figure 3 that if the initial monetary balances were above m, then ih/m (the

slope of the line which starting at the origin goes through a particular point in the th1 = 0

curve) increases in absolute value in the transition; therefore from (27) the inflation rate
increases as well. Conversely, if initial money balances are below m, the rate of inflation
falls.

Irregardless of the initial effect on the level of the inflation rate, if the new currency is a
substitute for original currency in the sense of Section 3, then the rates of inflation required

to sustain the hyperinflation path will be lower than before. Equation (29) implies that the
rate of inflation depends on the value of the marginal utility of money, Urn. For the same
holdings of domestic currency, currency substitution lowers the marginal utility of money

thereby reducing the rate of inflation. In addition, the rate of growth of inflation falls as
along the hyperinflation path (I) described in Figure 2, the holdings of the indexed currency
increase. This reduces the marginal utility of money as compared with an equivalent change

in monetary holdings without the possibility of substituting away from domestic currency.

A fall in the rate of increase of the inflation rate due to the introduction of a more
14

Figure 3: Effects of a Second Currency on Monetary Dynamics

m

dr V4ULSQ

dm/dtrO

dm1Idt

"stabk" currency and a reduction in the inflation rates achieved during the hyperinflation
goes against the conventional wisdom. But, the intuition for this seemingly puzzling result
is rather straightforward. Along the hyperinflationary path (I), people are willing to reduce
monetary balances because they expect the inflation rate to increase in the future. If money

is "essential" in the sense that its marginal utility is very high, then the inflation rate
required to induce people to substitute out of this currency must be very large. If money

losses this "essentiality" property -because a very close substitute develops or becomes
available- then the inflation rate required to sustain a path with declining real monetary
balances falls.

l5

5 Empirical Testing
The hypothesis that hyperinilation isa bubble on the price level has been empirically tested
by Flood and Gather (1980), Flood, Garber, and Scott (1984), and Casella (1989). The

last two papers were unable to reject the existence of a bubble on the price level.

In this paper I follow Flood and Garber (1980) and test for bubbles for two historical

episodes. First, I consider the introduction of the chervonets, an indexed currency, in
November 1922 in the Soviet Union. [then consider the two Argentine hyperinfiations of
May-August 1989 and of December-March 1990. The Argentine experiences present a ideal

case studies because an intense process of financial adaptation took place in the short time
span between the two hyperinflations.

The model discussed in this paper generates two predictions. The first is that both
monies are substitutes and that therefore the demand for the original currency falls upon

introduction of the indexed alternative. The second is that bubbles are important in the

hyperinflationary process and that the value of the bubble grows at a smaller rate and
eventually is smaller with currency indexation than without. The first prediction of the
model derives from the negative cross-partial derivative derived in Section 3. 1 tested this by

testing whether that money demand falls when the new currency is introduced or financial

adaptation takes place. The second hypothesis was tested by estimating the value of the

bubble before and after the monetary reform and testing whether the bubble grows at a
slower rate with currency substitution than without.
To estimate the value of the bubble, I used a variation of the empirical model developed

by Flood and Garber (1980). Their model is a discrete time, partial equilibrium versiOn of
the theoretical model considered in this paper. Their model also allows for changes in the

16

rate of monetary growth; since tile rate
of money growth is not constant in the real world,

it must be accounted for in the econometric testing,
Specifically, the model consists of a Cagan money demand function of the form

—

p = + aE...i(rt) + c,

(32)

where mj and Pt are the logs of nominal money balances and the price level. As
usual,

E_ denotes the expectation conditional on the information available at the beginning of
the period. Finally, Ce 5 a random shock. The money demand semielasticity, a, is negative.

The rational expectations solution of (32) for the inflation rate is

Et_j(rij) = A00t —
where

=

E E_1(c1)',

(33)

> 1 and A0 is an arbitrary constant. The term A0€4' corresponds to

the bubble and describes the solution considered in this paper. The second term in (33)

represents the fundamentals driving the rate of inflation. My model predicts that with
currency substitution, should be smaller and the bubble will grow at a lower rate. A fall
in

takes place upon an increase in the absolute value of a. Both predictions of the model

are therefore tied to the behavior of a.
The empirical implementation of the model involved the following steps. First, I tested

for theintegratedness of my variables: the rate of inflation and the real stock of money. I
then computed a money demand function that allows for a change in monetary holdings
at the moment of the introduction of currency indexation. This consisted of testing for an
appropriate cointegrating vector between real money demand and inflation. If my money

demand function cointegrates, then I know that the estimators are superconsistent, ie.,

17

converge to the true population moments at a rate laster than the usual TL Unfortunately,

the limiting distribution is nonstandard and skewed to the left. (See Stock (1987).) In
order to obtain consistent estimators of the standard errors, I ran a Stock and Watson
(SW) regression. (See Stock and Watson, (1989).) The SW procedure entails running GLS
on the cointegrating equation and adding the backward and forward lags of all the residuals

of any cointegrating relationship present between the regressors. Alternatively, OLS with
Newey-West corrected standard errors (see Newey and West (1987)) also attain consistency.

As the inflation rate is an 1(1) process in my specilication, the cointegrating vectors that

had to be added to the system are the differences in the inflation rate. In general, three
forward and three backward lags were used.

Once a consistent estimate of the semielasticity of money was obtained, I computed 4)

and estimated, again using the SW procedure, the inflation prediction equation (33). This

enables me to test the significance of the bubble term and to estimate the value of A0.
Finally, I could compute, given the value of 4) and A0, the corresponding bubble for each
hyperinfiation.

Estimation of (32) was done by substituting the actual inflation rate for the expected
value. This would in general introduce an errors in variables problem. In this case, due to

the integratedness of the equation, the error term is asymptotically irrelevant. (See Engle
and Granger (1987)). Therefore, if real money and inflation are in fact cointegrated, my

estimators of the coefficients in equation (32) are consistent.

18

5.1 The Soviet Hyperinflation
The history of Soviet inflation begins with the restriction of convertibility shortly alter
the beginning of World War

1.

During the years until 1921, an important fraction of

government spending was financed by money issue, even though shortly after the revolution,

regulations issued by the People's Commissariat of Finance restricted the circulation of
currency in an attempt to construct a money-free economy. As the economy reverted to
barter, economic activity collapsed, and real money holdings declined sharply. After 1921, a
strong turn in economic policies took place under the "New Economic Policy" program. The

NEP accomplished a wide liberalization of the monetary and financial markets. Inflation
nevertheless continued unabated. The Soviet government increasingly became convinced of

the need of establishing a stable currency. Finally, the issue of the chervonets was agreed

upon. The state bank was responsible for the issue, but it was required to secure up to
no less than one quarter of the sum issued by precious metals and stable foreign currency.
Even though it was not a convertible currency, the value of the chervonets remained stable

during 1923, while the Soviet ruble continued to depreciate at an ever increasing rate.

Initially, chervonets were regarded with distrust but afterwards quickly began to substitute for old Soviet rubles. Finally, in March 1924 the old Soviet ruble was liquidated by

being exchanged at fixed parity with the chervonets. When the Soviet rubles were with.
drawn from circulation, (on March 10, 1924), each new ruble was exchanged for 50,000,000

prerevolutionary rubles.

I first tested for the integratedness of the money demand variables: the stock of real
monetary balances and the inflation rate. The ADF69 statistics for real monetary balances
'Data was obtained from Caan(1956), Katrenellenbaum (1925) and Yurovsky (1925).
The subscript in the AD? coefficient indicates the number of tags used in the computation of the

19

and inflation equal -1.16 and -0.27, respectively, which when compared with the critical
value of -2.89, does not allow me to reject the hypothesis of integratedness.'°
I next computed the S\V money demand function for the period between August 1919

and April 1924. The estimated equation is

=

18.44

+ 2.38D —

l.?9We —

2.26k1D) + 0.351 — 4.44th

(13.45) (9.19) (—4.54) (—5.60)

(9.49) (—9.51)

—

.2lChert,

(34)

(—7.67)

where tnt is real holdings of Soviet rubles, ir1 is the inilation rate, and I is a time trend.

The dummy D takes a value of one for periods after January 1923. While chervonets were

officially introduced in late November 1922, they only started to circulate in significant
pxantities in January 1923. Both time trends capture the progressive process of financial

adaptation that takes place in high inflation situations. The variable Cher2 measures the
real stock of chervontsi in circulation. The money demand function implied by equation

(29) together with the assumption on the cross-partial derivatives derived in Section 3
suggests that this variable should enter with a negative coefficient. Newey-West corrected

standard errors were used to compute the t-statistics reported.
A standard ADF3 test gave a statistic of -2.94, rejecting the hypothesis of nonstationar-

ity at the 5 percent level. I conclude then that (34) is a cointegrating vector and therefore

that the estimated parameters are consistent to their true population counterparts.

The first hypothesis I set out to test was whether there was a decline in monetary
statistic.
'0See Fuller (1976, Table 8.5.2. second panel) for 100 observations.

'1The Newey-West standard errors allowed for si,c significant covariances, with a dampening factor of .33
in the corresponding window.

20

balances following the introduction of the chervonets. The introduction of the chervonets
appears to have decreased the demand for Soviet rubles directly as measured by the negative

coefficient on the variable Cher. In addition, the elasticity of money demand -the critical
parameter to determine the effects on the bubble- also falls significantly, being equal to -1.79

before the introduction of the indexed currency and -4.05 after the reform. An additional
process of decline in money demand took place through progressive financial adaptation as

captured by the negative time trend.
The consistent estimates of the seinielasticities obtained from (34) allowed me to com-

pute the value of 4. For the pre-chervonets period, 0 = 1.56; after the introduction of the

chervonets, 4 =

1.25.

The bubble term grows slower under the indexed currency system

than before. In this sense, I have that the rate of inflation required to sustain the bubble
falls as an indexed currency is incorporated.

I next proceeded to test for the relevance of the bubble, by estimating the appropriate

inflation prediction equation (33). Following Flood and Garber (1980), I ran the corresponding SW regression for

7r = 5 +

+ PkCE_k + Aoçót + A1t + V,

(35)

which is appropriate as long as an AR(k) model is sufficient to describe the a process.
The two bubbles have the time variables normalized for comparison. I tested for a bubble
(Ao) between August 1922 and November 1922, ie., prior to the introduction of the cher-

vonets, and for a second bubble (.4) between January 1923 until the redemption of the
Soviet rubles in April 1924. The SW regression'2 for (35) gave coefficients equal to 0.0068
12j added to the regression the dilterences in the rate of money growth (or which I could not reject the

null of integratedness. In this case I added current and two forward Tags and set k = 6.

21

for the first bubble and 0.02 for the second. The corresponding t-statistics are 0.58 and
2.90, respectively. From this, I conclude that there was no bubble prior to the introduction

of the chervonets but that one developed shortly thereafter. Computation of the bubble
indicates that it was responsible for about 80 percent of the inflation rate toward the end
of the hyperinflation.'3 The AD!'3 statistic on the residuals of this regression equals -5.54,
clearly rejecting nonstationarity.

My model accounts both for the decline in monetary balances after the introduction
of the indexed currency and for the importance of bubbles in accounting for the hyperin.

fiationary process. Unfortunately, a comparison between the two bubbles is not possible
for this case because prior to the introduction of the chervonets, there was no bubble; the
inflationary process was basically driven by fundamentals. I next analyzed a case in which
there were clearly two hyperinflation episodes to allow for a comparison in the bubble terms.

5.2 The Argentine Hyperinflations
Argentina has along history of inflationary financing. During the lOSOs the rate of inflation

increased substantially, reaching hyperinifationary levels during the period May-August of
1989. During the hyperinflation, extensive financial adaptation took place, and the degree of

dollarization increased substantially. (See Sturzenegger (1991) and Dornbusch, Sturzeneg-

ger and Wolf (1990)). A stabilization program implemented in August 1989 stabilized the
economy until December. After mid.December, inflation increased once again and remained

high until March.
The two Argentine hyperinfiations were the conclusion of decades of excessive reliance
'3My methodology allowed me test br bubbles for any arbitrary period. If alternative dates are tried for

the time span of the bubble, similar results obtain.

22

on seigniorage to finance government spending. What makes these experiences extremely

relevant for the model at hand is the deepening of financial adaptation during the first
hyperinflation. The second hyperinfiation therefore took place with many more alternative
monetary assets already in place and therefore allowed to test the predictions of the model.

At an informal level, one could argue in favor of my model by noticing that inflation
reached 200 percent during the first hyperinflation but only 100 percent during the second.

In both cases, the reduction in real monetary holding was equivalent.'4 This suggests that

the rate of inflation required to reduce monetary holdings decreased substantially in the
short time span between the two hyperinflations.
More formally, I first tested for the integratedness of real money and the inflation rate.t5

The ADF6 statistics for real monetary balances and inflation equal 0.44 and -1.14, which
when compared with the critical value of -2.89 do not allow rejection of the hypothesis of

integratedness.'6 I then estimated the SW money demand equation, obtaining

inc =

6.45

+ 0.67D — 0.S2irc — 0.73(irtDj)

—

.017t,

(36)

(145.33) (9.28) (—5.34) (—6.10) (—7.64)
where mc is real holdings of Argentine australes, lrg is the inflation rate, and t is a time

trend. The dummy D takes a value of one for periods after July 1989, i.e., after the end
of the first hyperinflation. The time trend captures the progressive process of financial
"The trough in the level of real money holdings attained a vatue of 4.93 for the first hyperinfiation and
of 4.90 for the seconi This levet corresponds to a decline of 18 percent from the previous peak for the first
hyperinflation and a falt of 15 percent from the previous peak for the second hyperinflation.

The data was obtained from Tadicadores de Coyuntura, FIEL, Bs. As., several issues.
16See Fulter (1976, Table 8.5.2. second panet) for 100 observations.

23

adaptation that takes place in high inflation situations.
Again, for the parameters of the equation to converge to the true population moments,

we equation (36) must be a cointegration equation. A standard ADF3 test gave a statistic
of -2.95, rejecting the hypothesis of nonstationarity at the 5 percent level. I conclude then
that (36) is a cointegrating vector and that the parameters converge to the true population
moments.

The first hypothesis I wanted to test was whether there was a decline in monetary
balances after the first hyperinfiation. Notice that, from (36), the semielasticity of money

demand equals -.82 before the introduction of the indexed currency and -1.65 after the

reform. Also an additional process of decline in money demand took place through a
progressive financial adaptation, as captured by the negative time trend.
The consistent estimates of the semielasticities obtained from (36) allowed me to com-

pute the value of .

Before

the first hyperinflation, = 2.22;

after, =

1.61.

Again, the

rate of growth of inflation is much smaller under currency substitution.

I estimated (35) the inflation prediction equation, using the same methodology as I
described for the previous example. I allowed for bubbles between March and July 1989

and between November 1989 and March 1990. Both bubbles appear strongly significant
with coefficients (t.statistics) of .026 (15.10) and -059 (9.16) for the first and second hy-

perinfiation, respectively. From the t-statistics we conclude that bubbles are statistically
significant components of an explanation of Argentine hyperinflations. Again, I tested for

cointegratedness of this regression using an ADF3 test. I got a statistic of -3.62, which
easily rejects the null of nonstationarity.

Table 1 shows the inflation rate and the bubble for the two Argentine hyperinfiatioris.

The second bubble is the larger initially but grows more slowly as the rate of inflation
24

Table 1: Bubbles in the Argentine Ilyperinfiations

First llyper
Date

S econd

Inflation

Bubble

1989:3

.17

.06

1989:4

33

1989:5

Date

Hyper

Inflation

Bubble

1989:11

.07

.10

.12

1989:12

.40

.16

.78

.29

1990:1

.79

.26

1989:6

1.14

.63

1990:2

.62

.44

1989:7

1.97

1.41

1990:3

.96

.72

required to induce people to hold less money is reduced by the process of financial adap-

tation, dollarization, or introduction of currency indexation. The second hyperinflation
bubble reaches a smaller value than the corresponding one for the first hyperinflatiort, this

is fully consistent with the predictions of the model.

6 Conclusions
This paper studied the implications of introducing an "indexed" or "backed" currency on

the monetary equilibrium of an economy with fiat currency. To analyze this question, I
constructed a model with a utility function with two currencies. I showed that such util-

ity function will exhibit negative cross-partial between the two monies. Contrary to the
conventional wisdom, I found that in that in a rational expectations hyperinfiationary solution in which both monetary assets are substitutes, the introduction of a backed currency

reduces the rate of depreciation of the original money along the hyperinfiation path.

The introduction of the indexed currency induces a process of currency substitution

25

across steady states. Upon introduction of the second currency, a price level jump takes
place for the original one, reducing its real value. This substitution effect has been stressed

in the previous literature. What this paper shows is that it is incorrect to infer from this

that the equilibrium rate of inflation of the original currency should increase. On the
contrary, by lowering the marginal utility of the existing currency, the indexed currency
reduces the inflation rate required to sustain a path with declining real monetary holdings
of the original currency. In my model, with fixed money growth, this will result in a smaller

rate of growth of inflation.

Additionally if the original currency is experiencing a hyperinflation at the time the
new currency is introduced, then the shift to the backed currency occurs gradually. In the

long run, the whole system shills in the long run to the better currency. In this model, we
get a Gresham's Law in reverse: good money displaces bad.
The model is then tested empirically for the experiences of Soviet Union during the

early 1920s and for Argentina during the late lOSOs. The evidence shows an increase in the

semielasticity of money demand consistent with the implications of the model. I showed

that the bubble grows at a smaller rate when two currencies exist, validating the model's
implication that the rate of inflation required to sustain the hyperinilationary equilibrium
is smaller under the presence of an alternative currency.

The effects on welfare can be analyzed from the first order conditions for the agent's
maximization problem. The utility of the representative agent is maximized at the point

at which the marginal utilities of both currencies equal zero, i.e., where a1 =

a2

=

—6

(at the Friedman rule solution). A hyperinflation equilibrium is extremely costly in terms
of welfare because it increases the nominal interest rate, thereby inducing people to save

on cash holdings. The introduction of the indexed currency, presumably with a lower
26

c, improves upon the hyperinflatjonaz-y equilibrium with

one currency by providing an

alternate currency that more closely satisfies the Friedman rule. This is not only because

it provides a channel by which people can substitute their demand to a

currency with a

lower "relative price" but also because the rate of inflation of the original currency

may

actually decrease as well. Contrary to the results of some researchers who have cautioned
about the risks of financial adaptation because of its

exacerbating inflationary effects (see,

for example, De Gregorlo (1991) and Dornbusch and Reynoso (1939)), the results of this

study wholly support the introduction of an indexed currency.

References
[1] Bomberger, W. A. and Makinen, G. "Indexation, Inflatidnary Finance, and Hyperin.
flation: the 1945-1946 Hungarian Experience." Journal of Political Economy, Vol.88,
No.31, 1980.

[2] Bomberger, W. A. and Makinen, G.; "The Hungarian Hyperinflation and Stabilization
of 1945.1946." Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 91, No.51, 1983.

[3] Cagan, PhIlip "The Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinflation" edited by Milton Friedman
Studies in the Quantity Theory of Money. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 1956.

(4] Calvo, Guillermo; "Currency Substitution and the Real Exchange Rate."
Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 4, 1935, pp. [75.188.

[SJ Cassella, Alessandra "Testing for Rational Bubbles with Exogenous or Endogenous
Fundamentals." Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 24, 1989.

27

[6] De Gregorio, Jose "Welfare Costs of Inflation, Seigniorage, and Financial Innovation."

IMF Working Paper Number WP/91/1, 1991.
[7] Dornbusch, Rudiger and Reynoso Alejandro "Financial Factors in Economic Development." American Economic Review, Paper and Proceedings, Vol. 79, No. 2, 2989.
[81 Dornbusch, Rudiger, Sturzenegger, Federico A., and Wolf, Holger "Extreme Inflation:

Dynamics and Stabilization." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 2, 1990,
pp 1-84.

19] Engel, Charles "The Trade Balance and Real Exchange Rate under Currency Substitution." Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 8, 1989, pp. 47-58.

[10] Engle Robert and Granger C.W.J. "Cointegration and Error Correction: Representa.
tion, Estimation and Testing." Econornetrica, Vol. 55, No. 2, 1987, pp. 251-276.

[11] Feenstra, Robert C. "Functional Equivalence between Liquidity Costs and the Utility
of Money." Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 19, 1986, pp. 271-291.

[12] Flood, Robert P. and Garber, Peter M. "Market Fundamentals Versus Price-level
Bubbles: The First Tests." Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 88, No. 4, 1980, pp.
745-769.

[13] Flood Robert P., Garber Peter M. and Scott, L. "Further Tests on Bubbles."
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, Vol. 8, 1984.

[14] Fuller, "N. A. Introduction to Statistical Time Series. New York: John Wiley&Sons,
1976.

28

[15] Kaldor,

Nicholas "A study in Inflation,

1-Hungary's Classical Example."

Manchester Guardian, 21 November 1916a.
[16]

Kaldor, Nicholas; "A study in Inflation, Il-Stabilization", Manchester Guardian, 22
November 194Gb.

[17] Katzeneflenbaum,

S.

Russian Currency and Banking 1914-1924.

London:P.S.

King&Son, LTD. ,1925.

[18] Keller, A. Das Notgeld. Munich: Batteuberg Verlag, 1958.

[19] Liviatan, Nissan "Monetary Expansion and Real Exchange Rate Dynamics."
Jouraai of Political Economy, Vol 89, 1981, pp. 1218.1228.

(20] Newey Whitney and West Kenneth; "A Simple, Positive-Definite Heteroskedasticity
and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix." Econornetrica, 1987.

[21] Nogaro B. "Hungary's recent monetary Crisis and its Theoretical Meaning."
American Economic Review, Vol. 38, 1948.

[22] Obstfeld, Maurice and Rogoff, Kenneth; "Speculative Hyperinfiations in Maximizing
Models: Can we Rule them Out?." Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 91, 1983.
[23] Sidrauski, Miguel "Rational Choice and Patterns of Growth in a Monetary Economy."
American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 57, 1967.

[24] Stock, James H. "Asymptotic Properties of Least Squares Estimators of Cointegrating
Vectors", Econometrica Vol. 55, No. 5, 1987, pp. 1035.1056.

29

[25] Stock, James H. and Watson, Mark \V. "A Simple MLE ci Cointegrating Vectors in
Higher-Order Integrated System." NBER Technical Working Paper No 83, December
1989.

[26] Sturzenegger, Federico A. "Financial Adaptation and the Timing of Financial Liber-

alization in Eastern Europe." in Finance and the International Economy:5 edited by
Richard O'Brien, pp. 94-105, Oxford University Press, 1991.

[271 Yurovsky, L. Currency Problems and Policy ci the Soviet Union. London: Leonard
Parsons, 1925.

30

