NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF PRICE SHOPPING
IN MEDICAL MARKETS:
HOSPITAL RESPONSES TO
PPOs IN CALIFORNIA

Jonathan Gruber

Working Paper No. 4190

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1992

I am grateful to Josh Angrist, Steven Berry, Andy Bindrnan, David
Dranove, Andrea Gruber, Rachel Friedberg, Ciaran Phibbs, Ceci Rouse, Jon
Skinner, Doug Staiger, Larry Summers, Mike Whinston, numerous seminar
participants, and especially David Cutler, Larry Katz, Joe Newhouse. and Jim
Poterba for helpful discussions and comments. I am also grateful to ABT
Associates, Grace Carter, Doug Staiger, aid Ken Langa for providing data. I
acknowledge financial support from the Sloan Foundation, the Harvard Chiles
Fellowship, and (he Harvard Institute for Economic Research. This paper is
part of NBER's research program in Health Care and Public Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NEER Working Paper #4 190
October 1992

THE EFFECT OF PRICE SHOPPING
IN MEDICAL MARKETS:
HOSPITAL RESPONSES TO
PPOs IN CALIFORNIA

ABSTRACT

The last ten years have seen the introduction of price shopping into

medical markets which were previously dominated by price insensitive
consumers. Price shopping has been facilitated by the advent of the Preferred
Provider Organization (PPO), which coordinates the demand of a large number

of individual health care buyers, thereby gaining market power which it uses

to obtain steep discounts off list prices from providers. I study hospital
responses to the advent of price competition in California over the 1984-1988
period.

I note that, due to the nature of hospital bargaining with PPOs,

hospitals should face more competitive pressure in hospital markets that are

more competitive ex-arite. This hypothesis is supported by the fact that
hospital net prices declined in more ex-ante competitive areas in California

after the arrival of PPOs. Hospital average costs did not decline in more
competitive areas, however, indicating that there was a reduction in hospital

markups. Care to the uninsured by hospitals. which is financed out of
markups, fell substantially as competitive pressure grew; there was a 50 cent

reduction in uncompensated care for every one dollar rise in discounts to
private payers.

Jonathan Oruber
Mn' Department of Economics
E52-274c
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER

The dramatic rise in health care expenditures in the United States,
with the medical sector growing from 4.5% of !GNP to 12% of GNP over the

last forty years (Newbouse, 1992), has led to many proposals for reform of

our health care system. One approach which has received much recent
attention is the "managed competition' model (Butler and llaislmaier, 1989;

Enthoven and Kronick, 1989). A key perceived failing of the traditional
indemnity model of insurance, under which insurers would pay the billed
charges of any source of health care chosen by individuals, was that there was

no incentive for price shopping across medical providers by consumers. By
introducing incentives for such shopping, the managed competition advocates

argue, we can bring the forces of market competition to bear on the medical
sector, and efficiency increases in medical production will naturally follow.
Opponents of managed competition respond that the lessons of competition in

other markets cannot be so readily applied to medical markets, and that the

inflationary tendencies of our health care system can only be addressed
through a more regulatory approach.
What is often not recognized in this debate, however, is that the move

towards price shopping in medical markets has already begun. The key event

was the removal, the early 1980s, of state-level bathers to insurers' ability to

restrict an individual's choice of provider. These regulations made it
impossible for insurers to exercise their market power to shop amongst
providers on the basis of price, and their removal has precipitated a major
change in the structure of private health insurance. The mechanism which

insurers have used to facilitate price shopping is the Preferred Provider
Organization, or PPO. PPOs act as middlemen between individual buyers and

providers of health care. By coordinating the demand of a large number of
buyers, PPOs gain market power which they use to obtain steep discounts off

list prices from health care providers. In return for these discounts, PPOs use

2

tinancial incentives to the enrolled group to channel patients to the 'preferred"

providers. PPO potential enrollment has grown by a factor of 20 since 1984,

and one in 3 insured employees now has a PPO option in their health
insurance plan.' This rapid growth of PPOs suggests that the experience of
recent years provides a valuable opportunity to study the effects of market
competition on the delivery of health care.

In this paper, I study hospital responses to the introduction of price
competition in California over the 1984-1988 period. California's regulatory
bathers to price shopping by insurers were removed in 1983, and PPOs grew
rapidly thereafter; between 50 and 70% of all privately insured employees in

the state now have a PPO option in their health care plans.2 The effect on
hospital pricing has been dramatic. Figure 1 plots the growth in discounts to
private payers (as a fraction of gross patient revenues), and the growth in PPO

enrollment, in California over time.3 Roughly constant as a fraction of
revenues until 1984, discounts have grown by over 900% since. This growth

corresponds to the period of sizeable PPO enrollment growth in California,
following the 1983 enabling legislation.

'PPO enrollment is not easily measured, workers have financial incentives
to choose the preferred provider, but they may go anywhere they like. The
only available figure is 'potential enrollment', which is the number of workers
who have a PPO option in their health insurance plan; the takeup rate on this
option is estimated to be 55-60% (Rice et al., 1986).
2PPO location data from Marion Merrill Dow (1990). Enrollment growth

from Johns (1989); current level from author's calculations from data in
Arstejo-Kerslake (1988).
3Aggregate discounts from data from Office of Statewide Health Planning
and Development (various years). Discounts to PPOs only are not available,

so total discounts to private payers are used; see the discussion in Part III.
PPO enrollment from Johns (1989). The two series are normalized so that
each equals one in 1984, and then logged.

3

I proceed by modelling price competition among hospitals as being a

function of ex-ajite market concentration. Since PPOs must make themselves
attractive to local potential enrollees, a given hospital's bargaining power with

a PPO will largely be a function of that hospital's share of the local output
market. That is, in more ex-ante competitive output markets, where PPOs can
be more selective in choosing providers while retaining their attractiveness to
potential enrollees, hospitals should be forced to give larger price concessions

to the PPO.4 I confirm this conjecture by showing that hospital discounts
have grown the most, and net prices have fallen the most, in the most ex-ante
competitive markets.
Having established that ex-ante competition proxies for the effects of
Kthjecting price competition into hospital markets, I then ask what effect price

competition has had on hospital behavior. Proponents of market competition
have highlighted the potential of price shopping for restraining health care cost

growth. However, I note that hospital net prices to insured patients are the
sum of two components: costs and markups. In the shortrun, it is not obvious

which ol these components will adjust as prices fall. In fact, I find that
hospital costs did not fall in more competitive markets over the 1984-1.988
period. This inability of price competition to lower costs differs from the
experience of Medicare's Prospective Payment System (PPS), a government
cost containment program which led to a large fall in hospital costs over this

en. I discuss how this may have been a natural consequence of the relative
incentives to change patient treatment quality under PPS versus shopping by

ppos.
If average costs are unchanged, then the fall in net prices must be
coming out of markups to PPO patients. Reduced markups, however, do not

4This prediction also requires assumptions on the nature of ex-ante
competition, as I discuss below.

4

simply repcscnt a transfer from the hospital to the PPO, due to the rote ofthe
revenues eanied from private payers in supporting care for the
Uninsured.
Hospital charges to the uninsured are often not paid directly by that group, but

are cross-subsidized through higher charges to insured payers. I find evidence
of a significant reduction in hospital uncompensated care in more competitive

markets after the arrival of PPOs. I estimate that hospital uncompensated care

fell by approximately 50 cents for every dollar given in discounts to private
payers.

The paper proceeds as follows. In Part I, I present my argument for
why price shopping may be the most effective in the most ex-ante competitive

markets. In Part II, I introduce the empirical framework. I then examine the
effect of increased price shopping on hospital prices (Part III), costs (Part lv),

and uncompensated care (Part V). Part VI concludes by discussing the
implications of my findings for a welfare analysis of the managed competition

strategy.

PART 1: PRICE SHOPPING AND EX-ANTE COMPETITION
The basic premise of the empirical work is that price shopping will
be the most effective, in terms of obtaining lower net prices, in the most ex-

ante competitive, or least concentrated, hospital markets.

While this

assumption has been made in several recent studies of hospital markets, it has

not been theoretically justified! In the four sections of this Part, I argue that

5Dranove et al. (1992) discuss the switch from "patient-driven"
competition to "payor-driven' competition, and provide evidence that the

perverse price/concentration relationship discussed above reversed in
California between 1983 and 1988. Zwanzigerand Melnick (1988) refer to
the change as a switch from quality competition to price competition, and
show that the perverse cost/concentntion relationship in California disappeared
as well over these years. However, neither paper discusses why it is most

5

this is a sensible assumption. I first introduce the prevailing theories of
hospital markets before the introduction of price shopping, and then discuss the
way in which PPOs facilitated shopping in these markets. I then illustrate why

ex-ante competitive markets should be the most fertile ground for price
shopping once PPOs are introduced; that is, why ex-ante actual competition
is a reasonable proxy for potential price competition. Finally, I show that,

given that price shopping is most intense in the most el-ante competitive
markets, we would expect prices to fall there under a set of models of the ex-

ante equilibrium. I note, however, that this last prediction is not universal;
there are specifications of the ex-ante equilibrium which do not yield a strong

prediction about the relation between ex-ante competition and the change in
price.

Hospital Markets Before Price Shopping

Existing models of the hospital market are motivated by three key
features of this market. First, there is a broad consensus that there was little
price competition among hospitals before the 1980s. This was primarily due
to three related phenomena. Individuals were largely covered from their first
dollar of hospital expenditure under private health insurance, so there was little

incentive to shop.6 Furthermore, patients lacked the informational resources

necessary to search effectively across medical care providers. Finally, those
few patients who did have the incentives and resources necessary to shop for
low prices did not have the market power necessary to affect hospital pricing;

natural to use ex-ante actual competition to proxy for ex-post price
competition.
6In 1980, the average coinsurance rate for hospital services was only 5.2%
(Newhouse, 1992). Furthermore, 94% of insured employees had the full cost
of their health insurance paid by their employers in 1979 (author's tabulations
from March 1983 Current Population Survey).

6

the inframarginal losses to hospitals on their existing patient base from
lowering prices would exceed any gains from adding this small number of new

patients (Frech, 1985).

The second relevant feature is that a key determinant of patient
demand is distance to the provider. A recent study of patient choice across

hospitals (Luft et al., 1990) estimated that a 10% reduction in the distance
from a consumer to a provider would increase the probability of the consumer

going to that hospital by 13%; distance was the most consistently important
predictor of patient choice in their conditional choice logit model. Ma result,
hospital markets are very localized.

Finally, hospital prices and average costs are no lower, and may in

fact be higher, in more competitive hospital markets.' This reversal of the
standard Industrial Organization price/concentration relationship is robust to
detailed controls for differences across markets in the cost of inputs and other

area characteristics, and has motivated the two main models of the hospital
market in the era before price competition.

The first is the informational imperfections model of Satterthwaite

(l979). He models the medical marketplace as being under monopolistic
competition, due to the individualized nature of the product, and the presence

of imperfect and costly information. In such a model, markups are a fttnction

of the elasticity of demand facing each seller. However, this elasticity is
determined by the idiosyncracies of consumer search, rather than by the degree

of market concentration. Satterthwaite argues that information on providers

'See Robinson and Luft (1985) for recent evidence on costs; Noether
(1988) and Dranove et at. (1991) for recent evidence on prices; and Wooley
and Frech (1989) for a review of the evidence. In my data, both costs and
prices are higher in the ex-ante equilibrium ia more competitive markets.
8This discussion of Satterthwaite's model follows Dranove et al. (1992).
This model refers to physician markets, but it applies equally well to hospitals.

7

is no better in more concentrated markets, and may in fact be worse, since a
consumer desires overlapping recommendations before using a provider, and

the probability of such overlap falls as the number of providers in the market
rises. Thus, the relation between market concentration and price will be weak
or perverse (Satterthwaite predicts the latter).9

The second popular model is the quality competition, or medical
arms race" model, as described in Robinson and Luft (1985). Since patients
are primarily referred to hospitals by their physicians, hospitals compete with

one another through provision of expensive clinical services to attract
physicians, or quality. This medical arms race has the natural implication that

avenge costs should be higher in more competitive markets; however, prices

are indeterminate. There are two extensions to this model which predict the
level of prices. First, it may be that insurers simply allowed a fixed markup
on hospital costs, so that prices will be highest in the most competitive markets

as well. Alternatively, some recent papers which have found that costs are

higher in more competitive markets, but that prices are the same across

markets, have suggested that quality g4 price competition were acting
simultaneously (Noether, 1988; Woolley and Frech, 1989). That is, the
medical arms race was leading to higher quality and thus costs, while hospitals

also competed away their markups in more competitive markets in order to

attract patients. However, these models have not explained how price
competition operated, given the barriers to price shopping by patients
described above.

The Introduction of PPOs and Price Shopping

9As developed by Satterthwaite, this model does not offer predictions about

the correlation between market concentration and hospital costs. If we
assume, for example, the prices are highest in the most competitive markets,
and that hospital administrators prefer to produce a high quality/high cost
product, then costs will be higher in more competitive markets as well.

8

The nature of the hospital market changed dramatically in the mid1980s, with the introduction of the Preferred Provider Organization. PPOs

organize, or are organized by, groups of insured individuals (generally
employment-based) to negotiate a package of fees and services with local
health care providers. PPOs selectively contract with physicians and hospitals,
negotiating reduced fees in return for channelling their patient base to the
provider. The reductions obtained by PPOs are generally in the form of

discounts off of list prices or reduced per diem rates, rather than the fixed
price per admission strategy employed, for example, by Medicare under its

PPS program. While over 80% of PPOs used discounts as one of their
reimbursement methods in 1989, only 20% used fixed prices (Marion Merrill

Dow, 1990).

While PPOs' market power derives from their ability to channel
patients to preferred providers, members of the groups enrolled in PPOs are
not forced to choose from this set of doctors and hospitals. Rather, financial

incentives, such as reduced copayments or deductibles, are used to induce

patients to select one of these providers. Employees are thus offered an
element of choice which is absent from the Health Maintenance Organization

(HMO) model, which attempts to control costs by managing care from one

central source. This may explain the rapid acceptance of PPOs in the late
1980s as HMO enrollment growth has slowed.

PPOs therefore both

provide a means of shopping among providers on the basis of price, and of
introducing price incentives for consumers to choose the low cost providers.

They thus, in the words of Dranove et al., "inject" price competition into the

medical marketplace. Hospitals now have a strong incentive to offer lower

prices to PPOs, for two reasons. First, PPOs may be actually be able to
deliver more patients if the hospital becomes a member of the preferred panel,

so, perhaps for the first time, hospitals face a non-trivial price elasticity.
Second, hospitals are able to price discriminate between PPO members and

9
other patients through discounts to PPOs, so that there will be no inframarginal

loss in revenue from other private pay patients. Evidence that hospital prices

have responded to this injection is provided by Figure 1.
Why did PPOs not develop until the mid-1980s? The primary reason

appears to have been laws which did not allow insurance companies to
interfere with patients' choice of providers, which effectively prevented these

companies (the largest current sponsors) from establishing PPOs. California
allowed insurance companies to selectively contract beginning in July, 1983,

and PPOs began to grow in that state shortly thereafter. Such enabling
legislation has now been passed in 27 states ([linden, 1989), and in 19 others,

current insurance regulations are not viewed as prohibiting the growth of

PPOs. In the five states where insurance coverage is still viewed as
prohibiting such growth, there has been little PPO development.'0
Price Shopping Across Medical Markets

In this section, I show that it is natural to expect that the price
elasticity of demand of consumers should increase the most in the most ex-ante

competitive markets. This claim is based on a key institutional feature of
PPOs: they must offer a product which is attractive to local consumers. As

Johns et at. (1985) point out in their detailed review of PPO selection
criterion, PPO managers 'do not necessarily want to disnipt current utilization

patterns by channeling patients to less expensive providers. Rather, they
prefer to negotiate better prices from the hospitals and physicians that current

and potential policyholders prefer to usc' (p. 83). And a RAND study of
individual selection of PPO options in their health plans shows that the single

'°Marion Merrill Dow (1989) presents data on PPO enrollment by state,
which is significantly lower for the five states which Rolph et al. (1986)
classifSr as states where PPOs may have problems developing given existing
insurance regulations (and which did not pass enabling legislation subsequent
to 1986, according to Hinden, 1989).

10

most important predictor of PPO "takeup" was whether the PPO panel
included the individual's prior source of care (Hosek and Marquis, 1990). In
fact, the least successful PPO, in terms of attracting enrollees, in their study
was the one which was most restrictive in its selection of providers."
The fact that PPOs must make themselves attractive to enrollees in a
localized hospital market has the following important implication: a hospital's

bargaining power in negotiating with a PPO is a function of its market power

in the output market. To see why, consider first the case where there is one
PPO, who has organized some portion of the potential patients in the hospital's

area. Now, consider a (perhaps wral) hospital which has a monopoly in its
local market. Patients in this market area will not sign up for the PPO unless

that hospital is included in the preferred panel, since they will not travel out

of the local market to seek their care. Thus, the monopolist hospital has

become a nionopsonist with respect to the PPO; its power in the input
(potential patients) market is directly tied to its share of the output (actual
patients) market.

Contrast this to the case of a less concentrated hospital market. In

this market, the PPO does not make its product much less aitractive to
potential enrollees by excluding any one hospital. Since there are a number
of other hospitals to which individuals would be equally satisfied to go, any
given provider in a less concentrated market will have less bargaining power

vis-a-vis the PPO. Thus, once again, hospital bargaining power is a function
of the share of the local output market; a competitive firm in the output market

has less market power in the input market as well.'2 That is, the price

"Although this was also the PPO with the smallest incentive to enroll.
'2A parallel example is that of a union, which has organized workers in a
local area who are unable to travel, and which negotiates with a producer of

a good which has a local market only (ie. vegetables in the era before

11

elasticity of demand of consumers increases the most in the most competitive
markets, since PPOs have more alternatives from which to choose, subject to
the constraint of including a sufficient portion of the area's providers in order
to attract enrollees.

It is important to note that, since PPOs must sell themselves to
enrollees, the reason

a given market is a monopoly market or a

competitive market ex-ante is irrelevant. All that matters is that PPOs must
respect the force that has created that market structure. This argument has the
important (and testable) implication that the observed pattern of patient choice

should not change dramatically once PPOs are introduced into the market;
monopoly hospitals ex-ante should remain monopoly hospitals ex-post. I

present evidence consistent with this implication below, when I define my
measure of competition.'3

Increased Shopping and Net Prices

The final step in my argument is to show that the in.treased price

shopping will lead to net prices falling the most in the most competitive
markets. A larger increase in the elasticity of demand in competitive markets

does not guarantee that prices will fall the most there. Generally, ex-ante

refrigerated transportation). In that case, once again, a monopolist in the
output market (the only farm in town) will be a monopsonist in the input
market as well.
'3The model is more complicated when we consider the fact that there are
likely to be more PPOs in more competitive hospital markets as well. To the
extent that PPOs compete to sign up hospitals by requiring a smaller discount
to be a preferred provider, this will mitigate their bargaining power advantage
vis-a-vis hospitals in competitive markets. However, to the extent that PPOs
must compete to sign up area employees by offering lower prices for hospital

utilization, this will increase their need to demand lower discounts from
providers. That is, introducing another PPO into a given market results in a
reduction of both the monopsony and monopoly power of the existing PPO;
the net effect on the PPO's bargaining position is unclear.

12

prices should be closer to marginal costs in these markets as well, leaving less

rents for the PPO to negotiate over. This countervailing effect should make

the ultimate relation between output/input market concentration and the

negotiated price uncertain. However, in the hospital market, there are a
number of models (and a host of empirical evidence) which suggest that prices

are no closer to marginal costs in more ex-ante competitive markets, so that,

in fact, prices will fall the most there.

Consider first the Satterthwaite monopolistic competition mode'4

In that model, prices are no closer to marginal costs in more ex-ante
competitive markets, and markups may even be higher in these markets.
Thus, the increase in the elasticity of demand in competitive markets would be
-

expected

to lower markups and prices there, relative to more concentrated

markets.

Now consider the quality competition model, with fixed

markups. In this case, once again, prices are no closer to marginal costs in
more a-ante competitive markets, so they will fall farthest there as the price

elasticity of demand rises the most. One might object that, if the nature of
competition changes from quality to price competition, then it is misleading to

use a-ante quality competition to measure potential price competition. This
highlights the importance of the discussion above. PPOs did not change the
nature of competition; competition on quality dimensions persists into the new

era. What has changed is that price competition now exists as well. Thus,
markups will be squeezed, while costs should remain largely unchanged.
It follows from this last point, however, the quality competition model

with ex-ante price shopping will therefore

lead to the prediction that prices

will fall in competitive markets. In this model, markups are already lower in
competitive markets, so that there will be uncertainty as to the ultimate effect.

14'The effect of introducing price competition within the context of this
monopolistic competition model was first discussed by Dranove et al. (1986).

13

Thus, the ultimate effect of ex-ante competition on the change in prices is a
function of the "cot-rect0 model of theex-ante hospital market, and remains an

empirical question. The goal of Part III is to demonstrate that prices did in
fact fall more in more competitive markets. In order to do so, Part II presents
the data, defines the key regressor, and discusses my identification strategy.

PART II: DATA, MEASUREMENT, AND IDENTIFICATION
STRATEGY
Data

I primarily use two sources of data which are provided by the
California Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development: the Hospital

Disclosure Report and the Hospital Discharge Dataset. The disclosure report
is a detailed annual report on hospital finances, gross utilization statistics, and

facilities; there are roughly 10,000 variables for each California hospital in
each year. These data are audited for consistency by the state. The discharge
dataset contains a small number of variables (some demographics, payer type,

and diagnostic and procedural data) for each inpatient admission to California

hospitals in a year (roughly 3.5 million observations). I use each of these data

for the years 1982, 1984, and 1988. I also rely on several other sources of
data at various points in the empirical work; these are discussed in the data
appendix.

Sample

Insurers were allowed to establish PPOs in California beginning in
mid-1983, but they did not gain a substantial share of the private insurance

market until after 1984. I thtsefore study changes in hospital behavior over

the 1984-1988 period. The sample consists of all short-term acute care
hospitals in the state of California which were operating from 1982-1988 and
which have available inpatient discharge data and non-zero uncompensated care

14

in 1984 and 1988) The basic sample is 398 hospitals. Table 1 presents the
means of the data for 1984 and 1988 (where the data are time-varying). The

means are weighted by total hospital admissions in 1988, as are all
regressions, unless otherwise noted.2
Measuring Market Competition

I measure ex-ante competition with a "patient origin herfindahl",

discussed in Zwanziger and Melnick (1988), which defmes the hospital's
market area by the locations from which it draws its patients. This index is
created in two steps, using the discharge data (which reports the patient's zip
code of residence) for 1982 for all privately insured patients.3 First, for each
zip code in California, a herfindahi index is created by summing the squared

market shares of each hospital which draws from that zip code. Second, a
hospital-specific competition index is created by taking a weighted avenge of

the herfindahis for each zip code from which the hospital draws, where the
weights are the fraction of the hospital's patients from that zip code. That is,

if hospitals draw their patients from "competitive" areas (zip codes where

tme latter restriction arises from the use of the log of the dependent
variable in the uncompensated care regressions. It only excludes five very
small hospitals from the sample.

2Since most of the dependent variables used (ie. cost per discharge) are
defined at the patient level, hospitals with a large number of admissions will
have more precisely measured values. The weight reflects this. The estimates
are similar if the robust standard error correction of White (1978) is used
instead.

3The PPO enabling legislation didn't take effect until 1983, so that this
data should be free of their influence. This measure differs from that used by
Zwanziger and Melnick, who allow the extent of competition to differ by type
of service. However, they build their competition measure for all patients,
whereas mine focuses only on private pay patients, which may be more
appropriate for studying the influence of PPOs.

15

patients go to a large number of different hospitals), then they are competitive

hospitals. The construction of the herfmdahl is discussed in more detail in the
data appendix.

A potential disadvantage of this measure is that the market area
definition is determined by patient choice in the pre-PPO era, which may be

endogenous to hospital characteristics that are coielated with prices as well
(such as reputation or specialization). This would lead to a biased coefficient

on the herfmdahl in a price regression. However, the regressions which will

be run below relate the change in price to the herfindahi. Thus, any fixed

differences between more and less ex-ante competitive markets will be
differenced away. If price competition proceeds along the same dimensions
as prior competition (as the discussion above suggested that it should), then
this spurious factor which is correlated with market concentration can be taken

as fixed, and the herfindahl will therefore be exogenous in the changes
regression.
A direct implication of my claim that ex-post competition follows the

same pattern as ex-ante competition is that the observed pattern of patient
choice does not change after the arrival of PPOs. In fact, the pattern of choice

does appear to be largely the same: the patient origin herfindahi created for
1988 is very highly correlated with that created for 1982 (correlation = 0.93).

Given that PPOs had organized such a large share of the privately insured
population in California by 1988, this fact implies that price shopping did not

alter the pattern of patient choice in the short run, justifying the fixed effects
assumption .

4Furthermore, the null hypothesis that the herflndahl is exogenous in the

changes regressions can also be tested given an alternative measure of
competition which is consistent, but less efficient, under this null hypothesis,
and which is consistent under the alternative that the herfmdahl is endogenous

(Hausman, 1978). One such alternative measure is the number of other

16

Regression Framework and Identification Issues
in the empirical work, 1 will run regressions of the form (for hospital
if

LSNPRJCE1

=a÷

JJHERF1

+ AZ11r +

(1)

ANPRICE1 is the change in net prices from 1984 to 1988, the period

during which PPOs arrived.

I will also run similar regressions using hospital

costs and uncompensated care as dependent variables. HERF1 is patient origin

herfindahl, as described above. Z11 are other hospital specific controls which

are both Lime varying and time invariant. c is a white noise error.

As discussed above, this model only yields predictions about the

relation between market concentration and changes in prices, costs, and
uncompensated care, since more competitive hospital markets may differ from

less competitive ones in a number of ways in the ex-ante equilibrium. The key

assumption of this mode! is therefore that there were no other features of the
California hospital market which changed during 1984-1988,

which were

correlated with both competition and prices, costs, or uncompensated care.
Ideally, this assumption could be tested by comparison to another sample of

hospitals, where PPOs weren't present, over the same time period. This
identification strategy would allow me to capture any underlying changes in the

effect of competition in the absence of price shopping. However, data
limitations for other states, as well as the rapid spread of PPOs over this

bospitals within a five mile radius of the hospital (unpublished data from the

University of California at San Francisco). The five mile measure can be
taken as exogenous to patient decisions in the short run, but it is less efficient

because of the arbitrariness of the radius chosen, and because it does not
capture pre-existing features of hospital markets which are relevant in
determining hospital bargaining power vis-a-vis PPOs. Using this specification

test, the exogeneity of the herfindahi cannot be rejected in any of the
regressions below.

17

period, make this impossible.

Instead, I use the set of California hospitals over an earlier period
(1982-1984), before PPOs had a substantial market presence, to test for time

invariant effects of competition on changes in prices, costs, and
uncompensated care. While this does not control for contemporaneous shocks,

it does control for any secular trends in prices which are correlated with
market competition.5

I also control for other major changes in the hospital environment

over the 1984-1988 period in an effort to isolate the impact of price
competition. One important event was the introduction of Medicare's PPS in

October, 1983. Before this time, hospitals were reimbursed by Medicare
based on their reported patient care costs. Under P1'S, hospitals are primarily

paid based not on their own costs, but based on a regional/national avenge.

As the program has been phased in, it has steadily decreased the avenge
reimbursement to hospitals. My measure of the hospital-specific impact of
PPS is the PPS "Bite", which measures the shortfall of reimbursement under

PPS relative to historical costs, treaded forward by average statewide cost

inflation.6 The change in the Bite from 1984 to 1988 is multiplied by the

'Fhis also helps to separate the effects of price competition, after the PPO
enabling legislation of 1983, from the effects of continued growth of HMOs.
While HMOs did grow rapidly over the 1984-1988 period, they grew equally

fast over 1982-1984 as well, so that any effect which they had which was

distinct from price competition should show up in this earlier era.
Furthermore, most HMO enrollment in the state during the period of this study
was in the Kaiser-Permanante HMO, which maintains its own hospitals (which
are not included in this analysis).

6For studies of the impact of PPS on hospital behavior, see Cutler (1991),
Staiger and Gaumer (1991), and Feder, Hadley, and Zuckerman (1987). The
bite variable used here is similar to that used in those papers. The 1984 bite
attempts to account for the fact that a number of hospitals were not yet on the
PPS system; however, the 1982-84 regression results below suggest that I may

18

historical (1982) Medicare share of revenues to create

BiteShare", capturing

the importance of this cutback in Medicare reimbursement to the hospitals total
revenues.

The calculation of this index is described in the data appendix.1

In early 1983, California also initiated selective contracting for its
Medicaid program (Medi-Ca1"), which previously paid hospitals based on an

avenge of their own costs and statewide inflation.

Under selective

contracting, the state negotiated with providers in each of a number of areas

in the state to become the exclusive Medi-Cal provider for that area.8
Previous researchers have used the fraction of the hospital's revenues which

were from Medi-Cal in 1982 as a proxy for the potential financial impact of
selective contracting. Absent a better measure, I use this index as well. To
the extent that the state of California had more power in negotiating its MediCal contracts in more competitive areas, my competition measure may capture
some of the effects of selective contracting. Below, I will test more directly

the hypothesis that the competition index is measuring the effect of increased

competition among private payers, and not the effects of Medi-Cal selective
contracting.

have mismeasured the bite for the first year of PPS.

7An alternative story which has been suggested to me to explain the arrival
of price competition after 1984 is not that it was due to the relaxing of
regulatory constraints on PPOs, but rather that PPS ushered in an era of price
competition, and PPO growth was an endogenous response to this new era.

However, the root cause of the arrival of price competition is irrelevant for
interpreting the results below. The key point is that price competition could

not take place without PPOs (or something like them) as a facilitating

mechanism, and that it is the need for PPOs to attract local enrollees which
gives rise to the correlation between ex-ante hospital market share and ex-post
hospital market power in negotiating prices.

tFor analyses of the impact of selective contracting, see Johns (1989),
Zwanziger and Melnick (1988), and Robinson and Phibbs (1989).

19

While the regressions are estimated for the changç in prices, costs,

and uncompensated care over the 1984-1988 period, I also include a set of
time invariant controls to capture aspects of the hospital and its market area

which may affect these changes.

I include hospital level controls for

ownership (dummies for public, for-profit, and religiously affiliated non-profit

hospitals), teaching status (internfbed ratio), and scale of operations (the log

of the number of beds). In this way, I rule out general changes in hospital
behavior which are correlated with their time invariant characteristics, such as

changes in pricing strategies by for-profit hospitals.

Finally, the regression also includes a set of controls for the area in
which hospital i resides: a central city dummy, a rural dummy, and (in some

specifications) a set of dummies for the 14 "Health Service Areas" (HSAs)

designated by the state of California.9 In this way, I can control for areaspecific shocks over this period which may be correlated with both competition

and the dependent variable of interest, such as shifts in the distribution of the

uninsured population which may confound the uncompensated care results.
This within area estimation is made possible by the fact that the herfindahl is

a hospital based measure, so that it varies substantially within HSAs.

'The HSAS divide the state into fairly equal areas, with between 2% and

8% of the hospital beds in each, except for the Los Angeles HSA, which
contains 36% of the beds. The results are the same when I control separately
for central city Los Angeles.

"While these controls do absorb about one-half of the variation in my

competition measure, I do not feel that this is legitimate variation for
identification, due to changes in the hospital environment across these broad
areas during this period (such as the spread of AIDS in Los Angeles and San
Francisco).

20

PART ifi: EX-ANTE HOSPITAL COMPETITION AND EX-POST
PRICE SHOPPING
The purpose of this Part is to test the claim that price shopping was

the most effective in the most ex-ante competitive markets. Ideally, the
dependent variable for testing this prediction would be a weighted avenge of

the discounts given, and net prices charged, to the set of hospital PPO
customers. Unfortunately, hospitals do not report the discount percentage

offered to PPOs or the net price charged, but rather only the total dollars
given in discounts to, and the total revenues earned from, non-government
payers. As an approximation to the discount percentage, I use discounts over

total gross non-government revenues. For net price, I use the net revenues
(total. minus discounts) from non-government payers, over total days of care

to these payers, or net average revenue per thy."
Column (1) of Table 2 presents estimates from a regression of the
1984-1988 change in discounts over revenues on the patient origin herfindahl

and the set of controls which will be used throughout this analysis. The
competition measure has a significant effect on discounts in the expected

direction: the negative coefficient indicates increased discounts in more
competitive areas. This estimate implies that a one standard deviation decrease

in the herfindahi would lead to an increase in discounts of about 1.6% of non-

government revenues. That is, the avenge hospital in Los Angeles county
saw a rise in discounts over inpatient revenues of 4% relative to the avenge

hospital in Northern California due to the increased level of market
competition.

"I do not identify here the effect of competition on the actual price
charged, but rather the effect on avenge revenues. This may confound the
facts that both a lower price is being charged and that it is being charged to
more patients; since PPOs can offer the best deal to potential enrollees in more
competitive markets, enrollment should be the highest there.

21

Discounts grew more slowly at public, for-profit, and teaching
hospitals than at non-profits, and faster in central cities. Furthermore,
hospitals which were hit hardest by the government cost control programs saw

the smallest increase in discounts. A rise in BiteShare indicates decreased
reimbursement under PPS (relative to cost-based reimbursement), so that the
negative coefficient implies that hospitals that saw the greatest fall in Medicare

price under PPS increased discounts the least. A larger Medi-Cal share
indicates a bigger effect of selective contracting, so that more Medi-Cal
pressure led to lower discounts as well. These fmdings may imply that PPOs
were able to gamer the biggest gains where there were the most excess rents;
hospitals which were burdened by other forms of cost control could not afford

to offer sizeable discounts.
Column (2) adds a set of 14 HSA dummies. They are highly (jointly)

significant, and serve to increase the coefficient on the competition measure

substantially, so that the average hospital in LA is now found to have
increased discounts over inpatient revenues by 7.2% more than the average

hospital in Northern California. The strong predictive power of the
competition measure within fairly narrow areas of the state is striking.
One problem with these regressions is the potential endogeneity of the

gross price charged to traditionally insured patients. If hospitals are able to
shift the burden of their PPO discounts to their commercially insured and Blue

Cross patients, then increased discounts may not proxy for lower net prices.

Thus, in column (3) of Table 2, I use the change in the log of net average
non-government revenues per day as the dependent variable; the regression
includes the HSA effects, which are once again highly (jointly) significant.

There is a significant (at the 7% level) fall in net average revenues, which

22

indicates that the cost is not simply being shifted to other private payers.'2

If either patient severity or treatment intensity (other than length of
stay) were falling in more competitive areas, then it could bias the net revenue

per day results downwards. I attempt to control for these factors in column
(4) of Table 2. I proxy for changes in patient severity by using the change in
the 'case mix index' for all private pay patients, which assigns severity

weights to each patient's primary diagnosis, and then tabulates the avenge

severity weight by hospital (see data appendix). I measure changes in
treatment intensity by the log change in the average number of procedures
performed during a private pay patient stay, tabulated by hospital from the
discharge abstract data. These controls do not enter significantly, nor do they
affect the coefficient on the herfmdahl.

An important component of my argument is that price competition
was only possible once PPOs had been introduced as a facilitating mechanism.
A testable implication of this claim is that there should not have been rising
discounts and failing prices in more competitive markets before 1984. Column

(5) of Table 2 presents the discount regression over the 1982-1984 period, and

shows that there in fact is no correlation between market competition and

discounts over this period.'3 Thus, there does not appear to have been a

t2'I'h fiadings are similar to those of Dranove et al. (1992). This lack
of shifting is perhaps unsurprising given the virtual disappearance of traditional

insurance over this period. The data in Melnick, Zwanziger and Bradley
(1989) show that, by 1988, over two-thirds of the state's population was
covered by some sort of negotiated arrangement with health care providers,
while tabulations from the 1989 March Current Population Survey reveal that

about 20% of the population lacked insurance. The remaining base of
traditionally insured patients may simply not have been broad enough to bear
the costs of PPO discounts.

'3The coefficients are much smaller than in column (3) since discount
growth is much lower over the earlier period. The result is similar if the
specification check is done on net avenge revenues per day instead. The

23

trend towards falling prices in more competitive markets before the arrival of

PPOs.

These results provide fairly strong evidence that net revenues were
falling in more ex-ante competitive markets, which suggests that the move to

price competition had the greatest effect there. Given this relationship, the
remainder of the paper is devoted to estimating the effect of price competition

on two key indicators of hospital behavior: costs and uncompensated care.

Before doing so, however, I pause to consider an alternative
explanation for my fmdings, which is the effects Medi-Cal's selective
contracting program. As described above, this program is similar to a PPO
for Medi-Cal patients, so it may also have had its greatest impact in the most
competitive hospital markets. I test for the effect of market structure on Medi-

Cal pricing in column (6) of Table 2, where I use as a dependent variable the
log change in the Medi-Cal net average revenues, which is defmed analogously

to private average net revenues. In fact, Medi-Cal prices do not seem to be
falling significantly in the most ex-ante competitive markets. Thus, the effects

of market competition on costs and on uncompensated care can be taken to

reflect the change in the nature of private price setting and not that of
government price setting.'4

signiflcantpositive coefficient for ABiteShare is troubling, and suggests that
I may have mismeasured the effects of PPS in its first year; the herflndahl
coefficient is similar if AlliteShare is excLuded.

'4A similar hypothesis could be developed for the relation between
Medicare net revenues and market competition: if costs where highest in the
most ex-ante competitive markets, Medicare could have the biggest influence

there. To the extent that ABiteShare misspecifies the effect of PPS, the
herfindahi may be picking up this effect. However, a similar regression using
change in Medicare net price as a dependent variable reveals no relation to the
herfmdahl.

24

PART IV: PRICE COMPETITION AND HOSPITAL COSTS
In the context of health care market reform, the terms prices and costs

are used almost interchangeably. Yet, hospital prices are in fact the sum of
two components: costs and markups. It is not obvious ex-ante that increased

price competition, which leads to lower prices, will result in lower hospital

costs as well. In fact, under the quality competition model, with quality
competition persisting into the price shopping era, costs should not be expected

to fall; under the Satterthwaite model, the implication of price shopping for
costs is uncertain. The only evidence on this point is the study of Zwanziger
and Melnick (1988), who examined Califoiniahospit.al data for the mid-1980s
and found a significant reduction in hospital costs in areas with a higher degree

of provider competition, which they attribute to the advent of provider
contracting with hospitals.

In Table 3, I adopt a framework similar to that of Zwanziger and
Melnick, as I examine the change in log operating expenses over the 19841988 period. The specification is the same as that of the previous tables, with

two additional controls: the change in case mix index for all patients in the
hospital, to control for severity differences which may affect costs; and the
change in log discharges for the hospital, to control for changes in the scale

of operation.'5 The first column of Table 3 confirms the findings of
Zwanziger and Melnick. Costs did rise more slowly in more competitive areas

over the 1984-1988 period, with costs rising 3.6% faster in Northern
California that in LA due to a lack of competitive pressure. The Medicare

'5'These two regressors are potentially endogenous. However, the results
without the case mix control are very similar. If I normalize expenses by
discharges (imposing a coefficient on change in log discharges of 1), the
coefficient on the herfindalil is insignificant. It is very similar to the reported
coefficient once the HSA dummies are included, however.

25

PPS control indicates a strong and significant effect on hospital costs as well,

with approximately 70% of the shortfall in reimbursement under PPS being
absorbed in lower costs; this confirms the earlier fmding of PPS's cost effects

in Feder, Hadley and Zuckerman (1987). The Medi-Cal control is also
negative and significant, indicating that selective contracting led to lower costs;

the coefficient is similar to that of Robinson and Phibbs (1989). The other
controls do not add much explanatory power, except for the case-mix control,

which indicates that costs are higher in hospitals with a more severely ill
patient mix.'6

In column (2), I add the set of 14 lISA dummies. The effect on the
herfmdahl coefficient is dramatic; it is now negative and insignificant. This

indicates that costs actually i in more competitive areas, with a one
standard deviation increase in the herfmdahl leading to a 0.6% increase in
costs.

This effect of including the area specific controls suggests that

locational shocks which were correlated with market competitiveness were
driving the cost findings of column (1). There is no effect of adding the HSA
dummies on the PPS measure, and the coefficient on the Medi-Cal share rise.

In the third column of the table, I reestimate this specification over the 19821984 period, and it reveals that there was no preexisting correlation between
market structure and changes in hospital costs.'7

The contrast between the effects on costs of Medicare's PPS and of

t6()ne problem is that ttBiteShare is a function of lagged (1982) costs; if
there is any serially correlated measurement error in expenses, this will bias
the estimate of the PPS variable. I have tried instrumenting ABiteShare by the

1982 Medicare share, which is the component of this variable which is
exogenous to expenses; it does not affect the results.

'7The case mix index change is omitted because this index cannot be
calculated for 1982. The large coefficient on iBiteShare in the 1982-1984
regressions once again implies that this index mismeasures the cost pressure
on hospitals in the first year of PPS.

market competition is striking. While over two-thirds of the cutbacks under
PPS were absorbed in lower hospital costs over the 1984-1988 period, market

competition was found to have no significant effect on costs. The difference

in the effect of these two means of "cost control" on hospital costs can be
traced to their incentives for patient treatment intensity (ie. length of stay) per

admission, which is the key factor behind hospital cost increases. Medicare
reimburses hospitals by a fixed price per admissiofi strategy, whereby hospitals

receive a fixed lump sum payment for an admission of a given severity. As

discussed in Cutler (1991), since hospitals bear the full marginal cost of

additional treatment quality, this introduces strong incentives to reduce
intensity under a wide. variety of models of hospital behavior. Cutler also
provides evidence that increases in Medicare cost pressure are associated with

falls in the treatment intensity of the e1derly.J

Price competition, on the other hand, did not introduce strong
incentives for reductions in patient treatment intensity, for two reasons. First,

PPOs generally reimburse by discounts off of usual charges. Since hospitals
are still being paid on the margin for additional quality, the incentive to reduce

costs by cutting quality is much weaker. Second, as discussed above, to the

extent that shopping on the basis of treatment quality existed in the ex-ante

equilibrium, such shopping continued after the arrival of PPOs. Thus,
hospitals who cut their treatment intensity in response to price pressure could

lose patients as a result. In fact, the quality elasticity for PPO patients may

have been much higher than that for Medicare patients, since these
organizations have more scope for evaluating treatment quality from a large
number of hospitals than do individual Medicare enrollees.

'81n (3ruber (1991), I replicate these regressions for California, and find
similar strong reductions in Medicare treatment intensity where the Medicare
"bite" is largest.

27

A more direct test of this supposition would be to ask whether
increases in competition are associated with changes in the treatment intensity
of PPO patients, just as increased PPS pressure led to a fall in intensity for the

elderly. In the remainder of Table 3, I model the relation between PP0
treatment intensity and market competition in 1988. l'his levels regression
necessarily differs from the changes specification used elsewhere, since there
is no data on PPO treatment in 1984; the hypothesis here is not about

changes

due to the arrival of PPOs, but rather about differences due to the
contemporaneous level of competitive pressure. The problem which this
raises, however, is that I am not able to purge the equation of time invariant
differences between more competitive and less competitive markets, as I do in
the changes. specification.

In order to control for systematic differences across markets in
treatment styles, I use as the dependent variable the difference between the

treatment intensity of PPO patients and the treatment intensity of the
traditionally insured. That is, rather than removing a fixed effect for market
structure, I remove the effect of .gna,jcet structure on treatment intensity for this

control group, id

ask:

do hospitals which face more competitive pressure

treat PPO patier ts worse than their traditionally insured counterparts?
Treatment intensity is measured along two dimensionst length of stay

and average charges per admission. I have tabulated average intensity per
hospital from the "HMO/Prepaid Health Plan" payer field for PPOs,'9 and
for the fields for "Commercial Insurance" and "Blue Cross/Blur Shield" for

'9This is the field into which hospitals were supposed to .classily PPO
patients during the period of my study (personal communicaticfl, California
Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development). B9 1988, PP9

enrollment was between 3 and 4 times as large as HMO etiroliment rn
California, excluding enrollment in the Kaiser-Permanante HMO. Thus, m
1988, the mean of treatment intensity for this field should be a reasonable
proxy for PPO patient treatment.

28
the traditionally insured. All treatment intensity measures are normalized for

case severity using the California severity index described in the data
appendix. Since PPO and/or traditionally insured admissions are very low at
some hospitals, 1 weight the regressions by a function of the hospital's number

of admissions in the HMO/PHP category and those in the traditionally insured
categories.

Columns (4) and (5) regress the difference in log treatment intensity

of the usual set of covariates. The results are consistent with the conclusions

above: PPO treatment intensity is no different than that for the traditionally
insured, in more competitive relative to less competitive markets. PPO length

of stay is somewhat higher, and average charges somewhat lower, where the
herfindahl is lowest, but neither estimate is as large as its standard error. One

problem with estimating the relative treatment intensity of PPO patients,

however, is selection bias.

If the individuals in this payer field are
systematically less healthy in more competitive areas (relative to the
traditionally insured), then the herfindahi coefficient will, be biased against a

fin1uig of reduced intensity. This may be true, for example, if PPOs in more

comptitive areas have the most effective pre-admission re' .ews of potential

'

hospitalizations, so that they keep the least sick cases out of the hospital. Of

cpurse, if selection bias serves to move patients across the 470 "Diagnostic
Related

Groujf (DRG) classifications used in my severity index, then it will

be captured by the severity acjustment to the intensity measures; only if there

are within-IIRG severity differences will selection remain a problem.

More Specifically, if PPO admissions are n1, and traditionally insured
....a"n,

admissions aI?-e n2, I weight by:

(n1+n2)
This is appropriate if the variance of each group's average treatment intensity
is propothoJ to one over the number of admissions in that group, and the
two groups' averages are independent.

29

However, if the severity of PPO patients is relatively great within
DRG, then it will most likely be greater across DROs as well. In column (6),

I therefore test for selection by using as the dependent variable the difference
in the case mix index between PPO patients and the traditionally insured. This
difference is not significantly related to the herfindahl, suggesting that selection

is not an important problem.
Thus, the striking differences in the effects of these two forms of cost

containment on costs may be largely due to their effects (or lack thereof) on
patient treatment intensity. This implies that forcing hospitals to bear the hill
marginal cost of an additional unit of treatment intensity (as PPS did) offered

more incentive for intensity decreases than did lowering the net price that
hospitals received (while leaving unchanged the demand for treatment quality).

If costs are not falling in response to competitive pressure, then the

reduction in average revenues will be coming out of hospital markups per
patient.2' In the next section, I focus on the effect of market competition on
an important hospital activity which is financed out of these markups: care to
the uninsured.

PART V: COMPETiTIVE PRESSURE AND HOSPiTAL
UNCOMPENSATED CARE
Hospitals are an important source of care for the uninsured: hospital

uncompensated charges totalled $15 billion in 1989, which was over 6% of

210f course, if hospitals which gave larger discounts gained PPO patients,
then the fall in markups per patient may have been offset. However, there is
no relation between market competition and changes in the total number of

private hospital admissions (traditionally insured plus HMO/PHP). This
suggests that PPOs are not actually causing net patient movement, but are
instead inducing lower hospital prices through the threat of such movement.

30

total gross patient revenues.r Traditionally, hospitals have used higher
charges to private patients to cross-subsidize their care to the uninsured. If
competitive pressure lowers hospital markups, they may lower the amount of
uncompensated care that hospitals can afford to provide.

Increased price shopping may not load to reduced uncompensated
care, however, if hospitals are either unwilling or unable to adjust this form
of charity. Under the Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Law
of 1986, hospitals which receive Medicare funding must at least stabilize any

patient brought to their emergency room (Public Citizen, 1991). Hospitals
which received construction funds through the Hill-Burton program are also
required to provide a minimum level of charity care tied to the level of those

funds. To the extent that these regulatory requirements are binding, it will
limit the ability of hospitals to reduce their uncompensated care; the response

of charity to competitive pressure is an empirical question.
I examine the effect of market competition on uncompensated care in

Table 4. The dependent variable is the change in log hospital uncompensated

charges, which is the sum of "free care" and "bad debt". I also add four
covariates to the basic regression framework: the change n log gross patient

revenues, the change in the percent uninsured in the SMSA, the log of the

median income in the hospital's area, and a dummy for sole community
hospitals. The first controls for the scale of hospital operations. The second

proxies for changes in 'demand" for uncompensated care by the uninsured;
area income will also capture demand if individuals will be less likely to pay

their bills in less wealthy areas. The last is included to capture the fact that

Aggregate uncompensated care figures from unpublished American
Hospital Association data. Both Saywell et al. (1989) and Weissman et al.
(1991) estimate that approximately 2/3 of uncompensated charges are to the
uninsured; the remainder arise from insured patients who do not pay some
portion of their bills.

31

hospitals which are the only source of uncompensated care in an area may be

unable to cut back on their care?
The first column of Table 4 provides strong evidence that hospitals
in more competitive areas reduced their uncompensated care. The herfindahi

enters significantly, and indicates that a one standard deviation increase in
competition led to a 7.8% fall in uncompensated care. In the second column,
I add the set of HSA dummies, and the coefficient rises, although the level of

significance is the same. The robustness of this finding to the inclusion of

area specific effects suggests that it is not driven solely by changes in the
distribution of the uninsured population which are not captured by my demand
controls.

BiteShare actually enters the regression positively, although it is
insignificant in both cases. The fact that PPS pressure did not lead to less
uncompensated care corroborates the conclusion above that most of the impact

of Medicare payment reductions was absorbed through reduced expenses.

While the per cent uninsured in the area does enter positively in the first

column, it is insignificant. The level of area income enters positively,
suggesting that uncompensated care rose in wealthier areas, even within lISA.

This may be the result of a negative correlation between the change in area

income and the level of income; or it could be that median income is an
incorrect proxy for demand. Public and religiously-affiliated hospitals are

rNone of the results reported below is affected by the use of
uncompensated care costs in place of charges. The coefficient on the scale
control is very close to one, and normalizing the dependent variable yields
identical results. The data on insurance status are from the. March CPS for
1982-1989; see the data appendix. Median area income is calculated using zip
code level income data from Rezide (1985), assigned to hospitals by the zip
codes from which they draw their patients. Sole community hospitals are those
that are the only source of inpatient services in a geographic area, as defined
by Medicare.

32
found to deliver more uncompensated care, and teaching hospitals deliver less.

The Medi-Cal share enters with a sizeable positive coefficient, which is the
opposite of what would be expected if Medi-Cal selective contracting squeezed

hospital markups. This variable, which is also a measure of traditional careS
to the poor, may be proxying for unobservables correlated with the hospital's
propensity to deliver uncompensated care.
The model in Table 4 will not be identified if other factors correlated

with market competition affects changes in the delivery of uncompensated

care. For example, if there is charity "crowding out' in more competitive
areas, because hospitals know that they have more neighbors to provide this
care, it will induce a spurious negative correlation between competition and

uncompensated care (Frank and Salkever, 1991). Once again, I assess this
potential bias by looking at the same set of hospitals in an earlier era. Column

(3) reveals that there is no pre-existing relationship between competition and
changes in uncompensated care.
Taken together with the earlier findings, these results suggest that the

introduction of price competition reduced the markups available to hospitals,

and that this led to a fall in uncompensated care. Given this conclusion, a
natural parameter of policy interest is the extent to which falling markups led

to reduced care to the uninsured, or the income elasticity of uncompensated

care. In column (4) of Table 4,1 regress the change in uncoinpensated care

on the change in discounts to private payers, along with the set of controls
from the previous columns?' There is a strong negative relationship between
the change in discounts and the change in uncompensated care; an increase in
discounts of 1% of revenues is found to lead to a 3.35% falL in uncompensated

9 replace the change in discounts over inpatient non-government revenues
used earlier with the change in discounts over total revenues, in order to gauge
the potential impact on total hospital income of a cutback by private payers
only.

33

care.

Over 1984-1988, uncompensated care averaged 6.9% of hospital
revenues; this implies that a one dollar increase in discounts led to a fall in
uncowpensated care of 23 cents.

This OLS estimate, however, is contaminated by the fact that
discounts are simultaneously chosen along with uncompensated care. In fact,
there is reason to believe that this would impart a positive bias to the discounts

coefficient; if hospitals finance increases in uncompensated care by raising

charges to insured patients, and PPOs negotiate over net prices, then PPOs
will demand a larger discount where there is more uncompensated care (higher

charges). However, if the only way in which market structure affects changes

in uncompensated care is through competitive pressure, then the herflndahl

serves as a valid instrument for estimating the income elasticity of
uncompensated care. To do so, I use the regression in Table 2, relating the
growth in discounts to market competition, as a first stage regression. In the

second stage, I relate the change in uncompensated care to the.change in

discounts over revenues, instrumented by the herfindahi. This structural
regression estimates the effect of an exogenous decrease in hospital. income on

hospital uncompensated care.

Column (5) runs the two stage least, squares version of the income

elasticity equation, where discounts are instrumented by market
competitiveness. The coefficient does rise, implying that the positive bias
discussed above may have been important; while the standard error rises by

even more, the estimate is significant. A one dollar increase in discounts is
now associated with a 53 cent reduction in uncompensated care. This sizeable

elasticity implies that the 4.7% average rise in discounts over revenues during

this era led to a 36% fall in the amount of uncompensated care delivered,
relative to its expected value.
How are Hospitals Adjusting Their Care to the Uninsured?

34
The estimates of Table 4 suggest a large reduction in uncompensated

care, relative to its expected level, in response to competitive pressure. In
order to understand the welfare implications of cutbacks in uncompensated
care, however, it is necessary to identify the means through which hospitals
are adjusting their care to the uninsured. Are hospitals seeing fewer uninsured

patients? Or are they seeing the same number, but cutting the intensity of
treatment?

In Table 5, I estimate the effect of competitive pressure on inpatient

utilization of the uninsured, which is tabulated from the discharge data
abstracts for patients whose expected source of payment is "Self-Pay"?' In
the first column, the dependent variable is the change in log admissions to the

uninsured. The basic specification is the same as that of Table 4, although the

scale control is now the change in log private admissions. In contrast to the
reduced form model in the second column of Table 4, however, the herfindahi

is wrong-signed and completely insignificant. Given the earlier estimates of
a sizeable reduction in uncompensated care, this is a disturbing result.

If hospitals were unable to turn away the uninsured, however, they

may have reacted solely by adjusting treatment of the uninsured who were

admitted. This is examined in the second and third columns of TableS, for

the two measures of treatment intensity used earlier, tabulated for the
uninsured and normalized for case severity. For length of stay, the herfindahl
also enters negatively, while for average charges there is evidence of reduced

care to the uninsured in more competitive areas. However, neither estimate
is significant.

2I do not use the payer field for "Medically Indigent", because hospitals

may be reimbursed by the county for some portion of their care to those
individuals classified as medically indigent under Section 17000 of the
California Statutes. The results are very similar if these individuals are
included.

35

These results do not offer much insight into how the reduction in
uncompensated care was carried out at the hospitals which were subject to
competitive pressure. However, there are two important problems with these

data for analyzing this question. First, the payer source (self-pay) is that
which is expected at the time of admission, and, if the ultimate source of

payment is unknown at that time, there may be misclassification error.
Discharge abstracts, which are tuned in six months after discharge, are often
not updated to reflect changes in payer status. While there is no strong prior
about the bias imparted by this misclassification, it does signal the potential for

impértant measurement error problems. Second, this data source ignores
outpatient care to the nninczured, a group which is disproportionately cared for

in an outpatient setting. In their study of New York state's subsidy for
hospital uncompensated care, Thorpe and Spencer (1991, th 17) report that
"the bulk" of the response of uncompensated care occurred on the outpatient

margin. Their results suggest the value of investigating the response of
outpatient uncompensated care to increases in competitive pressure.

A detailed study of outpatient care to the uninsured is limited by the

fact that regulators do not collect patient level data on outpatient care.
However, the hospital disclosure report does contain data on the aggregate
level of utilization of hospital services, including emergency room visits and

gross revenues. In two recent profiles of emergency room utilization, over
two-thirds of the visits made to the emergency room were by the uninsured
(Bindman et al., 1991; Baker et al., 1991). Thus, hospital actions to decrease
access of the uninsured to emergency rooms should be reflected in aggregate

utilization statistics?6 Furthermore, if hospitals desire to cut back on care

Zin fact, the state of California has seen a wave of trauma emergency
room closings since the mid- 1980s; 55 hospitals which reported offering access

to a trauma treatment emergency room in 1984 reported no such access in
1988. Probit regressions of closings on the herfindahi yielded a negative, but

36

to the uninsured where the need is least urgent, emergency rooms, ironically,
could absorb much of the adjustment. Grumbach et al. (1991) found that only

13% of patients surveyed while waiting for care at a large public hospital
emergency room had conditions that were definitely clinically appropriate for
emergency department services?

In the remainder of Table 5,

1

examine changes in the scope of

operation of emergency rooms across hospitals over the 1984-1988 period.
The dependent variable in the fourth column is the change in the log number
of emergency room visits. There is a sizeable fall in emergency room visits

in more competitive areas, with a one standard deviation increase in the
herfmdahl being associated with a 5.5% fall in visits (significant at 11% level).

This implies that emergency room visits fell by 14% in LA relative to
Northern California, due to increased competitive pressure; the inclusion of

HSA effects should control for gross regional changes in health conditions
which would bias this result.

In column (5) the dependent variable is the change in log gross
emergency room revenues; the change in log total gross outpatient revenues
is included on the right hand side in order to control for general shifts to
outpatient utilization and/or changes in outpatient pricing. Once again, there

is a sizeable (statistically significant) fall in emergency room utilization in
more competitive areas. In the final column, I use the structural specification

insignificant coefficient; similarly, hours of emergency room staffing fell
(Significantly) in more competitive areas.
"This figure is an understatement, since the study excluded those with the
most severe conditions, who did not wait for care. This most severe group

represented 16% of emergency room visits, so that the overall fraction of
definitely clinically appropriate visits is approximately 27%. This is consistent

with the figure of 43% reported by Baker et al. (1991), who used a more
expansive definition of clinical appropriateness.

37

of column (6) of Table 4, where the change in discounts over reven is
instrumented by the herflndahL A one dollar increase in discounts is found to

lead to a fall in emergency room revenues of 15 cents. While this result can

only account for (at most) one-third of the fall in uncompensated care
estimated in Table 4, it does suggest that a substantial portion of the
adjustment of uncompensated care was happening on the outpatient margin.
The welfare implications of this fall in care to the uninsured are considered in

the conclusions?

PART VI: CONCLUSIONS
From 1950-1980, health care costs doubled as a fraction of (3NP, and

the systems of cost-plus" reimbursement by the public sector and indemnity
insurance in the private sector were seen as two of the primary culprits. As

a response, the structure of both private and public insurance has been
radically transformed over the past decade. At one extreme is the regulatory
approach employed by Medicare, which sets fixed prices per admission, and
several states, which regulate the overall level of hospital cost increase. Price

shopping in medical markets, facilitated by the use of Preferred Provider
Organizations, represents the vanguard of an alternative competitive approach.

In this paper, I have examined the effects of price shopping across hospital

markets in California. I argued that a-ante actual competition was a good

A further explanation for the discrepancy between the uncompensated
care results and the inpatient utilization results is that hospitals may have
responded to competitive pressure by collecting more of their unpaid debts.
This would yield reduced dollars of uncompensated care with no reduced units

of care to the uninsured. The welfare implications of such a policy are
unclear, however, and depend on the income distribution of the individuals
from whom the increased bills are being collected. I am unable to investigate
this empirically, due to the fiungibility of the bad. debt and charity care
categories as measures of uncompensated care.

38

proxy for n-post price competition due to the need for PPOs to attract
enrbllées, and I found that net revenues did fall the most in the most n-ante
competitive markets.

A key consideration, however, is the means by which hospitals
adjusted to this increased competitive pressure. Roughly speaking, hospital
prices are the sum of two components, costs and markups, and the channel
through which price shopping will lead to reduced net revenues is unclear ex
ante.

I have provided evidence that increased competitive pressure in

California over the 1984-1988 period led to reduced hospital markups, with
little effect on hospitals costs. This fall in markups was found to have led to
less care for the uninsured, with each dollar in increased discounts to private

payers leading to a 50 cent fall in uncompensated care. This finding should

be interpreted cautiously, give my inability to find a similar response in
inpatient care of the uninsured; although some preliminary results suggested
that outpatient care may have borne much of the adjustment.
The finding that price shopping did not lead to a fall in hospital costs
highlights an important limitation of the managed competition strategy. Recent

research on medical cost inflation has suggested that technological advance is

the driving force behind cost increases (Weisbrod, 1991; Newhouse, 1992).

Long run cost control strategies may therefore necessitate retarding the
development of cost increasing, but potentially quality enhancing, technologies.

In the discussion of Part 1, 1 suggested that, since they must sell themselves
to potential enrollees, organizations such as PPOs are essentially aggregations

of individual preferences. Thus, until individuals are willing to make the sort

of tradeoffs between quality and costs which are necessaq, managed
competition cannot effectively control medical cost inflation. If society feels
that individuals are not capable of effectively making these choices, some form

of government intervention may be required. On the other hand, there may

be no better metric of which quality increases justify their cost than

39

individuals' willingness to pay for them?
A complete welfare analysis of managed competition also requires
answering an important question raised by this study: what was the implication

of price competition for the health of the uninsured? Over the 1984-1988
period, hospital uncompensated care (as a fraction of revenues) actually rose

on average.

At the same time, however, the uninsured population was

growing, and the underlying health distribution of this population may have
been deteriorating as well.3° The net change in services per uninsured person

(of a given health Level) is unclear, and depends on the extent to which the

uninsured in competitive areas had access to hospitals in nearby noncompetitive areas. Furthermore, if the reduction in uncompensated care
simply resulted in reduced "excess" utilization by the uninsured, then there
may not have been important consequences for the health of this group.

Some evidence on these points is provided by a recent study of a
public hospital closing in Northern California (Bindnianet al., 1990). The
authors found that uninsured patients saw a fall in their access to cue when

this local provider closed. As a result, there was a decrease in perceived

health and an increase in reported —. This suggests that reducing local
hospital access for the uninsured in competitive areas may have had real health
consequences.

Ultimately, reduced markups may leave private hospitals unable to
support their care to the uninsured. If an increased level of resources are

That is, there are no regulations against individuals willingness to pay

more for higher quality consumer durables. However, there may be an
important public goods aspect to medicaL technology which justifies
government intervention: once such a technology is developed, it may be
difficult, or perhaps even morally unacceptable, to exclude any individual from
using that technology regardless of their insurance status.

3°For example, due to the AIDS epidemic during these years.

40
devoted to the uninsured at public hospitals, then this population may see little

net reduction in their level of care. Furthermore, the members of the PPOs,
which formerly supported care of the uninsured through the implicit taxation

of cost-shifting, may now be forced to support this care through the explicit

taxation necessary to support the work of public hospitals. But, if public
hospitals get overcrowded, or it is not feasible to raise taxes to support their
activities, then the uninsured will get less care, and PPO members will end up

paying less. More research is needed into the question of what is happening
to the quantity and quality of care to the uninsured, and their health outcomes,

in California (and elsewhere) as competitive pressure increases. Similarly,
more insight into the distributional aspects of alternative financing mechanisms

for care to the uninsured (ie. cost-shifting versus local taxes) would help
economists to assess the social costs of private sector cost containment.
Finally, it would be interesting to examine the other activities which
are financed out of hospital markups. A better understanding of the objectives

of (primarily non-profit) hospitals could provide some useful insight into the

uses of hospital markups, and whether there are important welfare losses
attached to their reduction from competitive pressure.

41

DATA APPENDIX
A) Measuring Ex-Ante Market Competition - Patient Ori2in Herfindajij

The patient origin herfindahi is calculated by creating a herfindahl
index for each zip code in the state, then taking a weighted avenge of the
index for each zip code from which the hospital draws, where the weights are

the share of the hospital's patients from that zip code. If we represent the
distribution of hospital patients across zip codes as:

Hospital/ H H2

Hh

Total

Zip Code
A11

X1

XIh

Zfl.

XmZzr

Z2

4
Total

H,.1

H

where: X is the number of patients from zip code i that go to hospitalj
Zf1 is the total number of patients residing in zip code i
H.1 is thetotal number of patients who go to hospitalj
Then the Patient Origin Herfindahi for hospital H1 would be calculated as:

A ía A

..JL
i—i

..JL)2

ri li—i

This measure is calculated using the Hospital Discharge Dataset for 1982.

B) California Private Paver Case Mix Index
Treatment intensity has generally been normalized in past work by the

standard Medicare Case Mix Index, as reported in ProPAC (1991). However,

this case mix index is calculated primarily based on the elderly, and may be
inappropriate for use in studying treatment of PPO patients and the uninsured.

42
Therefore, I have calculated by own case mix index, based on all private pay

admissions to California hospitals in 1984) I do so by first tabulating the
average cost by DRO, where cost is charges times the hospitals cost/charge
ratio.2 I then remove any cases which are more than three standard deviations

from the mean for that DRO (as is done in calculating the Medicare index).
I tabulate the average costs over all DRGs, and assign a weight to each DRO
by its average cost over the overall avenge cost. The correlation between this

index and the Medicare index is 0.87.

0 Medicare PPS "Bite"
This is calculated following Staiger and Gaumer (1990). The rate at
which hospitals are paid, for the first five years of PPS, is an average of their
traditional cost per case and the regional/national average cost per case. After
1988, hospitals were paid based solely on national average costs, with several

remaining exceptions: in some regions, there was still a regional adjustment
to reimbursement rates; reimbursement was still adjusted for variations in local

labor costs; there were adjustments for teaching hospitals, and hospitals which
served a disproportionate share of poor patients; and sole community hospitals

continued to be paid based (partially) on their historic costs. The basic
formula is:

BITE, = - RATE, I (BASECOST*AVGINFI)
RATE, = ;BASECOSTUPDATE, + (1-aJ(b1N + (1-bORJ
*(1 +TCHJ*(1 +DSH1)

'I created a similar index for the uninsured only, for use in the uninsured
treatment intensity regressions; it was virtually identical (correlation of 0.98),
so the private pay index was used for both.

2The index is quite similar if charges are used instead. I also adjust for
variations in area wages, as is done by Medicare.

where BASECOST is the hospitals case-mix adjusted cost per
discharge in 1982
AVGINF1 is the statewide rate of hospital cost inflation
from 1982 to t
UPDATE is the mandated update factor for the hospit4d
specific portion
; is the blend factor from hospital specific to
regional/national average costs (depends on hospital
fiscal year)
b1 is the blend factor from regional to national average
costs (depends on federal fiscal year)
N, is national average costs (labor portion*local wage
index + non-labor portion)
R1 is regional average costs (labor portion*local wage
index + non-labor portion)
TCH, is the teaching adjustment, which is a function of
the intern/bed ratio
DSH, is the disproportionate share adjustment, which is a
function of the fraction of
patients who are poor

Transition dates and other details of implementation were collected
from the Federal Register for the years 1983-1988; many of these details are
not reflected in this simplified presentation. The program used to calculate the

Thite" is available on request. I do not account for adjustments for "outlier"

cases, which I assume is equal to the cost of treating those cases. The data
used come from the disclosure report, and from the Health Care Financing
Administration's "PPS Impact File".
D) Measures of the Uninsured Population from the CPS
The March CPS has included questions about insurance coverage in

the previous year in every year since 1980. These questions are used to
calculate the percent uninsured in each of nine areas in the state: central city
Los Angeles, the rest of Los Angeles, six other large SMSAS, and the rest of
the state. One important problem, however, is that the structure of this survey
was changed in 1988 to account for overcounting of the uninsured in previous

years, so that the definition of uninsured is not consistent across years. I
account for this by noting (following Bureau of the Census, 1988) that these

44
changes

years

would not be expected to affect the definition for individuals 25-54

old. In fct, nationwide this group had a relatively constant rate of

insurance coverage from 1986-1987, while other groups saw a large increase

in insurance coverage. Thus, I use this group as a "bridge" across these two
years, forcing the change in insurance coverage for other groups across these

years to match the change for this group.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Arstein-Kerslake, C. (1988).

"Profiles of Orgainizations Contracting with Hospitals".

Sacramento, CA: California Association of Hospitals and Health Systems.
Baker, David W., Carl D. Stevens, and Robert H. Brook (1991). "Patients Who Leave a Public
Hospital Emergency Department Without Being Seen By a Physician," Journal of the
American Medical Association, 266:1085-1090.

Bindman, Andrew, Kevin Grumbach, Dennis Keane, Loren Rauch, and John Luce (1991).
"Consequences of Queuing for Care at a Public Hospital Emergency Department,"
Journal of the American Medical Association, 266:1091-1096.

Bureau of the Census (1988). "User Note: Modifications to the March 1988 CPS Health
Insurance Questions: Some Preliminary Results". Washington, D.C.: Bureau of the
Census.

Butler, Stuart M. and Edmund F. Haislmaier, eds. (1989). A National Health System for
America. Washington, D.C.: The Heritage Foundation.

Cutler, David (1991). "Empirical Evidence on Hospital Delivery Under Prospective Payment".
Mimeo, MIT.

Dranove, David, Mark Satterthwaite, and J'ody Sindelar (1986). "The Effect of Injecting Price
Competition into the Hospital Market: The Case of Preferred Provider Organizations,"
InQuiry, 23:419-431.
Dranove, David, Mark Shanley and William 0. White (1991). "Price and Competition in
Hospital Markets: The Switch from Patient-driven to Payor-driven Competition".
Mimeo.
Enthoven, Alain, and Richard Kronick (1989). "A Consumer-Choice Health Plan for the
1990s," New FnIand Journal of Medicine, 320:29-37,94-101.
Fedcr, Judith, Jack Hadtey, and Stephen Zuckerman (1987). "How Did Medicare's Prospective
Payment System Affect Hospitals," New EnEland Journal of Medicine, 317:867-873.

Frank, Richard G., and David S. Salkever (1991). "The Supply of Charity Services by NonProfit Hospitals: Motives and Market Structure". Mimeo, Johns Hopkins.

Frech, H.E. III (1985). "Preferred Provider Organizations and Health Care Competition," in
Health Care in America, H.E. Frech ed. San Francisco: Pacific Research Institute for
Public Policy.
Gruber, Jonathan (1991). "What Do PPOs Do?". Mirneo, Harvard University, December.

.

Grumbach, Kevin, Andrew Bindman, and Dennis Keane (1991). "Public Hospital Emergency
Department Overcrowding: An Excess of Demand or a Demand for Better Primary Care
Access?". Mimeo, UC San Francisco.

Hausman, J.A. (1978). "Specification Tests in Econometrics," Econometrica, 46:1251-1270.
Hinden, Richard A. (1989). "Summary of PPO Legislation on a State Level, 1989". Chicago:
American Association of Preferred Provider Organizations.

Hosek, Susan D. and M. Susan Marquis (1990). Participation and Satisfaction in Employer
Plans with Preferred Provider Ornnization ODtions. Santa Monica, CA: RAND.

........

and Kenneth Wells(1990). Health Care UtilinIinn !n Emnlnver Plans
with Preferred Provider Or2anization Options. Santa Monica, CA: RAND.

Interstudy (various years). The Interstudy Edge. Minneapolis, MN: Interstudy.

Johns, Lucy (1989). "Selective Contracting in California: An Update," lnauirv, 26:345-353.

, Robert A. Derton and Maren Anderson (1985). Selective Contractin2 for Health
Services in California: Final Report. Washington, D.C.: Lewin and Associates.

Marion MenU Dow (1989,1990). "Managed Care Digest: I'PO Edition". Kansas City, MO:
Marion MenU Dow.

Melnick, Glenn A., Jack Zwanziger, and Tom Bradley (1989). "Competition and Cost
Containment in California: 1980-1987," Health Affairs, Summer:129-136.

Newhouse, Joseph (1992). "Medical Care Costs and Medical Care Cost Containment,"
fortcorning in Journal of Economic Persnectives.
Noether, Monica (1988). "Competition Among Hospitals," Journal of Health Economics, 7:259284.

Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development (various). Ae2regate Hosoital Financial

Daitfor California. Sacramento, CA: OSHPD.
ProPAC (1991). Reoort and Recommendations to the Con2ress. Washington, D.C.:ProPAC.
Public Citizen (1991). "140 Hospitals Named for Patient Dumping Violations". Washington,
D.C.: Public Citizen.

Rezide (1985). Rezide: The National Zip Code Encyclooedia. Alexandria, VA: Claritas.

Rice, Thomas, Greg de Lissovoy, Jon Gabel, and Dan Ermann (1986). "The State of PPOs:
Results From a National Survey," Health Affairs, Winter:25-39.

Robinson, James C. and Harold Luff (1985). "The Impact of Hospital Market Structure on

Patient Volume, Avenge Length of Stay, and the Cost of Care," Journal of Health
Economics, 4:333-356.
Robinson, James C. and Clarian S. Phibbs (1989). "An Evaluation of Selective Contracting in
California," Journal of Health Economics, 8:437-455.
Rolph, Elizabeth S. et al. (1986). State Laws and Regulations Governing Preferred Provider
Organizations. Santa Monica, CA: RAND.

Satterthwaite, Mark A. (1979). "Consumer Information, Equilibrium Industry Price, and the
Number of Sellers," Bell Journal of Economics, 10:483-502.
Saywell, Robert M., Terrell W. Zollinger, David K.W. Chu, Charlotte A. MacBeth, and Mark
E. Sechrist (1989). "Hospital and Patient Characteristics of Uncompcnsated Hospital
Care: Policy Implications," Journal of Helath Politics. Policy, and Law, 14:287-307.
Staiger, Douglas, and Gary L.Gaumer (1990). "The Impact of Financial Pressure on Quality

of Care in Hospitals: Post-Admission Mortality Under Medicare's Prospective Payment
System". Mimeo, Abt Associates.

Thorpe, Kenneth E. and Charles. E. Phelps (1991). "The Social Role of Not-For-Profit
Organizations: Hospital Provision of Charity Care," Economic Inquiry, 24:472-484.
and Christine Spencer (1991). "Do Uncompensated Care Pools Increase Access

to Care? Results from New York State". Forthcoming, Journal of Health Politics.
Policy, and Law.
Weisbrod, Burton (1991). "The Health Care Quadrilemma: An Essay onTechnological Change,
Insurance, Quality of Care, and Cost Containment," Journal of Economic Literature,
29:523-552.
Weissman, Joel S., Carol Lucas, and Arnold M. Epstein (1990). "Bad Debt, Free Care, and
the Problem of Under-Insurance". Mimeo.

White, H. (1980). "A Heteroskedasticity Consistent Covariance Matrix and a Direct Test for
Heteroskedasticity," Econometrica, 48:817-838.

Wootcy, J. Michael, and HE. Froth (1989). "How Hospitals Compete: A Review of the
Literature," Journal of Law and Public Policy, 2:57-79.
Zwanzigcr, Jack and Glenn A. Melnick (1988). "The Effects of Hospital Competition and the
Medicare PPS Program on Hospital Cost Bchavior in California," Journal ol Health
Economics, 7:301-320.

Table I: Means of Data
Variable

1964 Mean

Public Hospital

0.214

For-Profit Hospital

0.159

Religious Affiliation

0.127

Number of admissions

15219

15444

[16107)

114489]

Intern/Bed Ratio

0.093

Central City

0.493

Rural

0.071

Sole Community Hospital

0.016

% Uninsured in SMSA
Median Income in
Zip Code

1988 Mean

0.194

0.212

10.0471

10.0501

16177

18674

13309]

[3923]

Discount/Non-gov revs

0.019
(0.029)

0.112
[0.090]

A BiteShare

0.033
[0.019]

10.055)

1982 Medi-Cal Share

0.072

0.165
10.1291

Log (Operating

17.57

17.94

Expenses)

10.941

10.911

Uncompensated care/revenues

0.060
(0.098]

[0.1131

Patient Origin Herfindald

0.076

0.253

[0.116)
Number of Observations

398

398

I) All means are weighted by total hospital admissions in 1988.
2) Standard deviations in square brackets.
3) Sources: Annual Disclosure Report (hospital control and location variables, discounts, Medi-Cal share, operating
expenses, uncompensated care), Discharge Dataset (admissions, herfindabl), HCFA 'Impact File (sole community
hospital, intern/bed ratio), Current Population Survey (% uninsured), calculations using Impact File and Disclosure
report data (ABiteShare - described in Appendix B), and Rezide (1985) (income by zip code).

Table 2: Price Shopping. Discounts, and Net Prices
All regressions in changes
Column

(I)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Dependent

sSDiscnt/
NGPR
1984-88

M)iscnd

iNct NC

aNd NO

tsDiscnt/

aNd MCaI

NOPR

RevlDay

NGPR

1984-88

1984-88

Rev/Day
1984-1988

1982-84

Rev/Day

Variable
Patient Origin

-0.134

-0.241

0.275

Ilerfindahl

(0.041)

(0.054)

(0.153)

0.289
(0.154)

-0.003
(0.029)

(0.597)

One std dcv a

.0.016

-0.028

0.035

0.034

-0.0003

0.025

.8iteShare

-0.138
(0.087)

-0.107
(0.091)

-0.132
(0.260)

-0.190
(0.262)

0.271
(0.136)

0.047
(1.041)

Public

Hospital

-0.057
(0.012)

-0.056
(0.012)

0.009
(0.036)

0.003
(0.036)

0.0O2
(0.007)

0.458
(0.136)

For-ProIlt
Hospital

-0.058
(0.012)

-0.046
(0.013)

0.058
(0.036)

0.053
(0.036)

-0.005
(0.007)

-0.296

Religious

0.007
(0.013)

.0.059
(0.036)

-0.058
(0.036)

0.001

Affiliation

0.008
(0.013)

(0.008)

0.060
(0.143)

Intern/Bed
Ratio

-0.040
(0.030)

-0.037
(0.030)

0.121
(0.086)

0.100
(0.087)

-0.019
(0.017)

0.393
(0.331)

Log (Beds)

0.009
(0.001)

0.021
(0.008)

0.0004
(0.023)

0.003
(0.023)

0.003
(0.004)

0.104
(0.093)

Central

0.017

City

(0.009)

0.010
(0.009)

0.005
(0.026)

-0.003
(0.027)

0.003
(0.005)

.0.027
(0.108)

Rural

-0.007
(0.017)

-0.012
(0.022)

0.107

(0.064)

0.118
(0.064)

-0.001
(0.012)

-0.190
(0.244)

-0.181
(0.048)

-0.198
(0.049)

-0.146
(0.139)

-0.143
(0.140)

0.038
(0.026)

(0.544)

Medi-Cal 19S2

Skirt
Change in

0.156

Priv CMI

(0019)

S Log Priv
Puxcdures

(0.045)

14 lISA

(0.153)

-0.581

0.063

No

Dummies

N

0.214

390

Yes
(0.003)

(0.004)

Yes
(0.006)

Yes
I0.254

tO.002)

390

390

386

3%

335

Yes

Yes

Notes:

lj Standard errors in parentheses; all regressions weighted hy total hospital admissions in 198S
21 .Dtscnc/NGPk = change in discounts over non-government revenues, 1984-88.
3j .SNet NC Rev/Day
change in non-government revenues minus discounts over non-gov days.
4) .Net MCaI Rev/Day = change in Medi-Cal revenues minus Moth-Cal discounts over MediCal days.
5) The second row gives the change in the dependent variable for a one standard deviation change in the herfindahl.
6) Number in brackets tat I-ISA Duimmes row is signilicance level for a joint F test of the I-ISA dummies.

Table 3: Hospital Cons and PPO Patient Treatment

(I)

(2)

SLog

óLog

Expenses
Years

Patient Origin

(5)

(6)

Log CMI

Dill

Log Avg
Chg Dill

1988

1988

1988

0.022

4.145

(0,062)

(0.159)

0.068
(0.094)

(0.232)

0.003

-0.017

0.008

0.008

-0.647
(0.137)

-1.826
(0.315)

-0.189
(0.143)

O.013

(0.084)

0.294
(0.209)

0.044
(0.019)

0.016
(0.016)

(0.039)

0.008
(0.023)

.0.015
(0.057)

4.015

-0.019

(0.019)

(0,019)

-0.032
(0.015)

(0.030)

-0.026
(0.018)

(0.044)

0.042
(0.030)

.0.009
(0.018)

(0.044)

0.003

-0.266

(0.053)

(0.132)

0.001
(0.013)

.0.100
(0.031)

0.006
(0.014)

0.086
(0.0)4)

(4)
Log LOS

Expenses

(3)
b.Log
Expenses

1984-88

1984-88

1982-84

Ilerrmdahl

0.121
(0.061)

-0.049
(0.080)

One std dec S

0.014

-0.006

agiteShare

-0.687
(0.130)

Hospital

0.019
(0.018)

For-Profit
Hospital

Specification

Public

-0.004

0.015

Dill

0.065

4.061

Religious

.0.006

-0.011

4.019

Affiliation

(0.018)

(0.018',

(0.018)

Intern/Bed
Ratio

-0.019
(0.046)

0.013
(0.046)

(0.039)

0.067
(0.090)

Log (Beds)

-0.012
(0.011)

-0.005
(0,012)

.0.005
(0.010)

(0.021)

-0.002
(0.013)

-0.008
(0.014)

0.004
(0.011)

(0.02))

0.029
(0.026)

-0.004
(0.034)

0.008
(0.028)

(0.069)

0.048
(0.041)

0.046
(0.101)

Medi-Cal 1982

-0325
(0.074)

-0.403
(0.014)

(0.060)

-0.019
(0.149)

4.015

Share

(0.088)

-0.006
(0.218)

Central

City
Rural

Change in

0.473

CMI

(0.061)

Change in Log

0.613

Discharges

(0.029)

I4HSA

No

Dummies
N

398

.0,098

4.234

0.052
-0,068
0.003

0.011

0.466
(0.061)
0.602
(0.029)

0.605

(0.035)

Yes

Ye.

Ye.

Yea

Yes

(0.0011

10.0011

(0.006)

(0.3631

(0.0481

398

398

309

309

309

Notes:

I) Standard error, in parentheses; columns (1)-(3) weighted by total hospital admission, in 1988.
2) CMI is case mix index for all hospital patients, where calculation of weights is described in appendix.
3) Change in Log Discharges is the change in the log of hospital discharges from the disclosure report.
4) Columns (4)-(6) run as levels for 1982.
5) The dependent variable in column (4) is the difference between thc log of the avenge length of stay for PPO patients and.
the log average length of stay for the traditionally insured; in column (5), it is the difference in log avenge charges; in column
(6), it is the difference in the case mix index.
6) Column, (4)-(6) are weighted by:
(n5 + It1)
where n, is PPO admits, and ri i, traditionally insured admits.

Table 4: Compc4itivc Prcssure and Uncompcnsatcd Care
Dependent Variable is Change in Log Uneompensated Care

(I)

(2)

(3)

1984-88

1984-88

1982-84

(4)
1984-88

OL.S

OLS

OLS

OLS

Patient Origin

0.673

llerliadahi

(0335)

0.872
(0.427)

-0.136
(0.422)

One st4 dcv .S

0.078

0.101

4.016

Specification

(5)
1984-88
TSLS

.Sl)iscountf

-3352

7.669

GI'K

(0.690)

(1855)

iS UC (or a

4.231

4.529
-0.353
(0.766)

$1 SDiscouat

alftitcSharc

0.401

0.221

1.685

.0.155

(0.678)

(0.729)

(1.976)

(0.709)

1.048

Change in %
Unins in SMSA

(1.352)

-3.502
(6.737)

8.864
(6.739)

(6.241)

2.847
(7.309)

Log Zip Code.
Income

0.200
(0.187)

0.429

0i2S)

0.040
(0.203)

0.506
(0.220)

0.681
(0.277)

-0.821

Public

0.133

Hospital

(0.093)

0.160
(0.100)

0.189
(0.098)

0.101
(0.097)

-0.038
(0.159)

For-Profit
liospiLal

0.057
(0.096)

0.064
(0.099)

-0.068
(0.094)

.0,013
(0.097)

-0.089
(0.122)

Religious

Aililiation

0.138
(0.094)

0.154
(0.097)

.0.180
(0.109)

0.148
(0.095)

0.159
(0.100)

Intern/Bed
Ratio

-0.536

.0.493

-0.024

(0.233)

(0.241)

{Q.248)

-0.584
(0.236)

.0.706
(0.270)

-0.041
(0.056)

.0.068

(0.064)

-0.061
(0.059)

.0.009
(0.062)

0,044
(0.080)

(0.071)

-0.024
(0.085)

0.090
(0,079)

-0.001
(0.083)

(0.095)

-0.007
(0.134)

-0.069
(0.282)

0.070
(0.177)

.0.055
(0.118)

4.033

0.961
(0.397)

0.934
(0.407)

0.496
(0.387)

0.587
(0.385)

0.410
(0.434)

Uaspiul

-0.332
(0.259)

.0.289
(0.274)

(0.251)

.0.239
(0.266)

-0.255
(0.280)

Change in Log

1.041

0.954

1.473

1.121

1.331

(0.160)

(0.211)

(0.159)

(0.249)

Log (Beds)

-0.015

Central
City

Rural
Mcdi-Cal 1982
Share

Sole Community

-

Gross Pat Revs

(0.148)

14 I-ISA

No

Dummies
N

Sce jiage following Table 5.

398

0.001

.-...

0.043

(0.188)

Yea

Yes

Yes

Yet

10.6711

10.4001

(0.4491

10.4021

398

396

398

398

Table 5: How do Hospitals Adjust Uncornpcnsaied Care?
All Regressions Run Ova the 1984-1981 Period
Specification

(I)
AUC

(2)
AUG

Mm

Los

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

AUG
Avg Chg

ALog ER
Visits

ALo8 ER.

ALog ER
Cr Revs

0.474

Gr Revs

Patient Origin

4.111

-0.217

IlerfindahI

(0.481)

(0.210)

0.075
(0.100)

(0.300)

0.63*
(0.224)

One aid dev A

0.020

-0.025

0.009

0.053

0.070

.SDiscounls/
Revenue

-6.099

(3322)
4.155

AS ER Revs
ror 1$ ADise

ABiteShare

1.096
(0.813)

0.331
(0.366)

0.118
(0.176)

-0.013
(0.51$)

0.741
(0.487)

0.146
(0.662)

change in %

-1059

0.955

Unins in SMSA

(7.228)

(2.946)

-1.784
(1.40!)

-10.072
(4.540)

3.318
(4.374)

(5.794)

Log Zip
Code Income

-0038
(0.255)

-0A35
(0.108)

0.007
(0.052)

-0.165
(0.156)

0.147
(0.148)

0.415
(0.253)

0.095
(0.112)

0.082
(0.050)

0.042

Hospital

(0.024)

-0.025
(0.010)

-0.180
(0,067)

-0.339
(0.137)

For-Profit
Hospital

-0098

0077

-0.182

4.309

(0.051)

-0.009
(0.024)

-0.120

(0.114)

(DM70)

(0.061)

(0.106)

Religious
Affiliation

DM48

-0.043

(0.113)

(0.055)

0.009
(0.026)

-0.033
(0.068)

-0.081
(0.067)

-0.103
(0.082)

-0.303
(0.271)

-0.177
(0.123)

4.144

-0.160
(0.169)

4.243

4.360

(0.058)

(0.160)

(0.208)

Public

Intern/Bed
Ratio

6.831

-DM19

-0.049

0.012

0.040

(0.0)3)

(0.016)

-0.046
(0.046)

4.034

(0.072)

(0.044)

(0.064)

.0.164

0M72
(0.042)

-0.028
(0.020)

-0.079
(0.059)

.0.0)8

(0.096)

(0.057)

0.021
(0.081)

0.058
(0.208)

-0.082

.0045

0016

(0.081)

(0.039)

(0.121)

0.051
(0.119)

0.010
(0.147)

Medi-Cal 1982
Share

0.502
(0,464)

0A85

0.028

(0.203)

(0.098)

0.093
(0,290)

1.071
(0.276)

0.586
(0.380)

Solo Community
Hospital

-0.331

0.038

(0.307)

(0.110)

-0.009
(0.052)

-0.067
(0.191)

0.122
(0.180)

0.118
(0.221)

ALog

DAIS

Priv Control

(0.105)

0.735
(0.091)

0.858
(0.055)

0.884
(0.067)

(DM91)

Log (Beds)

Central
City
Rural

0.948

14 lISA

Yes

Yes

0.024J

(0.287

Yes
10.2201

Yes

Dummks

(0J

Yes
10.7771

Yes
10.9141

N

388

388

388

373

366

366

otes:

5c. foil pagc.

Ni,tes to Tahle 4:
I) Standard errors in parentheses.
2j All regressions weighted by 1988 total admissions.
3) Change in discounts over revenues is the change in discounts to private payers Over total gross patient revenues.
4) In columns (5), change in discounts over gross patient revenues is instrumented by the patient origin berfindahl.
5)ln columns (4) and (5), change in dollars of uncompensated case for a St change in discounts is evaluated at
average uncompensated care over revenues (or 1984 and 1988.
6j Change in percent uninsured is the change in the fraction of the area population without health insurance. See
data appendix (or details of its calculation.
7) Log zip code income is the log of the median area income by zip code of patient residence, from Raids (1985).
8) Sole community hospital is a dummy which equals one if the hospital is the only source of care in the area, as
defined by Medicare.

Notes to Table 5:
I) Standard errors in parentheses.
2) Columns (1), (4)-(6) weighted by total hospital admissions.

3) Columns (2) and (3) are weighted by: _mfli

(n + a,)
wherc n1 is current uninsured admits, and a2 is lagged uninsured admits.
4) UC Admits is self-pay admissions.
5) UC LOS is case mix adjusted length of stay for self-pay patients; UC Avg Cbgs is case mix adjusted average
charges per admit; the severity weights are described in the data appendix.
6) ER visits is total emergency room visits.
7) ER Gross Revs is total emergency room gross revenues.
8) Change in thscounts over revenues is the change in discounts to private payers over total gross patient revenues.
9) In the last column, the change in discounts is instrumented by the berfmdahl. The change in emergency room
revenues (or a $1 change in discounts is evaluated at avenge emergency room revenues over total revenues for 1984
and 1988.

