                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    MARKET CONDITIONS AND
                RETIREMENT OF PHYSICAL CAPITAL:
                  EVIDENCE FROM OIL TANKERS




                              lain Cockbum

                              Murray Frank




                         Working Paper No. 4194




           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                          October 1992




This paper is part of NBER's research program in Productivity. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                             NBER Woiking Paper #4 194
                                             October 1992


                    MARKET CONDiTIONS AND
                RETIREMENT OF PHYSICAL CAPITAL:
                  EVIDENCE FROM OIL TANKERS


                                 ABSTRACT


        The endogeneity of capital retirements is studied for the particular case
of oil tankers from 1979-- 1989. A model is estimated to examine the effect
of changes in market conditions on the price and scrappage of tankers. Energy
price rises had a major impact on the value of ships and on which ships were
scrapped. A simple model is able to account for many features of the market.
We use the information implicit in second-hand prices to ease the
computational burden for the model that is estimated.

lain Cockburn                                Murray Frank
Faculty of Commerce                          Faculty of Commerce
University of British Columbia               University of British Columbia
2053 Main Mall                               2053 Main Mall
Vancouver, BC                                Vancouver, BC
Canada V6T 1Z2                               Canada V6T 1Z2
and NBER
1 Introduction
1.1 Background
Depreciation of capital is a fundamental aspect of many dynamic pro-
cesses in economics. Areas of economics in which depreciation is central
include growth theory, business cycle analysis, dynamic oligopoly the-
ory, national income accounting, productivity measurement, and sonic
aspects of international trade and public finance. Despite the central im-
portance of depreciation, it is common to make convenient simplifying
assumptions that may have the effect of distorting the implications of
the process. In particular it is common to assume constant geometric
depreciation of capital that is independent of market conditions, almost
as if this were a technological fact. Depreciation is, however, at least
partly eudogenous and many patterns of depreciation are possible. As
stressed by Flulten (1990) and Berndt (1991), among others, given the
importance of the capital depreciation process there is surprisingly little
evidence concerning its actual character.
    This paper provides some empirical analysis of one component of de-
preciation, the important but neglected issue of capital retirement. rrhe
particular case examined is the oil tanker industry, which has a number
of features that allow us to address some questions of general signifi-
cance. Firstly, what determines the decision to scrap a piece of physical
capital? Are depreciation and retirement of capital determined by engi-

    Murray Frank gratefully acknowledges research support from Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Council of Canada grant 41O.91-O727. lain Cockburn's work was
supported in part by a UBC-HSS grant. We thank J. Brander, S. Das, R. J. Gordon,
Z. Griliches, R. FlaIl, T. Heaver, NI. Puterman, and S. Rosenthal for useful comments.
Mailing address for both authors: Faculty of Commerce and Business Administration,
2053 Main Mall, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada V6T 1Z2.


                                          1
neering considerations, independent of market conditions? Secondly, did
the energy price increases of the 1970s actually affect these decisions?
To what extent can the energy price rise be understood as a negative
technological shock to this industry?
   While the main focus of this study is on the economics of capital re-
tirement, it also makes a methodological point concerning the estimation
of dynamic structural models in the presence of a second hand market.
A simple partial equilibrium model is estimated, in which the ship owner
is modeled as solving a dynamic decision making problem about when
to retire a tanker. Estimation of dynamic programming models nor-
mally involves certain technical problems. One must keep track both of
the present period and also have a consistent treatment of the rest of
the program facing the decision maker, see Eckstein and Wolpin (1989),
Fakes (1991), and Rust (1992) for useful surveys. Using information from
the second hand market for ships substantially reduces the computational
and technical difficulties. By making the assumption that used ships are
efficiently priced, the analysis is drastically simplified. In essence the esti-
ination of a complex dynamic model reduces to a familiar discrete choice
model. This simplification may be of use to others who are interested in
studying assets for which efficient second hand markets exist.


1.2 The case of oil tankers
Oil tankers play a vital role in the world economy, but quite apart from
the industry's intrinsic importance (discussed in the appendix) there
a number of features of its institutions and its technology which make
it particularly well suited to examining depreciation. Firstly, ships are
traded on well-developed and closely watched markets. The institutions
of this market make it possible to easily identify and track individual

                                       2
pieces of capital tankers — over time. The market is highly competitive
and most transactions are "off shore" and therefore free from distortions
induced by, for example, tax policy. Secondly, the industry is fairly tur-
bulent. Prices of used tankers, scrapping, and deliveries of new ships
fluctuate substantially over time — there is plenty of "action" in the
phenomena we are trying to measure.
   The third advantage is the large and direct effects of energy prices
on both the demand for tanker services and the costs of supplying these
services. There are two particularly important components here. First,
oil tankers are used to transport oil: if the demand for oil decreases, then
there is less demand for the services of oil tankers. Second, oil is a major
input in the operation of a tanker. As a result of the energy price changes,
fuel costs rose from about 13% of total operating costs in 1970 to about
34% in 1985, see Stopford (1988, page 108).
   The fourth advantage of examining oil tankers is that compared to
many other capital goods they are relatively homogenous. Most of the
economically significant heterogeneity of tankers is captured by a small
number of observable characteristics: size, age, and engine technology.
Engine technology is particularly interesting. At the start of our period
there were two distinct engine technologies in wide use, steam turbines
and diesels. Steam turbines had about a 30% thermal efficiency while the
older diesels had a thermal efficiency of about 40%. By the end of the
period under consideration the thermal efficiency of diesels had risen to
about 53%. Since diesels consume less energy, they can also travel further
without refueling. If energy price shocks matter, then we should expect
the energy price increases to have had a negative impact on the value
of steam powered vessels relative to diesels. The existence of these two
technologies makes for a particularly clear case to study. As discussed in


                                     3
the appendix, there is considerable institutional evidence of adjustments
made in reaction to the energy price increases.


    The results of this study show that retirements are quite sensitive
to market conditions. Which ships get scrapped, and at what age they
get scrapped, seems to be endogenously determined by the relationship
between the value of the ships in use and their scrap value. The en-
ergy price increases had a substantial impact on these decisions. This
implies that the popular assumption of constant geometric depreciation
is not justified in this case.1 Interestingly if one were to ignore retire-
ment of capital, and focus simply on ships being sold for further trading,
one might have been tempted to conclude that the constant geometric
depreciation assumption is a reasonable approximation.
   Section 2 discusses the relationship between depreciation and the re-
tirement of capital. The model that we estimate is discussed in section 3.
The model is a simple partial equilibrium dynamic programming prob-
lem. The data set is described in section 4. The nature of the data is
discussed, and descriptive statistics are presented and discussed. Our
empirical results are presented in section 5. Conclusions are contained in
section 6. An institutional appendix discusses the oil tanker industry in
more detail.


2 Depreciation and Retirement of Capital
Depreciation of an existing stock of capital can be decomposed into two
effects: deterioration or degradation of the level of capital services pro—

   'Hall (1988 1989) has studied the invariance properties of the Solow productivity
residual. One implication of our findings is that such invariance does not hold in the
tanker market.

                                          4
vided by assets in use, and withdrawal of assets from use. These effects
are commonly summarized by a depreciation schedule which describes the
evolution of the level of services provided by an asset over its lifetime.
This depreciation schedule is almost invariably assumed to be exoge-
nously determined by engineering considerations, and to be unchanging
over time. Similarly, an unchanging distribution of retirement ages is
usually assumed. The retirement distribution truncates the depreciation
schedule.
   In contrast to common practice, there are good reasons for suppos-
ing that depreciation schedules are endogenously determined by market
conditions and the optimizing behavior of asset owners. One potentially
important issue is that increased utilization may cause machinery to wear
out faster, making depreciation a function of output rather than of time.
Another is that asset owners have the option to vary the intensity and
frequency of maintenance activities. In this study the focus is on retire-
ments, and as argued by Feldstein and Rothschild (1974), the contention
is that it may be unrealistic to assume that retirements are determined
exogenously when asset owners have the option of scrapping or otherwise
disposing of assets in response to changes in relative prices, shocks to
demand or other market conditions.
   Most of the evidence gathered on depreciation has addressed the con-
troversial issue of the shape of depreciation schedules. Various patterns
of depreciation have been proposed, ranging from "geometric", in which
productive capacity decays at a constant rate 6, to "one-hoss shay" in
which an asset continues to provide the same level of services until it falls
apart. Studies of vintage asset prices such as ilulten and Wykoff (1981)
typically show convex age-price profiles, which seem to be remarkably
stable over time. Hulten, Robertson, and Wykoff (1989) found that even


                                     5
such a large shock as the energy price increase of 1973 appeared not
to have caused age-price profiles to steepen significantly. This evidence
has been interpreted by Jorgenson (1989) and others, as supporting the
popular hypothesis of constant geometric depreciation rates.2
    There have been very few published studies of capital retirement.
Longitudinal data on individual pieces of capital are rarely collected, and
very little is known about distributions of service lives for productive
assets, let alone about the stability of these distributions over time. Cur-
rent practice in statistical agencies, and in much academic research, relies
largely upon two venerable studies, the Winfrey (1935) distributions on
retirements and the US Treasury's Bulletin F (1942) on asset lives.3 The
weakness of these data and the assumption that retirements are indepen-
dent of market conditions have been identified by Hulten (1990) as one
of the most serious problems in capital measurement.
    In this study scrapping decisions are modeled as being determined by
optimizing decisions taken in reaction to the primitives of the problem,
such as factor prices and demand for the final product. II the economic
variables have insignificant coefficients then one can reject their impor-
tance. If the economic variables turn out to be significant, and have the
expected signs, then we take this as evidence in support of the idea that
retirements are driven by market conditions as well as engineering con-
siderations. This would imply that at least some aspects of the overall
depreciation of the capital stock are endogenous.
   The size of the effect of accelerated or decelerated retirements on the
overall depreciation rate of the capital stock of a given industry or econ-

   2Note however that in a somewhat different context Pakes and Griliches (1984)
find evidence of a concave depreciation schedule that is time-dependent. Ohta and
Griliches (1986) also show that the inferences to be drawn concerning the effect of
energy price increases may be sensitive to the approach taken to testing.
  3Some additional data was collected by the Department of Commerce in the 1 970s.

                                        6
omy, depends upon factors such as the size of total retirements relative
to the outstanding stock. For some industries the effect may be small
enough to safely ignore in empirical work. In others, such as oil tankers,
we believe the standard assumption of a constant exogenous depreciation
schedule is untenable. Only further study of capital retirements can show
how many industries fall into each category.


3 The Model
In order to have a basis for parametric estimation one needs some sort of
model of the phenomenon being studied. The model specifies functional
forms and imposes certain restrictions. In the present case there are two
aspects to our model that need emphasis. First, we currently lack suitable
data to construct a dynamic general equilibrium model of the shipping
market.4 Our analysis is partial equilibrium in that we take a number
of market prices to be exogenous. Second, we assume that the market is
perfectly competitive.
   The importance of perfect competition for our analysis comes from
standard theory. In perfectly competitive markets there is often an equiv-
alence between the "benevolent social planner's decisions" and the market
equilibrium, see Stokey and Lucas (1989, chapter 15) for a more precise
statement. If this applies then the market solves a single dynamic op-
timization problem. In this case we think of each ship as an individual
realization from the same process. One can talk of either the ship owner's
decision, or equivalently, the social planner's decision. This allows us to

   Such a model would include the determinants of ship building, ship lay up, and
ship scrapping. Ideally it might also include a multidimensional set of choices for the
use of the ship in each period, For example it might include crewing, maintenance,
and routing decisions.


                                          7
treat different ships as if they are simply realizations from the same un-
derlying process.
    The market for used assets is assumed to be perfectly efficient and
there are no asymmetries of information amongst the market participants.
With second hand ships traded in a perfectly efficient market, the market
price of the ship is just the discounted present value of the future net cash
flows that the ship is expected to generate if it is used optimally in all
future periods.
    At time t = 0 there are j = 1, ..., J ships afloat. Each period from t =
o onwards, the owner of the ship is obliged to make a decision concerning
the disposition of the ship. There are three feasible choices. The ship
can be sold for scrap (1 = 0). It can be sold for further trading (i = 1).
Or, the owner can "sell" the ship to himself for further trading (i = 2).
The owner will sell the ship for scrap if that is more valuable than the
returns from the alternatives.
    Given our conditions on the efficiency of the second hand market,
the ship owner who is not scrapping his ship will be exactly indifferent
between selling the tanker for further trading, or "selling" the ship to
himself for further trading, and so we subsume (i = 2) into (i = 1). This
important simplification allows us to evaluate the expected value of the
program for ships that are not scrapped, by examining the market prices
of ships sold for further trading. A decision to scrap a tanker is obviously
not reversible. Our set up of the problem implies that the decision to
"sell" a ship, whether on the market or to oneself, is also taken to be a
terminating action.
    As in much asset pricing theory, one might ask: why should we ever

   5We do not have data concerning when particular ships were in lay up. We expect
that this must effect less efficient and older ships more than newer energy efficient
ships. When we refer to a ship as being operated this implicitly includes lay up.

                                         S
observe asset sales if the market is truly efficient? In the financial as-
set pricing literature a common answer is to assert that a liquidity need
strikes the existing owner of the asset. For example this might be some
unrelated business opportunity requiring cash to exploit. The important
feature, however one chooses to phrase this assumption, is that the deci-
sion to sell the asset should not in itself be informative as to the state of
the asset. From discussions with people who have institutional knowledge
of this market, we believe that this is not a bad approximation for the
example of oil tankers.
   The set of state variables, Xj, that faces a ship owner in any period
is fairly simple: the ship exists (or not), the ship is of a particular age,
the ship has a set of physical characteristics, the current energy price, the
current price of a used ship sold for scrap, the price of a used ship sold for
further trading. We also assume that there are state variables seen by the
market participants that cannot be observed by the econometrician. This
assumption generates an error term in the manner that is conventional in
discrete choice analysis, see McFadden (1981). In the empirical work we
examine different specifications of the set of state variables, For example,
in some runs we deleted the energy price.
   The dynamics of the problem are particularly simple. A ship is as-
sumed to exist. If a ship does not exist then obviously there is no decision
and no reward. Each period the ship ages by exactly one period. The
length of a time period is a quarter of a year in the empirical work. The
physical characteristics of the ship, the market price of energy, the prices
of ships sold for further trading, and the prices of ships sold for scrap,
are assumed to be exogenous.
   The one period return at time /, to the owner of ship j, from choice i, is

Uj which is unobserved by the econometrician, but assumed to be made

                                      9
up of a deterministic component which is a function of some (potentially
choice-specific) observed exogenous variables plus an error term

                      U(Xj, fit) = R(X,fi') +                           (1)

   The ship owner's problem is to formulate a decision rule for choosing
over alternatives i in each period, in a way that maximizes the discounted
present value of utility over an infinite horizon. The familiar recursive
formulation of this problem is given by Bellman's equation

        V(Xt, e) = Max1{f41(X/31) + e + bEV(X1, jt i)}                  (2)

   This functional equation defines the ship owner's value function (max-
imum expected discounted utility obtainable in period t) in terms of
the discount rate 8, a vector of parameters /3 = (/30, /31), state variables
    = (X), XJ), error terms = (? e}1), and EV, the expected value
of the rest of the program conditional on the state variables and choice
i. Jn general both the exogenous variables and the functional form of R
can be expected to differ across actions.
   To obtain a statistical model we follow the literature on logit and
dynamic discrete choice. Rust (1988) showed that certain assumptions
allow for dynamic versions of logit analysis. In particular, 4 follows a
multivariate extreme value distribution. This assumption is a conven-
tional distributional assumption used in static logit models, see McFad-
den (1981).
   Given these assumptions, the probability of choosing i is given by

               P(iIX,/3) =                                              (3)
                             eR°+E'0tpo) + eR'+t'U'tpl)
   For the ship owner's problem, this expression simplifies considerably.
Suppose he chooses to scrap (i = 0) the ship in period t. Then an

                                    10
immediate lump sum is received in period t and zero is received in all
future periods. The probability of scrapping is thus

                  P(OIX1fl) =                                          (4)
                                6R,+6E              + e4
   We now have a version of the model derived by Rust (1988). The
issue is then how to solve the model. Rust invokes an assumption of
conditional independence, and notes that the expected value of the rest
of the program satisfies a particular contraction mapping. He then com-
bines this contraction mapping with a maximum likelihood algorithm to
estimate the parameters of the model. The result is an interesting but
non-trivial problem in numerical methods. We do not follow this aspect
of Rust's approach.
   Instead we exploit the assumption that the second hand market is
efficient. in an efficient market, the value function conditional on choice
i = 1 will just be the market price of the tanker, Pj = R)-(-6EV(X, 1).
If the ship is operated this period, the expected return to the owner is
this period's charter rate, plus the expected discounted value of the rest
of the program conditional upon deciding to operate this period. We
assume that competitive bidding by informed participants in the market
makes the price of the ship equal to this amount. Now P(OIX, /3) =
          + e') and substituting for R7 from above we get

                                         eK,91 P°
                         P(OX1,/3) =                                   (5)

which is just a simple discrete choice logit model, using P and X as
explanatory variables.
   How do we implement equation 5? In particular, from where do we
get Pj, the current market price of the ship? We use a two-stage method
somewhat analogous to that used to handle endogenous explanatory van-

                                    11
ables in discrete choice models. Using a different data set which is a sam-
ple of transactions in which ships were sold for further trading (in which
almost none of the subsequently scrapped ships appear) we estimate an
auxiliary hedonic price equation by regressing price per dwt on to the
observed characteristics of ships sold for further trading and variables
capturing market conditions. We then use the estimated parameters of
this equation together with data the characteristics of the ships in our
scrapping data set to impute the market price the subsequently scrapped
ship could have been sold for in the second hand market in each period.
    That is to say, using our data set on transactions for further trading
Pkand Xkt, we estimate H = g(Xkt, y, vkt) where y is a vector of param-
eters and Ukt    is   an i.i.d. normal error. Given the estimated parameters
'5', we   take the characteristics of the ships in our data set on scrapping
transactions, XJ, substitute them into the equation we estimated, and
obtain Pj =
    To complete our model for ship scrapping we need to specify the spe-
cific functional forms of R°(X, /3) and the auxiliary price equation which
is equivalent to B'. We postulate that these are simple semi-log functions
of AGE (number of periods since the ship was built), DWT ("deadweight
tons", a measure of the size of the ship), DWT2, and STEAM (a dummy
variable taking a value of 1 if the engine is a steam engine, and taking a
value of 0 if it is a diesel type engine). There are a number of variables

   6Our procedure means, of course, that Pj is estimated rather than observed. This
introduces a further random effect into the equation. Since this random effect is
orthogonal to the other explanatory variables by construction, and to keep the analysis
as simple as possible we choose not to make a further distributional assumption and
then integrate it out. Rather, we simply subsume this additional source of error
into    discussed above, and interpret the logit coefficients as known up to a scale
factor which is the average standard deviation of the heteroscedas tic error terms, ffj
rather than the normal ö. This means that the estimated coefficients are slightly
downward-biased compared to their "true" values, see Yatchew and Griliches (1985),
Ruud (1982).


                                         12
that affect all tankers in much the same way, for example energy prices,
interest rates, current demand conditions, etc. These effects are con-
trolled for by using quarterly time dummy variables, and we also report
some regressions which employ energy prices directly.


4 The Data Set
4.1 Sources
The world shipping market is unusuafly closely monitored. There are
several very useful sources of detailed information about most of the
ships in the world. We have drawn heavily on four main primary sources:
Drewry's Shipping Statistics and Economics, ISL Shipping Statistics, Lloyd's
List, and Lloyd's Register. The first two of these publications are monthly
commercial publications that have existed for many years, and are our
primary source of data on transactions prices for ship sales. Ships are
identified in these publications by name, and where data on important
variables was not reported, or appeared to be in error, the ship was looked
up in Lloyd's Register. Though names change with ownership, Lloyd's
assigns each a unique ID number, and in some cases we were able to track
the same ship through as many as seven transactions before it was finally
scrapped. Unfortunately, as is the case with national statistical agencies,
every few years these publications alter their methods of data presenta-
tion somewhat. This makes is harder to construct the long-term panel of
data that would be desired and as a result we have focused largely on data
for the years 1979—1989. Ships below about 10,000 DWT in size are not
included in these sources, since they are not deemed to be "significant".




                                    13
4.2 Descriptive Statistics
Descriptive statistics for the variables of interest in the current study are
presented in Tables I and II. Table I summarizes transactions in which
ships were sold for scrap. We have a total of 853 complete observations on
sales for scrap for the period 1979—1989. (An additional 96 transactions
for which prices were not reported are included in the logit scrapping
model below.) The annual count of scrapping transactions ranges as high
as 168 ships in 1985, and as low as 14 ships in 1989. During the years 1982
through 1985 there were a rather large number of ships scrapped. The
ships being scrapped in those years also tended to be fairly large relative
to the other years that we observe. The average age of a scrapped ship
was just over 18 year for the period as a whole. The age distribution of
ships sold for scrap does not appear to be symmetric about the mean.
Ships of less than 6 years are not often scrapped. Most of the ships that
we observed being sold for scrap are between 6 years and 26 years of age.
The price per ldt of a ship sold for scrap seems to be independent of the
age of the ship. It also seems to be independent of whether the ship is
steam or diesel powered.
   Table ii presents summary statistics for the 1786 transactions we ob-
served in which ships were sold for further trading. In this case the annual
count ranges from a low of 75 in 1983 to a high of 271 in 1989. The av-
erage age of a ship sold for further trading remained roughly constant
through our time period at about 11.4 years.
   The average age of scrapped ships rose noticeably from 1985 to 1989.
Since 1985 the price per tonne of ship sold for scrap has also been rising.
As is the case for ships sold for scrap, the price per tonne of a ship sold
for further trading rose substantially from 1985 to 1989.
   In the early 1980s a high proportion (over 75% in some years) of the

                                     14
scrap sales reported in our sources were steam vessels. This proportion fell
over the course of the 1980s. In the second-hand market, on average 24%
of the vessels sold for further trading between 1979 and 1989 were steam
powered tankers. Again, this proportion fell over the sample period.
This reflects the fact that, as discussed above and in greater detail in the
appendix, the steam vessels were less energy efficient. Accordingly they
were tending to be phased out. By the end of the sample period, there
were simply fewer of them left.


5 Empirical Results
We begin with estimation of the parameters of the auxiliary price equa-
tion discussed above. Table III presents results from estimating conven-
tional hedonic price equations for oil tankers using data on 1786 transac-
tions in the market for further trading between 1979 and 1989. In these
regressions the dependent variable is calculated from the price reported
by Drewry 's for transactions in which tankers were "sold for further trad-
ing." The log of price per dwt is regressed using OLS on variables which
capture some important characteristics of each tanker: age, engine type,
and size. The use of a semi-log functional form is somewhat arbitrary. It
does fit the data well, and is widely used in other studies. A quadratic
term in size (DWT) is included to capture potential nonlinearities in the
relation between size and price per dwt. (The quadratic term in size has
the benefit of allowing a degree of flexibility in approximating the "true"
underlying functional form. Higher order terms in size were statistically
insignificant, and are not reported here.) Following the example of Hiii-
ten and Wykoff (1981) we also experimented with ML estimation of a
Box-Cox model, in which estimation of additional parameters allows the
age-price profile to be convex, linear, or concave. The results obtained

                                     15
did not reject the convexity imposed by the semi-log functional form.
    Equation la in Table ill fits the data reasonably well. The it2 of 0.61
is fairly high for a micro-level data set covering a 10-year period. All the
estimated coefficients are significant, and have the expected signs. Even
such a simple model seems able to account for much of the variation in
transaction prices in our sample quite well. The coefficient on AGE has
a very simple interpretation. Controlling for ship size and engine type,
the coefficient on AGE gives a geometric depreciation rate of 2.4% per
quarter. The relationship between size and price per dwt is significantly
nonlinear. The coefficients imply a U-shaped relationship, downward
sloping over most of the range of ship sizes in the sample, with price
per dwt reaching a minimum at about 300,000 dwt. This may reflect
economies of scale in construction of tankers, as well as the fact that larger
tankers were less cost-efficient on some major routes (Gulf to Rotterdam)
during the period when the Suez canal was open. Consistent with our
earlier discussion we find that there is a lower price for a steam powered
tanker.
    Equation lb differs from la by the inclusion of quarterly dummy
variables.7 These dummies control for unmeasured variation in conditions
that affect the tanker market as a whole rather than just an individual
ship. These may include changes in the demand for tanker services (as
reflected by spot charter rates), changes in various input costs, changes in
the size of the fleet due to deliveries of new builds, changes to the world's
order book for new ships, and political instability in various parts of the
world. While some of these factors are observable, others are not, in par-
ticular expectations of future demand and supply conditions. In principle

    71n principle there is enough data to use monthly dummies. We do not do this since
it seems to offer little in terms of interpretation (we are not studying political-economy
aspects). It also does not add much explanatory power in a statistical sense.

                                           16
we could collect data on some of the observable variables and include them
in the regression. However, it is unclear how to interpret the coefficients
in this reduced form context, and there are also problems with the extent
to which the observable effects may be confounded with unobservables.
Since our concern here is primarily to improve the fit of a reduced form
equation, rather than in structural determinants of the price of ships sold
for further trading, we prefer simply to use time dummies. These are an
economical way to control for both observable and unobservable aggre-
gate effects. Introduction of these 44 quarterly dummies improves the
explanatory power of the regression substantially.8 Note that both the
Ft2 and the adjusted It2 rise by roughly the same degree. The estimated
coefficients on the age and size variables are essentially unchanged. When
we tried running only the dummy variables as explanatory variable, an
K2 of only 0.32 was obtained. Accordingly it seems that while market
conditions are important, the characteristics of the individual tankers are
also a very significant determinant of their market price.
   In Equations la and lb we found that the engine type mattered to the
ship price. It is natural to wonder whether there are significant interac-
tion effects between engine type and other characteristics of the ship, and
in Equations 2a, 2b, and 2c the dummy variable for steam powered engine
is interacted with the other variables, effectively allowing us to estimate
a separate price equation for steam-powered tankers. These interaction
effects are highly significant. Steam-powered tankers have markedly dif-
ferent age-price and size-price profiles than do diesel powered ships. In
Equation 2a the estimated depreciation rate for steam-powered ships is
close to zero, and there is little effect of size upon the price per dwt.
Controlling for unobserved market-wide effects with the time dummies

   8Estiniated coefficients on the time dummies are not repofted here. They can be
interpreted as the hedonic price index for oil tankers over this period.

                                       17
alters the coefficients somewhat. In Equation 2b the depreciation rate
for steam-powered tankers is estimated as 1% per quarter, and a small
effect of size upon price per dwt can be seen. In Equation 2c the STEAM
dummy is interacted with the time dummies to allow further flexibility,
but this has essentially no effect upon the estimated coefficients.
   In Table IV we substitute a direct measure of energy cost (the quar-
terly mean price of marine bunker fuel) for the quarterly dummy vari-
ables. Equations lb and 2b are repeated from Table III to allow easy
comparison. No significant change in the coefficients of interest were ob-
tained. The estimated coefficient on the energy price is negative and
significant, as might be expected. Higher energy prices both increase op-
erating costs and decrease the demand for tanker services, making ships
less valuable.9
   Table V presents results from estimating similar price equations for
tankers sold for scrap. The quality of the data on the prices paid in these
transactions is rather poor. The original sources often report nothing
more than "VLCC Tankermeisier von Vancouver, 225,000 ldt sold to
Taiwanese breakers, for an estimated price of $l4m". Furthermore there
is little reason to believe that the characteristics of individual tankers
have much effect upon their scrap value per tonne of steel. Larger tankers
may be marginally easier to cut apart, and the scrap value of different
power plants is quite different, but these are second order effects on scrap
value per ldt. This is reflected in the regression results. Equations 3a
and 4a have R2's of almost zero, while the time dummies introduced in
Equations 3b, 4b, and 4e account for 60% or more of the variation in
prices per ldt. Scrap prices seem to be determined almost entirely by

   9Since the energy cost variable is measured quarterly, i.e. at the same frequency
as the time dummies and is the same for all ships one cannot include both sets of
variables in the equation at the same time.

                                        18
market-wide effects such as demand for scrap steel and the aggregate
tonnage of ships sold for scrap.
    Table VI presents our main results, in which the scrapping of ships
is modeled according to the structural model laid out in the previous
section, The data set used here is constructed by taking the scrapping
decisions observed in the primary sources between 1979 and 1989, and
"counting backwards" to 1979 to generate a partial "history" for each
ship.'° There are 949 ships, observed on average for 20.67 quarters giving
a total of 19,946 observations. Some of the characteristics of each ship
remain constant over time, such as size and engine type. These are simply
duplicated each period for each ship. Two variables do vary over time.
The first is the age of each ship, which by definition increases by one
quarter every quarter. The other is the estimated price the ship would
sell for on the second hand market in each quarter, which we calculate by
substituting its characteristics into the reduced form price equations. The
estimated price variable imputed from Equation lb is labelled P-IIAT1 in
the tables and the estimated price imputed from Equation 2b is labelled
P-HAT2.1' Equation 5a presents estimates of a simple logit estimation of
scrapping, without the imputed price variable. The dependent variable
is zero for each observation on a given ship, until the quarter in which we
observe scrapping when it is set equal to one. The exogenous variables
are defined as above. The estimated coefficients have the expected signs:
older ships and steam-powered ships are more likely to be scrapped, and

   '°Note that this creates a potential selection bias. By construction towards the end
of the sample the bias will be towards younger than average scrapping. For our data
this does not appear to be a major problem: Table I shows that the average age of
scrapped ships actually rose towards the end of our sample period.
   11    thus have a discrete approximation to a hazard model with time varying
covariates. Not surprisingly, given the high frequency of the data, the approximation
is quite good. Results from estimating a Cox Proportional Hazards model using the
same data and specifications are essentially identical to those from the logit model
(but are obtained at a much higher computational cost) and are not presented here.

                                         19
the relationship between size and the probability of scrapping follows an
inverted-U, increasing up to about 300,000 dwt and then falling.
   Introducing the imputed price as an explanatory variable has a dra-
matic effect. (Equations 5b, 5c, and 5d.) The coefficients on AGE,
STEAM, and the size variables fall by a factor of about 4 and lose much
of their significance. The P-IIAT variables, which measure the opportu-
nity cost of scrapping the ship have a strongly significant negative effect.
The more valuable the ship is in use, the less likely it is to be scrapped.
A very substantial improvement in the fit of the model is observed. The
P-HAT variables incorporate the impact of changes in energy prices and
other macroeconomic effects which affect the value of the ship in use. As
energy prices increase, a ship becomes less valuable (as in Equation ic or
2d) and, other things equal, its market value falls and it is more likely to
be scrapped.


6 Conclusions
There are several conclusions to be drawn. First and foremost, it seems
clear that retirements of ships do depend on market conditions. Accord-
ingly, an assumption of a constant exogenous rate of economic depre-
ciation is not supported by the data. The depreciation as reflected in
the market price, depends on the use to which the ship is going to be
put. Ships that are being sold for further trading exhibit a roughly con-
vex price-age profile after adjusting for various economic factors. This is
not true of ships being sold for scrap. Ships being sold for scrap sell at
roughly the same price independent of the age of the vessel.
   There has been some debate over the impact of energy price changes
on capital. For tankers the changes in energy prices made a major dif-
ference. This shows up in several ways. As discussed particularly in
                                    20
the appendix1 there is institutional evidence of considerable technological
change induced by the increased relative price of energy in the 1970s.
The effect of energy price changes is also apparent in the large differences
observed in the prices of steam tankers and diesel tankers. Steam tankers
are less energy efficient than are diesel tankers. The steam tankers traded
at prices that behave similarly to the prices of ships that are being sold
for scrap. Steam tankers were also more likely to be scrapped. Over the
sample period that we examined, the steam tankers make up a decreasing
proportion of the population. Unlike steam tankers, diesel tankers show
a more conventional depreciation pattern.
   Estimation of dynamic programming models has commonly been comp-
utationally difficult. In our context we were able to avoid the computa-
tional burden by using the information that is implicit in the second-hand
market. Unlike many previously studies, for our problem there is an ac-
tive second-hand market. By exploiting the information contained in
these prices we were able to reduce the computational burden. This ap-
proach may be useful for others studying assets for which second-hand
market prices are available.
   Relatively simple specifications are able to account for a good deal of
the price variation in tankers. The decision to scrap a tanker depends
crucially on the price that the same tanker could fetch in use. This is re-
flected in the importance of the imputed price in explaining the scrapping
decision. While the empirical evidence of the importance of opportunity
costs should not surprise economists, it does pose a problem for the man-
ner that capital depreciation is often modeled. At least for this type of
capital good, retirements are not driven simply by engineering considera-
Lions. Accordingly one should not expect an invariance of these decisions
when economic conditions change.


                                    21
   There are several directions for further work that we hope to pursue.
We would very much like to obtain evidence on two matters, new ship
delivery and lay up of existing ships. Until data on new ships is obtained
we cannot produce a general equilibrium model of the market. Data
on lay up decisions could enrich our understanding particularly of the
imputed options12 in ship prices.




 '2For example see Pindyck (1991).

                                     22
Appendix: Some Institutional Background
Information
The Tanker Industry
Ships are a vital part of the world economy, annually moving large vol-
umes of many economic products all round the globe. They range widely
in size and design. In this paper we consider only oil tankers. In January
1991 the world's merchant fleet totaled 642,650,600 gross tonnes (this
includes only ships of size at least 300 gt). The tonnage of oil tankers
consisted of 256,067,100 gt. In other words roughly 40% of the world's
merchant fleet consisted of oil tankers.
   The importance of oil is familiar. The associated importance of oil
tankers is due to the equally familiar point that much oil is produced in
different locations than it is used for production.13 Ships are used as the
major source of transportation (along with pipelines) to move oil from
where is found to where it is needed.
   Several features of this market are noteworthy. Ships are large, durable
pieces of capital. Once built, they last for many years. The gap between
the date on which a new ship is ordered and the date on which it is
delivered can easily be 2 years. At any moment some ships are in lay
up. These ships can be brought into service more rapidly than can new
builds. The volume of tonnage in lay up varies. For example in November
1990 there were 2,353,600 gt of oil tankers laid up. That is to say, just
under 1% of the world's merchant fleet of oil tankers were laid up. Often
the percentage in lay up is higher still.

  13The 1990 world oil production in millions of tonnes: North America 500.7,
Caribbean 288.1, Other Latin America 79.6, Western Europe 198.8, Eastern Europe
and USSR 585.3, Africa 317.5, Middle East 825.3, Far East 313.2, other and errors
41,9, WorM total 3150.4. Source: ISL Shipping Statistics, Jan/Feb 1991.

                                       23
   There are not only many ships in the world, there are also large num-
bets of ship owners. An assumption that this is a highly competitive
market is likely to be a better approximation than many other markets
economists have studied closely. Similarly there are many different com-
panies and countries that build ships. There is some heterogeneity in the
quality of these new builds. This heterogeneity is well known and the
ships are priced accordingly.
    Demand for shipping services is subject both to long term trends, as
well as day to day fluctuations. From about 1970 to 1983 there was a
major surge in the volume of crude oil transported by ship. Since 1983
the volume seems to have returned to the underlying trend that had been
prevailing since the early 1960s. Long term market trends can be adjusted
to by building new ships and scrapping old ships.
   Responding to the shorter term fluctuations in demand for shipping
services are quite a different matter. On a month to month basis the
supply of ships is almost fixed, so even small fluctuations in demand can,
and do, produce huge freight rate price reactions. Many commentators on
the industry have pointed to the limited ability to forecast future freight
rates as a real problem for the industry.
   The international nature of this industry mean that tax considera-
tions are less prominent here than in many industries. This is because
countries have competed to get ships registered in their country. These
so called flags of convenience offer several advantages. The advantages
for the shipping firms include low taxes, avoidance of safety standards,
and generally little governmental pressure. The ability to use lower cost
labor is of particular importance as it can reduce to cost of crewing by as
much as 45% (Branch (1988), page 18). The main flags of convenience
have been Liberia and Panama, as well as Cyprus, Singapore, and Oman.


                                    24
Tankers and Energy
Once a ship has been built, it requires management to find it employment,
a crew to run it, energy to power it, and periodic maintenance. Ships do
not last forever. Eventually they either sink, or get scrapped. Between
1970 and 1985 energy went from being a relatively small concern, to being
a first order issue, due to the energy price increases. Bunker fuel rose from
$20 a tonne to $180 a tonne where it stayed for several years. At that
level oil accounted for as much as 50% of the operating budget for most
vessels. Even at $80 a tonne, oil costs typically equaled manning costs.
As a result many adjustments were made in order to economize on the
use of fuel.
   The single most important adjustment concerns the speed at which
existing ships run. The horsepower of the main engine on a ship sets
an upper limit on how fast a ship can travel, however ships can be run
slower - "slow steaming". Over plausible ranges of speeds, a 10% increase
in speed normally requires a 30% increase in fuel consumption. ilence
slow steaming can economize on fuel to a considerable degree. Whether
it is economical to do so depends upon both the price of energy and the
demand for tanker services. Slow steaming delays the receipt of a tanker's
next cargo.
   There were two types of engines in common use during the period
under consideration, steam turbines and diesels. Steam turbines are more
expensive, but have lower maintenance costs. Steam turbines had about
a 30% thermal efficiency while the older diesels had a thermal efficiency
of about 40%. By the end of the period under consideration the thermal
efficiency of diesels had risen to about 53%. Since diesels consume less
energy, they can travel further without refueling. Since steam turbines
were less energy efficient it is not surprising that they gradually dropped

                                    25
from use. It should be noted that diesels are easy to siow steam, while
steam turbines require major adjustments to do so. There were also some
ships that had the main engine converted from steam to diesel power.
This conversion is expensive.
   There are a number of measures used in various ships in order to save
energy. Electricity is generated by a separate diesel generator. By using
power from the main engine to generate power while at sea, one can save
on maintenance of the auxiliary engine. This also allows one to make
use of the lower grade (and cheaper) fuel used by the main engine. The
main drawback to this sort of power take-off is the capital cost involved
in making the switch.
   On older ships with less thermally efficient engines it has proved prac-
tical to convert the heat from the diesel exhaust into steam. In some cases
enough electricity was thereby produced that it supplied all the sea going
electricity needs of the ship.
   Ship fuel derives from crude oil. The main engine uses mostly heavy
residual fuel. The generators use distillates or blended fuel. Lubricants
are also important to keep things running smoothly. Unlike oil products
used in cars and airplanes, ships use low grade oil often containing im-
purities. In order to use even lower grade fuels some ships have added
heaters in order to be able to blend the high viscosity fuel together with
the distillate. Again in this case the economic trade-off is that more cap-
ital and maintenance is required to effect this shift. Relative prices will
determine whether this makes sense for any particular ship.
   The main component of a ship is steel. The hull is painted in order to
reduce fouling by green slime, weeds and barnacles. Many paints are now
designed to gradually release poison to reduce the fouling. Painting is
also important to reduce corrosion and frictional resistance to the water.


                                    26
The use of relatively expensive self-polishing paints, such as those that
use tributylin copolymer as a binder, helps to reduce energy demands,
and has become more common recently.
   Three additional sources of energy savings are also worth mentioning.
There were significant improvements in propeller design. Ship board
energy audits have saved literally thousands of dollars a year in some cases
through reduced use of radar, lights and ventilation fans for example.
Finally the amount of ballast used can be reduced. This saves energy,
but increases risk if seas are heavy. The net effect of all these changes
has been that a VLCC from the mid 1970s would typically travel about
5.4 miles per tonne of fuel. Ten years later a modern VLCC would travel
about 7.7 miles per tonne. Not only has there been efforts to economize
on energy. The typical crew size has also been changing. It has been
shrinking. Over a ten or fifteen year period a typical crew has shrunk
from 40 to 30 members.




                                    27
References
Berndt, E. R. (1991) The Practice of Econometrics: Classic and Con-
         temporary. Addison-Wesley Publishing, Reading Mass..

Branch, A. E. (1988) Economics of Shipping Practice and Management,
         Second Edition. Chapman and Hall, London.

Drewry's Shipping Statistics and Economics, various, Drewry Shipping
         Consultants, London.

Eckstein, Z. and K. I. Wolpin (1989) "The Specification and Estima-
         tion of Dynamic Stochastic Discrete Choice Models: A Survey",
          Journal of Human Resources, 23, 4, 562—598.

Feldstein, M. S. and M. Rothschild (1974) "Towards an Economic Theory
          of Replacement Investment", Econometrica, 42, 3, 393—423.

Hall, R. E. (1988) "The Relationship between Price and Marginal Cost in
          U.S. Industry", Journal of Political Economy, 96, 5, 921—947.

Hall, It. E. (1989) "Invariance Properties of Solow's Productivity Resid-
           ual", NBER Working Paper #3034.

Hughes, C. N. (1987) Ship Performance: Some Technical and Commer-
        cial Aspects. Lloyd's of London Press Ltd., Colchester, Great
        Britain.

Hulten, C. It. (1990) "The Measurement of Capital", in Berndt, E. R.
         and J. Triplett, (eds.) Fifty Years of Economic Measurement,
         Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Hulten, C. R., J. W. Robertson, and F. C. Wykoff (1989) "Energy, Obso-
         lescence, and the Productivity Slowdown", in D. W. Jorgenson
         and It. Landau (eds.), Technology and Capital Formation, MIT
         Press, Cambridge Mass.

Hulten, C, R. and F. C. Wykoff (1981) "The Estimation of Economic
         Depreciation Using Vintage Asset Prices: An Application of
         the Box-Cox Power Transformation", Journal of Econometrics,
         15, 3, 367—396.

                                   28
ISL Shipping Statistics, various, Institute of Shipping Economics and
         Logistics, Bremen.

Jorgenson, D. W. (1989) "Capital as a Factor of Production", in D.
        W. Jorgenson and R. Landau, (eds.) Technology and Capital
         Formation, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.

Lloyd's List, various, Westmead, Hants,

Lloyd's Register of Shipping, various, Wyman and Sons, London.

McFadden, D. (1981) "Econometric Models of Probabilistic Choice",
       in C. Manski and D. McFadden, (eds.), Structural Analysis of
       Discrete Data, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.

Ohta, M. and Z. Griliches (1986) "Automobile Prices and Quality: Did
         the Gasoline Price Increases Change Consumer Tastes in the
         US?", Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 40, 2, 187—
         198.

Pakes, A. (1991) "Dynamic Structural Models: Problems and Prospects.
         Mixed Continuous Discrete Controls and Market interactions",
         Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No. 984.

Pakes, A. and Z. Griliches (1984) "Estimating Distributed Lags in Short
         Panels with an Application to the Specification of Depreciation
         Patterns and Capital Stock ConsLructs", Review of Economic
         Studies, 51, 243—262.

Pindyck, R. 5. (1991) "Irreversibility Uncertainty, and Investment",
         Journal of Economic Literature, 29, 3, 1110—1148.

Rust, J. (1988) "Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Discrete Control
          Processes", SIAM Journal of Control and Optimization, 26, 5,
         1006—1024.


Rust, J. (1992) "Do People Behave According to Bellman's Principle
          of Optimality?", Hoover Institution, Working Papers in Eco-
         nomics E—92—10.



                                  29
Ruud, P. (1982) "Sufficient Conditions for the Consistency of Maximum
          Likelihood Estimation Despite Misspecification of Distribution
         in Multinomial Discrete Choice", Econometrica, 51, 225—228.

Stokey, N. L. and R. K Lucas, Jr. (1989) Recursive Methods in Eco-
         nomic Dynamics. Harvard University Press, Cambridge Mass.

Stopford, M. (1988) Maritime Economics. Allen & Unwin Inc., Winch-
         ester Mass.

United States Department of the Treasury, Bureau of Internal Revenue
         (1942) "Bulletin "F": Income Tax, Depreciation, and Obsoles-
         cence, Estimated Useful Lives and Depreciation Rates", Gov-
         ernment Printing Office, Washington, DC.

Yatchew, A. and Z. Griliches (1985) "Specification Error in Probit Mod-
        els", Review of Economics and Statistics, 66, 134—139.

Winfrey, R. (1935) "Statistical Analyses of Industrial Property Re-
         tirements", Iowa Engineering Experiment Station, Bulletin no.
         125.




                                    30
                                                               Table 1


                                    SUMMARY STATISTICS: SCRAP SALES 1979-1989
                             SIZE DWT (l000s)                              PRECE/LDT                     AGE
          #01                                                                                                                 pCI
YEAR              mean     mm       max    var        total     mean       mAn max        var     mean mm       max   var    steam

1919        25      95.6     19      219   5674.6      2390      149.6      79 195.5     1016.7   16.8      9    26 28.7      84%
1980        38     158.5     19      332   8683.6      6023      193.5      75 250.5     1083.5   14.5      9    30 37.2      82%
1981        58       138     17      254   6553.5      8005      140.2      97 194.2     780.3    15.2      9    30 23.6      79%
1982       113     144.3     19      290   7913.1     16308      105.6 44.2        132   304.6    15.7      8    30 23.5      77%
1983       104     125.9     16      555   11492      13094      101.7 17.7        140   485.2    17.5      4    40 47.8      60%
1984       167       113     13      363   9178.8     18879      113.5      35 139.5     648.1    193       9    42 52.7      58%
1985       168     153.5     12      554   16525      25795      111.1      41     148   521.2    18.3      4    42    61     59%
1986        89     128.8     14      484   12748      11465      114.8     66.5    140   300.7    19.4      5    44 57.1      54%
1981        47     113.9     12      290   8908.7      5351      151.3      44     245 1920.2     20.1   10      33 32,7      45%
1988        30      98.5        2    316   8350.4      2956      226.6      150    267   995.8    22.5   11      34 32.7      40%
 1989       14      61.2     12      255   4789.9        856     232.9      177    270   992.8    26.1   15      37   34.6    29%
ALL        853     130.3        2 555       11109    111123      125.5     17.7    270 1685.4     18.2      4    44    49     62%

AGE is the number of years since the ship was built.
SIZE is thousands of deadweight tonnes.
PR1CE/LDT is current US dollars per lightweight displacement tonne,
PCT STEAM is the fraction of sales in that year which were steam-powered tankers

Source: Sales and prices from Drewry's and Lloyd's List, various volumes
        AGE, DWT from Drewry's and Lloyd's Register, various volumes
                                                              Table U


                 SUMMARY STATISTICS: SECOND RAND MARKET TRANSACTIONS 1979-1989
                            SIZE DWT (l000s)                            PRICE/DWT                         AGE
         tot                                                                                                                 pct
YEAR     sates     mean    mm    max      vat-      total     mean      ruin     max     var     mean   ruin max     var    steam

1979       150     108.8    14   424 7437.7         16325      145.6       7.8 694.4    26767    10.1     1     26   40.3    39%
1980       130      104     14    380 6717.4        13515      161.8       26     664   24723    10.7    2      29   35.5    22%
1981       139     105.7    12   417 8480.5         14692      96.6         9     682    18271     13    3      25   26.8    27%
1982       111     120.4    12   491     11118      13370      78.7         10    615    11522   11.5     1     22   24.2    34%
1983        75     108.3    16    332 8606.2         8119      93.6          8    592    14283   11.3     2     23   25.4    27%
1984       159      118     12   491     12813      18760       106         24    730    19020   11.5    0      24   32.2    28%
1985       161     123.4    18   555     11401      19865      74.4         11    325   4092.2   10.7     1     43   24.7    21%
1986       199     134.2    14   433     13412      26697      91.8        13    410     6239    11.2    0      27   22.3    27%
1987       171    118.5     10    357 9266.4        20266      136.2       23     651   15240    11.9     1     27   21.7    24%
1988       220     103,1    10   565 7941.3         22683      177.5        19 659.7    15851    11.9    0      23     18    19%
1989       271      88.2    11   565 6353.1         23915     316.8        34    1300   53575    11.2    0      30   29.2    11%
ALL       1786      Ill     10   565    9453.8     198206      149,7       7.8   1300   27065    11.4    0      43   27.2    24%

AGE is the number of years since the ship was built,
SIZE is thousands of deadweight tonnes.
PRICE/DWT is current US dollars per deadweight tonne.
PCT STEAM is the fraction of sales in that year which were stea'npowered tankers

Source: Sales and prices from Drewry's and Lloyd's List, various volumes
        Age, dwt from Drewiy 's and Lloyd's Register, various volumes
                                                                         Table Ill

                                      OLS Regression Results: Price Equations for the Second Hand Market I


                               Equation La               Equation lb                 Equation 2a            Equation 2b               Equation 2c
                             Eat          SE           Est          SE           Est           SE          Eat         SE           Est          SE

    INTERCEPT                 6.61!       0.0494        6.203      0.0792        1.042        0.0564       6.620       0.0773        6.529      0.0958
    AGE                      -0.024       0.0007       -0.025      0.0005       -0.027        0.0008      -0.026       0.0005       -0.026      0.0005
    AGE • STEAM                                                                  0.029        0.0022       0.016       0.0015        0.012      0.0019
    DWT                      -0.120       0.0052       -0.123      0.0033        -0.194       0.0092       -0.189      0.0059       -0.188      0.0057
    DWT STEAM                                                                    0.195        0.0138       0.147       0.0090        0.136      0.0099
    DWT2                      0.002       0.0001        0.002      0.0001        0.005        0.0004       0.005       0.0003        0.005      0.0002

    DWI'2 STEAM                                                                  -0.005       0.0004       -0.004      0.0003       -0.004      0.0003
    STEAM                    -0.290       0.0535       -0.136      0.0351        -3.489       0.2112       -2.154      0.1448       -1.708      0.2084


    QUARTER                     NO                       YES                          NO                    YES                   DIESEL + STEAMt
    DUMMIES

     RMSE                     0.639                     0.404                     0.595                    0.373                     0.362
     R-squared                0.617                     0.851                     0.668                    0.873                     0.883

     Adj R-sq                 0.617                     0.847                     0,667                    0.869                     0.877

Notes: 1786 observations on sales of oil tankers for further trading, from Dre'rny's monthly reports January 1979 to December 1990.

        Dependent variable is natural logarithm of price per deadweight ton. AGE is age of the ship, in quarters, based on the year it was built, as listed in
        Lloyd's Register. DWT is size measured in 10,000 deadweight tons. STEAM is a dummy variable equal to one when the ship is steam powered, zero
        otherwise.

        tin equation 2c steam and diesel tankers each have their own set of time dummies.
                                                                         Table IV

                                       OLS Regression Results; Price Equations for the Second [land Market II


                                                 Equation lb               Equation Ic               Equation 2b               Equation 2d
                                               Est          SE           Est          SE           Est          SE           F.st        SE
             INTERCEPT                          6.203       0.0792        7.492      0.0610        6.620       0.0773         7.719      0.0657
             AGE                               -0.025       0.0005       -0.025      0.0007        -0.026      0.0005        -0.027      0.0007
             AGE * STEAM                                                                           0.016       0.0015         0.020      0.0025
             DWT                               -0.123       0.0033       -0.123      0.0046        -0.189      0.0059        -0.187      0.0085
             DWT S STEAM                                                                           0.147       0.0090         0.156      0.0140
             DWV                                0.002       0.0001       0.002       0.0001        0.005       0.0003        0.005       0.0004
             DWV * STEAM                                                                          -0.004       0.0003       -0.004       0.0004
             STEAM                             -0.136       0.0351      -0.128       0.0485        -2.154      0.1448        -2,619      0.3335
             BUNKER FUEL PRICE                                          -0.004       0.0002                                 -0.004       0.0002
             (BUNKER FUEL PRICE)                                                                                            0.0006       0.0005
             • STEAM

             QUARTER                                 'YES                      NO                        YES                        NO
             DUMMIES

             RMSE                               0.404                    0.572                     0.313                     0.549
             k-squared                          0.R5                     0.693                     0,873                     0.718
                                                0.847                    0.693
             Adj R-sq                                   —                                          0.869                     0.717

Notes: 1786 observations on sales of oil tankers for further trading, from Drewry's monthly repot-ta January 1979 to December 1990,

        Dependent variable is natural logarithm of price per deadweight ton. AGE is age of the ship, in quarters, based on the year it was built, as listed in
        Lloyd's Register. DWT is Size measured in 10,000 deadweight tons. STEAM is a dummy variable equal to one when the ship is steam powered, zero
        otherwise. BUNKER FUEL PRICE is the quarterly average price of Marine Diesel Oil at R.otterdam, In US$/Ionne.
                                                                            Table V

                                             OLS Regression Results: Price Equations for the Scrap Market


                                   Equation 3a              Equation 3b               Equation Ia            Equation 4b              Equation 4c
                                  Est         SE           Est         SE             Est         SE       Est          SE           Est            SE
     INTERCEP                      4.182     0.0790         5.050    0.0806           4.616      0.1174     4.971      0.1001          4.807    0.2091
     AGE                          -0.001     0.0007        -0.003    0.0005      0.00003         0.0009    -0.003      0.0006         -0.003    0.0006
     AGE * STEAM                                                                      -0.002     0.0014    0.0004      0.0009          0.000    0.0010
     DWT                           0.011     0.0044         0.003    0.0029           0.027      0.0112     0.021      0.0071          0.022    0.0072
     DWT * STEAM                                                                      -0.023     0.0125    -0.018      0.0080         -0.019    0.0082
     DWT2                        -0.0003     0.0001       -0.0001    0.0001           -0.001     0.0004    -0.001      0.0003         -0.001    0.0003
     DWT2 '1' STEAM                                                                   0.0004     0.0004     0.001      0.0003          0.001    0.0003
     STEAM                         0.011     0.0260         0.022    0.0172           0.307      0.1697     0.058      0.1123          0.235    0.2338



     QUARTER                            NO                   YES                            NO               YES                 DIESEL    + STEAMt
     DUMMIES
     RMSE                          0.315                    0.197                     0.315                 0.197                      0.195
     R-squared                     0.035                    0.641                     0.041                 0.646                      0.668
     Adj R-sq                      0.030                    0.620                     0.033                 0.624                      0.628

Notes: 853 sales for scrap reported in Drewry's and Lloyd's Lisi, various volumes 1979-1989.
        Dependent variable is natural logarithm of price per deadweight ton. AGE is age of the ship, in quarters, based on the year it was built, as listed in
        Lloyd's Register. DWT is size measured in 10,000 deadweight tons. STEAM is a dummy variable equal to one when the ship is steam powered, zero
        otherwise.

        tIn equation 4c steam and diesel tankers each have their own set of time dummies.
                                                                  Table VI

                                                      Logit Estimates of Scrapping


                                     Equation Sa             Equation Sb              Equation Sc              Equation Sd
                                    Eat          SE         Est          SE          Est         SE          Eat         SE

           INTERCEPT                -6.317       0.217      -2.729       0.392      -3.364       0.353       -1.680       0,539
           AGE                       0.029       0.002       0.008       0.003       0.013       0.002     -0.0006      0.0035
                                                                  "
           AGE * STEAM                                                                                       0.029        0.004
           DWT                       0.158       0.016       0.044       0.019       0.080       0.017       0.009        0.049
           DWT ' STEAM                                                                                       0.134        0.052
           0WF2                     -0.003      0.0004      -0.001      0.0004     -0.0017     0.0004      -0.0007        0,002
           DWF2 * STEAM                                                                                      -0.002       0.002
           STEAM                     0.170       0.080      -0.025       0.081      -0.037       0.081       -3,286       0.546
           P-HATS                                           -0.029       0.003
           P-HAT?                                                                   -0.029      0.003        -0.032       0.003


           Chi-sq goodness                   290.27 (4)               413,2 (5)              402.4 (5)                460.5 (8)
           of fit(dØ
           log-likelihood                      -3654.7                 -3593.2                -3598.6                   -3569.6
           function

Notes: 19614 observations, based on transactions reported in Drewiy's and Lloyd's List, various volumes, 1979-1989
        Dependent variable is equal to 1 if the ship is scrapped in that quarter, 0 otherwise, AGE is age of the ship, in quarters, basedon the year
        it wa built, as listed in Lloyds Register. DWT is size measured in 10,000 deadweight tons. STEAM is a dummy variable equal to one when
        the ship is steam powered, zero otherwise. P-HATI is the predicted priceldwt for which the ship could be sold for further trading, based on
        the parameters estimated in Equation lb above. P-HAT? is the predicted pricefdwt based on Equation 2b above.
