                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                PRIVATE SAVING AND
                                    PUBLIC POLICY




                                  B. Douglas Bernheim

                                     John Karl Scholz




                                 Working Paper No. 4215




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 November 1992




This paper was prepared for a conference on "Tax Policy and the Economy," held on November
17, 1992 in Washington D.C. The second author is grateful to the National Science Foundation,
which provided research support through Grant Number SES-9211553. We also gratefully
acknowledge the work of Robert Avery and Arthur Kennickell, who developed a clean copy of
the 1983-1986 Survey of Consumer Finances, and provided extensive documentation. This paper
is part of NBER's research program in Public Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                            NBER Working Paper #42 15
                                                            November 1992

                                  PRIVATE SAVING AND
                                     PUBLIC POLICY

                                          ABSTRACT


   The evidence presented in this paper supports the view that many Americans, particularly

those without a college education, save too little. Our analysis also indicates that it should be

possible to increase total personal saving among lower income households by encouraging the

formation and expansion of private pension plans. It is doubtful that favorable tax treatment of

capital income would stimulate significant additional saving by this group. Conversely, the

expansion of private pensions would probably have little effect on saving by higher income

households. However, these households are more likely to increase saving significantly in

response to favorable tax treatment of capital income. Currently, eligibility for IRAs is linked

to an AG! cap, and pension coverage is more common among higher income households than

among low income households. The most effective system for promoting personal saving would

have precisely the opposite features. Extending tax incentives for saving to higher income

households is problematic. We discuss three competing policy options, IRA5 with AGI caps, the

universal IRA. and the Premium Saving Account (PSA). Our analysis reveals that the PSA

system is a more cost-effective vehicle for providing saving incentives to, all households,

particularly those in the top quintile of the income distribution.

B. Douglas Bernheirn                                         John Karl Scholz
Department of Economics                                      Department of Economics
Princeton University                                         University of Wisconsin-Madison
Princeton, New Jersey 08540-102 1                            1180 Observatory Drive
(609) 258-4021                                               Madison, Wisconsin 53706
and NBER                                                     (608) 262-5380
                                                             and NBER
1. Introduction

       Since the mid-l980s, low rates of national saving in the United States have generated an

enormous amount of concern among both economists and policy makers. Proposals to address

these concerns fall into two broad categories. One category consists of policies designed to

increase public saving; the other consists of policies that are intended to promote private saving.

The first category is synonymous with deficit reduction, while the second includes tax incentives,

pension policy, and strategies for discouraging the use of private debt. Some economists argue

that deficit reduction is the most reliable and efficacious method of increasing national saving

(see, for example, Summers (1985]), while others maintain that it is essential to restore adequate

rates of saving in the private sector (see, for example, Bernheim [1991]). To evaluate the merits

of strategies that target private saving, one must resolve two issues. First, aside from the

obvious fact that private saving is one component of national saving, are there reasons to be

concerned about the rate of private saving? Second, are there any effective and reliable methods

of promoting private saving?
        This paper investigates several factual matters bearing on both of these questions. Four

central findings emerge from our analysis. First, many households do not save enough to

provide themselves with adequate financial security, and as a result will be forced to accept

significantly reduced standards of living during retirement. This phenomenon is especially

prevalent when the head of the household lacks a college education. Second, patterns of asset

accumulation among those without college education bear littie or no resemblance to the patterns

that emerge from standard economic theories. In contrast, those with a college education not

only save more adequately for retirement, but also generally behave in a way that more closely
resembles "text book" life cycle planning. Third, consistent with this second fmding, employer

provided pensions do not appear to displace other personal saving in cases where the head of the

household lacks a college education. However, for college educated households, pensions do

appear to crowd out private saving. Fourth, it is likely that high income households respond

more vigorously to tax incentives for saving than do moderate and low income households.

       These findings have important implications for public policy. To the extent that many

households prepare poorly for retirement, there is cause to be concerned about the rate of

personal saving, per Se. Although lower income households may not respond significantly to

tax incentives, it should be possible to stimulate rates of saving among this group by encouraging

the creation and expansion of private pension plans. For high income households, the
implications are reversed: although pensions displace other forms of saving, tax incentives for

saving are probably efficacious.

       Because eligibility for deductible contributions to Individual Retirement Accounts is

subject to an adjusted gross earnings (AGI) cap, lower income households currently receive the

most favorable tax incentives for saving. Conversely, households with higher levels of income

and education are much more likely to be covered by private pensions. Thus, the current system

appears to be designed in a way that minimizes the impact of public policy on personal saving.

       Unfortunately, it is difficult to modify the current system in a way that would extend tax

incentives to higher income households without raising a host of new problems. The most

common proposals are either to drop the AGI cap on IRAs or to design some new, "universal

IRA" system without an AGI cap. The efficacy of these proposals is questionable. For many

high income households, saving for retirement may already exceed the proposed contribution


                                                2
limits; in that case, an IRA does not offer any reward for incremental saving. To the extent that

IRAs simply generate windfall gains for many wealthy individuals, the system would be

perceived as inequitable. Finally, the expansion of IRA eligibility could significantly reduce

public saving (increase federal deficits) and thereby defeat the purpose of the proposal.

       An alternative method of extending tax incentives for saving to higher income households

is through a system of Premium Savings Accounts, or PSA5 (see Bernheim and Scholz [1992]).

In brief, a household becomes eligible to contribute to a PSA only when its total saving exceeds

a minimum threshold (the floor); beyond that point, incremental saving may be placed into a

PSA, up to a cap (the ceiling). These floors and ceilings are tied to AGI: higher income

households must save more before becoming eligible.

       If one believes that it is desirable to provide high income households with tax incentives

for saving, does the PSA proposal offer an attractive alternative to universal IRA5? To answer

this question, we undertake a comparison of the two proposals. For each proposal, we calculate

an index of effectiveness and a measure of windfalls received by higher income individuals. We

also assess the relative budgetary costs of these proposals. Our analysis suggests that, relative

to a universal IRA system, the PSA proposal would significantly enhance incentives to save

among higher income households even as it would reduce both budgetary costs and windfalls to

 the wealthy.

        This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents evidence on the adequacy of

 personal saving. Section 3 examines evidence on the effectiveness of pension policy. Section

 4 discusses the impact of tax incentives for saving. Finally, section 5 concludes.




                                                 3
 2. The Adequacy of Personal Saving

        According to common wisdom, Americans consume too much and save too little. This

 impression is largely traceable to widely publicized statistics on aggregate personal saving.

International comparisons reveal that U.S. households save significantly less than their foreign

counterparts. Between 1980 and 1989, Americans saved 7.4% of disposable personal income,

compared with 11.4% for OECD Europe and 16.0% for Japan (OECD [l989J). Moreover,

since the mid-1980s, the rate of household saving in the U.S. has been well below its historical

average (see figure 1).

        Although these statistics raise legitimate concerns, they do not provide definitive evidence

of a problem. As measured, personal saving excludes capital gains. Thus, households could

in pnnciple accumulate wealth at a rapid rate even when measured saving is low. Rates of

personal saving can also vary across both time and countries for reasons unrelated to the

adequacy of saving considered from the perspective of individual households. To understand

this second point, consider the following hypothetical example. Envision two countries, A and

B, that are identical in all respects, except that the elderly make up a larger fraction of the

population in A than in B. Since households tend to accumulate wealth prior to retirement and

decumulate wealth thereafter, one would expect to observe a higher rate of aggregate personal

saving in country B. Indeed, in an economy with no growth in either population or productivity,

dissaving by retirees could completely offset saving by workers: one could in principle observe

no personal saving in the aggregate, regardless of how well individual households prepared for

retirement. Thus, ultimately, one can only judge the adequacy of personal saving by examining

microeconomic data on the behavior of individual households.



                                                4
       Generally, the available evidence suggests that American workers have prepared poorly

for retirement. According to Diamond [1977], during the 1960s roughly 40% of married

couples and over 50% of unmarried individuals reported that, after retirement, they received no

money income from assets. At age sixty,. nearly 30% of middle-class individuals lacked

sufficient wealth to replace two years' worth of income. Similarly, Hammermesh [1984]

concluded that, during the 1970s, most elderly individuals failed to accumulate resources

sufficient to sustain their accustomed standards of living. Indeed, consumption shortly after

retirement exceeded the highest sustainable level of consumption by an average of 14%.

Hammermesh found that, within a few years of retirement, most households were forced to

reduce their expenditures substantially) Hausman and Paquette [1987] also documented

substantial declines in consumption for men who involuntarily retired earlier than expected.

       Unfortunately, these microeconomic studies of the adequacy of personal saving are now

somewhat dated.     In addition, they tend to use fairly arbitrary standards of income or

consumption replacement to judge the adequacy of wealth accumulation. In this study, we adopt

a different strategy. Using an elaborate model of household decision making, we simulate asset

accumulation profiles.2 We then compare these simulated profiles with actual profiles estimated

from more recent household survey data.

       The simulation model uses a life cycle planning framework to establish the criteria for

household decision making. In this framework, a household's standard of living at any point



    'Other economists have reached somewhat more optimistic conclusions. See Kotlikoff,
Spivak and Summers [1982].

    7Development of this model was sponsored by Merrill Lynch & Co., Inc. For a detailed
description of the model, see Bernheim [1992b].

                                               5
is taken to be a function of its material consumption per capita, and its overall well-being

depends upon both its present and future standards of living. Loosely speaking, the life cycle

framework implies that a household should accumulate wealth sufficient to finance a standard

of living during retirement that is consistent with its standard of living prior to retirement.

       The model takes as inputs certain descriptive data concerning a household, including age,

birth cohort, current earnings, pension coverage, education, marital status, and gender (if
single), Based on these characteristics, the model imputes an earnings history, a family

composition history, and mortality probabilities. The earnings history is extrapolated from

cross-sectional age-earnings profiles and is adjusted to reflect the economy's baseline wage

growth.    Similarly, the family composition history is constructed from estimates of the

relationship between household size and various household characteristics.               Mortality

probabilities are obtained from gender-specific actuarial tables. The model also incorporates

important macroeconomic factors, such as interest rates, inflation, economic growth rates,

aspects of the federal, state, and local income tax systems, and social security statutes.

       The model generates consumption and asset trajectories through an iterative procedure.

The first step in this procedure determines the household's asset accumulation plan for the first

year of its economic life (taken to be age 26). The choice of a plan is based in part upon

forecasts of its future economic prospects.3 Decisions taken in the initial year determine the

level of retirement assets that the household carries into the following year. The second step

of the procedure determines the household's asset accumulation plan in its second year of

economic life. Since the household may learn more about its economic prospects between the



    3Forecasts of macroeconomic variables are calculated using simple econometric models.

                                                6
first and the second years, its forecasts may change. Consequently, the household's second year

plan may deviate from the plan that it envisioned in the first year. For example, if during the

second year rates of interest rise unexpectedly, the household may decide to take advantage of

this development by saving more than it had planned previously. Financial decisions taken in

the second year establish the level of retirement assets carried over into the third year. This

procedure is repeated, until the current year is reached. The household's asset accumulation

plan for the current year supplies the forecast for future asset and consumption trajectories.'

       It is important to understand that the model describes the accumulation of assets only for

retirement. There are, of course, many reasons to save. Households should prepare for the

possibility of illness, layoff, disability, death, and other risks for which they are imperfectly

insured. In addition, most households accumulate resources to pay for large expenses such as

college tuition or the purchase of an automobile. In the current study, no attempt is made to

estimate the extent to which households should save for these other reasons.

       Figures 2 and 3 depict the output of an illustrative simulation run. This particular

simulation was constructed for a household with the following characteristics: age 27 (as of

1991), some college education, married, current earnings of $60,540, and the primary earner

is covered by a private pension. Figure 2 displays, in constant 1991 dollars, this household's




     'It should be noted that, in each year, the model treats all forecasts of future prospects as
if these prospects were known with certainty. Yet, in each decision year, additional information
is acquired and forecasts are revised. It would be preferable to employ a simulation model that
would explicitly recognize uncertainty concerning future conditions and incorporate this
uncertainty into consumer decision making.     However, this alternative approach poses
considerable technical problems. The simplified approach adopted here probably has the effect
of understating the ideal level of asset accumulation since, in the presence of uncertainty,
households would also have a precautionary motive for saving.

                                                7
trajectory of after-tax earned income (including pensions and social security) and its

consumption. Note that after-tax earnings rise steeply early in life. Earnings growth continues

at a reduced level until the individual reaches age 55, at which point it begins to fall. After

retirement, earned income consists of social security and private pension benefits. Since

pensions are less than perfectly indexed for inflation, real benefits decline gradually over time.

       As a direct consequence of its rapid earnings growth early in life, the household saves

nothing for retirement prior to age 30. In fact, during its 20s, the household would prefer to

borrow against future income in order to consume more than its current after-tax income.

However, the model does not permit these households to obtain loans since they tack collateral.

Between ages 30 and 80, the consumption trajectory is relatively flat. This property reflects the

household's preference for a stable standard of living. However, during the 30s and 40s,

consumption is somewhat elevated relative to the 60s and 70s. This pattern results from changes

in household composition: between the ages of 30 and 50, the typical household incurs

significant child-rearing costs. Consumption declines rapidly after age 80 until, at age 101, it

matches after-tax retirement benefits. Falling survival probabilities drive this end-of-life decline.

Since there is a relatively low probability of reaching age 90, the household would prefer to

sacrifice the standard of living that it would receive at age 90 (if it survived that long) in favor

of a higher standard of living earlier in life.

       Figure 3 depicts the associated trajectory of retirement assets. Assets are accumulated

at an increasing rate early in life. They reach a peak at retirement, and then steadily decline

until they are exhausted at age 100.

       Actual asset trajectories are estimated using the 1983 and 1986 waves of the Survey of


                                                  8
Consumer Finances (SCF). The Federal Reserve in conjunction with other Federal agencies

sposored the SCF, and it is recognized as one of the best available sources for data on household

balance sheets.5

       We restrict attention to married couples for which the husband was fully employed and

between the ages of 25 and 64 in 1986. A total of 1314 households in the SCF sample satisfy

these criteria. Our measure of accumulated net worth includes stocks and mutual funds, bonds,

checking and savings accounts, IRA and Keogh accounts, money market accounts, certificates

of deposit, profit sharing and thrift accounts, the dollar cash value of whole life insurance, and

other financial assets, as well as net equity in property (other than primary residences) and

business assets, less credit card debt, consumer debt, and other debt.6 This measure of net

worth excludes all assets and liabilities associated with homes and vehicles. This is appropriate

since households appear to have a strong aversion to paying living expenses during retirement

by reducing home equity (see Venti and Wise [1989]); moreover, it seems likely that few

individuals save for retirement by accumulating wealth in the form of vehicles.

       We divide the sample into two subgroups, based upon whether or not the husband

completed college. Our sample includes 474 husbands who completed college and 840 husbands

who did not complete college. Education is of interest for two reasons. First, it may be related

to differences in behavior, either because education enhances an individual's ability to formulate

coherent long range plans, or because those who pursue more education do so precisely because




    5See Avery and Elliehausen [1988] and Avery and Kennickell [1988] for a more complete
discussion of the SCF.
    6Accumulated wealth for 1983 is expressed in 1986 dollars using the Consumer Price Index.

                                                9
 they are more likely to be concerned about the future. Second, education is highly correlated

 with income. Adjusted for age, the median earnings of households in which the husband is

college educated are roughly 57% higher than the median earnings of households in which the

husband is not college educated. Since IRA eligibility is subject to an AGI cap, differences in

saving behavior across income categories is of particular interest. Although it might seem more

natural to divide the sample by income in order to examine these differences, that approach

poses the practical difficulty that income varies with age. For example, a household with

earnings of $50,000 at age 27 is probably much wealthier over the course of a lifetime than a

household with earnings of $55,000 at age 55. For this purpose, one can think of education as

a proxy for permanent income.

         As a first step in our analysis, we examine changes in wealth between 1983 and 1986.

In order to control for differences in resources across households, we focus our discussion on

the ratio of the change in wealth to total wage income. We divide our sample into subgroups

based upon age (25 to 29, 30 to 34, 34 to 39, 40 to 44, 45 to 49, 50 to 54, 55 to 59, 60 to 64).

For each of these subgroups, we calculate the median change-in-wealth-to-wages ratio (adjusting

for sampling weights). The use of medians rather than means is important, because the

distribution of assets is highly skewed. Although mean wealth is quite high for many population

subgroups, this fact tells us very little about the adequacy of saving for the typical household

within these groups. Rather, it primarily reflects the extreme behavior of a few unrepresentative

households. In contrast, median wealth is not influenced by extreme outliers.

       We then simulate asset accumulation trajectories for households that are representative

of each population subgroup. The household characteristics (wage income, years of education)


                                               10
chosen for these simulations are based on within-subgroup population medians. Two simulations

are conducted for each population subgroup: one assumes that the primary earner is covered by

a private pension, while the other assumes that the primary earner is not covered by a private

pension.
       When comparing estimated and simulated trajectories, it is important to bear in mind that

the simulations focus on preparation for retirement as the sole motive for saving. Unfortunately,

when examining the data, one cannot determine whether particular assets were accumulated for

retirement or for some other purpose. Aside from excluding residences and vehicles, we make

no attempt to discern saving motives.       Consequently, the comparison between estimated

trajectories and simulated trajectories may provide an overly optimistic picture of the adequacy

of retirement saving.
                                                               '
       Figure 4 depicts results for the "no college' sample.       Actual" refers to median change-

in-wealth-to-wage ratios based upon the SCF; "Sim/no pen" indicates simulated change-in-

wealth-to-wage ratios for a representative household without pension coverage for the primary

earner; and "Sim/pen" denotes simulated change-in-wealth-to-wage ratios for a representative

household with pension coverage for the primary earner. Note that simulated change-in-wealth-

to-wage ratios rise steeply with age. This occurs for two reasons. First, wages increase more

rapidly than consumption during most of an individual's working life (refer back to Figure 2).

Second, reinvested capital income rises as the household accumulates assets. In contrast, the

actual change-in-wealth-to-wage ratios do not vary significantly with age. By the time the

household reaches middle age, simulated asset accumulation exceeds actual accumulation by a

wide margin. Although actual asset accumulation is higher than the simulated profiles at ages


                                                11
27 and 32, this result is of little consequence, since the data reflect saving for a variety of

purposes aside from retirement. Overall, Figure 4 suggests that, between 1983 and 1986,

households without a college education saved far less than our simulation model predicts.

          Figure 5 depicts results for the 'college sample. The contrast between Figures 4 and

5 is remarkable. In cases where the head of household has completed college, both simulated

and actual change-in-wealth-to-wage ratios rise steeply with age. Moreover, simulated asset

accumulation tracks actual asset accumulation remarkably well. Taken at face value, Figure 5

suggests    that college educated households saved adequately for retirement between 1983 and

1986.

          Low rates of asset accumulation do not necessarily imply that households are inadequately

prepared for retirement. In principle, a household with high initial assets in 1983 (relative to

the simulated trajectory) could save little between 1983 and 1986 and still remain above the

simulated asset trajectory in 1986. Conversely, high rates of asset accumulation do not

necessarily imply that households are adequately prepared for retirement, since these households

may have started out well below the simulated trajectory. To evaluate the adequacy of

retirement preparation, one must therefore examine levels of wealth in addition to changes in

wealth.

          Consequently, as a second step in our analysis, we examine levels of wealth for 1986.

We proceed exactly as in the first step, except that we focus on wealth-to-wage ratios, rather

than on change-in-wealth-to-wage ratios. Figures 6 and 7 depict the results. These figures

reinforce the lessons drawn from Figures 4 and 5. In particular, actual asset trajectories are far

below simulated trajectories for the "no-college" sample, while actual and simulated trajectories


                                                 12
track each other rather well for the college" sample. Indeed, since the majOrity of college

educated workers are covered by private pensions, it appears that actual asset trajectories are

actually above simulated trajectories for those with a college education.

         Although it is tempting to conclude that inadequate saving is largely confined to those

without a college education, this conclusion must be tempered by two considerations. First, as

indicated by Figure 1, personal saving declined sharply fj the 1983 to 1986 period. Using

a sample of relatively young individuals (ages 25 through 44) surveyed in early 1992, Bernheim

[1992a] found much more pervasive evidence of inadequate saving. Second, the model probably

understates the amount of wealth that each household ought to accumulate. The most obvious

reason for this bias is that the simulations envision retirement planning as the sole motive for

saving. In addition, it is quite likely that the model overstates mortality probabilities (since it

does not make any allowance for the fact that average life expectancy is projected to increase),

understates the importance of health and long term care costs for the elderly, and falls to

consider the effects of mounting economic pressures that may force Congress and employers to

scale back existing retirement benefits.

         Before proceeding to the next section, it is important to discuss one potential criticism

of this analysis. Some readers may be inclined to argue that our investigation sheds more light

on the nature of tastes than on the adequacy of saving for retirement (see, for example, Lazear

[1992]). After all, any measure of adequacy is subjective. If a household has chosen to save

relatively little, who are we to argue? Presumably, the household has its own best interests at

heart.

         We are not persuaded by this argument. Even in the context of the traditional life cycle



                                                13
hypothesis, individuals may face incentives that lead to inefficiently low levels of saving. For

example, as individuals save more, they may lose the benefits from social insurance programs

(Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes [1992]), risk the loss of eligibility for college scholarships

(Feldstein [19921), or reduce assistance from other members of the extended family (Bernheim

and Stark [l988J). These considerations may be particularly important for lower income

individuals.

        It is also possible that, for some households, the life cycle hypothesis may not adequately

characterize saving behavior. For some economic decisions one can argue that, through trial

and error, an individual eventually learns to behave in a way that is consistent with utility

maximization. This argument, however, is less persuasive in the context of life cycle saving.

Each individual accumulates resources for retirement only once; there is no opportunity to learn

from one's mistakes. Moreover, the life cycle saving decision is extraordinarily complex, in that

it requires an individual to contemplate labor earnings, investment strategies, macroeconomic

trends, and a vast assortment of risks, all over a very long time frame. It would be surprising

if the average individual, in isolation, with no practice and little or no training, would act as a

perfectly rational, farsighted utility maximizer. Manski [1990] discusses the circumstances in

which learning from others can take the place of personal experience. Even with good role

models and reference groups, however, it is difficult to imagine that households do not deviate

from their optimal life cycle consumption profiles.

       In recent years, a number of economists have argued against the view that individuals act




    7Bernheim [1992c] provides a more comprehensive discussion of the factors that could
produce an inefficiently low level of saving within the standard life cycle framework.

                                                14
as if they maximize an intertemporal utility function, and have instead emphasized the

importance of behavioral concepts such as habit, mental accounting, and self-control (see, for

example, Shefrin    and   Thaler [19881).    Behavioral theories allow for the possibility that

individuals may regret their bad habits and lack of foresight after the fact. Consequently, the

notion of inadequate saving has a clear normative meaning within the context of these theories.

       The evidence offered in this section suggests that most households without a college

education do not behave in a manner consistent with optimal life cycle planning. These

households save little relative to their simulated asset trajectories. Moreover, their estimated and

simulated trajectories do not even exhibit the same qualitative patterns (refer once again to

Figure 4). Given the behavioral differences between households with and without college

degrees, an important question arises: is it possible to design policies that effectively stimulate

saving at all levels of education and income?


3. Pension Policy

       In recent years, asset accumulation in private pension plans has accounted for a

substantial fraction of personal saving (see Bernheim and Shoven [1988] and Bosworth, Burtless,

and Sabelhaus [1991]). This observation raises the possibility that policies affecting private

pensions may have powerful effects on aggregate personal saving. Whether or not these effects

would actually materialize in practice depends upon the manner in which workers would respond

to an expansion of private pension coverage. Economic theory suggests that such an expansion



    It could be argued that low income individuals save less relative to simulated saving because
they discount the future more heavily. Although a higher discount factor would reduce saving,
it would not alter the qualitative features of the asset trajectories (unless discounting was high
enough to prevent the accumulation of any signficant assets for retirement).

                                                 15
would simply crowd out other forms of personal saving. The simulation results presented in

section 2 illustrate this principle. However, previous studies of personal saving generally fail

to find evidence for the hypothesis that private pensions reduce other forms of personal saving

(see, for example, the review in Shefrin and Thaler [1988], especially pages 622-624).

Depending upon whether one credits the theoretical analysis or the empirical studies, one can

reach dramatically different conclusions about the effect of pension policy on aggregate personal

saving.

          The analysis of section 2 raises an intriguing possibility: if the behavior of those with

college education conforms to the predictions of the life cycle hypothesis, while the behavior of

those without a college education does not, then perhaps private pensions do displace personal

saving among the college educated, but do not displace personal saving among the rest of the

population. In this case, pension policy could be an effective tool for stimulating total personal

saving, as long as it is primarily used to provide incentives for expansion of coverage among

lower income (less educated) workers.

          To investigate the effect of pensions on household saving, we estimate equations that

explain the median value of the wealth-to-wage ratio (henceforth WWRAT) as a function of the

husband's age (AGE), total household earnings (EARN), and a dummy variable summarizing

the husband's private pension coverage (PENS).9 We employ a cubic function of AGE to allow

for flexible age-wealth trajectories. Since earnings may be related to the shape of the asset

trajectory as well as to its absolute level, we also interact EARN with AGE. For similar


    9Since our object is to explain median wealth rather than mean wealth, we employ quantile
regression techniques (least absolute deviations), rather than more traditional regression
techniques (least squared deviations).

                                                16
 reasons, PENS is interacted with AGE in most specifications.

        For purposes of comparison with the previous literature, it is useful to begin with results

 for the entire data sample (all households, irrespective of educational attainment). The following

 estimated equation is consistent with the view that pensions fail to displace other forms of

personal saving:

        WWRAT = -4.72 + 0.411 AGE - 0.115 (AGE)2/10 + 0.106
                                                              (AGE)3/103
                (1.34)  (0.098)     (0.023)           (0.017)
                 -   0.140 EA.R.N/104 + 0.581 EARNxAGE/l06 - 0.0004 PENS
                     (0.024)            (0.045)                      (0.0379)

Note that the coefficient of the pension dummy is economically trivial and statistically

insignificant.

        The absence of a relationship between pension coverage and personal saving is sometimes

interpreted as providing evidence that standard economic models do not faithfully represent the

typical household's decision making process. Proponents of the standard model, however, argue

that the absence of a pension effect is a statistical artifact. Pension coverage is not random. A

worker who is concerned about retirement may turn down job offers from employers who fail

to provide attractive pension benefits. Conversely, a worker who gives little thought to

retirement may be unwilling to accept a job that provides pension coverage if this offer entails

a reduction in current disposable income. If these hypothetical facts are indeed descriptive of

behavior, then those who are inclined to select jobs with pension coverage will tend to save more

than those who are inclined to select jobs without pension coverage. For any particular

individual, a private pension may displace other forms of saving; however, in the data, this

pattern may be obscured by the fact that pension coverage is correlated with the inclination to


                                                  17
save more. In other words, a sample selection effect may offset the saving-displacement effect.

        Unless we can determine whether the absence of a pension effect is a behavioral

phenomenon or a statistical artifact, we cannot predict the impact of a change in pension policy

on personal saving. We suggest a method of distinguishing between these two hypotheses, based

upon the following argument. It is certainly possible that, by coincidence, a sample selection

effect exactly offsets the saving-displacement effect. However, the magnitude of the saving-

displacement effect should vary systematically with age; specifically, the difference between the

accumulated assets of those with pension coverage and those without pension coverage should

increase with age. Although the sample selection effect may also vary with age, it seems highly

unlikely that these two effects would exactly offset each other at         age.

         We therefore estimate a new equation, in which an interaction term involving PENS and

AGE is added to the list of explanatory variables. The estimated relationship is as follows:

         WWRAT = -4.64         + 0.406    AGE -   0.114 (AGE)2/lO + 0.105 (AGE)3/103
                      (1.47)    (0.108)           (0.025)              (0.019)
  -   0.137 EARN/tO4 + 0.576 EARNxAGE/10'              -    0.098 PENS + 0.310 PENSxAGE/102
      (0.026)              (0.049)                          (0.169)      (0.373)

Taken individually, the coefficients of the pension variables lack statistical significance. In

addition, the hypothesis that both coefficients equal zero is entirely consistent with the data.
                                                                                                   °

In other words, private pension eligibility is not systematically related to either the level or the

shape of the asset accumulation trajectory. Although, in principle, this could still reflect the

offsetting effects of asset displacement and sample selection, it seems implausible that these


    t'he F-statistic for the joint hypothesis that both coefficients equal zero is 0.78. One would
obtain an F-statistic of this magnitude or greater roughly 46% of the time, even if the true
coefficients were zero.

                                                  18
effects would offset each other at every age. It appears more likely that there is little or no

behavioral link between pension eligibility and personal saving.

         Of course, the preceding results do not distinguish between households on the basis of

education. In light of our previous findings, it is clearly important to make this distinction. We

therefore estimate wealth trajectories separately for the two subgroups (college educated, not

college educated) described in section 2.

        We obtain the following equation for households without a college education:

        WWRAT = -3.60          + 0.3 13    AGE -   0.086 (AGE)2/10 + 0.077 (AGE)3/103
                      (1.51)     (0.111)           (0.026)                (0.020)
 -   0.110     EARN! io + 0.406 EARNxAGEI1O' +               0.008   PENS -   0.125 PENSxAGE/102
     (0.044)              (0.088)                        (0.176)              (0.395)

Note that the coefficients of the pension variables are even smaller, both in terms of economic

and statistical significance, than they were in the previous equation (based on the full sample).

In order to illustrate the implications of this equation, we extrapolate asset trajectories for

hypothetical households with pension coverage and households without pension coverage."

Figure 8 exhibits these trajectories. Note that pension eligibility bears little or no relationship

to the path of the wealth-to-wage ratio.

        In contrast, we estimate the following equation for households with a college education:




    "For the purpose of this calculation, the household's earnings are taken to be constant at
$30,000. This figure is close to median age-adjusted earnings for households without a college
education.

                                                   19
        WWRAT = 5.78 - 0.502 AGE + 0.126 (AGE)2/10 — 0.080 (AGE)'/103
                (4.58) (0.329)     (0.077)          (0.058)
   + 0.062 EARN/b4 - 0.021 EARNxAGE,/106 + 0.899 PENS - 2.83 PENSxAGFI1O2
     (0.048)         (0.091)              (0.563)       (1.25)

 Note that the coefficients of the pension variables in this equation are much more significant,

both economically and statistically. The data decisively reject the hypothesis that both of these

coefficients equal zero.12 Note also that the signs of all the other coefficients in the equation

for college educated households are exactly the reverse of the signs of these coefficients in the

equation for households without college education. Clearly, the behavior of these two groups

differs markedly.

       In order to illustrate the implications of the estimated equation for college educated

households, we extrapolate asset accumulation trajectories for hypothetical households with

pnvate pensions and without private pensions. ' Figure 9 depicts these trajectories. Note that

those individuals who are eligible for pensions accumulate resources at a significantly slower rate

than those individuals without pensions. Remarkably, at age 62, the gap between the assets of

these two groups is almost identical in magnitude to the gap that emerges from our simulations

(figure 7). These patterns are strongly consistent with the view that private pensions displace

other personal saving for college educated households.         It is unlikely that the observed

relationship between pension coverage and saving results from spurious factors, since such




    12The F-statistic for this hypothesis is 5.60, which is significant at the 99% level of
confidence.

    '3For the purpose of this calculation, the household's earnings are taken to be constant at
$50,000. This figure is close to age-adjusted median earnings for households with a college
education.

                                               20
factors would presumably also have produced the same patterns for less educated households.'4

These results suggest that previous studies may have failed to find a significant saving

displacement effect simply because they did not distinguish
                                                              between households on the basis of

education.
       The contrast between figures 8 and 9 points to a clear and important conclusion: private

pensions displace personal wealth accumulation only when the head of the household is college

educated. This is consistent with the findings of section 2 on the adequacy of personal saving.

Indeed, our evidence tends to support a more general conclusion: college educated households
                                                                            while households with
behave in the manner predicted by standard economic theories of saving,

less education do not.

        It should be emphasized that past and current policies have been more successful at

stimulating the expansion of pension coverage among college educated workers than among those

with less education. Analysis of the SCF data reveals that 75.2% of husbands with college

degrees are covered by private pensions, in comparison to 55.7% of husbands without college
                                                                               pensions to those who
 degrees. In other words, the current system is quite effective at providing

 reduce other saving in response, but is substantially less effective at providing coverage to those

 individuals for whom pensions would represent incremental saving.
                                                                               could have the effect
         Proposals to encourage or require portability of private pensions

 of expanding pension coverage among lower income workers. The absence of portability

 substantially reduces the benefits of pension coverage for workers with relatively little job


       'It is worth mentioning that there is some evidence of a small sample selection effect: the
  trajectory for households with pensions starts out slightly above the trajectory for households
  without pensions. However, this effect is not the dominant pattern in the data.

                                                  21
 stability. On average, these workers also have relatively low earnings. Portability would

 enhance the attractiveness of pensions to workers with little job stability, and thereby increase

 the likelihood that these workers would obtain pension coverage.

        A more drastic proposal would require employers to provide all workers with private

 pension coverage. Although this requirement would not be related to income, it would have a

 far greater impact on pension coverage among low income workers than on pension coverage

 among high income workers (roughly three-fourths of whom are already covered). In response

 to this requirement, those employers who had not previously provided pension coverage would

 probably reduce other forms of employee compensation. Our analysis suggests that newly

 covered workers with high earnings would simply adjust other personal saving to offset this

 change. In contrast, newly covered workers with lower earnings would reduce consumption.

 In effect, mandatory pension coverage would force lower income households to increase saving.

       Our analysis also raises concern about the recent growth of 401K plans. Participation

in these plans is entirely voluntary. Many employers have substituted 401K plans for more

conventional plans in an effort to reduce operating expenses. We would not expect this trend

to have a significant impact on the total amount of saving done either by or on behalf of high

income workers. However, the elimination of compulsory contributions may significantly

depress total saving by or on behalf of lower income workers.


4. Tax Incentives for Saviflg

       The most commonly discussed strategies for stimulating personal saving entail reductions

in capital income taxation. Economic theory suggests that households will respond to a higher

alter-tax rate of return by increasing future consumption relative to current consumption.

                                              22
However, the increase in anticipated future net worth resulting from higher rates of return may

actually induce households to save less. Indeed, empirical estimates of the interest elasticity of

saving (which measures the sensitivity of saving to the after-tax rate of return) vary widely (see,

for example, Boskin [1978], Summers [19811, and Hall [1988]).

       Current policies provide saving incentives primarily to lower income households.

Eligibility for deductible Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs), for example, is subject to an

AGI cap. The existence of an AGI cap raises an important question: does the interest elasticity

of saving vary systematically across income classes?

        Simulations based upon the model described in section 2 suggest that higher income

households should be much more responsive than lower income households to a change in the

after-tax rate of retum. According to these simulations, a 35 year old, high school educated

couple with pension coverage and annual earnings of $30,000 in 1991 should have saved roughly

 1.5% of its earnings.u A permanent, one percentage point rise in the before-tax rate of return

modestly increases this figure to 1.6%. In contrast, a 35 year old, college educated couple with

pension coverage and annual earnings of $50,000 in 1991 should have saved roughly 4.8% of

 its earnings. The same permanent, one percentage point rise in the before-tax rate of return

 increases this figure by a much larger amount (both absolutely and proportionately), to 5.5%.

 Similar results hold for couples without pensions. For the representative high-school educated

 couple, saving would fall from 5.6% of earnings to 4.5% of earnings in response to the higher

 rate of return; for the college educated couple, it would fall less (both absolutely and



     t5ln this calculation, the rate of saving is defined as saving above and beyond reinvestment
 of capital income, divided by after-tax wage income.
                                                  23
 proportionately), from 9.2% to 8.8%.b6

         The contrast between the simulated responses of college educated individuals and high

 school educated individuals becomes even more striking when one factors in the statistics on

 pension coverage mentioned at the end of section 3. Averaging across those individuals with

 pensions and those individuals without pensions, the simulations imply that saving by college

 educated households would increase by 10.2% in response to a permanent one percentage point

 increase in the before-tax rate of return, while the saving of households without college degrees

 would fail by 4.5%. Consequently, a policy that provides tax incentives for saving exclusively

 to lower income households excludes those households that are most likely to increase saving

 in response to the policy; indeed, it is conceivable that such policies could actually reduce

aggregate personal saving.

        It is important to emphasize that this positive relationship between income and the interest

elasticity of saving results from a natural economic consideration, rather than from some peculiar

feature of the simulation model. It is natural to assume that, when planning for the future, most

households are concerned first and foremost with assuring themselves of some minimum

standard of living. As lifetime resources increase, households have more discretion to allocate

resources over time in a way that increases consumption above and beyond this minimum



    16These simulations imply that the interest elasticity of saving tends to be higher when the
household has private pension coverage.              The explanation for this phenomenon is
straightforward. An increase in the rate of return reduces the present discounted value of future
income; in that sense, it makes the household poorer, and reduces current consumption (this
effect was originally noted by Summers [1981]). Since pension income is received after
retirement, its present discounted value is more sensitive to the rate of return than is the present
discounted value of future (pre-retirement) earnings. Thus, those individuals with pensions are
more likely than those individuals without pensions to reduce current consumption in response
to an increase in the rate of return.

                                                24
standard. Saving to provide for minimum consumption is, in effect, saving for a fixed target.

It is well known that an individual who saves to achieve some target will reduce saving in

response to an increase in the rate of return (see, for example, Bernheim and Shoven [1988]).

In contrast, discretionary saving to finance consumption over and above the target responds

positively to an increase in the rate of return. For low income households, saving to achieve

the minimum consumption target is probably far more important than saving to fund incremental

consumption. Thus, target saving dominates the simulated behavior of these households, and

produces a low or negative interest elasticity of saving. On the other hand, for high income

households, saving to fund incremental consumption is probably far more important than saving
                                                                                     dominates the
to achieve the minimum consumption target. Consequently, incremental saving

simulated behavior of these households and produces a high interest elasticity of saving.    In the

Appendix, we develop this argument mathematically and demonstrate for a simple model that

the interest elasticity of saving rises with income.

        Throughout this section, we have assumed that household behavior accords with standard

economic theories. The preceding sections call this premise into question. However, this

observation does not undermine our conclusion. We have found that the behavior of college

 educated (high income) households does correspond to the predictions of standard theories;

 consequently, for this group, it is likely that one would observe a substantial interest elasticity

 of saving. On the other hand, we have also found that the behavior of households without a

 college education (those with lower income) does not conform to standard economic theories.

 Although this finding reduces our faith in the applicability of our simulation results, it does not

 reverse our conclusions concerning the interest elasticity of saving. The notion that households


                                                 25
 will respond to a change in the after-tax rate of return is predicated upon the assumption that

 households rationally anticipate and plan for future economic contingencies. To the extent that

this assumption proves incorrect, there is no particular reason to believe that low income

households will respond to a change in the after-tax rate of return.

        Most current proposals to provide tax incentives for saving are patterned after IRAs.

IRAs were established as part of the 1974 Employee Retirement Income Security Act, to give

workers who were not covered by employer-provided pension plans added incentives to

accumulate resources for retirement. In 1981, IRA eligibility was extended to all taxpayers.

Subsequently, the Tax Reform Act of 1986 curtailed the tax-deductibility of IRA contributions

for high income households.

       Two prominent current policy initiatives would reverse the direction of the 1986 reforms

and extend tax incentives for saving to households in higher income brackets. The Bush

Administration's Family Saving Accounts (FSA5) would allow single individuals with incomes

below $60,000 and married couples with incomes below $120,000 to make contributions of up

to $2,500 per person (not including children) to qualified accounts. The FSA proposal is an

example of a "back-loaded" system: contributions are nondeductible, but accumulated funds are

not taxed upon withdrawal. An alternative proposal, the Bentsen-Roth "super-IRA," would

allow contributions of up to $2,000 per person (not including children) to either a traditional

or back-loaded IRA.

       Unfortunately, there are sound conceptual reasons to doubt the effectiveness of extending

eligibility for IRA-style accounts to higher income households. First, contributions are capped.

Under the current system, a single taxpayer, for example, can make no more than $2,000 in tax-


                                              26
deductible contributions.   For any taxpayer who would have saved more than $2,000 in the

absence of IRAs, the availability of an IRA does not affect the costs or the benefits that result

from an additional dollar of saving, and therefore provides no incentive on the margin for the

taxpayer to increase saving. In such cases the IRA constitutes a "give-away" of public funds,

and its principal effect is to reduce federal tax receipts. In addition, the IRA may actually

induce the taxpayer to spend more on current consumption, since it increases his/her total after-

tax resources. For both of these reasons, the IRA would contribute to a lower rate of national

saving. These concerns are of little significance for low income households, because few of

them would save more than $2,000 in the absence of the program. It is far more likely that high

income households would save more than the contribution limit. Thus, a standard IRA-style

scheme may be a particularly ineffective method of providing high income households with tax

incentives for saving.

        Second, even if a taxpayer would not (in the absence of IRAs) have saved more than the

IRA contribution limit in a given year, he/she could take full advantage of the IRA deduction

either by drawing down previously accumulated assets or by borrowing. Indeed, the 1991 I

Guide for College Teachers devotes a full page to the issue, "What if You're Short of Cash to

Fund Your IRA?" (pp. 229-230). The Guide describes an IRS private letter ruling that allows

households to finance their IRA5 by borrowing. Contributions funded either by shifting existing

assets or by borrowing do not increase household saving. Instead, they depress national saving

by reducing Federal tax receipts, and add to the Federal budget deficit. Once again, high

income households, who possess greater wealth, financial sophistication, and access to credit

 markets, are more likely than lower income households to engage in borrowing or asset shifting,


                                                27
and thereby defeat the purpose of the program.

        Empirical evidence on the efficacy of IRAs is mixed. Gale and Scholz [1992] find little

evidence that IRAs stimulated household saving between 1983 and 1986. Venti and Wise [1986,

1987, 1990, 1991] and Feenberg and Skinner.[1989] argue that most IRA contributions during

this period represent net increases in household saving. Joines and Manegold [1991] conclude

that the effects of IRAs on household saving are unlikely to be as large as the estimates of Venti-

Wise and may be as small as the estimates of (ale-Scholz.

        An alternative proposal to promote household saving, based upon "Premium Saving

Accounts" (PSAs), is described in Bernheim arid Scholz [1992]. A PSA system would require

each taxpayer to save in total some fixed amount (the "floor") before becoming eligible to make

contributions to a tax-favored account. For each dollar saved in excess of the floor, the taxpayer

would be eligible to contribute one additional dollar to the tax-favored account, up to some limit

("the ceiling'). These floors and ceilings would vary with adjusted gross income (AGI) and

certain types of capital income. As with IRAs, capital income accrued on balances held in PSA

accounts would be exempt from taxation.'7

       The use of both floors and ceilings would create "windows" of program eligibility.

Consider, for example, a husband and wife with a combined AGI of $80,000. They might face

a floor of $8,000, and a ceiling of $12,000. Should they save less than $8,000 in the

corresponding tax year, they would not be eligible to make any contributions to a tax favored



     '7With this essential structure, a PSA system could be either front-loaded or back-loaded.
Penalties could be established to lock funds into tax-favored accounts for relatively short periods
of time (e.g. seven years), or until some age close to retirement (perhaps age 59 1/2). Accounts
could be established for specific purposes (e.g. retirement, purchase of a home, college
education), or the accounts could be unrestricted.

                                                28
account. If, on the other hand, they saved $9,500, they would be eligible for favorable tax

treatment on $1,500. If they saved more than $12,000, then they would be eligible to make the

maximum contribution of $4,000 (the difference between $12,000 and $8,000).

       The most important and distinctive feature of a PSA system is that floors and ceilings

would vary with AGI. Eligibility windows could be positioned to maximize, within each income

class, the number of households receiving tax breaks on the marginal dollar of saving. Thus,

higher income taxpayers would not be deprived of tax incentives for saving; rather, they would

simply be required to save larger fractions of their incomes than lower income taxpayers before

becoming eligible for the program. It would also be much more difficult for households to take

advantage of tax-favored PSA accounts by shifting assets or by borrowing, because eligibility

would be based upon total saving. An individual cannot increase total saving by shifting assets

from one account to another or by borrowing in order to invest.'

       To implement a PSA system, one needs to measure saving. Bernheim and Scholz [19921

propose the following measure:'9


  1. Net purchases of assets (i.e. for assets on which investors receive capital gains and
       losses, total purchases minus total sales),

                                              plus

  2. The January 1-to-January 1 change in cash account balances (for example, bank accounts),



   'The administrative feasibility of monitoring total saving for each taxpayer is discussed in
Bernheim and Scholz [1992].

    9Many economists would define saving as the change in the stock of wealth between two
points in time. If one adopts this definition, then saving is very hard to measure -- one would
need to assess the market value of all assets every year. The definition used in the text
represents a compromise between economic logic and administrative feasibility.

                                               29
                                               minus

  3. The January 1-to-January 1 change in total debt (for example, mortgages and consumer
       credit).


In effect, saving is defined as the incremental personal resources that an individual diverts into

investments in any given year, over and above reinvested capital gains.20

        If this definition of saving is employed, then it is also important to adjust each taxpayer's

eligibility floors and ceilings upward by the amount of capital income other than capital gains.

In the absence of such an adjustment, the system would distort investors' choices among assets,

causing them to tilt their portfolios towards assets that produce current income, rather than

capital gains. See Bernheim and Scholz [1992J for a detailed discussion of this issue.

        In the remainder of this section, we evaluate the effects of three distinct strategies for

stimulating household saving: an IRA-like program with an AGI cap (henceforth referred to as

the 'standard IRA system), an IRA-like program without an AOl cap (henceforth referred to

as the 'universal IRA' system), and a PSA system. We compare the cost effectiveness of

extending tax incentives for saving to higher income taxpayers through universal IRAs and

PSAs.

        Table 1 contains illustrative eligibility schedules for a PSA system. We selected these

particular schedules after examining the empirical distribution of saving. We restricted attention

to a class of simple schedules, and chose the schedules that provide maximum saving incentives.2



    2°Note that it is possible to compute this measure of saving without assessing the value of
unrealized capital assets since, by definition, unrealized gains are fully reinvested.
    21An eligibility schedule belongs to this class if the floor is set equal to zero up to some level
of AGI, beyond which the floor rises linearly with AOl. We also studied more complex
                                                 30
        The schedules define eligibility windows for each level of AG!. In order to facilitate

comparisons with IRAs, we have adopted window widths of $2,000 per year for single

households, $2,250 per year for married couples with one earner, and $4,000 per year for

married couples with two earners. The lower end of the window (the floor) is determined by

a two-part calculation. First, compute the value of an algebraic expression involving AG!. We

refer to this value as the 'unadjusted floor" -- it is identical for all taxpayers with the same level

of AG!. Second, add capital income other than capital gains to obtain the "adjusted floor" (or

simply, "the floor"). Table 1 indicates, for example, that a dual-earner married couple with an

AGI of $30,000 and no capital income would have a floor of $0 and a ceiling of $4,000. In

contrast, a couple with an AG! of $120,000 and dividend and interest income of $2,000 would

have a floor of $16,362 (.l67x$86,000+$2,000) and a ceiling of $20,362. Figure 10 graphs

the proposed eligibility schedule for married couples. Note that because the typical American

household saves very little, the floor is zero for lower income households.

       The standard and universal IRA systems differ from the PSA proposal in that the IRA

systems anchor the eligibility window at $0 for all income classes, and no adjustment is made

for capital income. The standard system phases out deductible contributions for couples with

incomes between $40,000 and $50,000 and for single taxpayers with incomes between $25,000

and $35,000. The universal system allows all households to make deductible contributions.22




schedules, but discovered that it was difficult to improve significantly upon the simple schdule
described in the text.

     22The IRA-like proposals we simulate are superior to actual IRA schemes, because, in
practice, IRA schemes are susceptible to tax arbitrage strategies involving borrowing and asset
shifting, which our simulations do not capture.

                                                 31
       We will compare these plans on the basis of three criteria. The first criterion is a

measure of effectiveness. Specifically, for each plan, we estimate the number of households that

would receive a higher after-tax rate of return on the incremental dollar of investment. We refer

to these households as the IMPACT GROUP. Our second criteria is a measure of wasteful

subsidization. Specifically, for each plan, we estimate the number of households that would

make the maximum eligible contribution to a tax-favored account while continuing to receive the

unsubsidized after-tax rate of return on the incremental dollar of investment. We refer to these

households as the NO-IMPACT GROUP. Our third criterion is also a measure of wasteful

subsidization: we calculate the budgetary cost of subsidizing the NO-IMPACT GROUP. We

refer to this cost as the GIVEAWAY.

       In evaluating these plans, it may be useful to consider other criteria, such as the ratio of

the number of households in the IMPACT GROUP to the DOLLARS OF GIVEAWAY. A

'bang-for-the-buck" ratio of this type would provide some indication of the cost-effectiveness

of each proposal.

       To calculate the size of the IMPACT GROUP, NO-IMPACT GROUP, and DOLLARS

OF GIVEAWAY, we must predict the extent to which each household would participate in each

plan. Our predictions are predicated on three behavioral assumptions. First, we assume that

no household would make a contribution to any tax-favored account unless it would contribute

to a universal IRA. Second, if a household would make a contribution to a universal IRA, then

that same household would also, if eligible, contribute to either a standard IRA or a PSA. The

justification for these first two assumptions is compelling: both proposals are identical to the

universal IRA system, except that eligibility is more restricted.


                                                32
        Our third assumption concerns the magnitude of contributions. For each alternative

proposal, we assume that an eligible household would make the maximum allowable contribution

when two conditions are satisfied: the household would contribute to a universal IRA, and its

total saving would exceed its eligibility ceiling. This third assumption is more problematic than

the others. Saving in a tax favored account may be an imperfect substitute for other forms of

saving due, perhaps, to restrictions on early withdrawal. Thus, it is conceivable that some

households would contribute less than the maximum amount even when these conditions are

satisfied. In practice, it would be very difficult to identify these households with available data.

        Obviously, our three assumptions are helpful only if we know whether or not households

are inclined to make contributions to universal IRA accounts. During the period of universal

IRA eligibility, this inclination can be inferred from actual behavior. Consequently, we base

our calculations upon a sample of households surveyed in 1983 and 1986 for which data on IRA

participation are available.

       More specifically, we use the 1983 and 1986 waves of the SCF. Key variables are

constructed as follows. Income is defined as the average of total household income for 1983,

1984, and 1985. Our measure of saving corresponds to the definition proposed above. To

calculate the net change in assets exclusive of capital gains or losses, we calculate (by asset

category) the average constant contribution needed to generate the balance in 1986, given the

observed balance in 1983 and the average rate of return that prevailed during this period. Our

asset categories include stocks and mutual funds, bonds, IRA and Keogh accounts, money

market accounts, certificates of deposit, profit sharing and thrift accounts, the dollar cash value

of whole life insurance, and other financial assets (for a more detailed discussion of the


                                                33
calculations, see Gale and Scholz, 1992). Changes in cash account balances (saving and

checking accounts) and total debt are measured directly.

       Table 2 provides background information on the saving propensities of households that

contributed to IRA accounts. The top panel shows that, on average across income groups, total

saving was positive for only 59.5 percent of participating couples. Among those households that

saved, average saving ranged from $5,693 in the lowest income quintile to $90,296 in the

highest income quintile. These averages, however, are affected by the relatively small number

of households that saved very large amounts. The third column of the table provides the saving

of the typical (median) participating household with positive total saving in each income quintile.

These figures range from $3,840 in the bottom quintile to $19,695 in the top quintile. The

typical participating couple with positive saving accumulates $7,128 per year.                 The

corresponding figure for single households is $3,579.

       Table 3 compares the effect of the policies on married couples. The top panel shows the

size of the IMPACT GROUP. Overall, the PSA system provides incentives to 2.4 million

couples, roughly 90% more than the IRA with AGI restrictions and 30% more than the universal

IRA. The difference is particularly pronounced in the top income quintile. By definition, the

IRA with AGI caps ignores these households. Relative to the universal IRA, the PSA increases

the number of couples receiving marginal incentives in the top income quintile by 122.4% 24



    23Burless, Bosworth, and Sabeihaus [1991] and Venti and Wise [1992] present tabulations
on household saving from several microdatasets, including the Survey of Consumer Finances.
The numbers on saving presented in Tale 2 differ from these other tabulations in that they apply
only to those households saving positive amounts.

    24Since high income households are more likely to increase saving in response to tax
incentives, there is some justification for selecting an eligibility schedule that would maximize

                                                34
Since, in this sample, over 60% of positive household saving is attributable to households in the

top quintile of the income distribution, this improvement is particularly important.

       The bottom two panels of Table 3 measure the NO-IMPACT group and the cost of these

ineffective subsidies. The calculations show, for example, that the PSA system would reduce

the number of households in the NO-IMPACT group by 1.75 million (28.2%) and would reduce

Federal expenditures on ineffective subsidies by $2.0 billion (34.0%), relative to the universal

IRA. In terms of cost-effectiveness, the PSA system increases the ratio of the IMPACT GROUP

to the GIVEAWAY by 96.5% overall, and by 287.2% (that is, by a factor of almost four) in

the top income quintile. The IRA with AG! caps also effectively reduces ineffective subsidies

and budgetary cost, but it achieves this reduction by excluding the very households that are most

likely to respond to tax incentives.

       Table 2 reveals that participating single households saved considerably less than married

households. Nevertheless, the gains from adopting the PSA system would still be substantial

for single households. Table 4 indicates that the size of the IMPACT group would increase by

15.1% overall, and by 235.4% in the top income quintile, relative to the universal IRA proposal.

Moreover, both the size of the NO-IMPACT group and the GIVEAWAY would fall relative to

the universal IRA proposal. The result is a 49.7% increase in overall cost-effectiveness (the




the IMPACT GROUP in the top income quintile, rather than the total IMPACT GROUP. This
would be accomplished with a schedule that sets the floor equal to zero as long as AGI is below
$45,000, and increases the floor by 17.7 cents for each dollar of AG! over $45,000. Relative
to the universal IRA, this PSA schedule increases the number of couples receiving marginal
incentives in the top income quintile by 266.1%. Surprisingly, the use of a schedule that
maximizes the IMPACT GROUP for the top quintile, rather than the total IMPACT GROUP,
reduces the total IMPACT GROUP only slightly (by roughly 9,000 households). However, it
increases the NO-IMPACT GROUP by 9.7%.

                                              35
    ratio of the IMPACT group to GIVEAWAY), and a 551.3% increase in cost effectiveness for

    the top income quintile, relative to the universal IRA proposal.

           These comparisons of IRA and PSA proposals incompletely incorporate behavioral

    responses. For example, households saving-strictly less than the PSA eligibility floor might

    increase their saving in order to become eligible for PSA5. It is also possible that these

    proposals will differentially affect saving for psychological reasons. Indeed, those who believe

    that IRAs significantly stimulated private saving often suggest psychological explanations, such

    as the following:   (1) IRAs were aggressively marketed by financial institutions; (2) IRAs

    provided taxpayers with an effective way of earmarking funds for retirement, thereby facilitating

    the division of funds into distinct 'mental accounts,' some of which are psychologically more

    difficult to invade; (3) the existence of a sizable early withdrawal penalty effectively locked

    saving into IRAs, thereby helping households to impose self-discipline; and (4) the IRA

    eligibility limit provided households with a saving 'target." Empirical evidence suggests that

    the fourth effect was particularly important (many households contributed exactly $2,000, the

    widely publicized contribution limit, even in cases where they were actually eligible to contribute

    more). The PSA system, like a universal IRA program, would preserve all these features.

    Indeed, the fourth effect would probably be strengthened with PSAs, since the proposal would

    provide many taxpayers with more ambitious targets.

•
    5. Conclusions

           The evidence presented in this paper supports the view that many Americans, particularly

    those without a college education, save too little. Our analysis also indicates that it should be

    possible to increase total personal saving among lower income households by encouraging the

                                                    36
formation and expansion of private pension plans. It is doubtful that favorable tax treatment of

capital income would stimulate significant additional saving by this group. Conversely, the

expansion of private pensions would probably have little effect on saving by higher income

households. However, these households are more likely to increase saving significantly in

response to favorable tax treatment of capital income. Currently, eligibility for IRAs is linked

to an AGI cap, and pension coverage is more common among higher income households than

among low income households. The most effective system for promoting personal saving would

have precisely the opposite features.

       Extending tax incentives for saving to higher income households is problematic. We

have discussed three competing policy options, IRAs with AGI caps, the universal IRA, and the

Premium Saving Account (PSA), Our analysis reveals that the PSA system is a more cost-

effective vehicle for providing saving incentives to all households, particularly those in the top

quintile of the income distribution.

       Pension policies and tax policies do not exhaust the full range of strategies for stimulating

personal saving. One particular class of policies not discussed here merits further attention. An

accumulating body of evidence, including that contained in sections 2 and 3 of this paper,

suggests that the behavior of many households (particularly those with lower income) are not

well-described by traditional economic theories. Consequently, it may be possible to design

more effective policies by educating the population or by exploiting the psychology of saving.

The Japanese appear to have had considerable success with such a strategy during the post-war

period (see Horioka [19881 and Bernheim [1991]). The development of a framework for

analyzing policies of this type is an important research priority.


                                                37
                                         References

 Avery, Robert B. and Gregory E. Elliehausen (1988), '1983 Survey of Consumer Finances:
       Technical Manual and Codebook," mimeo, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
       System, August

 Avery, Robert B. and Arthur B. Kennickell (1988), "1986 Survey of Consumer Finances:
        Technical Manual and Codebook," mimeo, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
        System, November

 Bernheim, B. Douglas (1991), The_Yanishing Nest Ere: Reflections on SavinE in America,
       Twentieth Century Fund

Bernheim, B. Douglas (1992a), "Is the Baby Boom Generation Preparing Adequately for
      Retirement? Summary Report," mimeo, Princeton University, August

Bernheirn, B. Douglas (1992b), "Is the Baby Boom Generation Preparing Adequately for
      Retirement? Technical Report," mimeo, Princeton University, August

Bernheim, B. Douglas (1992c), "A Discussion of Two Papers on Saving," prepared for the
      Economics of Aging Conference in Caneel Bay, mimeo, Princeton University, May

Bernheirn, B. Douglas arid John Karl Scholz (1992), "Premium Saving Accounts: A Proposal
      to Improve Tax Incentives for Saving," mimeo, Princeton University and the University
      of Wisconsin--Madison, September

Bernheirn, B. Douglas and John B. Shoven (1988), "Pension Funding and Saving," in Zvi
      Bodie, John B. Shoven, and David A. Wise (eds), Pensions in the U.S. Economy,
      Chicago: University of Chicago Press and NBER, 85-111

Bernheim, B. Douglas and Oded Stark (1988), "Altruism Within the Family Reconsidered: Do
      Nice Guys Finish Last?" American Economic Review 78, December, 1034-1045.

Boskin, Michael (1978), 'Taxation, Saving, and the Rate of Interest," Journal of Political
      Economy, April, 3-27

Bosworth, Barry, Gary Burtless, and John Sabelhaus (1991), "The Decline in Saving: Evidence
      from Household Surveys," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 183-241.

Diamond, Peter A. (1977), 'A Framework for Social Security Analysis," Journal of Public
       Economics, December, 275-298

Feenberg, Daniel R. and Jonathan Skinner (1989), "Sources of IRA Saving," in Lawrence
      Summers, ed., I&.Pplicy and the Economy, MIT Press, 25-46

                                            38
Feldstein, Martin (1992), "College Scholarship Rules and Private Saving," NBER Working
       Paper No. 4032, March

Gale, William G. and John Karl Scholz (1992), "IRAs and Household Saving," mimeo, UCLA
       and University of Wisconsin--Madison

Hall, Robert (1988), "Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption," Journal of Political Economy,
       96, 337-357

Hamermesh, Daniel S. (1984), "Consumption During Retirement: The Missing Link in the
     Life-Cycle," Review of Economics and Statistics, February, 1-7

Hausman, Jerry A. and Lynn Paquette (1987), "Involuntary Early Retirement and
       Consumption,' in G. Burtless, ed., Work. Health and Income Among the Elderly,
       Brookings Institution, 151-175.

Horioka, Charles Y. (1988), "Why is Japan's Private Saving Rate So High?" in R. Sato and T.
      Negishi (eds), Recent Developments in Japanese Economics, Tokyo: Harcourt Brace
      Jovanovich Japan/Academic Press

Hubbard, R. Glenn, Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes (1992), "Precautionary Saving and
      Social Insurance," mimeo, Columbia University, April

Joines, Douglas H. and James G. Manegold (1991), "IRA and Saving: Evidence From a Panel
        of Taxpayers," mimeo., U.S.C.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J., Avia Spivak, and Lawrence H. Summers (1982), "The Adequacy of
       Saving," American Economic Review, December, 1056-1069

Lazear, Edward P. (1992), "Some Thoughts on Savings," Hoover Institution Working Paper #E-
       92-17, June.

Manski, Charles F. (1990), "Dynamic Choice in a Social Setting: Learning From the Experience
      of Others," Journal of Econometrics, forthcoming.

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, (1989), Economic Outlook.
       Historical Statistics

Shefrin, Hersh M. and Richard H. Thaler (1988), "The Behavioral Life Cycle Hypothesis,"
       Economic Inquiry, 26, October, 609-643

Summers, Lawrence (1981), "Capital Taxation in a Life Cycle Growth Model," American
       Economic Review, September

                                               39
Summers, Lawrence (1985), "Issues in National Savings Policy," National Bureau of Economic
     Research Working Paper #1710, Cambridge, Massachusetts, September

Venti, Steven F. and David A. Wise (1986), "Tax-Deferred Accounts, Constrained Choice and
       Estimation of Individual Saving," Review of Economic Studies, LIII, 579-601

Venti, Steven F. and David A. Wise (1987), 'IRAs and Saving," in Martin Feldstein, ed. Ih
       Effects of Taxation on Capital Accumulation, Chicago: University of Chicago Press and
       NBER, 7-48

Vend, Steven F. and David A. Wise (1989), "Aging, Moving, and Housing Wealth," in David
      A. Wise (ed), The Economics of Aging, Chicago: University of Chicago Press and
      NBER

Venti, Steven F. and David A. Wise (1990), "Have IRAs Increased U.S. Saving?: Evidence
       from Consumer Expenditure Surveys," Ouarterly Journal of Economics, 105 (August),
      66 1-698

Venti, Steven F. and David A. Wise (1991), "The Saving Effect of Tax-Deferred Retirement
       Accounts: Evidence from SIPP," in B. Douglas Beroheim and John B. Shoven eds.,
       National Saving and Economic Performance, Chicago: University of Chicago Press and
       NEER, 103-128

Venti, Steven F. and David A. Wise (1992), 'Government Policy and Personal Retirement
       Saving,' Tax Policy and the Economy, 6, 1-41




                                           40
             Appendix: Household Income and the Interest Elasticity of Saving


        Consider a two-period model, in which an individual maximizes

                              u(c1 , c2) =   a'   [(c1 —       +
                                                                     (c2
                                                                           —
                                                                               m)]

subject to


                                     C   +—
                                          C2 = W + WL
                                                   —
                                             1÷r                   1+r

where c, denotes consumption in the t-th period of life (t= 1,2), r is the after-tax rate of return,

w is earnings in the   first period, w is earnings     in the second period (the reader should construe

this as pension income, where       <1   is the replacement rate),         m is minimum consumption, and

  is the (constant) elasticity of marginal utility with respect to consumption. Optimization

requires

                                         c2—m='y(c1—m),

where


                                         y [(1 +
Substituting this expression into the budget constraint and solving for first period saving (s =

w - c1), we obtain

                           s = (w   —m) — (1
                                                   +r)(w —m) + (wi. —m)
                                                           1   +r÷y

From this equation, we derive an expression for the interest elasticity of saving:




                                                      41
                                              rli-(
                                           = — J l(l +r)(1 —a)
                                  sdr                l+r+y
where

                                  = (1 + r) (w — in) + (wp   —
                                                                 m)
                                           y(w-m) -(w-m)
It is then apparent that


                             dw       (1 +r)(1 —a)(l +r÷y) dw

It follows that the sign of thjdw is the same as the sign of d/dw. But


                                dw [(y-)w + m(l-y)]2
which is positive if and only if <    1.   Thus, as long as income replacement during retirement

is less than complete, the interest elasticity of saving rises with income.




                                                42
                                          Table 1



                     Deductible Contribution Formula: Married Couples

                              Deductible Qualified             Deductible Qualified
                               Contribution Floor              Contribution Ceiling
If your income is           (Added to Capital Income)          (Added to Fboor)


Less than $34,000                     0                          $2,250 or $4,000

Greater than $34,000          .167x(Income-34,000)               $2,250 or $4,000




                    Deductible Contribution Formula: Single Households

                              Deductible Qualified             Deductible Qualified
                               Contribution Floor              Contribution Ceiling
If your income is           (Added to Capital Income)          (Added to Floor)


Less than $42000                      0                                $2,000

Greater than $42,000           .34x(Tncome-42,000)                     $2,000




    For the purpose of comparison with IRAs, married couples with one earner are allowed
to contribute $2,250 and married couples with two earners can contribute $4,000. In the
actual implementation of this proposal we see no compelling reason to make this distinction.
                                             Table 226

   Panel A: Average Annual Saving of Married Couples, IRA Contributors 1983-
   198627

                                                                   Dollars
   Income Quintiles        Percentage that      Average Amount for       Median Amount for
                                Save             HHlds that Save          HHlds that Save

  Second                        61.5                      12,741               6,839
  Middle                        58.5                      11,140              5,432
  Fourth                        61.7                      19,693              9,358
  Highest                       56.4                      90,296              19,695
  Full Population               595                      26,728               7,128

  Panel B: Average Annual Saving of Single Households, IRA-Contributors 1983-
  19862

                                                                   Dollars
  Income Quintiles        Percentage that      Average Amount for       Median Amount for
                               Save             HHlds that Save          HHlds that Save
  Lowest                       56.6                      2,885                2,322
 Second                        58.7                      5,015                5,841
 Middle                        70.7                      4,402                2,475
 Fourth                        63.0                      8,017               3,518
 Highest                       60.1                      36,212              9,923
 Full Population               61.7                      11,130              3,579




     26Data are from the 1983-1986 Survey of Consumer Finances. Saving is defined in the
text, income deciles are given in Table 1.

    27The weighted number of couples that contributed to IRAs between 1983 and 1986 is
13,536,814.

    28The weighted number of singles that contributed to IRAs between 1983 and 1986 is
3,252,938.
Table 3: A Comparison of 3 Saving-Incentive Proposals, Married Couples
                                      rMPACT GROUP (in l000s)
Income Ouintile        IRA wI AG! Cap         Universal IRA              A
                                                                         560
Lowest                        559                  559
Second                        344                  344                   377
Middle                        353                  550                   602
Fourth                         o                   284                   622
                               0                   102                   228
Highest
Full Population              1,256                 1,840                 2,388


                                      NO-IMPACT GROUP (in l000s)
Income Ouintile        IRA wI AG! Cap         Universal IRA              EA
Lowest                       1,039                 1,039                 921
Second                        1,262                1,262                 1,143
Middle                       1,277                 1,080                  813
Fourth                         0                   1,420                 773
Highest                        0                   1,416                  817
Full Population              3,578                 6,218                 4,467

                                  ANNUAL GIVEAWAY (in $l,000,000s)
Income Ouintile         IRA w/ AGI Cap     Universal IRA           PSA
Lowest                        465              465                 401
Second                        813              813                 725
Middle                        728              1,002               767
Fourth                          0                  1,631                  858
Highest                        0                   1,950                 1,119
Full Population               2,006                5,861                 3,870




    Simulations use data from the 1983-1986 Survey of Consumer Finances. Saving and
column headings are defined in the text. The PSA schedule is given in Table 1.
  Table 4:° A Comparison of 3 Saving-Incentive Proposals, Single Taxpayers
                                         IMPACT GROUP (in l000s)
  rncome Ouintile         IRA w/ AGI Cap         Universal IRA                PSA
  Lowest                        188                   188                     199
  Second                        105                   105                     150
 Middle                         136                   173                     173
 Fourth                          25                    97                      38
 Highest                         0                     40                     134
 Full Population                454                   603                     694

                                     NO-IMPACT GROUP (in l000s)
 Income Ouintile         IRA w/ AGI Cap    Universal IRA                     PSA
 Lowest                         196                   196                     185
 Second                         280                   280                    236
 Middle                         312                   275                    275
 Fourth                         290                   304                    263
 Highest                         0                    350                     197
 Full Population               1,078                 1,405                   1,155



 Income Ouintile
 Lowest
                         IRA w/ AGI Cap
                                 66
                                                 Universal IRA               A
                                                       66                     62
 Second                         141                   141                    117
 Middle                         168                   158                     158
 Fourth                         85                    188                    163
 Highest                         0                   292                     151
 Full Population                460                  845                     650




    30Simulations use data from the 1983-1986 Survey of Consumer Finances. Saving and
column headings are defined in the text. The PSA schedule is given in Table 1.
ct
CC

ct
C     C
(ID

C)

      C)
C
      C                                                >




C)    Ct

H     C
      Ct                                           R
           0



               awoDul qDsothip o   bulAcs pjosia
      Figure 2: Simulated Mter—Tax Income
          and Consumption Trajectories

                                                     AT   hcome


                                                    [endng
tcD




           27 33 39 45 51 57 63 69 75 81 87 93 99
             39 36 42 48 54 60 66 72 78 84 99102
0
0
                             B
H
                        8:

                        U)


                                 CD




                        so)

                        01




U)
                        N)

0


       (Thousands)
     Retijement Asets
     Figure 4: Rates of Asset Accumulation
                       No College

                                                       Pctuol
C
0
0)
                                                     Si-n/no   pen

0
0)
                                                      Si-n/pen
C
0)
C
 0
-c
 0
0
C




             27        37        47        57
                  32        42        52        62
     Figure   5:    Rates of Asset Accumulation
                                  College

U)
                                                              Pctual
c
0                                                           Sm/no
0)                                                                  pen


0
a)                                                           Sin/pen
C
a)
C
 0
-c
 0
0
C




                   27        37         47        57
                        32         42        52        62
                (11
         (1)




                               In

—                                    In
——
                                          a)




    zC
                               r—.
                               (N




           s5u1uJ08 / STGSSV
                           (1)
                    (1)




                                                  CN
                                                  (D

nj



                                             N
C    —                                                 w
     —
     C
                                             N
                                             r)

                                                 Ni

                                             N


         Lfl
         Ni
               Ni   i             L1)   Ui
                                        d



                      sbuiujo /
()       jfI
                                         (N
                                         (0


                                    U)


                                         (N
                                         Lfl




     0                                         a)

     U
     0
     z
                                         (N



                                    (N



         (0   (N — co dDdd     (N




              sbuiujo / sssj
$         Jk
          II   cL

                    zI
                    01
(-)


                                         -
                                         -u-
                                         -         (N




      )
      C                                  -   N..
                                                        a)




                                         -i
          In                   (N   -   C)




bC

                     sbuwD /
—
    C

Q   .-




         (spuosnouj)
           6uvDs
