                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    A DYNAMIC SPATIAL MODEL




                              Paul Krugman




                         Working Paper No. 4219




          NATIONAL, BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                         November 1992




This paper is part of NBER's research program in International Trade and
Investment. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #4219
                                                    November 1992

                        A DYNAMIC SPATIAL MODEL


                                         ABSTRACT


          Any interesting model of economic geography must involve a tension
between "centripetal" forces that tend to produce agglomerations and
"centrifugal" forces that tend to pull them apart. This paper explores one such
model, and shows that the model links together a number of themes in the
geography literature. These include: the role of market access, as measured by
a measure of "market potential", in determining manufacturing location; the
role of forward and backward linkages in producing agglomerations; the
potential for "catastrophes", i.e.   ,   discontinuous   changes in location in response
to small changes in exogenous variables: and the idea that the economy is a
"self-organizing system" that evolves a self-sustaining locational structure.



Paul Krugman
Department of Economics
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02 139
(617) 253-2655
Fax: (617) 253-4096
and NBER
       After a generation of neglect, the last
few years have seen a broad revival of
interest in regional economics. Economists
interested in international trade, in growth,
and in macroeconomics have all turned to
regional models and regional data. This
revival of interest in matters regional has
several sources.
     First, regional economic issues, though
they faded from mainstream economics for more
than    twenty years,   are of considerable
importance in their own right. The importance
of the regional dimension has been driven
home by such events as the boom—bust cycle in
New England and the difficulties of German
reunification. So—called "spatial aspects" ——
a euphemism for the continuing poverty of
much of Europe's periphery —— are a major
issue in the discussions of economic and
monetary union in Europe (see Commission of
the European Communities, 1990)
     Second, regional experience provides a
valuable laboratory for empirical work. Thus
Blanchard and Katz       (1992)   use regional
evidence   to investigate the process of
macroeconomic adjustment, Barro and Salai
Martin (1991) use it to investigate the
characteristics of the growth process, and
Glaeser et.al (1990) use it to shed light on
the nature of external economies.
                        2



      Finally,   regional economics,or more
broadly economic geography, is a subject of
considerable     intellectual       interest.     In
particular, it is one place in which economic
theory can make contact with trends in other
fields of research. A number of economists,
notably Brian Arthur (J.990a, 1990b) have
argued that increasing returns and external
economies mean that real           economies     are
characterized by strongly nonlinear dynamics.
They thus argue that economic analysis should
draw on the       ideas of scientists           like
Prigogine (Nicolis and Prigogine 1989), who
emphasize     the possibilities of multiple
equilibria,   catastrophic change, and self-
organization.    (See Waldrop (1992) for an
entertaining description of the attempts,
centered on the Santa Fe Institute, to make
"complexity"    into an          interdisciplinary
organizing principle) .     It
                           is debatable how
useful these ideas will turn out to be in
economics at large, but it seems clear that
they have their most natural application in
spatial and regional economics.            Indeed,
geographers have been among the first social
scientists to attempt to make use of trendy
new concepts in nonlinear dynamics (e.g.
Wilson (1981))
     This paper is an exploration of the
                         3


dynamic implications of a simple model of
economic geography. I have presented versions
of this model in two earlier papers (Krug-man
1991,    1992) .  Those   papers,    however,
restricted themselves to static analysis,
asking under what conditions particular
spatial economic structures were, in fact,
equilibria. This paper is explicit about the
dynamics. It also extends the two—region or
one—city analysis of the earlier papers to
the case of multiple agglomerations.
        While the model is simple in conception,
and the results we get are quite intuitive,
this dynamic analysis defies paper—and—pencil
analytics. Thus the paper relies heavily on
numerical examples.  This is currently an
unfashionable theoretical technique, but as
we will see it is highly productive in this
case.
     The paper is in seven parts. Part 1
describes the basic approach, and briefly
surveys some theoretical antecedents. Part 2
lays out the assumptions of the model. Part 3
shows      how    short—run equilibrium   is

determined. Part 4 uses a static analysis of
a two—region case to illustrate the nature of
the "centripetal" and "centrifugal" forces in
the model. Part 5 then examines dynamics in
the two—region case, while Part 6 analyzes
                      4



the evolution of a multi—region economy.
Finally, Part 7 draws some conclusions.


1. The basic aroach

       Any interesting model of economic
geography must exhibit a tension between two
kinds of forces: "centripetal" forces that
tend to     pull   economic   activity   into
agglomerations, and "centrifugal" forces that
tend to break such agglomerations up or limit
their size.
      There is a well—developed literature in
urban economics, largely deriving from the
work of Henderson (1974), in which a system
of cities evolves from such a tension. In
Henderson—type models, the centripetal force
arises   from assumed localized external
economies in production; the centrifugal
force is urban land rent. Together with
assumptions   about   the process of city
formation, Henderson's approach yields a
model of the number and sizes of cities
(though not of their location relative to one
another)
      There is a variant of this approach,
represented for example by Fujita (1988), in
which external economies are not assumed but
instead derived from increasing returns in a
                           5


monopolist ical   ly      competitive     industry
producing nontraded inputs. This leaves the
basic approach unchanged, and still leaves
the spatial relationship of cities to each
other undetermined.
       In my own work, I have tried a somewhat
different approach. No special assumptions
are made either about localized external
economies or nontradeability. Indeed, cities
are not primitive concepts in the model.
Instead,  agglomerations   emerge from the
interaction between increasing returns at the
level of the individual production facility,
transportation costs, and factor mobility.
Because of    increasing  returns,  it is
advantageous to concentrate production of
each good at a few locations. Because of
transportation costs, the best locations are
those with good access to markets (backward
linkage) and suppliers (forward linkage) . But
access to markets and suppliers will be best
precisely at those points at which producers
have   concentrated, and hence drawn mobile
factors of production to their vicinity.
     But not all factors are mobile, and the
presence of immobile factors provides the
centrifugal       force    that   works    against
agglomeration. In principle, one should
include urban land rents as part of the
                        6




story:     in the models I have worked out so
far,     however, this force is disregarded.
Instead,     the only force working against
agglomeration   is the incentive to set up new
facilities to serve a dispersed agricultural
hinterland.
     Many of the elements of this story have
been familiar to geographers for some time.
 (Useful surveys of the geography literature
may be found in Dicken and Lloyd (1990) and
Chisholm    (1990)) .  At   the    risk   of
oversimplifying a rich tradition, we may
identify three main strands of literature
that bear on the approach taken here.
       Closest in spirit to my model is the
literature on "market potential", begun by
Harris (1954) . This literature argues that
the desirability of a region as a production
site depends on its access to markets, . and
that the quality of that access may be
described by an index of "market potential"
which is a weighted sum of the purchasing
power of all regions,   with the weights
depending inversely on distance. Thus if   is
the income of region k,    and 0jk is the
distance between j and k, then the market
potential of region j would be determined by
an index of the form
                          7


                  M =   Ek Yg(D)            (1)


where g(.) is some declining function.
     Harris      showed that the traditional
manufacturing belt in the United States was,
for a variety of g(.) functions, the area of
highest market potential: while he did not
have an explicit model, he noted informally
that the persistence of that belt could be
attributed to the circular relationship in
which industrial concentration tended both to
follow   and to create market         access:

"[Mjanufacturing has developed partly in
areas or regions of largest markets and in
turn the size of these markets has been
augmented and other favorable conditions have
been developed by the very growth of this
industry." (Harris 1954, p. 315, quoted by
Chisholm 1990)
    Market potential analyses have been a
staple of geographical discussion, especially
in Europe (see, for example, Keeble et. al.
1982). The main theoretical weakness of the
approach is a           lack of    microeconomic
foundations: while it is plausible that some
index of market potential     should help
determine production location, there is no
explicit representation of how the market
                      a

actually works.
     A second, closely related literature
emphasizes the role of cumulative processes
in regional growth. Pred (1966), drawing on
the ideas of Myrdal (1957), suggested that
agglomerations, by providing a large local
market, are able to attract new industries,
which further enlarges their local market,
and so on. Other authors, such as Dixon and
Thirlwall (1975), have proposed alternative
motives   for  agglomeration   but   similar
dynamics. Such cumulative causation suggests
that initial advantages due to historical
accident may play a major role in explaining
the pattern of location. Like the market
potential literature, however, the cumulative
process literature lacks microfoundations.
     Finally, we must mention central place
theory. Developed by Christaller (1933) and
Lösch (1940), this theory emphasizes the
tradeoff between economies of scale and
transportation costs. Central place theory
suggests that the attempts of firms to make
the best of this tradeoff should lead to the
emergence of a lattice of production sites
roughly evenly spaced across the landscape,
perhaps in a hierarchical structure in which
activities with larger scale economies or
lower transport costs are concentrated in a
                       9


smaller number of higher—level sites. Central
place theory has been a powerful organizing
principle for research, even though it has
well—known weaknesses. Most notably, not only
does    it    not     have    any    explicit
microfoundations: it     also neglects    the
circular causation that is such a central
theme in both the market potential and the
cumulative process literatures. Nonetheless,
one would like a geographical model to
exhibit at least some central—place features.
      In summary, then, the urban economics
literature    offers   clear   and   explicit
analysis, but does not model the spatial
relationship of cities to each other. The
geographical   tradition,   while   rich in
insight, lacks a microeconomic foundation and
as a result lacks the sharp edges we want
from a theoretical analysis. What we want to
do next is introduce a formal model, with
complete microfoundations, that captures and
clarifies the insights of the geography
tradition.


2. Assumptions of the model


      In any model in which increasing returns
play a crucial role, one must somehow handle
the problem of market structure. Traditional
                              10

urban models do so by assuming               that
increasing returns are purely external to
firms, allowing the modeler to continue to
assume perfect competition.   The approach
taken here, however, involves avoiding, any
direct assumption of external economies:
externalities emerge as a consequence of
market interactions involving economies of
scale at the level of the individual firm.
Thus we must somehow model an imperfectly
competitive market structure. The workhorse
model of this kind is, of course, the Dixit—
Stiglitz       (1977)     model of   monopolistic
competition.   Dixit—Stiglitz    monopolistic
competition is grossly unrealistic, but it is
tractable and flexible; as we will see, it
leads to a very special but very suggestive
set of results.
    We assume, then, an economy in which
there are two sectors, manufacturing and
agriculture. Everyone shares the same Cobb—
Douglas tastes for the two types of goods:

                        u =   CMCA           (2)


where     is the share of manufactured goods in
expenditure.
        We assume that there is a single,
homogeneous agricultural good. Manufactures,
                      II

however, is a composite of a large number of
symmetric product varieties, with a constant
elasticity of substitution a between any two
varieties:


                                          (3)
               CM   =[E1 9]ri

      In setting up the production side of
this economy, we want to make allowance for
both mobile    and   immobile  factors   of
production, which at any given time are
distributed across a number of locations j =
1, . .. ,J. One might suppose that the natural
thing would be to assume that labor and
possibly capital are the mobile factors,
while land is the immobile factor; and that
both mobile and immobile factors are used in
both sectors. To do this, however, we would
have   to   take   account   of   land-labor
substitution in both sectors,        a major
complication of the model. We would also have
to worry about where landowners live. It
turns out to be much simpler, if even less
realistic, to assume that the two factors of
production are both "labor": mobile "workers"
who produce manufactured goods and immobile
"farmers" who produce the agricultural good.
                            12

         Farming is an activity that takes place
under constant returns to scale; thus the
farm labor used in producing any given
quantity of the agricultural good at location
j can, by choice of units, be set equal to
production:

                      LAj =      0Aj                (4)


     Manufacturing,         however, we assume to
involve economies of scale, with a fixed cost
for any variety produced at any given
location:

                   LMIj =   a +                     (5)




         Let LA and L, represent the economy—wide
supplies of the two factors "farmers" and
"workers" respectively. We will assume that
these supplies are fixed. They are, however,
allocated across locations. A share    of the
farm labor force is in location j; we take
these shares as exogenous. At any point in
time, a share A1 of the manufacturing labor
force is also in location j; these shares
will evolve over time in a fashion specified
below.
     At any point in time, then, there will
be   location—by—location              full   employment
                                13

equations for both factors/sectors:

                       LAj =                      (6)



                     E.LMIj = AjLM                (7)




       Next we introduce transportation costs.
For simplicity, we make some completely
unrealistic assumptions about these costs.
First, we assume that they apply only to
manufactured goods. Second, we assume that
they take the "iceberg" form introduced by
Paul    Samuelson:          instead of modeling a
separate transportation industry, we simply
assume that a fraction of any manufactured
good     shipped       melts         away en   route.
Specifically, let x be the amount of some
good shipped from j to k, and let z be the
amount that arrives; then we assume

                     ZjJk
                            =                    (8)



where r is the transportation cost and Dik is
the distance between the two locations.
     Finally, we turn to factor mobility.
Farmers are assumed completely immobile.
                             14

Workers are assumed to move toward locations
that offer them higher real wages.    (No
attempt is made here to model the moving
decision explicitly) .         As we will see in the
next section, it is possible to solve the
model at any point in time for the real wages
   paid to workers at each location. Let us
define the average real wage as

                         =                         (9)



     Then the assumed law of motion of the
economy is

                   d).                —
                             P)j((i)j(O)          (10)
                   dt


     That    is,     workers        move   away   from
locations with below—average real wages and
toward sites with above—average real wages.
     We have now specified a complete dynamic
model of geographic dynamics. The inputs into
this model are the parameters. , T, and a
 (which turn out to be the only parameters
that cannot be eliminated by choice of
units); a given allocation of farm labor
across locations; a matrix of distances
between locations; and an initial allocation
                         15

of   workers across, locations. These inputs
determine equilibrium at a point in time, and
in particular the vector of real wages, which
dictates the changes in the allocation of
workers, leading to an evolution of that
equilibrium over time.
     This sounds pretty abstract. Our next
step is to describe some of the features of
short—run equilibrium.
                        16

3. Short-run equilibrium


        As a preliminary step to the description
of short—run equilibrium, it is useful to
recall two basic points about Dixit—Stiglitz—
type models.
     First, in these models, the producer of
any one manufactured variety faces a constant
elasticity of demand a. Her profit—maximizing
strategy is therefore to set price as a fixed
markup over marginal cost:

                   Pu                      (11)


where        is the wage rate of workers at
location j.
        By choice of units we can simply say
that the f.o.b. price of manufactured goods
at j is equal to the wage rate:
                        =                  (12)
                             Wi



     Second, if firms are free to enter until
profits are zero, there is a unique zero—
prof it output of any manufactured variety,
which can be shown to be
                        17


                    =                     (13)


     Since all varieties are produced at the
sane scale, the number of varieties produced
at any given location is simply proportional
to that location's manufacturing labor force.
In particular, let n be the number of
manufactured varieties produced in the
economy as a whole, and let n be the number
produced at location j. Then we have

                  nj/n =                  (14)


     Equation (14) plays a crucial role in
the whole analysis in this paper. The logic
of the model depends crucially on increasing
returns, yet as we write out the equations of
short-run   equilibrium  these   increasing
returns will not be very visible. Where did
they go? The answer is that they are hidden
in (14). What increasing returns do is to
make it profitable to produce each variety in
only one location,           so that different
locations do not produce the same set of
goods but differentiated bundles of products.
When a location gains labor it does not
produce more of the same mix of products, but
                         18

adds new products. This "quantization" of
production is   the only way in which
increasing   returns  actually   enter   the
solution, but it is enough: as we will see,
the micro assumption does indeed have major
macro effects.
     There are now several ways to proceed.
The one that seems easiest represents short—
run equilibrium as the solution of four sets
of equations.
       First,     we determine income at each
location.       Given our assumption of zero
transport costs on agricultural goods, the
wage rate of farmers is the same at all
locations. Let there be ,i workers and 1—
farmers, a normalization that will set
economy—wide income equal to 1; and let us
measure all prices and wages in terms of the
agricultural good. Then we have

                 Yj =         +          (15)




     Next, we find the true or ideal price
index of the manufactures     aggregate to
consumers at each location. To do this, we
note that in order to have one unit of a
manufactured variety make it from k to j,
exp(rDJ) units must be shipped, so the c.i.f.
price on arrival is Wk exp(TDJ). Given the
                        19

CES function (3), the true price index of
manufactures at j is therefore


             T   =
                     [kxwkek)1]         (16)


     Given these true price indices, we can
solve for equilibrium wage rates. It is shown
in the appendix that

                                        (17)
                 =
                     [k Yk(Tke']
     It is worth stopping briefly at this
point, to note that the right hand side of
(17) bears a family resemblance to the market
potential index (1) . Like that index, it
depends on a weighted sum of purchasing power
at all locations, with the weights inversely
related to distance. The difference is that
the true price indices also enter into the
index: essentially this reflects the effect
of competition from producers in other
locations, which is missing from the usual
market potential approach. But there is a
definite affinity between the workings of
this model and the market potential tradition
in geography.
     Equation (17), however, only determines
                          20

wage rates in terms of agricultural goods.
Workers are interested in real wages in terms
of a   consumption basket  that  includes
manufactures as well. Thus the real wage
depends on both the wage in terms of the
agricultural       good and on the manufactures
price index:
                         =                   (18)


        We now have a soluble set of equations
for     short—run equilibrium. Equations (15)—
 (17) need to be solved simultaneously for the
vectors Y, T, and w; given these one can then
solve    (18)

     These equations are easily solved on the
computer —— in the numerical examples below,
I simply started with an initial guess at w
and then cycled (with some damping) over
(15)-(17) until convergence. In general,
however, they cannot be solved with pencil
and paper. Yet we would like to get some
intuition about the forces in our model
before going over to numerical methods.
        In order to do this, we examine a
limited question for a special case, before
moving on to more general problems.

4.   Centriieta1   and centrifuqal force-s
                       21

        In this section of the paper I ask a
question originally posed in Krugman (1991),
but which we can now restate in terms of our
more general framework.
        Consider an economy with only two
locations, each of which has the same number
of farmers       =     = 0.5) Under what
                                 .



conditions      is   concentration           of     all
manufacturing in one location        =   1   or 0) an
equilibrium? By answering this question, we
get some useful       insights   into how the
parameters of the model affect the relative
strength of centripetal and centrifugal
tendencies.
        What we do is solve (15)-(18) on the
assumption that A1=i, A2=O (the case where A1
= 0 is symmetric) . We ask whether, in that
case, the real wage that workers would earn
at location 2 is less than that at location
1. Concentration of manufacturing at 1 is an
equilibrium if and only if          in that
case.
        To save notation, let's normalize the
distance between the two locations to 1. Then
we immediately find from (15)—(18) that

                                                  (19)



and, substituting, that
                           22


            = [1+I.L et()+ _ec                    (20)


and

           = e           e+       1-I.L et1)10   (21)


      The condition for sustainability of
concentrated manufacturing, then, is that the
right hand side of (21) be less than one.
      In   the   intuitive    discussion of
agglomeration in Part 1 of this paper, it was
argued that agglomeration is possible because
of the circular relationship between the
location of the market and the location of
manufacturing. We can see this intuition
borne out in this model by considering what
would happen if manufacturing were a very
small part of the economy,          j.L close to zero.
Then (21) would reduce to

                 =                        _<1    (22)
                     [_.e_t1   ÷+et(°')



which is always less than one because of
Jensen's inequality. In this case, in which
firms sold only to the agricultural market,
                         23

it would always be advantageous to move away.
from any concentration of manufacturing in
order to get away from competitors.
     This desire to get away from competition
represents the centrifugal force in this
model,     the   force    that works  against
agglomeration. By examining (21), however, we
see that when the manufacturing sector is a
significant part of tbe economy there are two
centripetal forces working to hold an
agglomeration together. First, the first term
in (21) becomes less than one. By referring
back to (18), we see that this term is there
because of the role of manufacturing firms as
suppliers of goods to manufacturing workers;
in effect, this is a kind of Hirschmann
(1958)-type forward linkacte. Second, the
expression inside the brackets involves a
higher weight on the component that is less
than one and a lower weight on the component
that is greater than one. This reflects the
point that the region in which manufacturing
is concentrated has a higher income than the
other location. Thus there is also a backwar
linkage in which manufacturing wants to be
close to the market that manufacturing itself
creates.
     An economy with a large JA, then, may
have    a   self-sustaining   manufacturing
                            24

concentration due to forward and backward
linkages,         and wemay   presume  that
concentration is more likely, the larger is
j. What about the other parameters?
     The parameter whose effect may seem
counter—intuitive to some readers is the
transportation cost r. Concentration is more
likely when transport costs are low. To see
why, we note the following:
     First,  when r=O,     = 1. No surprise
here:    in the absence of transport costs,
location doen't       matter.
        Second,    in the vicinity of r=O, we          find
that
                   ___             a—i.                (23)
                                           < Q
                                    a


        Finally, we note that (21) may. be
rewritten as

             —                 +
                 [(i_v(2a_1)              e(010I1h'u

        If
                         ci:I. >                       (25)




then asr grows the real wage in location 2
                           25

eventually must exceed 1. In that case the
relationship between transport costs and the
real wage must have the shape illustrated by
the curves in Figure 1 (which are calculated
forT=.2,7=4, and.L=.2and.3).At
high transport costs a concentration of
production is not sustainable; there is a
range of low transport costs for which such a
concentration is not sustainable.
         If (25) is not satisfied, the curve lies
below 1 for all values of r. To understand
this case, we note that a/(a—1) is the ratio
of price and hence average cost to marginal
cost, a measure of equilibrium economies of
scale. Thus (25) amounts to saying that
neither the share of manufacturing in the
economy nor economies of scale are too large.
If scale economies and the manufacturing
share are sufficiently large, workers will
prefer to        cluster        together   even   with
prohibitive transport costs.
     Returning to the case where     (25) is
satisfied, we note that what we have defined
is a critical value of r, r, below which
concentration is an equilibrium. We may offer
some rough intuition here by stepping a bit
outside the formal model. Basically, when
transport costs are sufficiently low it is
worthwhile for manufacturers to concentrate
                        26

their production geographically so as to
realize economies of scale. Once they have
decided to concentrate production, however,
the optimal location is one that other
producers have also chosen. So low transport
costs foster agglomeration.
        One might expect that concentration
would also be more likely the higher is j.
Indeed,     in Figure 1           the   lower curve
corresponds to the higher value of .          It   is
straightforward to show (see Krugman 1991)
that

                          >   0                (26)




        Let us also bear in mind that a,        the
elasticity     of substitution, is inversely
related to       the   equilibrium       degree. of
economies of scale.    Thus we would expect to
find    that a high elasticity of substitution
works  against agglomeration,   and we can
indeed show (again see Krugman 1991) that

                          <0                  (27)




        What we get from this static exercise is
an indication of how the parameters of the
                         27

model ought to affect the balance between the
centripetal forces that favor agglomeration
and the centrifugal forces that oppose it.
Agglomeration is favored by low transport
costs (low T), a large share of manufacturing
in the economy (high ) and strong economies
of scale at the level of the firm (low a)
       This is, however, only an analysis of a
static equilibrium. We must turn next to
dynamics.

5.     Dynamics   i n   the    two—resion   case:
stability, instability, and catastroihes

        Let us now consider dynamics while
still restricting ourselves to the case of
two locations. We are interested both in the
types of equilibrium that might occur and in
the process of transition between equilibria
when exogenous variables change.
        How should we go about examining
dynamics? It might be possible, with great
difficulty, to prove some theorems. It is
much   easier,    however,    simply to rely on
simulation.  Given the small number of
parameters, it is possible to explore the
model quite thoroughly on the computer. Thus
from this point on we will rely on numerical
methods.
                         28

     As a startingpoint, consider Figure 2.
This figure corresponds to the case analyzed
in the preceding section, where        =   = 0.5,
=.2, =4. Now, however, we plot the share of
location 1 in manufacturing, A., against the
real wage difference   —    Note that we can
rewrite (10) in the two—region case as


                  —P)1          12)          (28)


so this diagram allows us readily to identify
stable and unstable equilibria.
     In the figure, we show three cases: high
transport costs (r = .385), low transport
costs (r =   .285),   and an intermediate case (r
= 335).   In the high cost case, there is a
unique stable equilibrium with'manufacturing
equally divided between the two locations. In
the low cost case, there are two stable
equilibria with manufacturing concentrated in
either location, and an unstable equilibrium
with manufacturing evenly divided. In both
cases the relationship between        and the wage
difference is monotonic.
     But in the intermediate case this
relationship is not monotonic. In the case
illustrated there is a unique and stable
equilibrium,     but     with   slightly     lower
                      29

transport     costs there are three stable
equilibria:     two   equilibria   with    all
manufacturing   concentrated,  one with    it
equally split between the locations.
     On reflection, it must be the case that
when transport costs are near the critical
level r* identified in Part 4, there is a non—
monotonic relationship between A and the wage
differential. Suppose that transport costs
were just at the critical level. Then the
curve in Figure 2 would have to reach zero at
either end. It could thus only be monotonic
if it were linear and indeed flat, which is
impossible given the non—linearity of the
model. This suggests why there is such an
affinity between models in which increasing
returns give rise to multiple equilibria and
the methods of nonlinear dynamics; I will not
try to pursue this any further, but simply
note that this model seems to illustrate a
more general principle.
     Now that we have a way to look at the
dynamics of the model, let us consider how
the model behaves when exogenous variables
are shifted. To do this, we must choose some
variables to shift. There are actually only
four parameters in this two—region model: the
elasticity of substitution (which determines
the degree of scale economies), the share of
                      30

manufacturing, the level of transport costs,
and the.agricultural share of region 1. Given
the structure of this model both the degree
of economies of scale and the share of
manufacturing are parameters of tastes rather
than technology or resources, which makes it
somewhat problematic to think about what it
means when they change, so we focus on
agriculture and transport costs.
     Figure 3    shows a calculation that
illustrates how the set of equilibria change
when we start with an equal allocation of
agriculture between the regions (i=°•5) and
gradually increase that share to 0.5?. As in
Figure 2, we     set p.2, a =       4;    the
transportation cost is set sufficiently high
(r = .335) so that the unique equilibrium is
initially with equal manufacturing shares,
but not high enough to make the curve
monotonic.
     What we see is that as   rises, we first
see the equilibrium share of location 1 in
manufacturing rise. At a certain point two
more equilibria emerge: a stable equilibrium
with all manufacturing in location 1, and an
unstable interior equilibrium. This latter
equilibrium   and    the   stable   interior
equilibrium first converge, then vanish.
     We can illustrate the equilibria as we
                          31

vary       schematically with Figure 4. In that
figure,.     solid     lines
                           represent    stable
equilibria, broken lines unstable equilibria.
In parts of the range there exist both a
concentrated and an interior equilibrium; in
others only one equilibrium exists.
        Clearly,     there is a potential for
"catastrophes@ ':      situations in which small
changes in          the exogenous location of
agricultural production make an equilibrium
untenable and lead to large changes in the
location of manufacturing. Such a catastrophe
is illustrated in Figure 4. Suppose that the
economy is initially in equilibrium at point
1, with all manufacturing concentrated in
region 1. Then suppose the center of gravity
of agricultural production gradually shifts
to region 2. At first, this will leave the
basic locational structure unchanged, as the
economy moves from 1 to 2. Any further
reallocation of agriculture, however, will
lead to a collapse of region l's dominance of
manufacturing, and the economy will move to
point 3.
       We can give this catastrophe a name:
call it the "California catastrophe". It has
been argued by a number of historians that
the rapid growth that began in California
after about 1900 was a critical mass
                          32

phenomenon: with the discovery of oil —— an
immobile    sector that would be part of
"agricultur&'in    this   model -- the resource-
exporting      state      finally     offered      a
sufficiently large local market to attract
manufacturing, which further enlarged the
market, and so on. That is almost exactly
what we see happening as we move from 2 to 3.
     Next consider what happens as we change
transportation costs. Figure 5 shows what
happens as we gradually reduce T starting
from an initial position in which r= 335 and
   = .504, i.e. in which region 1 has the
larger agricultural base. At the starting
value of r, there are two stable equilibria,
in   one of which          region 2     has     some
manufacturing. As transport costs decline, it
becomes     increasingly    attractive     to
concentrate   production   near the    larger
market. Thus this interior equilibrium has a
rising share of manufacturing in region 1.
Eventually    the    interior    equilibrium
disappears. Figure 6 shows schematically how
the set of equilibria depends on r; again,
solid lines represent stable equilibria,
broken lines unstable equilibria.
     Once again we have the possibility of a
catastrophe. Suppose that we start at pointi
in Figure 6,     and that r falls gradually.
                         33

Initially    this will reduce but not eliminate
manufacturing in region 2. Once the critical
point 2 is passed, however, a cumulative
process of decline sets in, even if there is
no further fall in T,         until   region 2's
manufacturing is eliminated.
       We can call this the "Mezzogiorno
catastrophe". Some economic historians have
argued that the coming of the railroads, by
exposing the nascent industrial base of
Southern    Italy to competition from the North,
led to that region's industrial collapse.
Whether or not the story is true, this model
shows that it makes sense.
       These exercises do not fully exhaust the
possibilities      of the two—location         case.
Rather      than     explore   all of     these
possibilities,     however, we now move beyond
the two—region case to study the dynamics of
a multi—region example.

6. Dynamics in a      multi—reaion model: the
economy as a self—orsanizins system

       We now turn to a multi—region model.
There    are at least two reasons for moving
beyond the two—region         case.   First,     the
tradition    of geography strongly emphasizes
the   need to model equilibrium in space; while
                         34

one may learn something about this from two—
location models, eventually one wants to be
able to talk about a true spatial structure.
Second, and more immediately, we would like
to talk about multiple agglomerations and
their spatial relationship to each other;
this is impossible in a two—location model.
        We assume, then that there are J>2
locations,     and we return to the assumption
that     agricultural    workers     are    equally
distributed among the regions, with a share
l/J in each.
       In a many—region model it is necessary to
specify the matrix of distances between
locations.     I choose the simplest setup that
preserves symmetry: the locations are equally
spaced around a circle, with transportation
possible       only     along      the     circle's
circumference. We let the distance between
any two neighboring locations equal 1. In the
numerical examples described shortly, we
consider in particular the case of 12
locations, laid out like a clock face. (The
number 12 was chosen because it is a fairly
small    number with a          large number of
divisors) . In this case,     the distance between
location 2 and location 7 is 5; the distance
between location 2 and location 11 is 3.
        How can we explore this economy? I have
                        35

adopted what we might call a Monte Carlo
approach: start the economy with a random
allocation of manufacturing workers across
locations, and then let it evolve until it
converges. We get insight into the model by
performing this experiment repeatedly with
various parameter values.
     Consider first a base case (chosen after
                                =
some experimenting) in which      .2, r = .2,
and a    = 4.
           Figure 7 shows what happens on a
typical run of this case. The first set of
bars show the initial, random allocation of
workers across locations. The second set
shows the allocation to which the economy
converges.      All workers end up in two
concentrations,  at locations 1 and       7 ——
opposite one another on the circle.
        There are several interesting points to
notice here. First, it is evident that there
is a process of reinforcement of initial
advantage. Thus location 7, which starts with
the largest share of workers, is able thereby
to attract still more workers and eventually
take half of the total. This is exactly the
kind of cumulative process described by Pred
(1966)

     The process is not, however, simply One
in which locations with larger initial work
forces grow.      A second city emerges at
                        36

location 1. Now while 1 had a large initial
labor force, it was actually smaller than
that of other locations, for example location
location 8. But location 8 was too close to
the winning location 7, and fell under its
"agglomeration shadow", whereas 1 was able to
match 7's eventual status thanks to its
relative lack ofrivals for its agricultural
hinterland. This is why the two emergent
cities are opposite one another —— and
therefore why the eventual pattern is one of
two central places symmetrically placed.
     Does this case always produce the same
result? Not exactly. In many cases the cities
were not exactly opposite one another, ending
up 5 rather than 6 apart. Also, in a few
experiments the economy ended up with three
cities,     exactly evenly spaced around the
circle.
          In a controlled set of 20           runs,
however, the outcome was always        a two—city
economy.    In 12 of the 20 runs the two cities
were 5 locations    apart, e.g. at 3    and   8;   in
the   other 8 runs the two cities were exactly
opposite. Clearly the model economy shows
multiple equilibria both in terms of which
locations play which role and to some extent
even in terms of the equilibrium spatial
structure. Nonetheless, it is also clear that
                            37

there is a            systematic   tendency     toward
formation of central places roughly evenly
spaced across the landscape.
     What   happens          if we     change      the
parameters? I have tried 10 runs on each of
three alternative cases:

 (i)    Less differentiated products (a = 2,       r =
.2,     iL   = .2):
             In this case (in which firms
have more market power, and in which the
equilibrium degree of scale economies is also
larger),        all runs produced only a single
city.


 (ii) A laraer inanufacturinc share (a = 4, r =
.2, j = .4): In this case, in which one would
expect the backward and forward linkages
driving agglomeration to be stronger, we also
consistently get only a single city.

(iii) Lower transDort costs (a = 4, T = .1, L
= 2):  In this case we would expect there to
be less incentive to set up multiple urban
centers, and again all ten runs produce only
a single city.

         What do we learn? We have already seen,
earlier in the paper, how both the market
potential       and cumulative process approaches
                      38

are more or lessvalidated in this model. Now
we see not only that the same approach can
produce multiple agglomerations, but that
something resembling central place theory
also emerges, because the dynamic forces do
tend to produce agglomerations that are
roughly evenly spaced across the landscape.
     We may also, on a more mystical note,
observe that these examples illustrate,
albeit in a very simplistic way, how the
economy may be regarded as a self—organizing
system of the kind emphasized by Prigogine.
We start each run with no structure, only a
random allocation of workers       across a
featureless agricultural surface. Yet the
model consistently evolves into a large—scale
structure      withroughly    evenly   spaced
agglomerations. One need not be pompous about
this, but this model does offer a pretty nice
example of emergent structure in which the
assumptions     are not too close to the
conclusions.


7. Conclusions


    The study of economic geography is
important in its own right, and regional
economic data shed useful light on important
issues in other parts of economics. Beyond
                              39

this,     however,      the        study of     economic
geography can be a useful proving ground for
some ideas that may be useful in the rest of
economics. These include the importance of
multiple equilibria and nonlinear dynamics,
and the usefulness of the computer as a
theoretical as well as an empirical tool.
        In this paper I have offered some
exercises using a simple theoretical model of
location. The model is patently unrealistic,
yet the results are strongly suggestive. We
see how economies of scale at the individual
level may aggregate to external economies,
how these external economies may lead to
multiple equilibria, and how the character of
equilibria depend in a                  systematic   and
intuitive   way    on    such   factors as
transportation costs and economies of scale.
On a grander note, we see fashionable
"nonlinear" ideas like catastrophic dynamics
and self—organizing systems emerge as natural
consequences of the interaction of rational
economic      agents,         in    a    full   general
equilibrium model with all the trimmings.
Thus it may be hoped that the study of
economic geography will help bring these
ideas into wider use.
                          40



REFERENCES


Arthur,    B. (1990a) ,   "Positive     feedbacks in
the economy", Scientific American (February),
92—99.


Arthur,   Brian (1990b),          "Silicon Valley'
locational   clusters: when  do increasing
returns imply monopoly?", Mathematical Social
Sciences   19, 235—251.


Barro, R.   and Sala—i—Martin, X.  (1991)
"Convergence across states and regions",
Brookincs Papers on Economic Activity 1:1991.


Blanchard,     O.J.   and Katz,         L.      (1992),
"Regional evolutions", Brookinas Papers on
Economic Activity 1:1992.


Chisholm, M. (1990), Recfions in recession and
resurgence, London: Hyman.

Commission of the European                  Communities
(1990),    One market,         one money,      European
Commission: Brussels.


Christaller, w.   (1933) ,       Central      Places in
Southern Germany,    Jena:         Fischer.     English
                        41

translation by C.W. Baskin, London: Prentice
Hall, 1966.


Dicken, P. and Lloyd, P., Location in     -

New York: Harper and Row.


Dixit, A.     and    Stiglitz, J.        (1977),
"Monopolistic competition and optimum product
diversity", American Economic Review, June.



Dixon, R. and Thirlwall, A.P. (1975), "A
model of regional growth differences along
Kaldorean lines", Oxford Economic Pacers 27,
201—14.


Fujita,   M.    (1988),    "A   monopolistic
competition model of spatial agglomeration:
differentiated product approach", Resional
Science and Urban Economics 18, 87—124.


Glaeser, E., Kallal, H., Scheinkman, J. and
Shleifer, A.   (1990) , "Growth in cities",
mimeo, U. of Chicago.


Harris, C. (1954), "The market as a factor in
the localization of industry in the United
States",   Annals of         the Association of
American Geosraohers, 64, 315—48.
                           42

Henderson, J.V. (1974), "The sizes and types
of cities", American Economic Review 64, 640—
56.



Hirschmann, A.       (1958), The Stratecrv of
Economic   Development,         New   Haven:      Yale
University Press.


Keeble, D.E., Owens, P.L, and Thompson, C.
(1982), "Regional accessibility and economic
potential in        theEuropean         Contrnunity",
Resional Studies, 16, 419—32.


Krugman, P. (1991), "Increasing returns and
economic geography", Journal of Political
Economy, June.


Krugman, P.  (1992), "First nature, second
nature, and metropolitan location", Journal
of Resional Science, forthcoming.

Lösch, A. (1940), The Economics of Location,
Jena:  Fischer.   English translation,   New
Haven: Yale University Press, 1954.


Myrdal, G.       (1957),    Economic Theory and
Underdeveloped Regions, London: Duckworth.


Nicolis, G.       and Prigogine, I.            (1989),
                       43

Exmlorincr complexity, New York: Freeman.

Pred, A. (1966), The spatial dynamics of us
urban—industrial  growth,   Cambridge:  MIT
Press.

Waldrop,   M.   (1992), Como1exitiv New York:
Simon and Schuster.


Wilson, A.G. (1981), Catastrophe theory and
bifurcation:    apnlications to urban       and
reaional   science,   Berkeley:   University of
California Press.
        Appendix                                       1




 APPENDIX: THE "MARKET POTENTIAL" FUNCTION

     In this appendix we show how equation
(17), which determines wage rates in each
location, may be derived.
        Let us refer to the c.i.f. price of a
good i at location k as             If the good was
produced at location, this c.i.f price is
(given our choice of units) equal to the wage
rate at j, multiplied by a transportation
cost factor that depends on the distance:

                     P'j,k   =wei              (A.1)

        We know that residents of k will spend a
share u     of     their income on manufactured
goods, implying

                    EP"i,kCj.k = p.Y           (A.2)

      We also know that the relative demand for
any   two manufactured goods depends only on
their     relative price. Let c            be     the
consumption      of good i at location k. Then the
consumption of one good relative to another -
— say, good i relative to good 1 ——       is
      By substituting (A.2) into (A.3), we can
     Appendix                                     2




                                      a
                  Cix
                  Clk
                        4r"i.t            (A.3)
                         I1   P1j,k

derive   an expression for the exoenditure of k
residents on product 1:
        Appendix                                             3




                                           I

                 ClkPlk = ILYk..h1k                  (A.4)
                                  1k Lii

        Now consider the total sales of goods
manufactured at a particular location, say
location 1, at location k. (Because of the
"iceberg" assumption on transportation costs,
these sales will include the full value of
the expenditure of k residents on these
goods). There are     such goods, competing
with n goods from each region j, all selling
at the c.i.f. prices described by (A.1). It
is thus clear from (A.4) that the total
expenditure by k residents on j products is
                                       D.      1—a
                                  n1we
                                     1
                 S1      1LY.             w fl-a     (A.5)
                  1j.

                                -.ij nwe
                                      r
                                     21.2

       Divide     both       the numerator and the
denominator of (A.5) by the total number of
products n, and recall that n3/n = A. Then we
have
                                               1-
                      = X1          [w1
                Sik                                    (6)



       Using our definition of the true price
index at k, given in text equation (16), this
may be rewritten
      Appendix                                            4




                 Sik   = AlY4WleJ'Tk1             (A.7)


      Now    consider          the     short—run market
clearing condition for workers at location 1.
One way to write this condition is that
economy—wide expenditure on these workers'
products must equal their income. Recall that
we have normalized supplies of labor so that
there are 2        workers in the economy as a
whole. The income of workers at location 1 is
therefore )1/.Lw1. Setting this equal to the sum
of their sales at all locations k, we have

            XlWL=?lILW1'°k           Y4e'TkI°'    (A.8)

or,   finally,


                       =                          (A.9)
                 Wi        {Ek Yk(e1kTk)]Q
       The same relationship holds for each
location,    giving us the expression (17) in
the text.
      __________________________
      I   I   I   .1 I   I  I
                                 _______ C


                                                          C

                                                          cc
                                                          d

                                   H                      N
                                       H
                                                          C


                                                          d
r
cii
L                                  \                      () 3
                                                          C-f-p
LL
                                       \
                                           \              *
                                                          c


                                                          C

                                                          N



                        -
                                                 /:

         I   I                                        —


                 OZ'L       OVI.               OOJ    060
             aboM DJ aAIoIaI
GAUSS        Son Nov   8 191Ot15 1992


                                                     Figure 2
        0
        0


        0
   0-
 '3)
 0 t
 Co.
 00
 4—
                                                         N
                   -                                 -       S.
                                                 —       t___                                   —    -    -
                                                         -
                                                         —Nt_'•
                                                                      N                    __•_-'_t..-
 <3)0'                                                                        -'
 00     I.
               -                                                                       N
        bL1


        Qr
        0
                                                                                                          ¼

        0
                         .1             I                         I       i        I

        ?°               Q:1                D3               0.5                            Q7           Q,'   OS   19
                                                                                                   0


                                        \•.\•,
         _____________________________________________
              •    I                  •,I
                            I
                                                 •—• I\



                                                 \;•••\\• \\
                                                  I
                                                      fg :(   :
                                                                  I       I   -

                                                                                          /
                                                                                                   to
                                                                                                   d


                                             7:           1           1
                                                                                      /
                                                                                                   N



                                 /
                                  // / / /  .-
                                                          /
                                                                              /
    L                  /                /   /
                                                                  /                                     0
                                                                                                        -o




         /
             //•_
               : /
                   /-•/                                                                            +
                                                                                                   d


        1/ :.
                  I          /
                                                                                                   C
                  I          I                                                                     0

p            --                                                                                    0
C


         I



        G000
                      • £000
                        I\i "'-.iocio
                                 -.
                                                      I                           I

                                                                          L000— LOOt—
                                                                                          i   .L
                                                                                                   0




                           aouaJaJ4ip 9bDM
lambda I

                      2   I




                      3




                              phil
           Figure 4
  _____________________________ _______                    0
                      —. I      -   I




                                          \'
                                          N
                      'N
                           N-
                                                           0
                                                           0
                                                   \
                                                       I   r
                                               :   /
                                          7/               N
                                                           C

                                        /..;
                                                           C




0t000 oc'oot ooao oi-ooo 0000•0 0H300—
             aouaajpp GÔDM
lambda I

           3




           2
                      I




                          tau

           Figure 6
                          •    I   '    I




                                            ____ (N



                                             ___ C

                                               S


      N                                                 C
                                                        C
      ci)
      L                                                 a
                                                        U
      L                                                 0
                                                        -J
                                                   to




                                                   t
('I
a
a
U)                                                 (N
a
t•4


a
2
C
C

             10     £'0       ro       VO      0,0

iS          GJDS 6UIJflTDDIflUD
Nuni her   Author                                                                     Date

4163       Laurie Simon Bagwefl   Conspicuous Consumption. Pure Profits. and          09/92
           B. Douglas   &rnheim   the Luxury Tax

4164       Ah M. Garber           Economic Foundations of Cost-Effectiveness          09/92
           Charles E. Phelps      Analysis

4165       Michael W. Klein       The Accuracy of Reports of Foreign Exchange         O9,2
                                  Intervention

4166       Charles W. Caiomiris   Greenback Resumption and Silver Risk: The           09/92
                                  Economics of Monetary Regime change in the
                                  United States, 1862-1900

4167       Richard C. Marston     DetcrntinanLs of Short-Ten Real Interest            09/92
                                  Differentials Between Japan and the United States

4168       Laurence Ball          Relative-Price Changes as Aggregate Supply Shocks   09/92
           N. Gregory Mankiw

4169       Taznini $ayoumi        Macroeconomic Adjustment Under Bretton Woods        09/92
           Barry Eichengreen      and the Post-Bretton-Woods Float:
                                  An Impulse-Response Analysis

4170       Michael M. Knetter     is Price Adjustment Asymmetric?:   Evaluating       09/92
                                  the Market Share and Marketing Bottlenecks
                                  Hypothesis

4171       Myron s. Scholes       Firms' Responses to Anticipated Reductions          09/92
           G. Pecer Wilson        in Tax Rates: The Tax Reform Act of 19S6
           Mark A. Woffson

4172       Michael Doaley         Endogenous Creditor Seniority and                   09/92
           Mark R. Stone          External Debt Values

4173       Alberto Meshia         Political   Instability     and Economic            O9/2
           Sule Ozier             Growth
           Nouriel Roubini
           Philip Swagel
4174       Robert A. Margo        Employment and Unemployment in the 1930s            09/92

4175       Robert S. Pindyck      Inveswjerfls of Uncertain costs                     09/92

4176       A Miwhdll Polinsky     Optimal Cleanup and Liability After                 09/92
           Steven Shavell         Environmentally           Harmful   Discharges
Number   Author                       TftJe                                           Date

4177     William T. Bogart            Incidence and Allocation Effects of a State     10,92
         David F. Bradford            Fiscal Policy ShIft; The Florlo Initiatives
         Michael G. Williams          in New Jersey

4178     Vernon Henderson             Industrial Development in Cities                10/92
         An Kuncoro
         Man Turner

4179     lames R Markusen             Complementarity and Increasing Returns in       10192
         Thomas F. Rutherford         Inrennediate Inputs:
         Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes   A Theoretical and Applied General-Equilibrium
                                      Analysis

4180     David E. Bloom               Projecting the Number of New AIDS Cascs         10/92
         Sherry Glied                 in the U.S.

4181     James M. Poterba             401(k) Plans and Tax-Defermd Saving             10192
         Steven F. Verdi
         David A. Wise

4182     Alan 1. Auethach             The Increasing Annuitizaüon of the Etdcdy       10/92
         Laurence I Kotlikoff         Estimates and Implications for
         David N. Well                Intergenerational Transfers. Inequality, and
                                      National Saving

4183     Michael Dooley               Exchange Rates. Country Preferences. and Gold   10/92
         Peter Isarci
         Mark Taylor

4184     Federico Sturzcnegger        I-iyperinflation with Currency Substitution:    10i92
                                      Inuoducirig an Indexed Currency

4185     Robert H. Porter             The Role of Information in U.S. Offshore        10192
                                      Oil and Gas Lease Auctions

4186     Xavier SaLa-i-Martir,        Transfrss                                       10/92

4157     Robert Kacsiner              The Effect of Illicit Drug Use on the Labor     10/92
                                      Supply of Young Adults

4188     John Y. Campbell             Inspecting the Mechanism: An Analytical         10/92
                                      Approach to the Stochastic Growth Mode'

4189     Louis Kaplow                 Optimal Distribution and the Taxation of        I(W2
                                      the Family

4190     Jonathan Orube'              The Effect of Price Shopping in Medical         1CV92
                                      Markets: Hospital Responses to PPOs in
                                      California
Number   Author                  The                                            Dale

4191     James R. Hines Jr.      Credit and Deferral as International           10,92
                                 Investment lnccntives

4192     Michael W. Klein        The Real Exchange Rate and Foreign             10/92
         Eric Rosengren          Direct Investment in the United S caws:
                                 Relative Wealth vs. Relative Wage Effects

4193     John V. Campbell        Trading Volume and Serial Correlation          10/92
         Sanford .1. Grossman    in Stock Returns
         hang   Wang

4194     lain Cockbvrn           Market Conditions and Retirement of Physical   1O,2
         Murray Frank            Capital: Evidence 1mm Oil Tankers

4195     David Card              The Effect of Unions on the Disuibutions       10/92
                                 of Wages: RedisuibuLion or Relabelling?

4196     Jesse M. Abraham        Patterns and Determinants of Metropolitan      10i92
         Panic H. Hendershott    Howe Prices, 1977-91

4197     Bruce D. Meyer          Policy Lessons fium the U.S. Unemployment
                                 Insurance Experiments

4198     Carsten Kowalczyk       Hubs and Spokes. and Frcc Track in the         10/92
         Ronald 5. WonhiacoEt    Americas

4199     Leslie E. Papke         Participation in and Contributions to 401(k)   10192
                                 Pension Plans: Evidence fwm Plan Data

4200     David G. Blanchflower   International Wage Curves                      10/92
         Andrew J. Oswald

4201     Robin L. Lumsdaine      Pension Plan provisions and Retirement: Men    10/92
         James H. $tk            & Women. Medicare. and Models
         David A. Wise

4202     Gaiy Solon              Measuring the CyclicaliLy of Real Wages:       10/92
         Robert Barsky           How Important is Composition Bias?
         Jonathan A. Padcsr

4203     Louis Kaplow            Accuncy in the Determination of Liability      10/92
         Steven Shavell

4204     Daniel S. Harnermesli   Turnover and (he Dynamics of Labor Demand      10192
         Gerard Pfann

4205     Dominique Dcmougin      J'rivatization, Risk-Taking. and the           11192
         Hans-Werner .Sinn       Communist Firm
Number         Author                        Thie                                                  Date

4206           Robert I. Barro               Capital Mobility in Neocbsskal Models of               11/92
               N. Gregory Mankiw             Growth
               Xavier SaIa-i-Martin

4207           Lars E.O. Svensson            Why Exchange Rate Bands? Monetary Independence I 1i92
                                             in Spite of Fixed Exchange Rates

4208           Assaf Razin                   Business Cycle Volatility and Openness An             I 1/92
               Andrew Rosen                  Expbraiory Cross-Section Analysis

4209           Richard B. Freeman            SYhat Direction for Labor Ma&et [zstituLions          11/92
                                             in Eastcrn and Central Europe?

4210           Charles age]                  Can the Markov Swicching Model Forecast               11192
                                             Exchange Rates?

4211           Anil K. Kashyap               Citdii Conditions and the Cyclical Behavior           11/92
               Owen A. Lamont                of Inventories: A Case Study of the 198 1-82
               Jeremy C. Stein               Recession

4212           John DiNardo                  Alcohol, Marijuana, and American Youth: The           11/92
               Thomas Lemicux                Unintended Effects of Government Regulation

4213           David Neumark                 Are Rising Wage Profiles a Forced-Saving              11/92
                                             Mechanism?

42 14          Assaf Razin                   Convergence in Growth Rates: The Role of              11/92
               Oil-Wa Then                   Capital Mobility and IncematicnM Taxation

4215           B. Douglas Eemhcim            Private Saving and Public Policy                      11/92
               John Karl Scholz

4216           Henry 5, Farber               Union Membership in the United States:                11/92
               Alan B. Krueger               The Decline Continues

4217           René M. Stulz                 Foreign Equity Investment Restrictions and            11/92
               Walter Wasscriallcn           Shareholder Wealth Maximization

4218           Linda L. Tesar                Home Bias and the Globalization of                    11/92
               Ingrid M. Werner              Securities Markets

4219           Paul Kiugnun                  A DynamicSpatialModcl                                 11/92




 Copies of the above working papers c be obtained by sending $5.00 per copy (plus $IO.OOkrder for postage
and handling for all locations oulside the continental U.S.) to Working Papers, NBER. 1050 MassachuseLts
Avenue. Cambridge, MA 02138. Advance payment is required on all orders. P!ease make checks payable to the
NadonaJ Bureau of Economic Research.
