                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE GENDER EARNINGS GAP: SOME
                            INTERNATIONAL EVIDENCE




                                     Francine D. Blau

                                    Lawrence M. Kahn




                                 Working Paper No. 4224




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 December 1992


Francine Blau is Professor of Economics and Labor and Industrial Relations, University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and Research Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Lawrence Kahn is Professor of Economics and Labor and Industrial Relations. University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. We are most grateful to David Blanchilower for his efforts in
making the International Social Survey Programme (ISSP) data available to us and to Andrea
Ichino forproviding the Bank of Italy data. We have benefitted from the helpful comments of
participants at the NBER/Ford preconference and conference on 'Differences and Changes in
Wage Structures" in London. September 1991, and Cambridge. MA., July 1992. the AEA
Meetings in New Orleans, January 1992, and the Harvard and University of Chicago Labor
Workshops. This research was supported by a grant from the Ford Foundation to the NBER.
This paper is part of NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                            NBER Working Paper #4224
                                                            December 1992

                           THE GENDER EARNINGS GAP: SOME
                              INTERNATIONAL EVIDENCE

                                          ABSTRACT

    This paper uses micro-data to analyze international differences in the gender pay gap among
a sample of ten industrialized nations. We particularly focus on explaining the surprisingly low
ranking of the U.S. in comparison to other industrialized countries. Empirical research on gender
pay gaps has traditionally focused on the role of gender-specific factors, particularly gender
differences in qualifications and differences in the treatment of otherwise equally qualified male
and female workers (i.e., labor market discrimination). An innovative feature of our study is to
focus on the role of wage structure--the array of prices set for various labor market skills--in
influencing the gender gap.
    The striking finding of this study is the enormous importance of overall wage structure in
explaining the lower ranking of U.S. women. Our results suggest that the U.S. gap would be
similar to that in countries like Sweden, Italy and Australia (the countries with the smallest gaps)
if the U.S. had their level of wage inequality. This insight helps to resolve three puzzling sets
of facts: (1) U.S. women compare favorably with women in other countries in terms of human
capital and occupational status: (2) the U.S. has had a longer and often stronger commitment to
equal pay and equal employment opportunity policies than have most of the other countries in
our sample; but (3) the gender pay gap is larger in the U.S. than in most industrialized countries.
An important part of the explanation of this pattern is that the labor market in the U.S. places
a much larger penalty on those with lower levels of labor market skills (both measured and
unmeasured).
Francine D. Blau                                             Lawrence M. Kahn
Institute of Labor and Industrial                            Institute of Labor and
        Relations                                              Industrial Relations
University of Illinois                                       University of Illinois
504 East Armory Avenue                                       504 East Armory Avenue
Champaign, IL 61820                                          Champaign, IL 61820
phone: (217)333-4842                                         phone: (217)333-4295
bitnet: franb@uiucvmd                                        bitnet: dodgers@uiucvmd
and NBER
       Despite in many cases dramatic reductions in the male-female pay gap since the 1950s,

gender differentials persist in all industrialized nations. However, the size of the gender gap
varies considerably across countries. Published data suggest that, by the late 1980s, the
Scandinavian countries, France, Australia and New Zealand had female-to-male hourly pay
ratios of 80-90 percent, while other countries in Western Europe and the U.S. had pay ratios
of roughly 65-75 percent. The U.S. was among the countries with the largest differentials.
Only Japan with a ratio as low as 50 percent had a consistently larger gap (see Figure 1). This
paper uses micrc-data to analyze international differences in the gender pay gap among a
sample of ten industrialized nations. We particularly focus on explaining the surprisingly low
ranking of the U.S. in comparison to other industrialized countries. An advantage of an
international perspective is that countries vary considerably with respect to governmental
policies, women's relative labor market qualifications and wage-setting institutions. Such
variability allows one to infer reasons for differences in the pay gap and, by implication, the

impact of alternative government policies.
        Empirical research on gender pay gaps has traditionally focused on the role of gender
differences in qualifications and of differences in the treatment of otherwise equally qualified

male and female workers (i.e., labor market discrimination). Analyses of trends over time in
the gender differential within countries as well as intercountry comparisons of gender earnings
ratios have tended to emphasize these types of gender-specific factors. An innovative feature
of our study is to focus on the role of wage structure as an additional factor influencing the

gender gap. To analyze the impact of wage structure, we adapt a framework developed by
Juhn, Murphy and Pierce (1991) to analyze trends over time in race differentialsin the U.S.
 Our findings suggest that labor market institutions that affect overall wage inequality have an

 extremely important effect on the gender earnings gap.
        Wage structure describes the array of prices set for various labor market skills
 (measured and unmeasured) and rents received for employment in particular sectors of the

 economy. Research on gender-specific factors influencing the pay gap suggests that men and
                                                2



women tend to have different levels of labor market skills and to be employed in different
sectors. This implies a potentially important role for wage structure in determining the pay
gap. For example, suppose that in two countries, women have lower levels of labor market
experience than men but that the gender difference in experience is the same in the two
countries. If the return to experience is higher in one country, then that nation will have a

larger gender pay gap. Or, as another example, suppose that the extent of occupational
segregation by sex is the same in two countries but that the wage premium associated with
employment in male jobs is higher in one country. Then, again, that country will have a

higher pay gap.
       Skill prices can be affected by relative supplies, by technology (e.g. high tech
industries place a premium on highly trained workers), by the composition of demand, or, as
emphasized in this paper, by the wage-setting institutions of each country. Specifically,
centralized wage-setting institutions which tend to reduce interfirm and interindustry wage
variation and are often associated with conscious policies to raise the relative pay of low-wage

workers (regardless of gender) may indirectly reduce the gender pay gap.
       The striking finding of this study is the enormous importance of overall wage structure
in explaining the international differences, particularly the lower ranking of U.S. women. The
higher level of wage inequality in the U.S. than elsewhere works to increase the gender
differential in the U.S. relative to all the other countries in our sample. Our results suggest
that the U.S. gap would be similar to that in countries like Sweden, Italy and Australia (the
countries with the smallest gaps) if the U.S. had their level of wage inequality.
       This insight helps to resolve three puzzling sets of facts: (1) U.S. women compare
favorably with women in other countries in terms of human capital and occupational status; (2)
the U.S. has had a longer and often stronger commitment to equal pay and equal employment

opportunity policies than have most of the other countries in our sample; but (3) the gender
pay gap is larger in the U.S. than in most industrialized countries. An important part of the
explanation of this pattern is that the labor market in the U.S. places a much larger penalty on
                                                3



those with tower levels of labor market skills (both measured and unmeasured). Put

differently, our findings suggest that the gender gap in pay in the U.S. would be far less than
it is if U.S. wage-setting processes more closely resembled those in the other countries, as

long as U.S. women retained the same level of relative skills.1
       In addition to having a relatively high level of wage inequality, the U.S. labor market

has seen a major increase in inequality and the rewards to skills over the 1970s and 1980s

(Katz and Murphy, 1992; Juhn, Murphy and Pierce, forthcoming). Thus, while American
women have increased their relative levels of labor market skills (Blau and Ferber, 1992;
O'Neill and Polachek, 1991), they are essentially swimming upstream in a labor market that
has grown increasingly unfavorable to those with below-average skills. The decline in the

U.S. gender pay gap in the 1980s becomes all the more impressive in light of this growing

overall inequality. Below, we present U.S. data indicating that over the 1971-88 period, rising

U.S. wage inequality reduced the convergence in the gender pay gap by about one fourth.

       The paper is organized as follows. Section I presents a brief overview of our findings.

highlighting the striking importance of wage structure in explaining the international

differences. Section II summarizes the institutional setting in each country focusing on gender-

specific policies and the degree of centralization of wage-setting institutions. Section III

outlines the basic analytical framework and presents detailed empirical results based on our

microdata files. Section IV examines the impact of rising inequality on the U.S. gender pay

gap over the 1971-88 period. Finally, Section V presents our conclusions.


I. An Overview of the Findings
        International differences in gender gaps are summarized in Figure 2 which gives gender

earnings ratios adjusted for hours for ten industrialized countries based on our micro-data files

 for each country. Data are from the mid-1980s, with the exception of Norway and Sweden for


   Of course, under different wage-setting institutions, U.S. women might have different
 incentives to acquire labor market skills.
                                                 4



which the data are from around 1980.2 (More detailed information about the data and the

adjustment process are given below.) Figure 2 indicates that Italy, Sweden, Austria and

Australia have the highest gender ratios. The U.S. ranks towards the bottom of the group,

with six of the nine countries (Sweden, Norway, Australia, Austria, Italy, and Germany)

having higher gender earnings ratios, and only three (the U.K., Hungary and Switzerland)
having lower ratios.

        The Italian ratio probably overstates the actual gender ratio in that country. Italy has

an especially large proportion of workers who are self-employed or work in an informal sector

in which government-mandated benefits are not paid. The self-employed could not be

included in computing the gender ratio for Italy because hours worked were not available for

them. However, we did ascertain that the gender ratio (not adjusted for hours) in Italy is

considerably smaller (.6566) when the self-employed are included than when the sample is

restricted to employees (.743l). Further, it is likely that informal sector employment is

underreported by the respondents in our survey-based data, possibly also resulting in an

understatement of the gender gap. Nonetheless, it is likely that Italy is among the countries

with the smallest gender gaps, although not necessarily heading the list, as would be suggested
by the data in Figure 2.

       To illuminate the role of wage structure, we present the mean percentile rankings of

women in the male wage distribution for each country in Figure 3•4 Gender-specific factors,

including differences in qualifications and the impact of labor market discrimination, are
2 The country rankings here are similar to those based on published data (when available) or
other studies. Note, however, the ratios for the Scandinavian countries and Australia are
below those reported in OECD publications. This discrepancy appears to be due to the OECD
data being restricted to manufacturing workers for Sweden and Norway and to nonsupervisory
employees for Australia. The magnitudes of the gender ratios which we obtain are consistent
with other studies which use microdata for these countries.

 The gender ratios for the other countries were similar regardless of whether or not the self-
employed were included. Our results include the self-employed for the other countries.
4That is, we assign each woman in country j a percentile ranking in country j's male wage
distribution. The female mean of these percentiles by country is presented in Figure 2.
                                                S


viewed as determining the percentile ranking of women in the male wage distribution, while

the overall wage structure (as measured by the magnitude of male wage inequality) determines

the wage penalty or reward associated with this position in the wage distribution. The basic

premise is that males at the same percentile ranking as women may be viewed as comparable
in the eyes of employers. Thus the same set of factors will determine the relative rewards of
women and of these comparable males, and differences between the rankings of countries in
Figures 2 and 3 represent the role of wage structure.
       The most striking difference is for the U.S. Whereas the U.S. ranks towards the
bottom of the list with respect to the female-male earnings ratios, it ranks near the top in terms

of women's percentile ranking. Only Italy ranks higher and, as noted above, we have most
likely overstated Italy's gender ratio. Thus, the relatively high gender pay gap in the U.S.
does not appear to be due to a low ranking of women in the male wage distribution, rather it is
due to the higher level of wage inequality in the U.S. which results in an especially large wage
penalty for being below average in the distribution.
       Also notable in comparing the two figures is the change in the rankings of the
Scandinavian countries. Sweden falls from the 2nd highest country in Figure 2 to the 5th in
Figure 3, while Norway falls from 5th in Figure 2 to 8th in Figure 3. This suggests that the
relatively more equal wage distribution in the Scandinavian countries is an important reason
for the relatively high status of women there. So, for example, while the mean percentile
ranking of women in the U.S. is 33.2, at the U.S. level of male wage inequality this
corresponds to a wage which is 66.9 percent of the male mean. In contrast, Swedish women's
percentile ranking of 28.2 corresponds to a wage which is 77.2 percent of the male mean and
Norwegian women's ranking of 26.4 corresponds to 71.4 percent of the male mean.

II. The Institutional Setting
       In this section we review international differences in gender-specific policies and basic
wage-setting institutions. Human capital is also a major determinant of gender pay gaps, and
                                                 6



below, we present some international comparisons of women's relative levels of measured
human capital. However, international differences in policies and institutions appear to be
more dramatic than those in women's relative human capital levels, at least in our sample.
Further, human capital can be affected by such policies and institutions as discussed below.
We therefore emphasize the institutional setting in our comparisons of gender-based wage
differentials. We first consider what the effect of the policies and wage-setting institutions is
expected to be; then we compare each country to the U.S. across each dimension. We also
note findings from previous research which suggest the importance of both gender-specific
policies and labor market institutions in reducing the gender pay gap in specific instances.

       Gender-specific policies include equal employment opportunity (EEC) and anti-
discrimination laws, as well as laws and policies governing family leave. The expected
positive effect of the former on the earnings ratio is reasonably straightforward, although the

impact will most likely depend on the effectiveness of the legislation as well as its provisions.
Moreover, evaluating the impact of EEO law changes on women's relative pay in specific
instances is complicated by the difficulty of locating an appropriate control group and, as
Ehrenberg (1989) has pointed out, the possibility that the change in law was endogenously
determined.

       In general, it is expected that, given considerable segregation of women by occupation
and industry, equal pay laws mandating equal pay for equal work within the same occupation
and firm will have a relatively small effect. Laws requiring equal opportunity, hiring
preferences, and/or "comparable worth" (i.e., equal pay for work of equal value to the firm,

regardless of specific occupational category) have potentially larger impacts on the wage
differential. In addition, since EEC laws involve occupational shifts, they may require
considerable time to have an impact on pay. Thus, the comparable worth approach which
provides for immediate increases in relative pay in female-dominated occupations may be

expected to have the largest initial wage effect, possibly accompanied by a negative impact on
female employment.
                                                 7



       The expected impact of family leave (disproportionately taken by women even when it
is available to men) is unclear a priori. On the one hand, it is possible that such policies raise
the relative earnings of women by encouraging the preservation of their ties to particular firms
and hence increasing the incentives of employers and women to invest in firm-specific

training. On the other hand, the existence of such policies could increase the incidence and/or
duration of temporary labor force withdrawals among women, raising the gender gap for the

affected group. Further, the incremental costs associated with mandated leave policies may
increase the incentives of employers to discriminate against women.

       With respect to wage structure, it seems likely that systems of centrally-determined pay
entail smaller gender wage differentials for a variety of reasons. First, in the U.S., a
significant portion of the male-female pay gap is associated with interindustry or interfirm

wage differentials that result from its relatively decentralized-pay setting institutions (Blau,

1977; Johnson and Solon, 1986; Sorensen, 1990; and Groshen, 1991). Thus, centralized
systems which reduce the extent of wage variation across industries and firms are likely to
lower the gender differential, all else equal. Second, since in all countries the female wage
distribution lies below the male distribution, centralized systems that consciously raise
minimum pay levels regardless of gender will also tend to lower male-female wage
differentials. Finally, the impact of gender-specific policies to raise female wages may be
greater under centralized systems where such policies can be more speedily and effectively

implemented.
       We now turn to a comparison of the U.S. to the other countries in our sample along
each of these three dimensions. First, with respect to gender-specific discrimination policies,
equal employment policy in the U.S.S has consisted of the Equal Pay Act of 1963 (requiring

equal pay for equal work), the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (requiring equal employment
opportunity), and the Executive Order implemented in 1968 (which requires government

  See Blau and Ferber (1992) for a summary.
                                                  8



contractors to take "affirmative action" to see that women and minorities are equitably

treated). Comparable worth pay policies remain rare in the private sector although they have
been adopted by a number of state governments.
         In general, U.S. policies in this area compare relatively favorably on their face to those
of the other countries in our sample. All have passed some equal pay and equal opportunity

legislation, but, interestingly, the U.S. commitment, particularly to equal employment
opportunity, predates that in most of the other countries (See Table 1). While Italy did
mandate Equal Pay through collective bargaining in the industrial sector in 1960 (predating the

U.S. Equal Pay Act by three years), an Equal Employment Opportunity Act was not passed

there   until 1977. The earliest of the other countries, Australia and the U.K., began to

implement equal pay in 1969 and 1970. Equal Opportunity measures were instituted in 1975

in the U.K. and 1978 in Norway. The remainder of the countries passed all relevant
legislation in the 1980s. The one country with a clearly stronger intervention than the U.S. is
Australia, the only one to have implemented a national policy of comparable worth through its
labor courts (see below). (Although Switzerland incorporated the principle of equal pay for

work of equal value into its constitution in 1981 (Simona 1985), there is no indication that it
has been implemented as yet).

         There is some econometric evidence that, all else equal, government policy in the

1970s raised the U.S. female-male pay ratio (BelIer, 1979); and further that the portion of the
differential attributable to discrimination (as conventionally measured) declined (Blau and

BelIer, 1988). Stronger evidence of the impact of anti-discrimination policies has been
obtained for Australia, Sweden and the U.K. Since the impact of these policies was related to

labor market structure, we discuss it below.

         The laws governing maternity and parental leave in the various countries are

summarized in Table 2. The U.S. is the only country in our sample which does not have

government-mandat leave at the federal level. It is, however, required in the U.S. that

pregnancy be treated the same as any other medical disability. Thus, leave for the physical
                                                 9



aspects of child-bearing must be covered under a firm's medical disability plan, if it hasone.
Further, it has been found that 40 percent of employees of large and medium size
establishments are employed at firms which provide parental leave to women beyond this, the

vast majority (92 percent) at firms offering unpaid leave (Hyland, 1990). Plans allowed an
average of 20 weeks off for unpaid leave. It may be noted that provision for parental leave is
particularly generous in Sweden where nearly a year of paid parental leave is provided after 12
weeks of paid (at 90 percent) maternity leave. While the U.S. clearly lags behind the other
countries in the provision of parental leave, as our discussion above suggests, it is unclear
what impact this will have on the pay gap.
       U.S. pay-setting is far less centralized than that in the other countries in this study,
with the possible exception of Switzerland. The U.S. unionization rates of 20.5 percent for
male and 12.5 percent for female workers are considerably lower than elsewhere (see Table A-
2). Further, the collective bargaining process itself is very decentralized in the U.S., with an
emphasis on single-firm agreements, and the U.S. government exerts minimal intervention in

wage-setting (Flanagan, Kahn, Smith and Ehrenberg, 1989). Wage determination is also
highly decentralized in Switzerland where there is no minimum wage legislation and many
collective bargaining agreements do not mention pay (Wrong 1987). While we have no
explicit information on Hungary, we assume that as a (then) Communist country, albeit a
somewhat more market-oriented one, it most likely had relatively centralized wage-
determination institutions.
        Wage setting is clearly very centralized in the Scandinavian countries where the great
majority of workers (64-80 percent in our micro-data) are unionized and the collective
bargaining process is very centralized. For example, in Sweden and Norway, the major union
federation (LO) signs an agreement with the employers (SAF) covering a rnor portion of the
                                               l0


labor force.6 Several changes in collective bargaining practices, both gender-specific and

general, helped reduce the Swedish gender pay gap (Lofstrom and Gustafsson 1991). From
1960-65, labor and management phased out the system of separate wage schedules for men and
women that had previously existed in Swedish collective bargaining agreements. In addition,
from 1968 to 1974, the LO made a conscious effort to raise the relative wages of lower-paid
workers, regardless of gender. Finally, in 1977 the LO and SAF negotiated a comprehensive

package of equal employment provisions, predating the 1980 passage of formal EEO
legislation.
       German and Austrian wage determination institutions are also highly centralized, and

Austrian pay-setting in particular appears to resemble that of Sweden and Norway. While a
smaller percentage of Austrian workers is unionized than in Scandinavia (Table A-2),

collective bargaining agreements in Austria in most cases cover an entire industry or group of
industries throughout the country. There thus appears to be little room for interfirm

differentials in negotiated wages among union workers. Further, the terms of such agreements
extend to nonunion workers (Tomandl and Fuerboeck, 1986).

       While collective bargaining in Germany is less centralized than in Austria, it is

undoubtedly more centralized than in the U.S. Unlike the U.S. emphasis on single-firm

agreements, contracts usually cover all employers in an industry in a state (Kennedy 1982).

As in Austria, the terms of such agreements extend to nonunion workers. In contrast to

Austria, however, nationwide agreements and interindustry contracts are rare.

       The Australian wage setting process while also highly centralized differs considerably
from the countries described above. In Australia minimum wage rates for occupations are set

by government tribunals.7 Currently, nearly 90 percent of employees are covered by tribunal
6 While wage setting is still far more centralized in these countries than in other European
nations, there were some signs that the system was becoming less centralized in the 1980s
(Leion, 1985; Thorsrud, 1985).
 This description of Australian pay-setting is based on Gregory and Daly (1991) and
Kilhngsworth (1990).
                                               11



awards. Until World War H, female award rates were set at 54 percent of male rates; in 1950,
this was raised to 75 percent. From 1969 to 1972, the concept of equal pay for equal work
was implemented, as the female award rate was raised to 100 percent of the male rate for the

same job. Finally, in 1972, the Federal Tribunal moved to the comparable worth concept so
that women in female occupations would also be covered by rulings on the minimum male
award in other occ    ti      The raw data in Figure 1, as well as some econometric evidence

(e.g., Gregory and Daly, 1991) suggest that these gender-specific policies implemented by the
wage courts have played an important role in lowering the pay gap.
       Wage determination in Italy is also a very centralized process, and has included explicit
attempts to narrow pay differentials in a manner similar to that in Scandinavia. First, while
about 40 percent of the Italian labor force in 1985 was unionized (Bean and Holden, 1992),
labor courts in Italy are empowered to extend the terms of collective bargaining agreements to
nonunion workers (Treu, 1990), most likely yielding an effective degree of unionization which

is considerably greater. Second, and more important for understanding the Italian wage
structure, is the operation of the wage indexation system, known as the scala mobile. This
system, in existence since 1975, gives across-the-board lira increases in wages in response to
inflation in a conscious attempt to reduced skilled-nonskilled pay differentials (Treu, 1990).
By 1990, Italian employers claimed that accumulated indexation payments accounted for 40
percent of labor costs.9
       Wage-setting in Britain appears to be less centralized than in the countries reviewed
above, but is most likely more centralized than in the U.S. Roughly 40-50 percent of British
workers are in unions, suggesting a larger role for unions and the collective bargaining process
in Britain. In other respects, the wage-setting process appears similar to the U.S. In the
British private sector in 1980, only 26 percent of all (union and nonunion) workers had their
 While about 40 percent of workers are covered by federal (compared to state or other)
awards, these other tribunals often follow the federal lead (Killingsworth 1990).

  See "New Industrial Relations Talks Continue," (January 1990), p. 7.
                                               12



wages set in multiemployer contracts or by wages councils. The rest were covered by single-

firm agreements or had wages determined by management (Sisson and Brown, 1983).
Similarly government intervention in British pay-setting has been largely limited to periods in
which incomes policies limited overall wage increases and reliance on such policies waned in
the l9SOs (Davies, 1983).
       In an econometric analysis that controlled for other factors affecting women's relative
pay, Zabalza and Tzannatos (1985) found significant effects for the 1970 equal pay legislation.
This legislation was implemented through collective agreements (it was not until 1975 that the
labor market was more broadly covered). Not only was it required that differentiated male
and female rates be removed, but also that in workplaces covered by collective agreements
women could not be paid at less than the lowest male rate (OECD 1988; Zabalza and
Tzannatos 1985). Thus, the impact of the law was in part to raise the minimum for women
covered by collective bargaining.

III. Earnjns Ratios in the Micro-Data
       Our principal data source for the study of individual countries is the International Social
Survey Programme (ISSP) data. The following countries and time periods were used: Austria

(1985-87), West Germany (1985-88), Hungary (1986-88), Switzerland (1987), United
Kingdom (1985-88), and United States (1985-88). The 1985-88 ISSP files lack data on the
Scandinavian countries, and preliminary results suggested that the Australian data in the ISSP
were inconsistent with other sources and that the Italian ISSP data contained very few
observations on women. We therefore supplemented the ISSP with three additional micro-data
sets in order to include these countries with very high gender earnings ratios. We used the
Clasp Structure and Class Consciousness (CSCC) data base, originally compiled by Erik
Wright, for Sweden (1980) and Norway (1982); the Income Distribution Survey (IDS) for
                                                  13



Australia (1986); and a Bank of Italy (BI) survey for Italy (1987).     In each case, the sample
was restricted to individuals aged 18-65 years old.

          The specific earnings measures used in the data for each country are described in detail
in the Appendix. In each case the earnings figure is expressed on an annual or monthly basis.

The computation of gender wage differentials from these data sets is complicated by the
omission from these files of information on annual weeks worked. Weekly hours worked is

available, however, allowing for some adjustment of the earnings data for time input)1 (The

adjustment for time input is described below.) In all but two cases, the earnings variable was

coded into categories)2 In the analyses presented below, we arbitrarily coded the top (open-

ended) category as 1.2 times its minimum value. However, the gender ratios were virtually

identical when we experimented with alternative assumptions for the top category ranging from

1    to 1.5 times its minimum value. Finally, concern for adequate sample size led us to pool

years of data for those countries in the ISSP surveyed more than once (see above).




  For descriptions of these data, see Blanchflower and Freeman (1992)--ISSP; Rosenfeld and
Kalleberg (1990)--CSCC; Blackburn and Bloom (199l)--IDS; and Erickson and Ichino
(1992)--BI.

   There is information on weeks worked for Australia and for a subset of the Norwegian data.
Analyses correcting for weeks worked yielded very similar results to those reported here, with
slightly lower adjusted gender differentials. Lack of information on hours worked for those
with multiple jobs forced us to limit the Swedish sample to those with one job only.
12
   The Australian earnings data were originally reported as a continuous variable. However,
to maintain comparability with the other countries, we recoded the Australian earnings into the
ISSP's intervals for Australia. When the analysis was performed for Australia using the
original continuous variable, the results were virtually identical to those reported here. The El
data were also continuous but did not match up with the ISSP categories for Italy. We
therefore used the continuous earnings variable for Italy. As noted below, Italy s wage
distribution had lower residual variance than in most of the other countries. Use of earnings
categories for these other countries implies that Italy's residual variance would have been even
lower relative to the others if earnings categories had been used for Italy as well.
                                               14


       A. Estimation of the Gender Differentials

       Table 3 gives estimated gender ratios for log earnings corrected for hours for all

workers and by marital status. These estimates were obtained as follows. For each country,

the following regression was run separately by sex:'3

(1)           InEARN = b0 + b1PART + b2HRPART + b3HRFULL + B'X + e,
where ln(EARN) is the natural log of earnings; PART is a dummy variable for part-time
employment (less than 35 hours per week); ERPART and HRPULL are interactions of weekly
work hours with part- and full-time status; X is a vector of explanatory variables including

years of schooling, potential experience and its square, union membership,14 and industrial
and occupation dummy variables; and e is an error term. (See the Appendix for the variable
means and regression results.) The model allows for both a part-time shift term and different
slopes for hours for part-time and full-time workers. A detailed adjustment for part-time
employment is important in light of the prevalence of part-time work for women in many

countries (see below).
       The PART, HRPART and HRFULL coefficients from (1) were used to adjust each
person's earnings for work hours by assuming a 40 hour work week. That is, For each worker
  we have:

(2)            YFULL1 = lnEARN - bjPART -                                   -
                                                                  b3(HRPULLj 40)
where the coefficients, bn, are obtained from estimating equation (1) for males and females
separately. Gross hours-corrected gender earnings ratios based on the mean of YFULL. for the
indicated groups were then calculated for each country and are shown in Table 3.



t3For countries with more than one year of data, the log earnings variable was obtained by
transforming each observation into its 1988 (or end year) equivalent on the basis of regressions
including only gender and year dummy variables. Thus, the dependent variable for each
observation on individual i in year t is lnEARN - EtbtYRit, where lnEARNt is the observed
log earnings for individual i in year t, YRt and are the dummy variable and estimated
coefficient for year t respectively, and the end year is the omitted year.
 14 Union status was not available for Italy or Australia.
                                                15



         In the first column are the hours-corrected gender earnings ratio for all workers shown

in Figure 2. The last two columns of Table 3 provide gender ratios for married and for single
workers separately.15 It is well-known that the family division of labor can influence pay gaps

by affecting women's (and men's) investments in human capital, accumulation of seniority and
experience, and job search strategies.16 Except for Hungary, for which we have no data on
hours, the pay ratio is relatively high among single workers, ranging from .83 to
Further, the rankings of the pay gaps for single workers are not always consistent with the
overall rankings. In contrast, the pay gap is much larger for married workers and corresponds
more consistently to the rankings for the overall labor force. Nonetheless, since the ratios for
married workers are always lower than those for single workers, a question may be raised as to
whether the overall differences in ratios across countries are simply due to intercountry

differences in family composition. This appears not to be the case, however. In the second
column of Table 3, the earnings ratios for all workers are computed using the U.S. proportions

of married and single workers. The implied ratios are similar to those for all workers in the
first column of the Table. This similarity suggests that cross-country differences in the family
composition of the labor force do not account for the observed differences in relative pay gaps.
Rather, as concluded above, it is the intercountry differences in the ratios particularly among
married workers that drive the international differences.


   Note that equation (1) which is used to obtain hours-corrected earnings for each individual
does not control for marital status. This specification was employed because of the
complications involved in considering marital status as a productivity indicator for men and
women (see our discussion below). We do however provide additional results for a subsample
of married workers, a strategy that in effect controls for marital status.
16 The
       division of labor in the home can also of course be affected by women's relative labor
market opportunities. Nonetheless, we would still expect the division of labor to have some
impact on relative pay.
   Reasons for the low estimated pay gaps among single workers include the likelihood that
they are disproportionately young (the pay gap is lower for young workers--see Mincer and
Polachek, 1974), and that single males are less productive than married males (see Korenman
and Neumark, 1991).
                                                16


       B. Gender Differences in Worker Characteristics
       The data presented in Table 3 suggest that international differences in the gender pay

gap are not due to differences in marital status composition. Before providing a formal
decomposition of these pay gaps, we briefly examine intercountry differences in other worker

characteristics. Such data can reveal at least qualitative differences in the relative labor market
skills of women across countries. Overall, we conclude that U.S. women compare favorably
with those in other countries when we consider their labor market qualifications relative to
those of men.
       For all countries except Switzerland and Italy, education and potential experience are
similar for men and women (see Table A-2). In Switzerland, the female labor force is less
educated and younger than the male labor force, while in Italy, women are more highly
educated and younger than men. While unfortunately we lack data on actual labor market
experience, some indication of labor force commitment may be gained by an examination of
the labor force participation (LFP) rates by gender-marital status groups for each country
shown in Table 4. As may be see in the Table, the labor force participation rate of the U.S.
women is higher than that in any of the other countries except Sweden. The absolute ma]e-
female differential in participation rates in the U.S. is comparable to that in Hungary and
lower than that in any of the other countries apart from Sweden.
       While the U.S. female population has higher labor force participation than most other
countries in the 19$Os, this does not necessarily imply that the average employed American
woman has more labor market experience. It is possible that in a country with a high female
participation rate recent entrants comprise a high proportion of the labor force, and thus that
women workers have less experience on average than in a country with a low female LFP rate.
On the other hand, it is possible that a country's high female LFP rate is due to a more
continuous labor force attachment among women (Blau and Ferber, 1992; Polachek, 1990).
        Polachek (1990) in fact finds that in the 1970s, a growing female LFP rate in the U.S.
was associated with a rising gender gap in actual experience. This finding was due to the low
                                                 17



experience levels of the large number of new entrants (or reentrants). However, by the 1980s,
rising U.S. female LFP rates in the U.S. were accompanied by rising female relative

experience levels. Lacking international data on actual experience, we tentatively conclude
that U.S. women are at least as oriented toward market work as women in most other

countries.

       This conclusion is reinforced by an examination of the incidence of part-time work
shown in Table 5. A smaller percentage of employed women in the U.S. than in any other

country works part time (less than 35 hours per week), Further, since the incidence of part-
time work among men is considerably higher in the U.S. than in other countries, the gender
differential in part-time work is much smaller in the U.S. than elsewhere. We particularly
note the high incidence of part-time work among Scandinavian women. About 46 percent of
Swedish and 53 percent of Norwegian employed women work part-time, compared to only 24
percent of employed U.S.               Finally, while the incidence of part-time work is only
slightly higher for Italian than for U.S. women, the Italian female labor force participation rate
is much lower than that in the U.S. (Table 4).
       The commitment of U.S. women to market work is further underscored by examination
of the incidence of part-time work by marital status also shown in Tables. In all countries,
married women are more likely to work part-time than single women, and single men
generally have a higher incidence of part-time work than married men. However, U.S.
married women are far less likely to work part-time than those in any other country, while
U.S. married men are slightly more likely to work part-time than those elsewhere. In
addition, the gap in the incidence of part-time work between married and single women is only
about .10 in the U.S., while it ranges from .24 to .36 elsewhere.

   The high incidence of PART for Scandinavian women may be due in part to the generous
family leave policies in these countries. In addition to policies guaranteeing paid parental
leave in both Sweden and Norway, Sweden has since 1979 allowed working parents of small
children the right to have a six hour day on demand (Haavio-Mannila and Kauppinen,
forthcoming).
                                                18



       Tables 4 and 5 are suggestive of a higher level of relative labor force commitment
among U.S. women, particularly married women, than among those in most other countries.

Table 6 indicates a lower level of occupational segregation (at the one—digit level of
aggregation) for U.S. women than for those in other countries (with the exception of
Switzerland))9 Industrial segregation, again measured at the one digit level, is similar in the
U.S. to that in the other countries in the sample. The high levels of occupational and
industrial segregation in Scandinavia are especially noteworthy and perhaps understandable in

tight of the high incidence of part-time work there.
       A country's level of occupational segregation is likely to reflect both women's relative

training levels and labor force commitment and the impact of employer, governmental or
union policies (Reskin, et. aL, 1986; Btau and Ferber, 1992). To the extent that it reflects
training and commitment, we may again conclude that U.S. women's workforce credentials
relative to men's exceed those in other countries.
       C. Analysis of International Differences in the Pay Gao: The Effects of Skills.
             Treatment of Women and Overall Ineoualitv
       Juhn, Murphy and Pierce (1991) have devised a method that allows us to decompose
the international differences in gender pay gaps into a portion due to gender-specific factors
and a portion due to differences in the overall level of wage inequality. Following their
notation, suppose that we have for male worker i and country j a male wage equation:
                   =
(3)                    XijBj +
where Yj is the log of wages; X is a vector of explanatory variables; B is a vector of
coefficients; Oj is a standardized residual (i.e. with mean zero and variance 1 for each
country); and    is the country's residual standard deviation of wages (i.e. its level of male

residual wage inequality).
t9This conclusion regarding the U.S. position largely holds true when the segregation index is
calculated using published data from the ILO (Blau and Ferber, 1992, p. 309). Note that our
findings for Switzerland must be interpreted with caution given the small size of our sample.
A segregation index computed on the basis of ILO data does not indicate a lower level of
segregation for Switzerland than for the U.S.
                                                19



        Then the male-female log wage gap for country j is:

 (4)            Dj eYmy.YIyoXJBj+960j,
where the m and (subscripts refer to male and female avenges, respectively; and a 8
                                                                                    prefix
signifies the average male-female difference for the variable immediately following. Equation

(4) states that the country's pay gap can be decomposed into differences in measured

qualifications (ôX), and differences in the standardized residual
                                                                 (&8) multiplied by the money
value per unit difference in the standardized residual (c9.2° Note that the final term of (4)

corresponds to the "unexplained" differential in a standard decomposition of the gender

differential when the contribution of the means is evaluated using the male function.

        The pay gap difference between two countries j and k can then be decomposed

using (4):

(5)            Dj-Dk = (&Xj-ôXlJBk + ÔXJ(Bj-Bk) + (6Oj-3Ok)q
                                             + 60j(oj-ovj.
       The first term in (5) reflects the contribution of intercountry differences in observed

labor market qualifications (31) to the gender gap. For example, the pay gap in one country

may be less than in another due to women's higher relative levels of education. The second

term reflects the impact of different measured prices across countries for observed labor

market qualifications. For example, for a given (positive) male-female difference in

schooling, a higher return to education will raise the male-female pay gap.

       The third term measures the effect of international differences in the relative wage

positions of men and women after controlling for measured characteristics (i.e., whether

women rank higher or lower within the male residual wage distribution). That is, it gives the
20 Note that this formulation is based on a single wage equation for males. That is, one could
repeat the analysis starting with a female wage equation. Male-female differences in
regression coefficients can reflect either discrimination or sex-correlated measurement errors of
variables such as experience. In using the male wage equation for this decomposition analysis,
we in effect simulate what the wage equation in a nondiscriminatory labor market would look
like (although the elimination of discrimination might change the male as well as the female
reward structure). We present both male and female wage equations for each country in the
Appendix.
                                               20



contribution to the cross-country difference in the gender gap that would result if the two
countrieshail the same levels of residual male wage inequality and differed only in their
percentile rankings of the female wage residuals. In one country, for instance, the average

woman's wage residual may be at the 35th percentile of the male distribution, while in another

country, it may be at only the 25th percentile. This percentile ranking may reflect gender
differences in unmeasured characteristics and/or the impact of labor market discrimination

against women. In the empirical work which follows, we label this term the "gap" effect.

       Finally, the fourth term of (5) reflects intercountry differences in residual inequality. It

measures the contribution to the intercountry difference that would result if two countries had

the same percentile rankings of the female wage residuals and differed only in the extent of

male residual wage inequality. Suppose, as is likely, that, controlling for measured

characteristics, the female mean log wage is less than the male mean in country j. Then the

larger is the intercountry difference in the overall residual inequality in wages (j-cqJ, the

larger difference there will be in the ultimate. pay gaps in the two countries. That is,

unmeasured deficits in female relative skills or discrimination lower women's position in the

male distribution of wage residuals. The larger the penalty a country places on being below

average in wages, the larger will be its pay gap. In the empirical work below we label this the

effect of "unobserved prices."

       Following Juhn, Murphy and Pierce (1991), we estimate the third term and fourth

terms of (5) empirically using the entire distributions of wage residuals for each country. For

example, to compute (oej-oewui&, we first give each woman in country j a percentile number

based on the ranking of her wage residual (from the country j male wage regression) in

country j's distribution of male wage residuals. We then impute each country j woman's wage

residual given her percentile ranking in country j and the distribution of male wage residuals in

country k. The difference between the mean of these imputed wage residuals for country j and

the actual mean female wage residual for country k is used to find the estimate of (Sj-&Olc)ak
                                                21



(note that the mean male residual is always zero). The fourth term of(s), &O(cj-cmJ, is

obtained analogously.

       According to (5), the full impact of gender-specific factors is reflected in the sum of
the first and third terms, the effect of gender differences in qualifications and of gender
differences in wage rankings at a given level of measured characteristics. Labor market
structure is reflected in the sum of the second and fourth terms, the impact of intercountry
differences in returns to measured and unmeasured characteristics. Within the framework of a
traditional decomposition, the sum of the third and fourth terms represents the impact of
intercountry differences in the "unexplained" differential which is commonly taken as an
estimate of discrimination.

       The possibility of discrimination complicates the interpretation of the last term of (5).
With labor market discrimination, this term in part reflects the interaction between countryj's
level of discrimination (defined as pushing women down the distribution of wages) and
intercountry differences in the overall level of inequality which determine how large the
penalty is for that lower position in the distribution (Juhn, Murphy and Pierce, 1991). We
wilt present some indirect evidence that in the case of the countries compared here, this term at
least in part reflects the impact of overall wage-setting. The observed price effect may also
reflect discrimination if, for example, women are "crowded" by exclusion into certain sectors,
lowering relative earnings there even for men (Bergmann, 1974).

       We implement this decomposition using the Juhn, Murphy and Pierce (1991)
accounting method performed on equation (1). Each country's gross gender differential is
expressed in terms of YFULL, hours corrected earnings defined in equation (2). The
explanatory variables in X include the traditional human capital variables of education,
potential experience and its square, as well as union membership, and one-digit industry and
occupation dummy variables.2t The structural variables may reflect both worker skills and

21 For Hungary, Australia and Italy, industry and/or occupation differ from those for the rest
of the countries. In addition, for the latter two, union membership status is not available. For
                                               22



rents received by workers with these characteristics. Unfortunately the data sets available to us

lack information on actual labor market experience. Thus this remains an important omitted

variable in these analyses, although, to some degree, our controls for education, hours,

industry, and occupation may pick up some of the effects of such omissions.

       We have not controlled for marital status in this analysis, although, as noted above, it

may be an important ctor influencing the pay gap. An alternative would have been to
include marital status as a productivity characteristic. However, such an approach is

problematic since this variable appears to measure higher skills for men (Korenman and

Neumark, 1991), but most likely lower skills for women, especially when data on actual labor

market experience are lacking. The approach we have followed allows us to place a sharper

interpretation in the decomposition on the impact of differences in labor market skills.

Recognizing the potential importance of marital status, however, we also perform a

decomposition of pay gaps among married workers. Differences in the results for the whole

labor force and those for married workers can provide interesting insights in cross-country

comparisons. Sample size limitations prevented us from analyzing single workers.

       The decomposition for the whole labor force is summarized in Table 7 and that for

married workers (based on equation 1 estimated for married workers only) is presented in

Table 8. Looking first at the results for the whole work force (Table 7), we see that the mean

female percentile, after controlling for measured characteristics,22 ranges from 21.2 in

Germany to about 37 in the United States, Australia, Sweden and Italy. It is noteworthy that

U.S. (and Italian) women place at the top of the list. The column headed "Gap" shows the

contribution of each country's female placement in the male residual wage distribution to its


the purposes of comparing the U.S. and these countries, we estimated U.S. equations that
conformed to the same specification as each country.

22 For each country, this is the mean of the percentile ranking of each woman's residual from
the male regression (ed) in the distribution of male wage residuals (elm).
                                                   23



relative pay gap. The figure is positive for all countries except Australia and Italy,23
indicating that these differences in rankings raise the differential relative to the U.S., often

substantially (the unweighted average effect is .1886). The column headed "Unobserved
Prices" shows that the lower level of residual wage inequality in each of the other countries
has   a negative effect, often quite considerable, on its gap relative to that in the U.S. (the

unweighted average effect is -.2015).
         Table 7 also provides estimates of the impact of measured skills and their prices on
intercountry differences in the pay gap. The "Observed X's" effect is generally positive,
indicating that U.S. women have relatively favorable levels of the measured variables (the
unweighted average effect is .0286). The "Observed Prices" effect is always negative,
indicating that the male returns to the explanatory variables increase the pay gap in the U.S.
relative to other countries (the unweighted average effect is -.0699). However, these observed
effects are much smaller in magnitude than the Unobserved Prices and Gap effects.
         The last two columns of the lower panel of Table 7 give the total effect of gender-
specific factors and wage structure. The results suggest that U.S. women fare well with
respect to gender-specific factors (as measured by the sum of the Observed X's and the Gap
effects). For all but Italy, Australia and Sweden, U.S. women have relatively favorable levels
of both productivity characteristics and gender-specific treatment in the labor market. For
these three countries, the gender-specific factors (i.e., the observed X's and the gap effects)
approximately cancel out. In contrast, the U.S. level of inequality (reflected in the sum of
Observed Prices and Unobserved Prices effects) greatly raises its gender pay gap compared to
each of the other countries in the sample. This inequality effect is sufficient or more than

23 Although in both Table 7 and Table 8, the mean female percentile is highest in U.S., there
are a few instances in which the gap effect is negative. This reflects 1) our use of the whole
distribution in computing the percentiles and the gap effects which can result in such
inconsistencies and 2) our use of alternative specifications for the U.S. wage regression to
compare the U.S. to countries for which we were not able to include the same industry,
occupation, or union status variables which occasionally resulted in a slightly lower percentile
for the U.S. than for the country in question.
                                                  24


sufficient to account for the higher pay gap in the U.S. than in the six countries with the

smaller gaps.
         The conclusions for married women (Table 8) are similar to those for all workers.

U.S. women again have the highest percentile ranking, yet the pay gap is larger in the U.S.
than in all the other countries except the U.K.U We again find that the U.S. level of
inequality raises its pay gap, while gender specific factors usually lower it. With the exception
of Australia and Sweden, higher U.S. inequality (i.e., wage structure) is sufficient or more
than sufficient to explain the higher pay gap in the U.S. compared to the countries with
smaller differentials. In the case of Australia and Sweden, U.S. inequality accounts for 72-79
percent of the difference in the married worker pay gap. One interpretation of the moderate
difference between these results and the results for all workers (where inequality accounted for
100 percent of the cross-country difference) is that the types of gender-related interventions in

Sweden and Australia (discussed above) have had a disproportionate effect on married

workers. Parental leave (Sweden) and comparable worth (Australia) may have especially large
positive effects on the relative earnings of married women.
         An additional point of interest is that, in both Tables 7 and 8, the residual standard
deviation of the wage regressions is considerably higher for U.S. men and women than for
men and women in other countries (the female residual standard deviation is computed from a
female wage regression). Across all the countries in the sample, the correlation coefficient
between the male and female standard deviations is .9344. The fact that the male and female
standard deviations seem to move together in this manner adds to credibility to our framework
in which a country's overall level of inequality is assumed to affect both men and women.25
Other than the U.S., the residual standard deviation is higher for Australia than for the other

24
     Marital status is not available for Italy.

  The standard deviation of gross hours corrected earnings (YFULL) is also higher in the
U.S. than elsewhere (results not shown). Similarly, across all countries, the correlation of the
male and female standard deviations is .9647.
                                                  25


countries. This occurs despite the Australian tradition of administered wages. This suggests
that actual earnings may deviate from award levels, which are intended to be the minimum
rates.26

          The striking finding of Tables 7 and 8 is the importance of wage structure in explaining

international differences in the gender gap. However, as noted earlier, what we have labeled
wage inequality could also reflect the impact of labor market discrimination. What are we
thus to conclude about labor market structure? From a number of indirect indicators we
conclude that it is important, even though it may not be possible to precisely estimate its
effect.

          First, our review of wage-setting institutions in each country strongly suggests that the
U.S. system is considerably less centralized than in other countries, thus making a finding of
the importance of wage structure plausible. Second, the U.S. has had a longer and often

stronger commitment to Equal Pay and Equal Employment Opportunity policies than most
other countries in our sample.27 Further, U.S. women compare favorably to women in other
countries in terms of their qualifications and occupational status relative to men. Thus, it is
credible that gender-specific factors do not explain the relatively high pay gap in the U.S.
Third, we found that residual wage variation (and, in results not shown, wage variation) of
both men and women in the U.S. considerably exceeds that of the same gender group in other
countries. Similarly, across all countries, female and male wage (and residual wage) variation
were found to be highly correlated. This, suggests that the same set of factors--measured and
unmeasured prices and wage-setting institutions—affect the wages of both men and women in
each country in a similar way. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, even though the

   According to Watts and Mitchell (1990), the Australian wage award system allows for
considerable variability in actual earnings. Such variations can be achieved by promotions. In
the 1980s, the dispersion in actual earnings appeared to increase, despite the imposition of
awards with uniform percentage wage increases (Watts and Mitchell, 1990).
27 A primary exception is the comparable worth approach pursued in Australia which might be
expected to produce a larger immediate impact on wages.
                                               26



estimated wage inequality effect may include the impact of gender discrimination as it interacts
with wage structure, our findings nonetheless suggest an extremely important role for wage

inequality in affecting the gender ratio.
IV. Swimming Upstream: U.S. Women and the Male Wa2e Distribution--1971 to 1988
       Figure 1 shows that in the 1980s, the gender pay gap in the U.S. narrowed
considerably, following a long period of relative stability. In addition, as noted above, labor
market inequality has been increasing in the u.s. in recent years. The analysis reported above
indicated that the high level of U.S. wage inequality has raised its gender pay gap compared to
that in other countries. This finding, in conjunction with these time-series features of the U.S.
labor market, implies that U.S. women have been swimming against a current of rising
inequality. The falling gender gap in the U.S. becomes even more impressive in light of these
recent trends.
       To provide some evidence on the degree to which growing inequality has retarded the
progress of women's relative pay in the U.S., we have included some analyses of wages from
the 1971-88 period. Specifically, we have examined the log of real weeldy wages for full-time
workers using data from the 1972, 1982 and 1989 Current Population Surveys. This

information refers to earnings in 1971, 1981, and 1988, respectively. Earnings are expressed
in 1981 dollars using the consumer price index.
       Trends in the pay gap and in the wage distribution for these years are described in the
upper panel of Table 9. During this time, women moved steadily up the distribution of male
wages, from an average percentile of 19.53 in 1971 to a 30.41 figure for 1988; the pace of
this upward movement increased in the 1980s. The gender pay differential also fell during
both the 1971-1981 and 1981-1988 periods, with some acceleration after 1981. (Figure 1



28 This
        latter figure is roughly similar to our results for gross hours corrected earnings from
the ISS? (33.2) given in Figure 3, providing further confirmation of the ISSP's
representativeness.
                                                27


shows similar trends.) The declining gender gap reflected a combination of falling male and
rising female real wages over the 1971-88 period.

        Table 9 also indicates that the standard deviations of the log of female and the log of
male real earnings both rose in the 1980s; from 1971 to 1981, however, only male variability
increased. Katz and Murphy (1992) found similar male and female patterns for changes in
overall wage inequality. Such results could imply that the wage structure widened for both
men and women in the 1980s but only for men in the l970s, calling into question (at least for

the 1970s) our approach based on male inequality. However, changes in the variation in log
wages are not the same as changes in the wage structure, since the former can be affected by
changes in the distribution of productive characteristics as well as in skill prices. Katz and
Murphy (1992) in fact found that residual wage inequality rose steadily and at similar rates for
both men and women in both the 1970s and 1980s. These findings do suggest that similar
processes were at work for both men and women in the U.S. during this period.29
       The lower panel of Table 9 provides a decomposition of changes in the pay gap into
portions due to women's movement up the male distribution and due to changes in male
inequality. The stories for the two subperiods are similar: if the overall degree of inequality
had not risen, the pay gap would have closed faster than it in fact did. Taking the 1971-88
period as a whole, if male inequality had stayed at its 1971 level but women's relative
qualifications and/or treatment had improved at their actual rates, then the pay gap would have
fallen by .2301 log points. Since the actual fall in the pay gap was .1735 log points, our
figures imply that growing inequality in the 1970s and l9SOs reduced the convergence in the

pay gap by .0566 log points (or about one fourth--24.6 percent--of the potential decline in the
pay gap). The retarding effect of increasing inequality on female gains is also illustrated in
Figure 4 where we see that, had male wage inequality remained at its 1971 level, the gender
29 Since Juhn, Murphy and Pierce (forthcoming) found in their study of male wage inequality
that residual inequality grew within as well as between cohorts, they interpret the increase as
being due to a rise in skill prices rather than to an increase in the variance of unobserved
productivity characteristics.
                                               28


ratio would have increased from 58.0 in 1971 to 73.1 percent in 1988, 4 percentage points
higher than the actual 1988 ratio of 69.0 percent.
       The results for the U.S. trends imply a moderate but noticeable effect of rising
inequality in slowing the convergence in women's relative pay. It is noteworthy that the
inequality effect is smaller in Table 9 than it is in Tables 7 and 8. That is, the higher U.S.
level of inequality compared to other countries has a larger effect on intercountry differences
in the gender pay gap than changes in U.S. inequality over time have had on U.S. trends in the
pay gap. While there have been major recent changes in the U.S. wage structure, cross-
sectional differences between the U.S. and other countries are even more dramatic.
V. Conclusions                          -



       In this paper, we have used micro-data to examine the gender pay gap in ten

industrialized countries. Published data indicate that the gender gap is higher in the U.S. than
in most industrialized countries; and it is higher than six of the countries in our sample. The
striking finding of the paper is the importance of wage structure in explaining the higher U.S.
gender gap. The greater level of wage inequality in the U.S. than elsewhere works to increase
the gender differential in the U.S. relative to all the other countries in our sample. Our results
suggest that the U.S. gap would be similar to that in countries like Sweden, Italy and Australia
(the countries with the smallest gaps) if the U.S. had their level of wage inequality. This
suggests that we need to focus both on the supply and demand for skills (i.e., some of the
determinants of skill prices) and on wage-setting institutions to explain this important cause of
international differences in the gender pay gap. In a brief review of the institutional setting in
each of these countries we concluded that the wage-determination process in the U.S. is more

decentralized than elsewhere, quite likely contributing to its higher level of wage inequality.
       Much attention has been focused on women's growing relative levels of skills and labor
force commitment as causes of changes in the pay gap. Our research suggests that to
understand changes in the gender pay gap fully, it would also be fruitful to examine the impact
of changes in wage structure. As a preliminary step in that direction, we examined male and
                                              29


female wends in real weekly wages for the 1971-1988 period in the U.S. to determine the

degree to which growing U.S. inequality has retarded the growth of women's relative wages.
In the face of rising inequality, women's relative skills and treatment have to improve merely
for the pay gap to remain constant; still larger gains are necessary for it to be reduced. We
found that women were able to counter the effects of rising inequality on their relative earnings
through a steady increase in their percentile ranking in the male wage distribution, from 19.53
in 1971 to 30.41 in 1988. The pace of this upward movement quickened in the 1980s as did
the increase in women's relative wages. Our results indicate that increasing inequality reduced
women's potential gains in relative pay by about one quarter during the 197 1-88 period.
                                         References
Bean, Ron and Ken Holden, "Cross-national Differences in Trade Union Membership in
       OECD Countries," Industrial Relations Journal 23 (Spring 1992): 52-59.

BelIer, Andrea, "The Impact of Equal Employment Opportunity Laws on the Male/Female
      Earnings Differential," in Cynthia B. Uoyd, Emily Andrews and Curtis Gilroy, eds.,
      Women in the Labor Market (New York: Columbia University Press, 1979), pp. 304-
      330.

Bergmann, Barbara R., "Occupational Segregation, Wages and Profits When Employers
     Discriminate by Race or Sex," Eastern Economic Journal 1 (April-July 1974): 103-110.
Blackburn, McKinley L. and David E. Bloom, "Changes in the Structure of Family Income
      Inequality in the U.S. and Other Industrialized Nations During the 1980s," (June
       1991).
Blanchflower, David and Richard Freeman, "Unionism in the U.S. and Other Advanced
      O.E.C.D. Countries," Industrial Relations 31 (Winter 1992): 56-79.
Blau, Francine D., Eaual Pay in the Office (Lexington, Mass: D.C. Heath, 1977).
_________ and Andrea BelIer, "Trends in Earnings Differentials by Gender, 1971-1981,"
       Industrial and Labor Relations Review 41 (July 1988): 5 13-529.

_________ and Marianne Ferber, The Economics of Women. Men. and Work (Englewood
      Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hail, 2nd ed., 1992).
Davies, Robert J., "Incomes and Anti-Inflation Policy," in George S. Bain, ed., Industrial
      Relations in Britain (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1983), pp. 419-455.

Ehrenberg, Ronald G., "Commentary," in Robert T. Michael, Heidi I. Hartmann, and Brigid
      O'Farrell, eds., Pay Equity: Empirical Inquiries (Washington, D.C.: National
      Academy Press, 1989), pp. 243-246.
Erickson, Chris, and Andrea Ichino, "Wage Differentials in Italy: Market Forces and
       Institutions," paper presented at the NBER Conference on "Differences and Changes in
       Wage Structures," Cambridge, MA., July 1992
flanagan, Robert J., Lawrence M. Kahn, Robert S. Smith and Ronald 0. Ehrenberg,
       Economics of the Employment Relationship (Glenview, Ill.: Scott, Foresman, 1989).
Gregory, R.G. and A.E. Daly, "Can Economic Theory Explain Why Australian Women Are
      So Well Paid Relative to Their U.S. Counterparts?" in Steven L. Willborn, ed.,
      Womens's Wa2es: Stability and Chanees in Six Industrialized Countries (Greenwich,
      CT: IA! Press, 1991).
Groshen, Erica L., "The Structure of the Female/Male Wage Differential: Is it Who Your
      Are, What You Do, or Where You Work?" Journal of Human Resources 26 (Summer
       1991): 457-72.
Haavio-Mannila, Elina and Kaisa Kauppinen, "Women's Lives and Women's Work in the
      Nordic Countries," in Hilda Kahne and Janet Giele, eds., Women's Lives and
       Women's Work in Modernizing and Industrial Countries (Boulder: Westview Press,
       forthcoming).
Hyland, Stephanie L. "Helping Employees with Family Care,1 Monthly Labor Review 113
      (September 1990): 22-26.
ILO, Conditions of Work Digest, 7, no. 2 (February, 1988), Tables 2 and 3, pp. 20-21.
ILO, Yearbook of Labour Statistics, various issues (Geneva: ILO).

Johnson, George E. and Gary Solon, "Estimates of the Direct Effects of Comparable Worth
      Policy," American Economic Review 76 (December 1986): 1117-1125.
Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M. Murphy, and Brooks Pierce, "Accounting for the Slowdown in
       Black-White Wage Convergence," in Marvin H. Kosters, ed., Workers and Their
       Waces (Washington D.C., IkE! Press, 1991), pp. 107-143.
              "Wage Inequality and the Rise in Returns to Skill," Journal of Political
       Economy, forthcoming.
Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy, "Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-87: Supply and
       Demand Factors," Ouarterly Journal of Economics, 107 (February 1992): 35-78.
Kennedy, Thomas, European Labor Relations (Lexington, Mass.: D.C. Heath, 1982).
Killingsworth, Mark, The Economics of Comparable Worth (Kalamazoo, Mich.: W.E.
       Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 1990)
Korenrnan, Sanders and David Neumark, "Does Marriage Really Make Men More
      Productive?" Journal of Human Resources 26 (Spring 1991): 282-307.
Leion, Anders, "Sweden," in B.C. Roberts, ed., Industrial Relations in Europe (London:
       Croom Helm, 1985), pp. 204-221.
Lofstrom, Asa and Siv Gustafsson, "Policy Changes and Women's Wages in Sweden," in
       Steven L. Wiliborn, ed., Womens's Wa2es: Stability and Chanaes in Six Industrialized
       Countries (Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1991).

Mincer, Jacob, and Solomon Polachek, "Family Investments in Human Capital: Earnings of
      Women," Journal of Political Economy 82, pt. 2 (March/April 1974): S76-S 108.
"New Industrial Relations Talks Continue," European Industrial Relations Review, No. 192
      (January 1990): 7.
O'Neill, June and Solomon Polachek, "Why the Gender Gap in Wages Narrowed in the
       1980s," Unpublished paper, Baruch College, CUNY, November 1991.

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Labour Force Statistics, various
      issues (Paris: OECD).
                Employment Outlook Sentember 1988 (Paris: OECD, 1988).
Polachek, Solomon, "Trends in Male-Female Wages: Differences Between the 1970s and the
       1980s," Paper presented at the American Economic Association meetings, December
       1990.

Reskin, Barbara, et. a!. Women's Work. Men's Work (Washington, D.C.: National Academy
       of Sciences, 1986).
Rosenfeld, Rachel and Arne Kalleberg, "A Cross-national Comparison of the Gender Gap in
      Income," American Journal of Sociolo2y 96 (July 1990): 69-106.
Simona, ilda, "Switzerland," in Jenny Farley, cii, Women Workers in Fifteen Countries
      (Ithaca, NY: ILR Press, 1985), pp. 147-153.
Sisson, Keith and William Brown, "Industrial Relations in the Private Sector: Donovan Re-
       visited," in George S. Bain, George S. Sam, ed., Industrial Relations in Britain
        (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1983), pp. 137-154.
Sorensen, Elaine, "The Crowding Hypothesis and Comparable Worth Issue," Journal of
      Human Resources 25 (Winter 1990): 55-89.

Thorsrud, Einar, "Norway," in B.C. Roberts, ed., Industrial Relations in Europe (London:
      Croom Helm, 1985), pp. 180-203.
Tomandl, Theodor and Karl Fuerboeck, Social Partnership (Ithaca, N.Y.: ILR Press, 1986).
Treu, T., "Italy," Bulletin of Comoarative Labour Relations 19(1990): 227-250.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Handbook of Labor Statistics, various issues (Washington,
      D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office).
Watts, Martin J. and William J. Mitchell, "The Impact of Incomes Policy on the Male Inter-
       Industry Wage Structure," Journal of Industrial Relations 32 (September 1990): 353-

Wrong, Gale, "Switzerland," Bulletin of Comoarative Labour Relations 16 (1987): 183-201.
Zahaiza, A. and Z. Tzannatos, "The Effect of Britain's Anti-Discriminatory Legislation on
       Relative Pay and Employment," The Economic Journal 95 (September 1985): 679-699.
                                                            Figure 1
                           Female-to-Male Hourly Earnings Ratios, Nonagricultural Workers, 1967-90




                                                                             0+90


                                                                             0.85
                                                                                                                                          Denmark

                                                                             0.80


                                                                             0.75


                                                                             0.70
                                                                        a
                                                                        '5                                                             •% Ireland
                                                                             0.65


                                                                             0.60
                                                                                                  /
                                                                                             —I
                                                                             0.55


                                                                             0.50


                                                                             0.45
                                                                                    C C C 1 N N Ii tu)N C     45 Cl 0 N N W In C N 45 0 0
                                                                                    N 45 04 0 .- N N    N   N N N 04 45 45 45 45 45 04 '5 '5 '5 CI
                                                                                                              Year


 a) Sample Countries                                                   b) Other Countries

Source: Various issues of OECD. LABOR FORCE STATISTiCS; lW YEARBOOK OF LABOUR STATISTICS; aM U.S. BLS. HANDBOOK OF
            LABOR STATISTICS.



NBERINT+XLS
                       Figure 2:. Gender Earnings Ratios Adjusted
                                for Hours Only (Percent)

         85.0 -
                  82.3

         80.0     —l




         75.0                     74.1

                                                 71.4 70.9
    0
         70.0
    C



         65.0



          60.0


                                -I-I
          55.0
                                                                           E

                                                                       tct
                                                             (0
                                                             C)
                                                             S.
                                                                           0
                                                                  C
                                                                           0)
                           C
                           C,
                                       S
                                       —
                                       —    S.
                                                  >.   C
                                                       >.
                                                         O
                                                       ID.c
                                                             S.   (3
                                                                  I-
                                                                  C)
                       5               (0                         t3
                                                       E
                           C,

                           U)
                                       C4         o    —
                                                          w  S.
                                                                  Ct
                                                                       C
                                                                           C)




NBERT7F2.XLS
                             Figure 3: Female Percentile in Male
                                         Distribution

          40.0     -


                   37.5


          35.0     -I

                             33.2
                                    32.3
                                           30.5

    .
    a
    C
    C,
          30.0 -   —I



                                                  28.2
                                                         27.6 27.5
    C.,                                                              26.4
    C,
          25.0
                                                                            23.6

                                                                                   21.2
          20.0



          15.0 -
                              •
                              0,
                                                          •0
                                                                             E
                                                                             0
                                                                             0
                        >.
                              C
                              1
                              CI)
                                     C
                                     C      C      Ct     C    >.
                                                               C      >-
                                                                             a
                                                                             C
                              C,

                              C
                                     tO
                                     3
                                     4
                                            3
                                            C
                                                   Ct
                                                   C,
                                                  .0      w
                                                          N    C

                                                               C,
                                                                      i.o
                                                                      2
                                                                             .0
                                                                             w
                                                                                    C
                                                                                    C)

                                                                                    I
                                                                                    3
                                                  Cl)     Q)   C,            C



NBZRT7F2.XLS
                           Figure 4: Simulated Female-Male Pay
                              Ratios: U.S., 1971-88 (Percent)

            75.0
                                                                    73.1

                                                                           70.8
            70.0 -.
                                                                                  69.0



                                              65.1
            65.0     -



     0                                               62.4
     .4-I

                                                                       a 1971 level of
                                                            '60.0           inequality
            60.0
                         58.0                                          U     1981 level of
                                                                            inequality

                                55.4
                                                                       a    1988 level of
            55.0 -                                                          inequality

                                       53.0



            50.0
                          1971 female          1981 female           1988 female
                           percentile           percentile            percentile

NBERCPS2.XL$
                                                     Tahle 1
                               Equal Pay and Equal Employment Opportunity Policy

                                                                          Principal Implemenfing Measures
Country                              Year                         Title                           Enforcement Machinery
Australia   Equal Pay                 1969         Major decisions by Conciliation            Conciliation and Arbitration
                                      1972         and Arbitration Commission                 Commission

            Equal Employment          1984         Sex Discrimination Act                     Sex Discrimination Commissioner
            Opportunity               1984, 1987   Public Service Act Amendments              Public Service Commission
                                      1986         Affirmative Action Act                     Human Rights and Equal
                                                                                              Opportunities Commission;
                                                                                              Affirmative Action Agency
Austria     Equal Pay                 1979         Law on Equal Treatment in                  Equality Commission
                                                   Employment                            1.
            Equal Employment
            Opportunity
                                      1985         (amended)
                                                                                        J     Ministry of Labour

Germany     Equal Pay                1980          Code of Civil Procedure ( 612)             Ministry of Labour and Social
                                                                                              Affairs; Labour Courts

            Equal Employment         1949          Basic Law                                  Ministry of Labour and Social
            Opportunity              1980          Code of Civil Procedure                    Affairs; Labour Courts
                                                   Cli 61 Ia, 61 lb. 612a)

                                     1986          Directive on professional                  Ministry of Youth, Family,
                                                   promotion of women in Federal              Women and Health
                                                   Administration
Italy       Equal Pay                1960          Equal Pay Agreement of the                 Collective bargaining parties
                                                   industrial sector
                                     1964          Equal Pay Law for the agricultural         Ministry of Labor
                                                   sector
            Equal Employment         1977          Act on Equal Employment
            Opportunity                            Opportunities between the Sexes
                                                                                              Labour Tribunals;
                                     1983          Ministerial Decree of the
                                                                                         i
                                                   Implementation of Equal
                                                   Employment Opportunities
                                                                                        j     Ministry of Labour

                                                   Principles

                                                                                                                   HSERTASJ.OOC/wlw
                                                               Table I cont'd.
                                           Equal Pay and Equal Employment Opportunity Policy

                                                                                         Principal lntpletncnting Measures
Country                                            Year                          Title                             Enforcement Machinery
Norway               Equal Pay                                   Act on Equal Status between the              Equal Status Council; Equal
                     Equal Employment        _     1978          Sexes                                        Status Ombudsman; Equal Status
                     Opportunity            J                                                                 Appeals Board

                                                                 Basic Agreement between                      Collective bargaining parties
                                                                 Employers' and Trade Unions
                                                                 Confederation
Sweden               Equal Pay                                   Act on Equality between Men and              Equal Opportunity Ombudsman
                     Equal Employment        .-    1980          Women at Work
                     Opportunity           J       1983-1984
                                                                 Major Equal Opportunity                      Collective bargaining parties
                                                                 Agreements between Employers
                                                                 and Trade Unions' Confederation
                                                                 in Private and Public Sector
United Kingdom       Equal Pay                     1970          Equal Pay Act
                                                   1975          (in force)                                   Industrial Tribunals
                                                   1984          (amended)

                     Equal Employment              1975          Sex Discrimination Act                       Equal Opportunities Commission
                     Opportunity                   1986          (amended)                                    (EOC); Industrial Tribunals
United States        Equal Pay                     1963          Equal Pay Act                                Equal Employment Opportunity
                                                                                                              Commission (EEOC)


                                                                 :::1unities } Equal Em4oyment Opportunity

                                                   1968          Executive Order 11375                        Office of Federal Contract
                                                                                                              Compliance_Programs

Source: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, OECD Employment Outlook (September 1988), Table 5.11, pp. 167-s.



                                                                                                                                 NB(RTk83.OQCfwfw
                                               Table 2
                                  Maternity and Parental Leave



Country                                  Maximum Length               Paid/Unpaid
                                           Maternity Leave
Australia                                52 weeks                     Unpaid'
Austria                                  16 weeks                     100%
Germany, Federal   Republic              14 weeks                     100%
Hungary                                  24 weeks                     100%
Italy                                    5 months                     80%
Norway                                   20 weeks                     100%
Sweden                                   12 weeks                     90%
Switzerland                              8-12 weeks                   Paid as sicknessb
United Kingdom
UnitedStates                             d
                                         40 weeks                     Up to 90%C



                                            Parental Leave
Australia                                Up to 66 weekse              Mostly unpaid
Austria                                  Age 1 year                   Unpaid (allowance possible)
Germany, Federal Republic                Age 1 year                   Paid (fixed allowance)
Hungary                                  Age 18 months                Paid (child-care benefits)
Italy                                    6 months                     Paid (reduced benefits)
Norway                                   70 days                      Paid (social security)
Sweden                                   360 days                     Paidt (social security)
United States

•   Provisions for Commonwealth Government employees include 12 weeks' paid leave under certain
    conditions.
b
    Compensation depends on the level of insurance.
    18 weeks paid at different rates,
d   Some states provide unpaid maternity leave. Federal law prohibits employment discrimination
    based on pregnancy and childbirth.
    Applies to some public sector employees only. Parental leave may encompass maternity leave,
    adoption leave, etc.
    90% for the first 270 days, then reduced fixed rate.
t   In some states only. Up to 12 weeks, unpaid.



Source: International Labour Organization, Conditions of Work Digest, 7, no. 2 (February, 1988),
Tables2and3,•pp. 20-I.

NBaTAB2. DCC
                                   Table 3

              Gender Earnings Ratios Corrected for Hourst


                             All Workers
                   Own   Country            US
                          Family        Family      Married    Single
Country            composition compositionb         Workers   Workers

Australia                 0,7334        0.7386       0.6756    0.9044

Austria                   0.7407        0.7489       0.6607    0.9170

Germany                   0.7091        0.7248       0.6006    0.9806

Hungary                   0.6454        0.6631       0.6087    0.7728

Italy                     0.8232             ————      ————     —
Norway                    0.7138        0.7411       0.6756    0.8958

Sweden                   0.7724         0.7865       0.7209    0.9435

Switzerland              0.6455         0.6872       0.6140    0.8709

United Kingdom           0.6133         0.6447       0.5604    0.8251

United States            0.6692         0.6692       0.5672    0.8758



aYFULL, earnings evaluated at full—time (40) hours (see equation
(2)). The number of hours is not available for Hungary, but all
workers are full time. Marital status is not available for Italy.

bComputed using U.S. proportions of married and single workers.
                                                Table 4

                                  Labor   Force Participation Rates

                                          Men                           Women

                                          Not                            Not
Country                   Married     Married       All      Married   Married    All
Australia                 0.8933      0.8688      0.8856     0.5624    0.6774    0.59S6

Austria                   0.7701      0.7956      0.7784     0.3883    0.5605    0.4444

Germany                   0.8408      0.7047      0.7884     0.3742    0.5759    0.4477

Hungary                   0.8552      0.8041      0.8423     0.6638    0.6320    0.6562

                            ———           ———     0.7880       ———       ———     0.4390
Italy (1980)

Norway                    0.9067      0.7790      0.8778     0.5896    0.5960    0.5910

Sweden (1988)               ———           ——      0.9000       ———       ———     0.8500

Switzerland               0.9679      0.8477      0.9312     0.3949    0.8181    0.6045

United Kingdom            0.9211      0.8202      0.8930     0.5572    0.6686    0.5886

United States             0.9068      0.8564      0.8873     0.6200    0.7076    0.6614



Note; Source     for Sweden is Lofetrom and Gustafason (1991). Source for Italy
         is OECD, Labor Force Statistics (1990), p. 299.




NBTAB2DOC. EURLFP. PRJ4
                                                   Table S
                                  Hearts for Narriad Spouse Present (MAflP)
                                  and Part—time Work (PART), Employed Saple

                                                                 Part—time (PART)
                           Married (HARSP)                Men                        Women
Country                     Hen      Women       All    Single   Harried      All    Single   Married

Australia              0.6971       0.6494     0.0457   0.0674    0.0362    0.3740   0.2070    0.4641
Austria                0.6651       0.5711     0.0218   0.0233    0.0211    0.2821   0.1444    0.3855
Germany                0.6859       0.5252     0.0170   0.0280    0.0119    0.3455   0.1663    0.5076
                           ———       ———       0.0573    ———        ———     0.2613     ———       ———
Italy
Norway                0.8053        0.8050     0.0697   0.0679    0.0701    0.5251   0.2673    0.5875
Sweden                0.7374        0.7177     0.0525   0.0500    0.0534    0.4565   0.2766    0.5272
Switzerland           0.7268        0.3129    0.0232    0.0377    0.0177    0.2517   0.1386    0.5000
United Kingdom        0.7664        0.7060    0.0366    0,0464    0.0336    0.4485   0.2034    0.5506
United States         0.6366        0.5059    0.1145    0.1800    0.0771    0.2437   0.1915    0.2947

Note: PART is defined as employed for less than 35 hours per week. This variable is
not available for Hungary. Marital status is not available for Italy.




BERTAZ2.DOC. MARFAPT.PRN
                            Table 6

         Gender Segregation Indexes by 1—digit
                Occupation and Industry

Country                       Occupation   Industry

Australia                       0.3807     0.3302
Austria                         0.4020     0.3140

Germany                         0.4216     0.3203

Hungary                         0.4084     0.2467

Norway                          0.4341     0.3893

Sweden                          0.4614     0.4263

Switzerland                     0.3222     0.2913

United Kingdom                  0.4395     0.3488
United states                   0.3568     0.3430




NBEgTAD2. DOC. EURSEG.PRN
                                                   Tabl• 7
                              Analysis   of   Log Wages (TFULL)t All Work•rs

                                                       Moan         Hale      Female
                                      Female         Female     Residual    Residual
Country                        Da   Residual     Percentilet) Strd. dev. Strd. dev.

Australia               0.3100      —0.2386            36.8         0.5998     0.6811     —0.0956
Austria                 0.3002      —0.2739            30.4         0.3967     0.4450      0.1014
Germany                 0.3437      —0.2939            30.5         0.3774     0.4903     —0.0579
Hungary                 0.4379      —0.4115            21.2         0.3905     0.3667      0.0252
Italy                   0.1946      —0.1653            37.3         0.3811     0.4375     —0.1737
Norway                  0.3371      —0.3070            29.5         0.4101     0.5120     —0.0645
Sweden                  0.2582      —0.1985            36.2         0.4231     0.4551     —0.1434
Switzerland             0.4377      —0.2233            35.1         0.4048     0.5260      0.0361
United Kingdom         0.4889       —0.3904            24.1         0.4084     0.4379      0.0873
United States          0.4016       —0.2777            37.3         0.6717     0.7725

                            0b          Oh—                     Unob—        Sun            Sum
                         served      served                    served    Gender—           Wage
Country                       Vs     Prices           Gap      Prices   Specif ic   structured
Australia                0.0595     —0.0737       —0.0410     —0.0404     0.0185        —0.1141
Austria                  0.0679     —0.1655        0.2283     —0.2321     0.2962        —0.3976
Germany                  0.0351     —0.1091        0.2538     —0.2376     0.2889        —0.3467
Hungary                 —0.0257     —0.0351        0.5827     —0.4967     0.5570        —0.5318
Italy                    0.0111     —0.0434       —0.0133     —0.1282    —0.0022        —0.1716
Norway                   0.0062     —0.0999        0.2445     —0.2152     0.2507        —0.3151
Sweden                  —0.0236     —0.0406        0.0203     —0.0995    —0.0033        —0.1401
Switzerland              0.1008     —0.0102        0.0020     —0.0564     0.1028        —0.0666
United Kingdom           0.0261     —0.0514        0.4200     —0.3073     0.4461        —0.3587



aThS gender difference in YFULL, earnings evaluated at full—time (40) hours (see
equation (2)).
b
  The mean female residual percentile in the male distribution of wage
residuals.

c The sun of the observed X's and gap effects.

d The sum of the observed and unobserved prices effects.


Notes: Regressions include control, for education, potential experience and its
square, union status, and occupation and industry dummy variables. The U.S.
value used to calculate "DiDUSA for Hungary, Australia and Italy is based on
hours corrections from U.S. regressions which conform to the specifications for
each of those countries. However, the u.s. value in the D column is based on
the more detailed specification permitted by the ISSP and CSCC data files.




NDERTAB2.DOC.   DECOMfl2.nc
                                           T.bl. 8

                     Analysis of Log Wages (YFULL): Married       Work.rs



                                                Mean           Male         Female
                                Female        Female       Residual       Residual
Country                   a   Residual.   Percentilek    Strd. dev.     Strd. dev.      DjDusA

Australia            0.4091    —0.3629        28.7           0.5480         0.6887      —0.1621
Austria              0.4255    —0.3966        23.9           0.4041         0.4751      —0.1427
Germany              0.5068    —0.4817        18.8           0.3280         0.5225      —0.0614
Hungary              0.4964    —0.4462        16.8           0.3811         0.3703      —0.0700
Norway               0.3881    —0.3435        25.6           0.3735         0.5033      —0.1801
Sweden               0.2839    —0.2536        30.2           0.3537         0.4152      —0.2843
United Kingdom      0.5789     —0.4587        21.0           0.3931         0.4510       0.0107
United States        0.5682    —0.4650        30.4           0.6062         0.8450

                        Ob—         Ob-                   Unob—            Sum            Sum
                     served      served                 served         Gender—            Wage
Country                 X's      Prices          Gap    Prices        SpecificC      structured

Australia            0.0513     —0.0578    —0.0958      —0.0598       —0.0445         —0.1176
Austria              0.0509     —0.1251     0.2142      —0.2826        0.2651         —0.4077
Germany              0.0145     —0.0924     0.4740      —0.4573        0.4885         —0.5497
Hungary             —0.0281     —0.0168     0.4997      —0.5248        0.4716         —0.5416
Norway              —0.0102     —0.0483     0.1129      —0.2344        0.1027         —0.2827
Sweden              —0.0307     —0.0422    —0.0279      —0.1835       —0.0586         —0.2257
United Kingdom       0.0040      0.0130     0.3170      —0.3233        0.3210         —0.3103



arhe gender difference in YFULL,      earnings   evaluated at full—time (40) hours (see
equation (2)).

bThe mean female residual percentile in the male distribution of wage residuals.

CThe sum of the observed X's and gap effects.

      sum of the observed and unobserved prices effects.

Notes: Regressions include controls for education, potential experience and its
square, union status, and occupation and industry dummy variables. The U.S.
value used to calculate 'DLDUSA for Hungary, Australia and Italy is based on
hours corrections from U.S. regressions which conform to the specifications for
each of those countries. However, the U.S. value in the D" column is based on
the more detailed specification permitted by the ISSP and CSCC data files.




NBERTAD2. . DECOMP92ASC
                                           Table 9

            Analysis of tog Real Weekly Wages for Full—Time Workers,
                    United States, 1971—1988 (1981 dollars)

                                                1971               1981           1988


Mean Female Percentile in
    Male Distribution                           19.53             24.06          30.41

Ln (wage)

     Males                                     5.9800         5.8857            5.9003
                                              (.5123)         (.5493)           (.5891)

     Females                                   5.4360         5.4148            5.5298
                                              (.4754)         (.4773)           (.5354)

Differential                                   0.5440         0.4709            0.3705


                                         Decomposition of Changes

                                               Due to Change              Due to Change
                          Total Change             in Female                    in Male
Period                     in Ln(wage)            Percentile                 Inequality

1971—1981                      —0.0731                  —0.1143                  0.0412

1981—1988                      —0.1004                  —0.1251                  0.0247

1971—1988                      —0.1735                  —0.2301                  0.0566




?ThAB2. DOC, LTSTIMEASC
                                           Appendix
             Variable Definitions. Means and Earnin2s Regression Results by Country
       Definitions of the explanatory variables are given in Table A-i. The earnings
definitions for each country are listed below:

       Austria: Net Monthly Income from Employment

       Germany and Switzerland: Net Income per Month after taxes and social insurance
       Italy: Annual labor income
       Britain: Total annual earnings before taxes
       USA: Previous year's earnings from occupation before taxes

       Hungary: Monthly earnings
       Sweden: Income (from all sources) in previous year
       Norway: Annual income from all jobs.
       Australia: Annual earnings from all jobs.




WBTAB2.DOC
                                         Table A-i
                           Definitions of Explanatory Variables

    EDUC = years of schooling completed
    PEXP = age - EDUC -6
    PEXPSQ = EXP squared
    UNION = dummy variable for union membership
    Occupation dummy variables:
               PROF = professional and technical workers (the omitted category)
               MOR = managers, except farm
               CLER = clerical workers
               SALES = sales workers
               CRAFT = craft workers
               OPER = operatives
               LAB = laborers, except farm
               SERVWK = service workers
               FARMMGR = farm managers
               FARMLAB = farm laborers
    Industry dummy variables:
           AG = agriculture, forestry and fisheries
           MINCON = mining and construction
           MANDUR = durable goods manufacturing
           MANNON = nondurable goods manufacturing
           TRANS = transportation, communications and utilities
           WTRADE = wholesale trade
           RTRADE = retail trade
           FIRE = finance, insurance and real estate
               SERVS = services
               GOVT = government (the omitted category).
    Industry dummy variables for Hungary:
           AG (see above)
           MINMAN = mining and manufacturing
               CONST = construction
               TRANS (see above)
               TRADE = wholesale and retail trade
               SERVS = services, finance insurance and real estate
               GOVT (see above), the omitted category
    Occupation dummy variables for Australia:
          MGR = managers and farm managers
          CLER, CRAFT, and OPER (see above)
          LAB = laborers and farm laborers
          SALESW = sales and service workers
          PROF (see above), the omitted category
    Industry dummy variables for Australia:
           AG, TRANS, MINCON (see above)
               MANUF = manufacturing
               TRADE = wholesale and retail trade
               FISERV = finance, insurance, real estate and services
               GOVT (see above), the omitted category




NBERTAB2.DOC
                                     Table A-i, cont'd
                            Definitions of Explanatory Variables

         Occupation dummy variables for Italy:
               BLUE = blue collar
               WHITELOW = lower level white collar
               WHITEHI = higher level white collar, the omitted category

         Industry dummy variables for Italy:
                AG, TRANS, TRADE (see above)
                ff40 = Mining, Construction and Manufacturing
                FIRE, GOVT (see above)
                SERVS (see above), the omitted category




BERTAB2. DOC
                                                                      Tabi. A—2

                                                     Nnns of Explanatory Variables


                Gereany        United   kingdom      UnitS St.te.           Austrie           Swi   tunaS           Sweden             Norwey
              Nan    Women       Men     Women       Men      Women       Men   Warn       Men      Women        Men    Wcman        Men   Women


PART        0.017    0.346     0.037      0.449    0.115      0.244     0.022    0.282    0.023       0.252     0.053     0.456    0.070     0.525
NPART       0.437    7.619     0.892      9.233    2.626      5.268     0.514   6.284     0.585       6.252     1.300    10.526     1.624    10.737
MFLILL     44.308   28.212     43.664    21.604   42.459     33.487    45.531   31.502   47.335      33.367    41.151    22.138    41.386    19.280
(DYRS      10.205    10.400    11.291    11.331    13.383    13.265    11.089   10.911   11.335      10.565    10.236    10.460    11.256    10.950
PUP        22.939    19.613    21.817    20.628    18.843    18.962    20.712   19.138   23.134      18.565    22.746    22.419    22.267    21.473
PEXPSQ    676.298   523.591   642.187   576.875   497.025   513.662   580.379 521.858    664.526    503.707   694.397   685.044   659.995   617.569
UNiON       0.349    0.180     0.471     0.396     0.205      0.125    0.542    0.349     0.433       0.265    0.786      0.796    0.599     0.595
NOR         0.104    0.069     0.157     0.066     0.187      0.141    0.145    0.062     0.180       0.095    0.055      0.018    0.102     0,039
CLER        0.092    0.272     0.072     0.327     0.055      0.259    0.134    0.298     0.116       0.293    0.063      0.198    0.088     0.237
SALES       0.049    0.119     0.046     0.077     0.061     0.054     0.042    0.075     0.054       0.061    0.061     0.093     0.070     0.095
CRAFT       0.351    0.059     0.292     0.081     0.206     0.028     0.308    0.073     0.183       0.014    0.197      0.021    0.220     0.017
OPER        0.095    0.015     0.119     0.032     0.124      0.071    0.101    0.037     0.090      0.027     0.269     0.087     0.190     0.060
LAO         0.013    0.019     0.051     0.008     0.059     0.009     0.047    0.028     0.021       0.020    0.050     0.006     0.017     0.012
SERVW#Z     0.057    0.134     0.060     0.191     0.081     0.208     0.061    0.183     0.052       0.075    0.0Th     0.321     0.052     0.191
FARM4GR     0.024    0.011     0.005     0.001     0.019     0.003     0.042    0.046     0.018       0.014    0.020     0.000     0.038     0,008
FARMLAS     0.009    0.007     0.005     0.003     0.009     0.002     0.014    0.014     0.003       0.007    0.009      0.006    0.010     0,008
AG          0.031    0.021     0.015     0.007     0.041     0.013     0.056    0.050     0.031       0.020    0.046      0.006    0.056     0.019
MICON       0.121    0.018     0.118     0.011     0.119     0.013     0.128    0.034     0.103       0.014    0.127      0.021    0.118     0.014
MAN0UR      0.244    0.094     0.195     0.072     0.151     0.064     0.235    0.096     0.188       0.088    0.225      0.069    0.207     0.081
MAJINON     0.111    0.098     0.129     0,107     0.092     0.066     0.103    0.147     0.152       0.129    0.094      0.084    0.034     0.056
TRAIlS      0.056    0.011     0.104     0.032     0.086      0.035     0.076   0.014     0.070       0.034    0.138      0.051    0.125     0.021
WIRA0E      0.023    0.030     0.044     0.029     0.046      0.018    0.030    0.041     0.003       0.020    0.037      0.012    0.047     0.031
RTRAOE      0.043    0.153     0.073      0.181    0.115      0.174     0.058   0.103     0.000       0.000    0.039      0.102    0.053     0.104
FiRE        0.050    0.051     0.051      0.054    0.052      0.083     0.042    0.050    0.088       0.054    0.015      0.018    0.047     0.044
SERVS       0.089    0.248     0.202      0.439    0.218      0.471     0.112    0.311    0.111       0.122    0.230      0.565     0.299    0.606




MIERTAID .DOC. MLAN92.ASC
                                 Table A—2 (cont'd.)
                         Means   of Explanatory Variable.
                    Austratla              Ntrgary               Italy
                Men     Wonen          Men    ISeen        Mrv     War,en



PART          0.046      0.374       ---       -•        0.057      0.261
MPART        0.929       7.031       ---       ---       1.315      5.733
I4FULL      42.370      25.865       ---       ---      39.163     29.515
EDYRS       11.010      11.189      11.406  11.026       9.820     11.017
PEXP        19.385      17.161      19.765  19.971      23.917     19.664
PEXPSQ     519,751     431.540     524.690 530.290     732.306    532.517
UNION         ---        ---         0.636   0.762       •--        '--
NCR          0.114       0.030       0.059   0.051       ...        ...
CLER         0.093       0.345      0.072      0.24?     ".         ...
SALESW       0.0Th       0.190      0.012      0.039                ...
CRAFT        0.241       0.038      0.252      0.050     ."
OPER         0.116       0.033      0.270      0.076                ..
LAO
BLUE
             0.157
             ...
                         0.149
                         ...        •...
                                    0.110      0.179
                                               ...
                                                        ...
                                                        0.514
                                                                    ...
                                                                    0.384
WNITELCM
SERVUK
FARI*IGR
             ""'         ...
                         "-         0.041
                                    0.012
                                               0.107
                                               0.003
                                                        "-
                                                        0.433       0.606
                                                                    ."
FARMLAB      ...                    0.058      0.032    ...         ...
AG           0.034       0.013      0.233      0,132    0.034       0.035
MIcON
NANUF
TRANS
             0.104
             0.215
             0.146
                         0.018
                         0.113
                         0.046
                                    -—

                                    0.111
                                               "
                                               0.056
                                                        "
                                                        0.116
                                                                    -"
                                                                    0.162
TRADE        0.163       0.194      0.042      0,116    0.112       0.035
FISERV       0.257       0.556      ..-        ...      ...         .--
             ...         -.-        ...
                                               ""
             '
IWO                                                     0.392       0.186
FIRE         .--         --'        ...                 0.040       0.039
GOVT         ...         ."         ."                  0.144       0.131
MIWMM                    ---                            ...         ...
CONSI        -"
             '"
                         -"
                                    0.316
                                    0.092
                                               0.280
                                               0.048    -'          '.'
SERVE                               0.147      0.320                --.




PJHERTAR2. DCC. MEANY2.ASC
                                                            Table A-3
                     Coefficient. f rot R.gre.sion Analysis of YFULL
YFULL Coefficients for Geriny                                   YFULL Coefficients for United Kingdom

                          Hen                  Women                        Hen                Women
                                  std                     Std                      Std                     Std
VariebLe         Coeff           Error     Coeff      Error       Coeff           Error    Coeff       Error


INTERCEP         6.0688          0.0912    6.3533     0.1780      8.0856          0.1508   7.7343      0.2127
PART         -0.5261             0.2609 -1.1741       0.17Th      -1.3979         0.2071 -1.8227 0.1557
HPART         0.0256 0.0094 0.0358                    0.0053      0.0491          0.0078   0.0579      0.0029
HFULL         0.0107 0.0013 0.0027                    0.0029      0.0045       0.0012      0.0042      0.0035
EDYRS         0.0478 0.0042 0.0535                    0.0089      0.0700          0.0096   0.0928      0.0112
PUP           0.0686 0.0032 0.0480                    0.0058       0.0529 0.0033 0.0145 0.0040
PEXPSQ       -0.0011  0.0001 -0.0009                  0.0001      -0.0010 0.0001 -0.0002 0.0001
UNION            0.0250 0.0213 0.1033 0.0451                       0.0515  0.0236 0.0707 0.0290
NOR              0.0555      0.0382 0.1125            0.0744      0.1101       0.0397 -0.0875          0.0623
CLER         -0.1775         0.0445 -0.0363           0.0509      -0.3158 0.0505 -0.2251               0.0430
SALES            0.0277 0.0523 -0.1492 0.0721                     -0.0606 0.0597 -0.3541               0.0665
CRAFT        -0.1860         0.0323 -0.2051           0.0895      -0.2253 0.0373 -0.4172               0.0680
OPEN         -0.2417         0.0421 -0.0612           0.1521      -0.3488 0.0456 -0.5156               0.0893
LAB          -0.5462         0.0908 -0.2836 0.1307                -0.4431 0.0577 -0.2227               0.1524
SERVYK       -0.1020         0.0481       -0.2497     0.0620      -0.2678 0.0535 -0.4489               0.0467
FARSIOR      -0.1357 0.1695 -0.7794                   0.2792      -0.0177 0.1726 -0.8178               0.4971
FARHLAS      -0.2572         0.1547 -0.2342           0.2505      -0.3512      0.1880 -0.6753 0.2757
AG           -0.2911         0.1600 -0.0674           0.2176      -0.2860      0.1256 -0.1540 0.2187
HICON        -0.0050         0.0384       0.0214      0.1311      0.0208       0.0546      0.1342 0.1323
HANDUR       0.0524          0.0311 -0.0224           0.0709      -0.0594      0.0498      0.0971     0.0736
MANNON       0.0353          0.0374 -0.1834           0.0736      0.0077       0.0525      0.0281     0.0701
TRANS        0.0676          0.0474       0.1702      0.1618      -0.0138      0.0548      0.1142     0.0860
WTRADE       -0.0608         0.0672       -0.0903    0.1042      -0.0411       0.0689      0.1811     0.0914
RTRADE       -0.0994         0.0536 -0.1338          0.0662      -0.3327       0.0598 -0.1362         0.0646
FIRE         0.1061          0.0547       0.0097 0.0874           0.1424 0.0643            0.0463     0.0738
SERVS        -0.0300         0.0393 .0.0808          0.0511      -0.1782 0.0463 -0.0674               0.0560

S.E.E.                   .3774                  .4903                     .4084                 .4379

R2                       .4582                  .3526                     .4016                 .6521


Salrp(e   size            1592                      874                     1477                    1204




NBERTAflDOC. C0E92.A3C
                                                 Table A—3 (cont'd)

                       Coefficients from Regression Analysis of YFULL

 YFULL Coefficients for the United States                      YFULL    Coefficients for Austila

                       Men                  Women                        Ken                     Women
                               Std                   Std                        Std
 Variabte      Coeff          Error     Coeff       Error       Coeff          Error     Coeff         Error

 INTERCEP      8.2375         0.1770    8.1492      0.2507      8.8191         0.1507 8.5387 0.2357
 PART         -0.7413         0.1763 -1.6344        0.1843     -1.4062         0.4051 -1.3813          0.2189
  WART         0.0238 0.0062            0.0421      0.0056      0.0549         0.0162    0.0375        0.0067
 HFULL         0.0085         0.0018    0.0050 0.0029           0.0054         0.0018 -0.0029          0.0034
 EDYRS         0.0695         0.0080    0.0810      0.01 17    0.0187 0.0080             0.0484        0.0124
 PEXP          0.0534         0.0055    0.0333      0.0066     0.0342         0.0053    0.0301         0.0066
 PEXPSQ       -0.0008         0.0001 -0.0004        0.0001    -0.0005         0.0001 -0.0005           0.0001
 LIIION       0.2222          0.0469    0.1344      0.0704     0.0789         0.0354    0.0761         0.0492
 NCR          0.0757 0.0642             0.0927      0.0838    -00908          0.0755 -0.1068           0.1151
 CIER         -0.3257 0.0908 -0.1161                0.0748    -0.2499         0.0747 -0.0954           0.0754
 SALES        -0.0660         0.0917 -0.5432 0.1189           -0.2707 0.1085 -0.1729 0.1159
 CRAFT        -0.1738         0.0681 -0.1290      0.15Th      -0.2919 0.0668 -0.3829 0.1136
 OPER         -0.3292        0.0780 -0.2162       0.1259      -0.3266         0.0800 -0.2741        0.1462
 LAB        -0.5927 0.0952 -0.5162                0.2501      -0.3842         0.0959 -0.3099        0.1505
 SERWK      -0.3620          0.0838    -0.4565    0.0804      -0.2849         0.0839 -0.3055        0.0791
 FARjq4GR   -0.4261          0.2119 0.4187 0.4612             -0.7096         0.1633 -0.6664        0.2803
 FARKLAB    -0.5874          0.2447 -0.9051       0.5658      -0.4406 0.1587 -0.4234                0.2150
AG            0.1102         0.1743 -0.5273       0.2605      -0.0389 0.1388 -0.0132                0.2601
NICOW       -0.1844          0.0884 -0.3026       0.2211       0.0493      0.0649 -0.1102           0.1338
KAWDUR        0.0177 0.0828            0.0655     0.13Th      -0.0275      0.0588       0.0764      0.0972
NANNON      -0.0550          0.0898 -0.2454       0.1371       0.0299 0.0667 -0.0295 0.0975
TRANS         0.0403         0.0914    0.1340     0.1507      -0.0171  0.0734  0.0940 0.1939
WIRADE      -0.2941          0.1103 -0.2987       0.1933       0.2073      0.1069       0.1628 0.1249
RTRADE      -0.3025       0.0864 -0.3796          0.1089      -0.1369 0.0894            0.0098     0.1026
FIRE          0.0399      0.1056 -0.0377 0.1214                0.2223     0.0937        0.1295     0.1151
SERVS       -0.2801       0.0759 -0.2486          0.0973      -0.0078     0.0683        0.0330     0.0705

S.E.E.             .6717                    .7725                      .3967                 .4450

R2                 .3808                    .4206                   .2883                    .3754

SançLe size            1406                  1194                       642                      436




NBERTAB2.DOC, C0EP92.A.5C
                                             Tab]., A—3 (contd)

                  coefficients fro. Regression Analysis of YFULL


YFULL Coefficients for SwitzerLand                        flULL Coefficients for Sweden


                    Men                  Woen                        Men                 Ucinen
                           Std                   Std                         Std                  std
Variable   Coeff          Error     Coeff       Error        Coeff         Error      Coeff       Error


INTERCEP   6.2999 0.1917 6.2689                 0.5978       9.4122        0.2359     9.6928      0.5082

PART       0.0939 0.5455 -2.1373                0.6649      -0.7021        0.3539 -1.1591         0.4648
HPART      -0.0008        0.0203    0.0665      0.0164       0.0198        0.0129     0.0301      0.0061
HFULL      0.0082         0.0028 0.0021         0.0117       0.0047        0.0028 0.0011          0.0106
EDYRS      0.0548         0.0067    0.0736      0.0172       0.0434        0.0098     0.0426      0.0116
PEXP       0.0719         0.0076    0.0543      0.0155       0.0674        0.0063     0.0297 0.0082
PEXPSQ     -0.0010        0.0001 -0.0008        0.0003      -0.0010        0.0001 -0.0004         0.0002
UMION      0.0292         0.0440    0.1327      0.1135       0.1856 0.05Th            0.2828      0.0701

NOR        0iTh5 o.0673             -0.0985     0.1800       0.1813 0.1060            0.2228      0.2065
cia        -0.0448        0.0831 -0.0022        0.1503      -0.0589        0.0980     0.0820      0.0959
SALES      -0.1381 0.1082 -0.3101               0.2676       0.0591        0.1356 -0.0116         0.1649
cRAFT      -0.2318 0.0739 -0.1221               0.4239      -0.0151        0.0786 -0.1128         0.2179
OPER       -0.1631 0.0921 -0.1092               0.3465      -0.1832        0.0750     0.1938      0.1467
LAB        -0.2081 0.1578 -0.1627               0.3438      -0.1149        0.1272     0.0597      0.3691
SERVWI(    -0.2955        0.1146 -0.3821        0.2029      -0.2598 0.0980 -0.0610                0.0887

FARPV4GR   -1.0129 0.2748 -0.2577               0.7095      -0.5679 0.2391            0.0000      0.0000

FARMLAB     0.0150        0.4585     0.1439     0.5670      -0.1725        0.2900 -0.5875         0.3538

AG         -3.0096        0.2132 -0.2208        0.5417       0.2624        0.1842     0.0000 00000
MICON       0.0720        0.0823     0.2963     0.4067       0.1777          0.1182   0.3277 0.2192
MANDUR      0.1055        0.0706     0.1037     0.1809       0.1746          0.1123 -0.0218 0.1572
MAWNON      0.0478 0.0736 -0.0111 0.1906                     0.1167          0.1225 -0.1237 0.1481
TRANS      -0.0181 0.0986 0.4299 0.2779                      0.1508          0.1147   0.0280      0.1517
UTRADE     -0.2745  0.4206 0.3203 0.3443                     0.1869          0.1530   0.0207      0.2764
RTRADE      0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000                      0.0322          0.1748 -0.0353       0.1762
FIRE        0.2721        0.0874     0.2463      0.2221      0.5201          0.2367 0.2120
                                                                             0.1931
SERVS          0.0625      0.0801    0.3602      0.1649      0.1146 0.1065 -0.0171 0.1109

S.E.E.                  4049                 .5236                   .4231                    .4551


R2                  .5341                    .6294                   .6240                    .4251


Sairple sIze            388                    147                     457                      333




P4bFAB2.DOC, COEF92.ASC
                                                 Table A—3 (cont'd)
                    Coefficients I roa Regression Analysis of nULL
 flULL Coefficients for Norway                                   niii Coefficients for Australia

                        Men                    Women                                    Men                 Women
                               Std                     Std                                    Std                   Std
 Variabte      Coeff          Error    Coeff           Error     Variable      Coeff       Error    Coeff       Error


 INTERCEP 10.2470             0.1844   11.1202         0.3962    INTERCEP      8.9394      0.0958   8.8661      0.1631
 PART         -1.5105         0.1818 -2.0945        0.3370      PART          -1.5624      0.1153 -1.6534       0.1397
 HPART        0.0536          0.0066   0.0529       0.0044      IIPART        0.0383 0.0042         0.0472 0.0024
 HFULL        0.0052          0.0016 -0.0095        0.0078      HFIJLL        0.0019 0.0014         0.0028 0.0031
 EDYRS        0.0453      0.0070 0.0385             0.0119      EDYRS         0.0452      0.0046    0.0410      0.0058
 PUP          0.0531      0.0048 0.0099             0.0072      PEXP          0.0579      0.0028 0.0295         0.0038
 PEXPSQ       -0.0008     0.0001 -0.0001            0.0001      PEXPSO        -0.0010     0.0001 -0.0004        0.0001
 UNION        0.0648      0.0331       0.2091       0.0499      NCR         -0.0149       0.0362 -0.1992        0.0805
 NCR          0.0465      0.0592 -0.0028           0.1238       CLER        -0.1389       0.0380 -0.1506       0.0410
 CLER         -0.0051     0.0620 -0.0582           0.0723       SALESIJ     -01999 0.0416 -0.2987 0.0478
 SALES        0.0073      0.0784       0.0232      0.1311       CRAFT       -0.2205       0.0328 -0.3468       0.0742
 CRAFT      -0.0630 0.0552 -0.1612                 0.1977       OPER        -0.1485       0.0394 -0.3662       0.0862
 OPER       -0.1419       0.0607 -0.2354           0.1329       LAB         -0.2629       0.0364 -0.4735       0.0518
 LAB        -0.1307 0.1381             0.0766      0.2741       AG          -0.8151       0.0595 -0.5734       0.1231
 SERWK        0.0094      0.0752 -0.2786           0.0764       MICON       -0.0603       0.0429 0.1726 0.1056
 FARMGR     -0.5140       0.1725       2.1019      0.5204       NANUF       -0.0831       0.0376    0.0488 0.0661
 FARHLAB    -0.7038       0.2001       1.0246      0.5229       TRANS       -0.0072 0.0393          0.0739     0.0775
AG            0.3971      0.1934 -1.5774           0.4789       TRADE       -0.2151       0.0400 -0.0734       0.0610
NINCON      -0.0478       0.1311 -0.3251           0.2456       FISERV      -0.2083       0.0366 -0.M115       0.0544
NANDUR      -0.0037 0.1273 -0.1261                 0.1755
NANWON      -0.2243       0.1476 -0.2625           0.1919
TRANS       -0.0315       0.1303       0.2525      0.2193
WTRADE        0.1342      0.1421 -0.2353           0.1989
RTRADE      -0.0375       0.1434 -0.3269           0.1830
FIRE          0.1425      0.1383 -0.0611           0.1834
SERVS       -0.1339       0.1242 -0.1704           0.1600

S.E.E.             .4101                    .5120               S.E.E.             .5998                .6811

R2                 .4139                    .5101               R2                 .3135                .4318

Saapte size             832                      518            Sanpte size         4556                 3003




NBERTAB2. DOC, COEF92.ASC
                                              Table A—3 (cont'd)
                  Coefficients from Regression Analysis of YFULL

flULL Coefficients for }Itngary                            flULL Coefficients for Italy


                      Men                    Women                                 lien                 Women
                             Std                     Std                                  Std                   Std
Variable      Coeff         Error    Coeff       Error     Variable       Coeff       Error     Coeff       Error



INTERCEP      8.1770        0.0830   7.7577 0.0807         INTERCEP       8.7303      0.0783    8.7173      0.1579
EDYRS         0.0375        0.0036 00463 0.0039            PART       -0.4825         0.1064 -0.8566        0.1268
PEXP          0.0329        0.0030   0.0319 0.0028         HPART          0.0205      0.0039    0.0207      0.0030
PEXPSO     -0.0006          0.0001 -0.0005       0.0001    HFULL          0.0082      0.0012    0.0005      0.0027
UNION         0.0115        0.0212   0.1027 0.0225         ED             0.0395      0.0022    0.0525      0.0034
P4GR          0.0552        0.0475 -0.1281       0.0466    EXP        0.0457 0.0019             0.0377      0.0027
CLER       -0.1546          0.0451 -0.1851       0.0293    EXPSO    -0.0007 0.0000 -0.0005                  0.0001
SALES      -0.3007          0.0961 -0.3734       0.0578    BLUE     -0.5476 0.0330 -0.4142                  0.0950
CRAFT      -0.0550          0.0358 -0.2164       0.0419    WIIITELOW -0.3783  0.0294 -0.2420                0.0910
OPER       -0.0717          0.0374 -0.1305       0.0420    AG       -0.1392 0.0363 -0.6666                  0.0523
LAB        -0.1076          0.0453 -0.2507 0.0357          IWO        0.0579 0.0196 0.0102                  0.0282
SER -0.0977                 0.0558 -0.1862       0.0378    TRADE      0.0578 0.0245 0.0299                  0.0281
FARMMGR    -0.0564          0.0904 -0.8869       0.1567    TRANS          0.1081      0.0243    0.0420      0.0504
FARHIAB    -0.1442          0.0545 -0.3435       0.0630    FIRE        0.2218 0.0338 0.1546                 0.0481
AG         -0.0517          0.0455   0.0054      0.0495    GOVT       -0.0162 0.0228 -0.0415                0.0299
P4INMAN       0.0536        0.0428 -0.0593       0.0439
CONST      -0.0230          0.0496 -0.0012       0.0560
TRANS      -0.0735          0.0490   0.0197 0.0538
TRADE      -0.1243          0.0630 -0.0216 0.0506
SERVS         0.0264        0.0447 -0.1825 0.0427

S.EE.                  .3905                 .3668         S.E.E                  .3811                 .4375

R2                     .2059                 .2819         R2                     .3995                 .3741

Sanple size            1876                   1835         Sairple size            4152                  2480




NBmAB2.DOC, C0EE92.ASC
