                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             A TAX-BASED TEST OF THE
                          DIVIDEND SIGNALING HYPOTHESIS




                                   B. Douglas Bernheim

                                       Adam Wantz




                                  Working Paper No. 4244




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 December 1992




Financial support from the National Science Foundation (grant SES-8821666) is gratefully
acknowledged. This paper is part of NB ER's research programs in Corporate Finance and Public
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                            NBER Working Paper #4244
                                                            December 1992



                              A TAX-BASED TEST OF THE
                           DIVIDEND SIGNALING HYPOTHESIS

                                          ABSTRACT



       We propose and implement a new test of the dividend signaling hypothesis that is

designed to discriminate between dividend signaling and other theories that would account for

the apparent existence of a dividend preference. Our test refines the use of data on stock price

responses to dividend announcements. In particular, we study the effect of dividend taxation on

the bang-for-the-buck, which we define as the share price response per dollar of dividends.

Most dividend signaling models imply that an increase in dividend taxation should increase the

bang-for-the-buck. In contrast, other dividend preference theories imply that an increase in

dividend taxation should decrease the bang-for-the-buck. Since there have recently been

considerable variation in the tax treatment of dividends, we are able to study dividend

announcement effects under different tax regimes. Our central finding is that there is a strong

positive relationship between dividend tax rates and the bang-for-the-buck. This result supports

the dividend signaling hypothesis, and is consistent with alternatives. The paper also provides

corroborating evidence based on the relationship between the bang-for-the-buck and bond ratings.


B. Douglas Bernheim                                        Adam Wantz
Department of Economics                                    Shepard International, Inc.
Princeton University                                       30 S. Wacker Drive, #1418
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021                                   Chicago, IL 60606
and NBER
1. Introduction

     Economists have proposed numerous theories designed to explain corporate

dividend policy. Different views about dividend policy lead to strikingly

different conclusions about issues such as the cost of capital and the effects

of tax policy. It is, therefore, important to distinguiah between these

theories on the basis of empirical evidence. Unfortunately, this task has

proven difficult.

     In an attempt to test various theories of corporate dividend policy,

Poterba and Summers (1983, 1984, 1985] assembled evidence on the relative

market value of dividends and capital gains, the effect of dividend taxation

on dividend payout, and the effect of dividend taxation on investment. Their

evaluation of this evidence was favorable to a "traditional view" of

dividends, in which firms derive an advantage from the payment of dividends,

and where this advantage is reflected in market value. This class of theories

is obviously very broad, and includes (among other things) the possibility

that firms pay dividends to signal private information about profitability,1

the hypothesis that dividends provide a mechanism for restricting managerial

discretion,2 and the conjecture that investors prefer dividends for

non-traditional, behavioral reasons.3

     The fact that stock prices rise when companies announce plans to increase

dividends, and fall when companies reveal that they intend to cut dividends,




1 See e.g. Bhattacharys (1979, 1980), Haksnsson (1982), Miller and Rock
(1985), Kumar (1988), Kumar end Spatt (1987), John and Williams (1985),
Ambarish, John, and Williams (1987), John and Nachman (1987), and Bernheim
(1991).
2 See Jensen and Meckling (1976).
3
    See Shefrin and Statmsn (1984).


                                        1
is often cited as evidence for the theory that dividends signal

profitability.4 Unfortunately, this evidence does not distinguish between the

hypothesis that tha dividend conveys good news, snd the hypothesis that the

dividend is the good news. Thus, although studies of dividend announcement

effects lend additional support to Poterba and Summers' "traditional view,"

they do not allow us to differentiate between dividend signaling and other

explanations for a dividend preference.

     Under the dividend signaling hypothesis, firms that pay high levels of

dividends should be more profitable than otherwise identical firms (from the

point of view of the investor) that pay lower levels of dividends. This

observation suggests that one can teat the signaling theory by examining the

extent to which current dividends help to predict future earnings. Several

early studies (Watts (1973) and Conedes (1978)) concluded that dividends are

essentially unrelated to subsequent earnings. However, a more recent study by

Ofer and Siegel (1987) found that analysts revise their earnings forecasts in

response to unanticipated dividend changes, and moreover that these revisions

are rational.

     Another empirical strategy was proposed by Lang and Litzenberger (1989).

These authors argued that, under the managerial discipline hypothesis,

dividend announcements should have larger, positive effects on share price

when firma are overinvesting. This suggests that one should find larger share

price responses among firms that have lower values of Tobin's Q. Lang and

Litzenberger present data that are consistent with this prediction, and




   The literature on stock price responses to announcements of changes in
dividend policy includes papers by Pettit (1972, 1977), Laub (1976), Charest
(1978), Aharony and Swary (1980), Asquith and Mullins (1983), Eades (1982),
Brickley (1983), Kane, Lee, and Marcus (1984), and Eades, Hess, and Kim
(1983).
conclude that the data on share price responses to dividend announcements

support the managerial discipline hypothesis, rather than dividend signaling.

     From the preceding discussion, it is clear that the existing evidence is

mixed; the literature has not succeeded in resolving the importance of

dividend signaling relative to other variants of the "traditional" view. In

thia paper, we contribute to this debate by proposing and implementing a new

test of dividend signaling that is designed to discriminate between

signaling and other theories of dividend preference. Our test refines the

use of data on stock price responses to dividend announcements. In

particular, we study the effect of dividend taxation on the      -




"bang-for-the-buck,"   which we define as the share price response per dollar

of dividends. Most dividend signaling models imply that an increase in

dividend taxation should increase the bang-for-the-buck. On the other hand,

other dividend preference theories imply that an increase in dividend taxation

should decrease the bang-for-the-buck. Since there has recently been

considerable variation in the tax treatment of dividends, we are able to study

dividend announcement effects under different tax regimes. Our central

finding is that there is a strong positive relationship between dividend tax

rates and the bang-for-the-buck. This result supports the dividend

signaling hypothesis, and is inconsistent with alternative theories of a

dividend preference, such as the managerial discipline hypothesis.

     Our analysis of tax effects suggests a much broader strategy for testing

the dividend signaling hypothesis. The dividend tax rate is simply one

example of a publicly observed factor that is positively correlated with the

marginal costs of paying dividends. Under the dividend signaling hypothesis,

the bang-for-the-buck will tend to be high when observable information

suggests that the marginal costs of paying dividends is high; the alternative
hypotheses have the opposite implication. There are many publicly observed

variables that are probably correlated with the marginal costs of paying

dividends. One obvious candidate is a firm's bond rating. Our empirical

analysis reveals a negative relationship between bond ratings and the

bang-for-the-buck. Since the marginal cost of dividends is presumably low

when the bond rating is high, this result corroborates our central finding:

the bang-for-the-buck is high when, on the basis of public information, a

rational investor would expect dividends to be costly. This finding provides

additional support for the dividend signaling hypothesis.

      The paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we explore the

relationship between dividend taxation and the bang-for-the-buck under several

alternative theories of corporate dividend policy. Our empirical strategy is

discussed in section 3. Section 4 contains a description of the data. We

present our results in section 5. Section 6 concludes.



2. Theoretical Preliminaries

      In this section, we explore the relationship between the

bang-for-the-buck and the dividend tax rate under several alternative theories

of corporate dividend policy. Each of these theories implies that dividend

payout, y, other observable characteristics, w, and the tax rate, r, are

related to the market valuation of the firm according to some function

V(y,w,r). The "bang-for-the-buck" refers to the impact of dividends on

valuation, per dollar of dividends. One natural measure of the average

bang-for-the-buck is

                               V(y,w,r) - V(O,co,r)
(1)
                                        y

Of course, one can also use V(y,w,r) as a measure of the marginal

bang- for- the-buck.
      2.1 Dividend Signaling

      A careful reading of recent papers on dividend signaling reveals that an

increase in the tax rate applicable to dividends has the effect of increasing

the bang-for-the-buck. The purpose of this section is to exhibit this result

in the context of a simple signaling model, and to argue that the principle

should be reasonably general.

      The basic intuition for the result is straightforward. In a standard

dividend signaling model, high quality firms pay dividends in order to

deter imitation by lower quality firms. Higher dividend taxes make dividends

more costly. Consequently, a high quality firm does not need to pay as large

a dividend in order to deter imitation. Thus, the firm manages to convey the

same information but at a lower level of payout.

      Unfortunately, the result is not quite so simple. Although the high

quality firm pays a smaller dividend, the total costs associated with dividend

payment may actually be larger due to the higher tax rate. Consequently, the

equilibrium value of a high quality firm may fall as the tax rate risea. This

implies that both the numerator and the denominator in equation (1) will

decline --   the   ultimate impact on the bang-for-the-buck is not clear   priori.

      To show how these effects play out, we consider a simple model of

dividend signaling, based loosely on Bhattacharya [1979). We use 9 to denote

the characteristics of the firm that are not publicly observable.      9 takes on

                            L H . The
values in the interval [9 ,9 ]        fundamental value of a firm (that is, the

value that it would command in a world of symmetric information) is given as a

function of observable and unobservable characteristics, dividends, and

dividend taxes. We will write this function as


(2)                         V8(y,9,w,r)   — v'(y,9,w)   -
                                                            ry




                                           S
(where r is the tax rate applicable to dividends). Throughout, we take V"()

to be differentiable in all of its arguments. To represent the notion that 9

denotes a higher level of quality than 9L' we assume that V > 0. Dividends

are assumed to be costly, so V < 0 for r > 0. Finally, we will for

simplicity assume that dividends are more costly on the margin to lower

quality firms (VS9 > 0). Under this last assumption, our model satisfies the

"single crossing property," which allows us to analyze signaling equilibria in

the standard way. A failure of this property would not qualitatively alter

our ultimate conclusion (see Bernheim [1991]).

      The quality parameter 9 is known only to the manager of the firm.

Investors observe the firm's other characteristics (a), its dividend (y), and

the dividend tax rate (c). The market valuation must therefore depend only on

y, co and r. We will write this valuation as V"(y,co,r). This function is

produced endogenously as a consequence of the signaling equilibrium.

      We assume that managers care both about current market value and their

own assessment of value. The justification for this assumption is standard

(see e.g. Bernheim [1991]). In particular, the managerial objective function

is given by

(3)                         V (y,co,r) + cV"(y,9,co,r)


where m is some fixed parameter.

      We solve for a separating equilibrium conditional upon the exogenous

observables, a and r. Managers choose y to maximize (1). For each 9, the

optimal choice of y satisfies


(4)                       v"(y,w,r) + mV"(y,9,a,r) — 0


In addition, equilibrium beliefs must be self-fulfilling. Thus, for any 9 and

the corresponding optimal value of y, we must have
(5)                           V(y,w,r) —    V(y,9,c,r)

We differentiate (5) to obtain



(6)                 V(y,w,v) —   vS(y,e,,,r)   +   V(y,9,w,r)

Substitution of (6) into (4) yields



(7)
                            d9..   -   ______
                                       (1-i-a) V(y,9,r)

                                         v;(y.9,,,T)
Equation (7) is recognizable as a first order differential equation. The

solution, 9(y,w,r), must also satisfy the following initial condition:


(8)                                9(O,w,r) —      9



Equation (8) is a consequence of the fact that         firms are correctly

identified as such in equilibrium; consequently, they have no reason to incur

the costs associated with a positive dividend.

      To assess the effect of dividend taxation on the average

bang-for-the-buck, we need to evaluate V(y,w,i-). Unfortunately we have not

been able to prove a general result concerning the sign of this derivative.

Instead, we will present a partial result and an example.

      Suppose for the moment that V(y,c,r) > 0 for y            0. Then clearly, the

marginal bang-for-the-buck rises with r. Moreover, since V(O,c,r) —

V(0,,r') — V(O9,w0),        the average bang-for-the-buck also rises with r.

If we can guarantee that V(y,w,r) > 0 only on some interval [0,] then, at

a minimum, the average and marginal bang-for-the-buck rise with          on this

interval.    Using equations (2), (5), and (7), it is possible to show that


(9)              'f(y,wr) —
                              a[l.v;9[y,9(y,w,r),w)       9(y,wr)]

From (8), it follows that 9(O,w,r) — 0.        Thus,
(10)                             Vt(O,w,r) — a > 0


Equation (10) establishes that an increase in r increases the slope of the

market valuation function et y —      0.   Moreover, as long es 65(y,w,r) is

continuously differentiable, v will he positive in some neighborhood of

y — 0.   Thus, for smsll y, an increase in r necessarily increases both the

average and marginal bang-for-the-buck.

       The intuition for this result is straightforward. Figure 1 depicts the

function V'(y,w,r) for some fixed r and w. On the same diagram, we have

superimposed an indifference curve (1) for the manager of a type 1 firm. In

general, the equation for a type 6 indifference curve is given by

                                V +   aV5(y,6,w,c) —         C


where C is some constant. V5(y,w,r) must he tangent to I at the point

                            is the level of dividends selected by a type 1         firm.
(,     VGë.wr)J where
Likewise, V(y,w,r) must be tangent to 'L'          an indifference curve for the

manager of a type 6 firm, at the point (ot V(O6wO)J. As r rises (to

r'), the indifference curve for a 6 manager rotates upward around this point

(to I'). To preserve the tangency property, V5(y,w,r) muat also rotate

upwards (to V8(y,co,r')).

       We now present an example designed to establish the proposition that the

dividend signaling hypothesis can indeed produce the result that an increase

in r raises the bang-for-the-buck globally. Suppose in particular that


(11)                            v(y,w,6) —       6 -   (w-6)y,

where w > 6       Note that v' < 0, v > 0, and v5 > 0, so that V8(y,6,w t) has
              H             y          6                ye

all the properties required of it. After substituting (2) and (11) into (8),

we obtain




                                             8
                               dO        (1+a)(co+r-9)
 12
                               dy
                                    -
                                               l+y
Note that thia differential equation ia separable. It is therefore easy to

verify that the solution to (12) is

                          a                                 —(1ta)
(13)                     9 (y,w,r) — w   + r   -
                                                   K(1+y)

where K depends on the constant of integration. From (8), it follows that

K — w ÷ r. Using (2), (5), (11), and (13), we find that


(14)                       V'(y,w,r) —
                                          (w÷r)[l_(l÷y)_0]
From (14), it is evident that an increase in r raises both the marginal and

average bang-for-the-buck for all values of y >          0.
       This analysis does not rule out the possibility that, for some

parameterizations, the bang-for-the-buck falls with r when y is sufficiently

large. Nor does it rule this possibility out for theories of dividend

signaling that are not captured by our simple model. Nevertheless, taken

together with the existing literature on dividend signaling, it does suggest

that a positive relationship between r and the bang-for-the-buck is the most

natural consequence of the dividend signaling hypothesis. If the data point

to a negative relationship, we should become at least somewhat skeptical about

the validity of this hypothesis.



       2.2 Alternative Hypotheses

       In this section, we formulate a simple model of corporate dividend policy

based upon a stylized representation of alternative "traditionalt' hypotheses,

and argue that this model is capable of explaining the existing evidence on
dividend announcement effects. We then show that such a model implies that

there should be an inverse relationship between the dividend tax rate and the

bang-for- the -buck.

       Since the alternative hypotheses do not concern the transmission of

information, we drop the unobservable parameter e.              Thus, the fundamental

value of the firm is given by:


(15)                        V&(y,w,r)   —
                                            va(y,co)   -
                                                           ry

One csn think of the function Va(.) as summarizing the effect of dividends on

managerial efficiency; alternatively, it could reflect shareholders' intrinsic

preferences for dividends vs. retained earnings. In contrast to the

signaling hypothesis, we asaume here that V() > 0, at least over some

range. Thus, firma may pay dividends for their own sake, rather than to

convey information. Since investors observe y, w, and c, the market valuation

of this firm coincidea with its fundamental value:


(16)                          va(y,w,r) —        V5(y,co,r)

       While managerial utility depends in part upon V managers also care

directly about dividends. When dividends are high, managers have fewer

resources under their control; this depresses their utility. The relative

weights placed on V and y depend upon the firm's value-relevant

characteristics, a. However, we assume that dividend policy is not perfectly

predictable, given knowledge of a and the function Va(.) (if it was perfectly

predictable, then share price would not respond to dividend announcements,

since announcements would be perfectly anticipated, and their implications

capitalized into value). We represent this lack of perfect predictability by

supplementing the managerial preference function with an additional parameter,

o, that is determined randomly, and that is not publicly observed. Thus,



                                            10
    managers act ss if they maximize some utility function, W(V,y,ca,a), where

    W > 0 and WY < 0. Managers must, of course, ohey the restriction that

    V —   Vt(y,w,i-).   The optimal choice of y is given hy yt(war)

           Now we argue that this simple model can account for the central facts

*   concerning share price responses to dividend announcements. Since W < 0,

    managers will generally choose a level of dividends helow that which maximizes

    value. That is, Vt(ya(w,a,r),w,r) > 0. Consequently, innovations in a

    that increase y will tend to raise value (for fixed co and r), while

    innovations in a that reduce y will depress value. Since a is unobserved,

    share price will respond positively to the announcement of a dividend

    increase, and negatively to the announcement of a reduction.5

           Although this class of hypotheses -       - which   hold that dividends contribute

    directly to the vslue of the firm --       are   cspable of explaining the existing

    evidence on dividend announcement effects, their implications differ from

    those of dividend signaling models once the effect of dividend taxation on

    bang-for-the-buck is considered. From equations (15) and (16), it follows

    immediately that


                         V(y,w,r) -   V8(0,w,r) — va(y,w)_va(O,w)        -

                                  y                            y

    and

                                      V8(y,co,r) —   v(y,co)   -   r.
    In other words, both the average snd marginal bang-for-the-buck fall with r.

    The intuition for this property is straightforward. Share price responds

    positively to dividends because shareholders value dividends (either for their



    5
       Indeed, if V6(.) is concave in y, the absolute response to a reduction will
    be greater than the response to an equivslent increase, which is also
    consistent with existing evidence.


                                                11
own sake, or for their ebility to discipline managers). When dividends are

taxed, shareholders like them less; this attenuates the positive effect of

dividends on share price.



     2.3 Related Observations

     The analysis of sections 2.1 snd 2.2 suggests a much broader strategy for

testing the dividend signaling hypothesis. Although we have interpreted r as

a tax parameter, this is not at all fundamental to our argument. Indeed, one

can think of T as g publicly observed variable that is positively related to

the marginal cost of paying dividends. Under the dividend signaling

hypothesis, the bang-for-the-buck should rise with r, while the alternative

hypotheses have the opposite implication.

     The dividend signaling literature identifies the prospect of a cash

shortfall as one of the most important non-tax cost of paying dividends.

Certainly, there are many publicly observed variables that are correlated with

financial slack. One obvious candidate is a first's bond rating. When a

firm's bond rating is low, the public knows that (on average) paying dividends

is a relatively expensive activity. Thus, a firm with a low bond rating and

positive private information can deter imitation by firms with low bond

ratings and negative private information by paying a relatively small

dividend. In contrast, when a firm's bond rating is high, the public knows

that (on average) paying dividends is a relatively inexpensive activity.

Thus, a firm with a high bond rating and positive private information may have

to pay quite a substantial dividend in order to deter imitation by firms with

high bond ratings and negative private information. It follows that, under

the dividend signaling hypothesis, bond ratings should be positively

correlated with the bang-for-the-buck.




                                         12
    Under the alternative hypotheses, the bang-for-the-buck will tend to be

low when observable information suggests that the marginal costs of paying

dividenda is high (e.g. the firm has a low bond rating). This conclusion

follows from the ssme considerations identified in section 2.2: when

dividends are known to be more costly, shareholders like them less, and this

attenuates the positive effect of dividends on share price.6

     Our empirical analysis is designed to test between dividend signaling

and the alternative hypotheses by examining the effects of kQth dividend

taxation and observable firm characteristics (specifically, bond ratings) on

the bang-for-the-buck. In the next section, we discuss our strategy for

measuring the relationship between dividend tax rates (r) and the

bang-for-the-buck. The reader should bear in mind that it is equally

appropriate to interpret r as any publicly observed variable that is

positively correlated with the marginal costs of paying dividends. Any factor

that increases this marginal cost can, in a broad sense, be thought of as a

dividend "tax."



3. Empiricsl Strategy

     In the next section, we estimate the derivative of the market valuation

function with respect to dividends (v(y,wr)J .     We then examine the sign of

    to distinguish between signaling (V >   0)   and the alternative hypotheses

(Vyl <0).




6  Under the managerial discipline hypothesis, there is an additional reason
to expect this result. Management is assumed to operate inefficiently when an
organization has financial slack. Firms with high bond ratings typically have
more slack. Thus, a given dividend should be more beneficial when bond
ratings are high. One might object to this conclusion on the grounds that
firms with low bond ratings are generally managed by individuals who are more
inclined to place their own interests over those of the stockholders. This
hypothesis strikes us as only marginally plausible.

                                       13
       Estimates of V(y,w,r) are obtained by studying the effects of dividend

announcements on share price. This is accomplished as follows. Let St denote

the value of a firm's equity at time t, and let y, r, and a denote

respectively the contemporaneous dividend announcement, dividend tax rate, and

other pertinent information. Define the return                    as follows:


                                            S -S
                                       t
                                      R —
                                                  S
                                                      t— 1




Using the fact that S —      V(y,w,r),      it is easy to verify that


                                     V(y,w,r) -
                  R —            +                           E[V(yar)Iwr]
(17)
                        E[Rwr]
(where the operator E takes an expectation, treating y as a random variable).

       Now suppose that we estimate an equation of the form


(18)                             Rt —r(y,a,r)+c
                                       t t t    t
where c is a random disturbance. Presumably, c arises from our inability to
control for all of the relevant information revealed at time t. Under the

assumption that c is uncorrelated with other observable variables (including

the dividend announcement), C(y,w,T) represents an estimate of the

right-hand side of (17). Note that



                              r(y,a,r) —          '
                                              V (y a ,r )
(19)
                                                             _:
and


                             r(y,w,r) —               "
                                              V (y ,a ,r )
(20)
                                                             _:                  4

Since S         is strictly positive r and V are necessarily of the same sign.
          t-1                         yr          yr
Consequently, we implement our test by determining the sign of r.




                                             14
       If the function V(.) is linear in y, then R will depend upon y only

through the term

                                  —   y   -
                                              E[yw,r].
That   is, share price will respond to the unexpected component of the dividend

announcement. In that case, one can write I'() as a function of u ,o ,              and
                                                                            t   t
r.     We adopt this simplification in our empirical analysis.

       Historical data on daily share prices and dividend announcements were

obtained from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) NYSE/AMEX and

NASDAQ data files. For the purpose of our analysis, an observation consists

of an instance in which a firm announced an increase in dividends. Previous

research suggests that share price responds more strongly to the announcement

of a negative change in dividends, than to the announcement of a positive

change. It is conceivable that positive and negative changes are driven by

fundamentally different processes. We therefore chose to focus exclusively on

cases in which firms announced increases in dividends. Our basic sample

consists of all such announcements occurring between the beginning of 1962 and

the end of 1988.

       For the regressions reported here, cumulative abnormal returns (A) are

used as the dependent variable. These returns are measured over a three-day

window, centered on the announcement date. Conceptually, the abnormal return

should be thought of as R -                        in other words, we simply move the
                               E[RIør];
term E[RIwr] to the left-hand side of equation (17). This comporta with

common practice in the literature on the measurement of dividend announcement

effects.

       In practice, E[RIwr] is not observable. For the results reported

here we simply use the concurrent return on a value-weighted market portfolio,

R. When abnormal returns are calculated in this manner, they are usually

referred to as "market adjusted returns" (see Brown           and Warner (1985)).


                                              15
Clearly R is not an ideal measure of EIR
                                                 Lt
                                                      Iat ,r tJ1.   However, this is not

likely   to create prohlems for two reasons. First, we are not concerned here

with the level of dividend announcement effects. Rather, we are attempting to

estimate the extent to which dividend announcement effects vary with dividend

tax rates. Even if the average ahnormal return is biased in one direction or

another, as long as this bias does not change systematically with tax rates,

it does not affect our ability to test between the hypotheses of interest.

Second, if it is possible to write EIR           ,rtJ1    as the sum     of Rnitend   some
                                        Lt Iat
function   g(w,T), then one can interpret our estimated relationship as a

version of equation (17) in which R has been moved to the left-hand side,

and g(w,r) remains on the right-hand size.

        Independent variables were constructed as follows. ADIV measures the
                                                                             it

size of the dividend change announced at time t for security i. Formally,

this variable is defined as follows:


                                             D
                                 ADIV —
                                     it           e
                                                 pit

where       is the last dividend paid prior to date t, D is the new dividend

announced at date t, and p is the average share price in the ten-day period

preceding the dividend announcement window.

     ADIV functions as our measure of u, the unexpected component of the

dividend announcement. The use of this variable is justified if, as is

commonly assumed in the literature, investors typically expect firms to

maintain their dividends at previous levels. However, it is important to

realize that our central test of the dividend signaling hypothesis remains

valid even when this assumption is not satisfied. In that case, u can be

thought of as a linear combination of            and other right-hand side variables.

Although this alters the interpretation of coefficients for variables other

than DIV ,
           it the   coefficient of E1DIV still measures r ().
                                       it                            y


                                            16
         THETA measures the tax burden on dividends, relative to capital gains.

In particular,

                                                            Il-rn
                          THETA   —         w
                                                              1
                                      i—i            il-z
                                                     i It)    I     il-c
                                                                    I.
                                                                           t
where m is the marginal dividend tax rate at time t for investors in class
       it

i,   z    is the accrual-equivalent capital gains tax rate at time t for

investors in class i, c's is the tax rate on undistributed profits prevailing

at time t, w       are equity ownership weights, and s is the number of distinct

shareholder classes. We obtained historical data on THETA from Poterba

[1987]

         Three features of this variable deserve emphasis. First, THETA varies

only over time, not across firms. In principle, one could construct a

firm-specific tax clientele variable by studying ex-dividend day behavior for

individual firms (as in Auerbach [1985]). Unfortunately, this method of

measuring effective tax rates is not valid under certain important hypotheses

concerning dividend policy.8 In addition, measures of tax rates constructed

from ex-dividend day share price movements are usually very imprecise. It is

therefore not surprising that, in previous studies, the use of firm-specific

tax clientele variables has shed little if any light on the determinants of

corporate financial policy (see e.g. Auerbach [1985] and Mackie-Mason [1988]).

We eschew this approach, and use a more reliable aggregate measure of the tax

burden on dividends.




     For 1987 and 1988 data on THETA were obtained directly from Poterba
(private communication).
8 For example, if shareholders prefer dividends because dividends provide
liquidity, then firma should pay dividends until, on the margin, the benefits
of liquidity just offset the tax costs. This implies that share prices should
fall by one dollar for each dollar of dividends on the ex-day, regardless of
the tax rate.


                                                17
      Second, Poterba's measure of the relative tax hurden on dividends is only

available on a yearly basis. Let 9k denote the value of this variable in

year k. For a dividend announcement date Ct) falling in year k, we set

THETA —
      t
           B
               k
                   .     In   other words, we assume that dividend tax rates change

discretely at the end of each year. In some cases, this is entirely

appropriate (e.g. new statutes went into effect at the end of the year). In

other instances, it is more likely that changes in                         occurred gradually (e.g.

because of changes in the composition of stock ownership). Since most of the

variation in 9 results from changes in the tax law, and since we omit

dividend announcements that occurred close to the effective dates of major tax

reforms (see below), it is unlikely that our analysis is significantly flawed

by our failure to account for intra year variation in THETA.

      Third, note that THETA is inversely related to the effective tax rate on

dividends (m). It is important to bear this fact in mind when evaluating

our empirical results. Under the signaling hypothesis, an increase in THETA

should decrease the bang-for-the-buck; the alternative hypotheses imply that

an increase in THETA should increase the bang-for-the-buck.

       In section 2.3, we argued that, for the purpose of our analysis, one can

think of any publicly observed factor that increases the marginal cost of

paying dividends as a dividend "tax." It follows that one can also test the

dividend signaling hypothesis against the alternatives by examining the

relationships between bang-for-the-buck and other firm-specific

characteristics. In this paper, we focus on bond ratings, which are

summarized             by the variable HIRATEDit .   HIRATED
                                                               it
                                                                    is   a dummy   variable   that

takes on a value of 1 if firm i's bond rating is BE+ or better, and is equal

to   0 if the bond rating is worse than 88+. Under the dividend signaling
hypothesis,             we expect to observe a greater bang-for-the-buck when

HIRATED
          it   —        0.



                                                     18
     Historical data on bond ratings were obtained from quarterly Compustat

files. These data are available beginning in 1977. For years prior to 1977,

we assumed that firm i's bond rating was equal to its 1977 value. To obtain

some feel for the validity of this assumption, we examined changes in bond

ratings between the earliest and latest dates for which Compustat data were

available. It should be noted that these data span a 14-year period

(1977-1990). Over this period, roughly 97% of all firms did not experience

changes in bond ratings large enough to alter their values of HIRATEO1. For

a number of reasons, we also conducted our analysis of dividend announcement

effects using a shorter sample period (1978-1988) that is completely covered

by the Compustat files.

     Even subsequent to 1977, Compustat does not contain information on bond

ratings for all firms covered by the CRSP tapes. When bond ratings were not

available, we imputed the value of HIRATED based on auxiliary regressions.9

     Our   empirical   strategy also requires us to identify variables that

summarize important aspects of publicly available information

Obviously, the market has access to a great deal of information on virtually

every publicly traded company. In our analysis, it is important to control

for variables that ought to affect the market's interpretation of a dividend

announcement.

     If a company has experienced substantial share price appreciation since

its last dividend change, the market may regard the announcement of a dividend

increase as an effort to keep pace, rather than as an attempt to signal

fundamentally new information. Likewise, if there has been substantial

inflation since a company last changed its dividend, the announcement of an




   Each auxiliary regression explained HIRATED as a function of the other
independent variables. We estimated the auxiliary regressions using
subsamples for which complete data were available.


                                          19
increase might be interpreted as an adjustment for inflation. To control for

these factors, we introduce the variables CR0 and INFL •                      which represent,
                                                            it        it

respectively, the growth in share price and the CPI since firm                      i's    lest

dividend change.

         The amount of time that has elapsed since a company's last dividend

change may also color the market's reaction to the announcement of an

increase. A given change in dividends may be more significant for companies

that rarely alter dividend policy, than for companies that have changed

dividends frequently. To account for this possibility, we introduce the

variable MONTHS which is defined as the length of time (in months) between t

and t' ,    where (as before) t' is the date of firm i's most recent dividend

change prior to date t.

         Finally, it is conceivable that share price responses to dividend

announcements may vary with current macroeconomic conditions. For example, a

dividend increase may be a more persuasive signal of good prospects during a

recession than during a boom. To allow for this possibility, we include the

variable CAP, which measures seasonally adjusted capacity utilization in the

manufacturing sector for the month in which the dividend announcement (at time

t) took place. Note that, in contrast to THETA, CAP varies monthly, rather

than annually.

         We estimated a variety of empirical specifications explaining abnormal

returns, Ait, as a function of ADIVit, THETAt , CAPt, CR0it              ,
                                                                             INFL     ,   MONTHS
                                                                                 it                it

and HIRATED , as well as interactions between these variables. Our results
               it

were robust across specifications. For purposes of brevity, we report results

based on only two specifications. Both have the following form:


           Ait—fl+tDIV
                 0
                       [fl+flTHETA
                             2    t
                                    +flHIRATEO
                                       3     it
                                                +X -yl                       +Zit2
                                                                                 y +c it
                          itLi                                    itij

where X is a vector of the other publicly observed variables and the vector

Z        consists of X , THETA       ,   and HIRATED        The first specification does not
    it               it          t                     it


                                                  20
restrict the values of any coefficients in this equation. While this provides

for a flexible functional form, evaluation of the hang-for-the-buck through a

casual inspection of the estimated coefficients is difficult. Our second

specification imposes the restriction that y           — 0, which allows the reader

more easily to infer a bang-for-the-buck for different values of THETA and

HIRATED. In light of equation (20), one can determine the sign of V by

examining fi.       If   fi   < 0, higher dividend taxation increases the

bang-for-the-buck, as predicted by the dividend signaling hypothesis. One can

also perform a comparable test based on bond ratings by examining fi.

     These specifications were estimated with OLS, using White's [1980] method

of calculating heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errorsJ° From our basic

sample covering the 1962-1988 period, we excluded observations for a number of

reasons.

     First, to construct several independent variables, we required data on a

prior dividend change. Consequently, we were forced to drop the first

dividend announcement for each firm.

     Second, we excluded all dividend announcements occurring in close

proximity to major shifts in tax policy. During our sample period, there were

two instances of tax reform that significantly altered the relative taxation

of dividends and capital gains. The first occurred in 1981, the second in

1986. Theory suggests that a given change in dividends may convey different

information, depending upon whether it occurs in response to a change in tax

regime, or to other factors. In particular, the distribution of y

conditional on w and r may be different when tax policy has just changed

(and firms are adjusting to the new regime) than when the current tax policy




10 The use of White's correction is particularly appropriate given the fact
that HIRATED        is imputed for some observations.
               it




                                               21
has persisted for some time. We handled this ptoblem by dropping dividend

announcements occurring in one-year windows centered around January 1, 1982

and January 1, 1987 (exclusion criterion "A"). We examined the sensitivity of

our results to alternative selection criteria. We also report here results

based upon the alternative criterion of dropping the first dividend change for

each firm after the two major shifts in tax policy (exclusion criterion "8").

We also estimated (but do not report) regressions in which no observations

were excluded for this reason; the results were similar.

     Some previous studies of dividend announcement effects also exclude

observations for which earnings announcements occur in close proximity to

dividend announcements. This is important when one's purpose is to measure

the absolute level of abnormal returns on dividend announcement dates. Our

object is to examine how the sensitivity of abnormal returns to dividends

varies with observable factors that are correlated with the marginal cost of

dividends. There is no particular reason to believe that the bias created by

including observations with earnings announcement conflicts is systematically

related to tax regimes or bond ratings. Thus, we estimate one set of

regressions in which no exclusions are made for this reason.

     To ascertain the extent to which our results might be affected by the

inclusion of observations with earnings announcement conflicts, we also

estimated a set of regressions in which these observations were removed from

the sample. Unfortunately, the available data on earnings announcements

begin in 1978. Thus, when excluding observations with earnings announcement

conflicts, we also dropped all dividend announcements occurring before 1978.11




 11 For completeness we also estimated (but do not report) a set of regressions
 for the sample period 1978-1988, where earnings announcement conflicts were
 not removed. The results were similar.



                                       22
These regressions are of particular interest since, as mentioned previously,

data on bond ratings are svailable beginning in 1917.

     For the 1962-1988 sample period, exclusion criterion A leaves us with

12,961 observations. For exclusion criterion B, the number of observations

falls to 12,054. For the 1978-1988 sample period with earnings announcement

conflicts removed, we have 4519 observations with exclusion criterion A, and

3749 observations with exclusion criterion B.

     At several points in this discussion, we mentioned that our results are

not particularly sensitive to alternative (unreported) estimation strategies,

such as the use of different specifications, sample definitions, and exclusion

criteria. We also experimented with variable definitions, and continued to

obtain similar results. The regressions presented in the next section were

chosen because they exemplify the robust patterns exhibited by a much larger

set of estimates.




4. Results

     Regreasion results for the 1962 through 1988 sample period are reported

in Table 1. Table 2 contains results for the 1978-1988 aample, where earnings

announcement conflicts have been removed. For our purposes, the coefficients

of primary interest are those associated with tDIV, ADIVTHETA, and

ADIVHIRATED. An inspection of these coefficients reveals two robust patterns.

     First, the coefficients of ADIVTHETA are negative and estimated quite

precisely. In each of the eight regressions, the asaociated t-atatistic

exceeds 2; in most cases it exceeds 2.5. These coefficients imply that an

increase in the dividend tax rate raises the bang-for-the-buck (V > 0) for

firms with low bond ratings. This finding is consistent with the dividend

signaling hypothesis, and inconsistent with the alternatives outlined in

section 2.




                                      23
     Second, the coefficients of EsDIVHIRATED ere all negative.

Unfortunstely, in Table 1 the estimated values of these coefficients are not

statistically significant at conventional levels of confidence. Mote

significant effects --   both economically and statistically -- are found in
Table 2. This is to be expected, since all bond ratings prior to 1977 are

imputed. The effect of a high bond rating on the bang-for-the-buck is both

negative and statistically significant (at conventional levels) in equations 1

and 3 of Table 2. Statistical significance is somewhat lower in equations 2

and 4.

     Aa we have argued in section 2.3, a negative relationship between bond

rating and bang-for-the-buck also argues in favor of the dividend signaling

hypothesis. In effect, an increase in the marginal cost of paying dividends

arising from an observable deterioration of a firm's financial condition is

analogous to an increase in the marginal coat of dividends arising from an

increase in the dividend tax rate. Under the signaling hypothesis and the

alternatives, the effect of a decline in bond rating should therefore be

compareble to the effect of an increase in the tax rate. Thus, the evidence

on the effect of bond ratings contained in Tables I and 2 offers qualified

support for the dividend signaling hypothesis.

     As a plausibility check on the estimates in Tables 1 and 2, we have also

calculated the bang-for-the-buck (the derivative of the excess return with

respect to tDIV), evaluated at the mean values of the other independent

variables. The resulting estimates of bang-for-the-buck, along with their

associated standard errors, are presented in the final row of these tables.

For example, the estimates in the second column of Table 1 imply that a one

percentage point increase in the ratio of dividends to share price raises the

abnormal return over the announcement window by 3.28 percentage points. Note

that this effect is estimated with great precision in all of the



                                        24
    specifications. To put these estimates in perspective, conaider the fact

    that, over the sample period, the average announced dividend increase was

    roughly 0.14% of share price. A firm announcing an increase equal to twice

    this average would, on average, improve its abnormal return over the

W   announcement window by 0.46 percentage points. This compares with an average

    abnormal return of 1.19% for all observations in our sample.

         One possible criticism of this analysis is that THETA may not be an

    appropriate measure of the tax burden on dividends, relative to undiatributed

    profits. THETA depends in part on the measurement of effective tax rates for

    different classes of investors. Measurement of such rates--particularly the

    accrual-equivalent capital gains tax rate--is notoriously difficult. Indeed,

    Balcer and Judd [1987) have argued that it is impossible to summarize the

    "effective" rate of capital gains taxation with a single number. Moreover,

    THETA is calculated as a weighted average of effective tax rates for different

    classes of investors. If some particular class of investors accounts for a

    disproportionate share of arbitrage activity, then this weighted average will

    he inappropriate.

         Fortunately, it is possible to test the hypotheses of interest without

    attaching significance to particular values of THETA. Although the dividend

    tax rate does vary form year to year, much of this variation results from s

    small number of significant tax reforms. For example, although THETA rose

    from 0.691 in 1979 to 0.784 in 1985, more than half of this increase occurred

    between 1981 and 1982, when the first round of the Regan edministretion's tax

    reforms went into effect. A second round of tax reforms increased THETA from

    0.783 in 1986, to 0.825 in 1987, and to 0.880 in 1988. Regardless of whether

    one credits the particular numbers, it is clear that the relative tax burden

    on dividends declined significantly after each round of tax reform.

    Consequently, we divided our sample period into three regimes: pre-1982



                                          25
(regime I, high dividend taxetion), 1982 to 1986 (regime II, medium dividend

taxetion), and 1981 to 1988 (regime III, low dividend taxation). We

reestimated our hasic specification for each regime, omitting THETA and

interactions involving THETA. We then compared estimates across regimes. The

signaling hypothesis implies that the bang-for-the-buck should decline from

regime I to regime II, and from regime II to regime III. It also implies that

the bang-for-the-buck should be lower for firms with higher bond ratings

within each regime. The alternative hypotheses have the opposite

implications.

     Results appear in Table 3. Estimates for regimes I, II, and III are

based on 2154, 1710, and 655 observations, respectively. The final row of

this table provides an estimate of the bang-for-the-buck for firms with low

bond ratings, evaluated at the mean values of the other independent variables.

An inspection of these results reveals several patterns. First, the

bang-for-the-buck declines sharply across regimes. Indeed, in the third

regime, one can no longer reject the hypothesis that an increase in dividends

makes no marginal contribution to abnormal returns. Second, the estimated

bang-for-the-buck is significantly lower (both economically and statistically)

for firma with high bond ratings, both in regime I and regime II. Although it

is higher in regime III, this result is not statistically significant (the

coefficient of tDIVHIRATED is email relative to its standard error).

Apparently, the absence of stronger results on the effect of bond rating in

Tables 1 and 2 is exclusively attributable to behavior in regime III, during

which low dividend tax rates apparently muted the marginal effect of dividends

on excess returns. Overall, these findings argue strongly in favor of the

dividend signaling hypothesis.

     Another potential objection to this analysis is that variation in tax

rates is only present across years, and not across firms. Since THETA tends



                                      26
to decline over the sample period, our effort to measure tax effects could

conceivably pick up some spurious trend. We are inclined to doubt this

hypothesis for two reasons. First, the evidence on tax effects is

corroborated by evidence on bond ratings, and bond ratings vary considerably

across firms. Second, the most plausible explanation for a spurious trend

suggests that our estimates should be biased against the dividend signaling

hypothesis. During the l980s, domestic firma faced increasing levels of

competition from abroad. Casual evidence suggests that, as a result,

investors became more sensitive to managerial inefficiency. Thus, in the

absence of signaling, one would have expected to observe an increase in the

bang-for-the-buck during the 1980s.

     It is also possible to teat directly the hypothesis that the evolution of

the bang-for-the-buck through time results from changes in the tax regime,

rather than from some other consideration. We refer the reader to figure 2

for a schematic depiction of our testing strategy. In this figure, the

sampling period is divided into the 3 tax regimes. The second regime is

further subdivided into two subregimes, ha and lIb. We propose performing

teats for structural change across regimes and subregimea. Teat 1 examines

whether the relationship governing exceaa returns is the same in regime I as

in regime ha. Test 2 examinea the atsbility of the excess return

relationship over regimes ha and lib. Teat 3 compares the estimated

relationahipa for regimes hlb and III. Each of these compariaona involves a

joint teat for the equality of 12 coefficient pairs. Under the hypothesis

that the evolution of the excess return relationship is driven by changes in

the tax regime, we would expect to obtain the following reaults:

          Teat 1: Reject equality of coefficienta

          Test 2: Do not reject equality of coefficients

          Teat 3: Reject equality of coefficienta



                                      27
Under the alternative hypothesis that the evolution of the excess return

relationship is driven by spurious factors, one would not expect to obtsin the

same pattern of results, except by some improbably coincidence. If, for

example, the process of change was relatively smooth, one would expect to

obtain roughly similar test statistics for tests 1, 2, and 3. Each joint

hypothesis might or might not be rejected; the key point is that there would

not be a dramatic, systematic difference in the test statistics across the

three joint hypotheses.

     One might object that the data are more likely to reject test 1, for two

reasons. First, although regimes ha, lib, and III are all roughly of the

same duration, regime I is roughly twice as long. If there is a spurious

trend, then there will be less similarity between behavior in regime Ia (the

first half of regime I) and regime ha than between behavior in regimes ha

and hib, since the temporal separation between regimes Ia and lie is greater

than that between regimes ha and lib. Second, since regime I is longer, it

contains substantially more data. This implies that the coefficients will be

estimated more precisely. If any change occurs through time, greater

precision makes rejection more likely.
                                                                  *
     We address this objection by performing a fourth test (test I ),   whtch
examines the stability of the excess return relationship over regimes lb and

Ila. Since regime lb is roughly of the same duration as regimes lie, hhb, and

III, the basis for the objection is eliminated.

     Results are contained in Table 4. Tests 1 and 1* decisively reject the

hypothesis of structural stability at the 99% level of confidence. Test 3

also rejects the hypothesis of structural stability at that 95% level of

confidence. In sharp contrast, the F-statistic for test 2 is actually less

than unity. Thus, there is strong evidence that the relationship of interest

changed significantly between regimes I and II, and between regimes II and



                                         28
III, but that this relationship remained remarkably steble during regime II.

This is precisely the pattern that would emerge if the evolution of the

relationship for excess returns was primarily driven by changes in the tax

system, end it differs sharply from the pattern that one would expect to find

if the evolution of the relationship for excess returns was primarily driven

by other factors.



5. Conclusions

     In this paper, we have shown that the dividend signaling hypothesis

implies that abnormal returns should be more sensitive to the magnitude of

announced dividend changes when observable factors (such as tax rates and bond

ratings) suggest that the marginal costs of dividends are high. Plausible

alternative hypotheses have the opposite implication. Our empirical

investigation reveals thet the "bang-for-the-buck" generated by dividend

announcements rises with the dividend tax rate and fells with bond rating.

These findings are favorable to the signaling hypothesis.

     Our tests emphasize implications of signaling that do not appear to be

particularly model-specific. Consequently, it may be possible to adapt our

approsch in order to test signaling models in other contexts. For example,

one might test the hypothesis that education functions as a signal of ability

by identifying observable employee characteristics that are systematically

correlated with the costs of obtsining education. Under the signaling

hypothesis, the returns to sdditional education should be higher for those

individuals whose observable costs of education are also high.




                                       29
                                   References

Aharony, J. and I. Swary, 1980. "Quarterly Dividend and Earnings
     Announcements and Stockholder's Returns: An Empirical Analysis," Journal
     f  Finance, Vol. 35, pp. 1-12.
Ambarish, R., K. John and J. Williams, 1987. "Efficient Signaling wich
     Dividends and Investments." Journal of Finance, Vol. 42, pp. 321-343.
Asquith, P. and D. Mullins, 1983. "The Impact of Initiating Dividend
     Payments on Shareholders' Wealth," Journal   Business, Vol. 56,
     pp. 77-96.
Auerhach, A., 1985. "Real Determinanta of Corporate Leverage," in Corporate
     Capital Structures in the United Statea, ad. B. Friedman, Chicago:
     University of Chicago Press, pp. 301-322.
galcer, Y. and K. Judd, 1987. "Effects of Capital Gains Taxation on
     Life-Cycle Investment and Portfolio Management," Journal f Finance,
     pp. 743-761.
Bernheim, B.D. •    1991. "Tax Policy and the Dividend Puzzle," aBJ Journal p.
     Economics,     Vol. 22, pp. 455-476.
Bhattacharya, 5., 1979. "Imperfect Information, Dividend Policy, and the
     'Bird in the Hand' Fallacy," Bell Journal of Economica, Vol. 10,
     pp. 259-270.
______   1980. "Nondissipative Signaling Structures and Dividend Policy."
     quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 95, pp. 1-24.
Brickley, James A., 1983. "Shareholder Wealth, Information Signaling, and
     the Specially Designated Dividend: An Empirical Study," Journal
     Financial Economics, Vol. 12, pp. 297-330.
Brown, S.J. and J.B. Warner, 1985. "Using Daily Stock Returns: The Case of
     Event Studies," Journal of Financial Economics, Vol 14, pp. 3-31.
Charest, C., 1978. "Dividend Information, Stock Returns, and Market
     Efficiency," Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 6, pp. 297-330.
Eades, K.M., 1982. "On Dividends as a Signal of Firm Value," Journal of
     Financial    quantitative Analysis, Vol. 17, pp. 471-500.
______ and P.J. Hess and E.H. Kim, 1985. "Market Rationality and Dividend
     Announcements," Journal   Financial Economics, Vol. 16, pp. 581-604.
Conedes, N.J., 1978. "Corporate Signaling, External Accounting, and Capital
     Market Equilibrium: Evidence on Dividends, Income and Extraordinary
     Items," Journal of Accountina Research, Vol. 16, pp. 26-79.
Hakansson, N.H., 1982. "To Pay or Not to Pay Dividend." Journal        Finance,
     Vol. 37, pp. 415-428.
Jensen, M. and W. Meckling, 1976. "Theory of the Firm: Managerial
     Behavior, Agency Costs, and Ownership Structures," Journal   Financial
     Economics, Vol. 3, pp. 305-360.
John, K. and D.C. Nachman, 1987. "Multiperiod Financing Strategies and
     Dividend Management." CRSP Working Paper No. 210.

_____ and J. Williams, 1985. "Dividends, Dilution, and Taxes: A Signaling
     Equilibrium," Journal of Finance, Vol. 40, pp. 1053-1070.
Kane, A. and Y. Lee and A. Marcus, 1984. "Earnings and Dividend
     Announcements: Is There a Corroboration Effect?," Journal of Finance,
     Vol. 39, pp. 1091-1099.
                                        30
Kuinar, P., 1988. "shareholder-Manager Conflict, Costly Monitoring and the
     Information Content of Dividends." Mimeo, Carnegie Mellon University.

______ and C. spatt, 1987. "Asymmetric Information and the smoothing of
     Dividends." Mimeo, Carnegie Mellon University.
Lang, L.H.P. and R.H. Litzenberger, 1989.  "Dividend Announcements: Cash
     Flow signaling vs. Free Cash Flow Hypothesis?" Journal f Financial
     Economics, Vol. 24, PP. 181-191.
Laub, P.M., 1976. "On the Informational Content of Dividends," Journal 21
     Business, pp. 73-80.
Mackie-Mason, J. 1988. "Do Taxes Affect Corporate Financing Decisions?"
     NBER Working Paper No, 2632.
Miller, N.H. and K. Rock, 1985. "Dividend Policy under Asymmetric
     Information."   Journal .[ Finance, Vol, 40, pp. 1031-1051.
Ofer, A.R. and D. Saigel, 1987. "Corporate Financial Policy, Information,
     and Market Expectations: An Empirical Investigation of Dividends,"
     Journal 21 Finance, Vol. 42, PP. 365-394.
Pettit. R., 1972. "Dividend Announcements, security Performance, and Capital
     Market Efficiency," Journal gj Finance, Vol. 27, PP. 993-1008.

______   1977. "Taxes, Transaction Costs and Clientele Effects of Dividends,"
     Journal of Financial Economics, pp. 419-436.
Poterba, J. and L. 5ummers, 1983. "Dividend Taxes, Corporate Investment,
     and Q," Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 22, PP. 135-167.

______   1984. "New Evidence that Taxes Affect the Valuation of Dividends,"
     Journal 21 Finance,
______   1985. "The Economic Effects of Dividend Taxation," in Recent
     Advances in Cornorate Finance, E.I. Altman and MC. subrahmanyam, ads.,
     Homewood, Illinois: Richard Irwin, PP. 227-284.
shefrin, H. and M. 5tatman, 1984. "Explaining Investor Preferences for Cash
     Dividends," Journal 21 Financial Economics, Vol. 13, pp. 253-282.
Watts, R., 1973. "The Information Content of Prices," Journal 21 Business,
     Vol. 46, pp. 191-211.
White, H. , 1980. "A Heteroscedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix
     Estimator and a Direct Test for Heteroscedasticity," Econometrica 48,
     Pp. 817-838.




                                      31
                        Table i       Estimates for 1962-1988


                                                     Equation
Variable
                                1                2                  3           4


Constant                   0.0168           0.0189         0.00787        0.00904
                           (0.0147)        (0.0187)        (0.0163)      (0.0209)
DIV                       14.9             14.2           13.3           14.3
                          (4.37)          (10.1)           (4.55)       (10.6)
DIVTHETA                 -16.0            -20.8           -14.2         -18.6
                           (5.53)          (5.71)          (5.75)        (6.08)
DIV•HIRATED                -1.57           -1.03           -1.04         -0.534
                           (1.28)          (1.11)          (1.23)        (1.10)
DIV•CAP                                     0.238                         0.226
                                           (0.0610)                      (0.0610)
ADIVCRO                                     0.472                         0.855
                                           (0.909)                       (1.05)
tDIV•INFL                                 -15.8                         -17.2
                                           (5.84)                        (6.21)
DIV.M0NTHS/102                              1.02                          1.10
                                           (0.402)                       (0.422)
THETA/b2                   -1.31           -0.789          -1.73         -1.35
                           (0.984)         (0.999)         (0.982)       (1.00)
HIRATED/103                2.25             1.53            1.94          1.25
                           (2.17)          (1.98)          (2.09)        (1.94)
CAP/b4                     -0.316          -3.66           -0.0187       -3.30
                           (0.788)         (1.05)          (0.837)       (1.10)
GR0/10                     0.225           -5.23           -0.729       -12.2
                           (7.52)         (12.95)          (8.30)       (15.3)
INFL/102                   0.182            2.41            1.12          3.56
                           (0.699)         (1.03)          (0.837)       (1.20)
MONTHS/b6                   2.16          -12.7            -1.02        -17.1
                           (4.38)          (6.83)          (4.88)        (7.40)


Root MSE                   0.0366           0.0365          0.0357        0.0355
Selection criterion         A               A                   B          B

Bang-for-the-buck           2.43            3.28            2.45          3.44
                           (0.358)         (0.388)         (0.373)       (0.409)


Notes:     (1) Standard errors in parentheses

           (2) Bang-for-the-buck is calculated at the mean values of the
               independent variables for the 1962 - 1988 period.




                                            32
                         Table 2: Estimates for 1978 - 1988,
                   fl Earnines Announcement Conflicts Removed
                                                  Equation
Variable
                                1             2                  3          4

Constant                   -0.0444      -0.0395         -0.0599       -0.0548
                           (0.0305)     (0.0355)        (0.0334)      (0.0363)
ADIV                       17.0         12.6            15.6         18.5
                           (6.61)      (16.7)           (6.97)       (17.8)
tDIV•THETA                -18.7        -23.6           -17.1         -18.5
                           (7.74)       (9.19)          (8.16)        (7.74)
ADIV.}IIRATED              -2.84        -1.79           -2.66         -1.82
                           (1.25)       (1.20)          (1.38)        (1.14)
ADIVCAP                                 0.337                         0.326
                                        (0.136)                       (0.137)
ADIV•CRO                                -0.174                        -0.147
                                        (1.11)                        (1.11)
ADIV•INFL                              -20.0                         -30.5
                                        (9.34)                       (12.7)

ADIV•MONTHS/102                          1.45                          3.81
                                        (0.751)                       (1.93)
THETA/b2                    2.29        -3.14            1.98         2.27
                           (1.64)       (1.80)          (1.72)        (1.69)
HIRATED/103                 2.81         1.25            4.06          2.56
                           (3.05)       (3.02)          (3.05)        (2.87)
CAP/b4                     -0.336       -4.87           -0.467        -5.18
                           (1.48)       (2.34)          (1.65)        (2.54)
CRO/104                    35.9         36.0            37.7         36.9
                          (11.2)       (16.7)          (14.0)        (18.6)
INFL/102                    3.09         5.72            4.99          8.38
                           (1.91)       (2.31)          (2.13)        (2.42)
MONTHS/iC8                -15.2        -32.9           -37.9         -79.7
                          (11.8)       (15.6)          (15.4)        (24.2)


Root MSE                    0.0364      0.363            0.336        0.0336
Selection criterion         A            A                   B         B
Bang-for-the-buck           1.34         1.58            1.41          1.97
                           (0.467)      (0.472)         (0.483)       (0.543)

Notes: (1) Standard errors in parentheses

           (2) Bang-for-the-buck is calculated st the mean values of the
               independent variables for the 1978 - 1988 period.




                                         33
                          Table : Tax Regime Estimates



                            Regime 1            Regime II      Regime III
Variable
                          (1978- 1981)        (1982 - 1986)   (1987 - 1988)


Constant                     .0.324               0.0284         0.199
                             (0.197)             (0.0491)        (0.238)
ADIV                        181                  11.6            1.45
                           (118)                (32.7)         (47.2)
ADIV•HIRATED                 -9.89               -4.80           3.00
                             (2.20)              (1.98)          (4.87)
ADIV•CAP                      0.305               0.335          0.180
                             (0.346)             (0.246)         (0.544)
ADIV•GRO                     -4.38                4.70           -2.17
                             (1.55)              (2.04)          (7.29)
ADIV.INFL                  -197                 -38.5          -13.9
                            (96.4)              (28.2)          (37.4)

DIV.M0NTHS/l02               20.5                1.77           -0.255
                             (8.57)              (1.73)         (2.64)

HIRATED/103                  12.1                 2.72           6.43
                             (4.47)              (3.81)         (13.1)

CAP/b4                       -5.95               -9.48          -45.8
                              (5.66)             (3.77)         (18.9)
CR01104                      67.9                -3.36         122
                            (30.4)              (19.9)          (78.5)
INFL/102                     36.9                 4.89           17.7
                             (16.6)              (3.88)         (15.1)
MONTHS/b6                  -370                 -19.5           -70.0
                           (150)                (22.8)          (67.0)


Root MSE                      0.0313              0.0313          0.0495

Bang-for-the-buck            19.8                 5.21           -2.17
                              (5.35)             (1.83)          (2.24)


Notes:     (1) Standard errors in parentheses

           (2) Bang-for-the-buck is calculated at the mean values of the
               independent variables for the 1978 - 1988 period, except for
               HIRATED, which is set equal to zero.




                                         34
           Table 4:     Tests   for   Structural Chan&e




Test      Regimes                 Test Statistic          Probability
                                          (F)                  >F



  1       I and ha               F(12,3020) — 2.86           0.06%



  1
      *   lb and lie             F(l2,2064) — 2.27           0.75%


  2       ha and lib             F(l2,l686) — 0.74         71.29%


  3       hIb and III            F(l2,l451) — 1.91           2.95%




                                 35
