                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    MONETARY POLICY
                                    AND BANK LENDING




                                        Anil K. Kashyap

                                        Jeremy C. Stein




                                   Working Paper No. 4317



                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 1993




Paper prepared for NBER Conference on Monetary Policy. We thank Ben Bernanke, Martin
Eichenbaum, Mark Gertler, Bruce Greenwald and Eugene Fama for helpful conversations. Owen
Lamont for research assistance, Michael Gibson for kindly providing data, and Maureen
O'Donnell for help in preparing the manuscript. We are also grateful to the Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago, University of Chicago IBM Faculty Research Fund, the National Science
Foundation and MiT's International Financial Services Research Center for research and financial
support. We gratefully acknowledge the Bradley Foundation for financial support. This paper
is part of NBER's research program in Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                           Working Paper #4317
                                                           April 1993


                                   MONETARY POLICY
                                   AND BANK LENDING



                                         ABSTRACT



    This paper surveys recent work that relates to the "lending" view of monetary policy

transmission. It has three main goals: 1) to explain why it is important to distinguish between

the lending and "money" views of policy transmission; 2) to outline the microcconomic

conditions that arc needed to generate a lending channel; and 3) to review the empirical evidence

that bears on the lending view.




Anil K. Kashyap                                            Jeremy C. Stein
University of Chicago                                      Sloan School of Management
Graduate School of Business                                M.I.T.
1101 East 58th Street                                      E52-448
Chicago. IL 60637                                          50 Memorial Drive
and NBE.R                                                  Cambridge, MA 02139
                                                           and NBER
        1. Introduction

       In this paper, we survey recent theoretical and empirical work that relates to the

"lending" channel of monetary policy transmission. To begin, we.need to define clearly what

is meant by the lending channel. It is perhaps easiest to do so by contrasting the lending view

of monetary policy transmission with the simpler, and better-known, money" view.

       In what we take to be the polar, pure money version of the monetary transmission

mechanism, there are effectively only two assets -- money and bonds. In this world, the banking

sector's only special role has to do with the liability side of its balance sheet -- the fact that it

can create money by issuing demand deposits. On the asset side of their balance sheets, banks

do nothing unique -- like the household sector, they too just invest in bonds.

       In this two asset-world, monetary non-neutrality arises if movements in reserves affect

real interest rates. The transmission works as follows: a decrease in reserves reduces the

banking sector's ability to issue demand deposits. As a matter of accounting, this implies that

the banking sector must also hold (on net) fewer bonds. Thus the household sector must hold

less money, and more bonds. If prices do not adjust fully and instantaneously, households will

have less money in        terms, and equilibrium will require an increase in real interest rates.

This in turn can have real effects on investment, and ultimately, on aggregate economic activity.

       Note that as we have defined the pure money view of the transmission mechanism --

solely by reference to the fact that it is characterized by the simple two-asset feature --there are

a wide range of alternative formulations that capture its essence. These include the texthook IS-

LM model, as well as the dynamic equilibrium/cash-in advance models of Rotemberg (1984),

Grossman and Weiss (1983), Lucas (1990) and Christiano and Eichenbaum (1992). Although


                                                 1
these two classes of models differ along a number of dimensions, (e.g., in the way they generate

incomplete price adjustment) they share the two-asset feature.

        By contrast, we say there is a distinct lending channel of monetary policy transmission

when the two-asset simplification is inappropriate in a specific sense. In the lending view, there

are three assets — money, publicly issued bonds, and intermediated 1oans" -- that differ from

each other in meaningful ways and must be accounted for separately when analyzing the impact

of monetary policy shocks. The banking sector now can be special in two relevant ways: in

addition to creating money, it makes loans, which (unlike buying bonds) the household sector

cannot do.

        In this three-asset world, monetary policy can work not only through its impact on the

bond-market rate of interest, but also through its independent impact on the supply of

intermediated loans. To think about the distinction between the money and lending channels,

take an extreme example where households view the two assets that they do hold — money and

bonds — as very close substitutes. In this case, a decrease in reserves that leads to a decline in

the money supply will have a minimal impact on the interest rate on publicly-held bonds. Thus

the money channel is very weak. However, the decrease in reserves can still have important real

consequences, if it leads banks to cut back on loan supply: the cost of loans relative to bonds

will rise, and those firms that rely on bank lending (say because they do not have access to

public bond markets) will be led to cut back on investment. Put differently, monetary policy

can have significant real effects that are not summarized by its consequences for open-market

interest rates.

        A couple of points about the lending view should be emphasized right away, to prevent


                                               2
further confusion. First, as we have defined it, the lending view centers on the premise that

bank loans and publicly issued bonds are not perfect substitutes. It does not hinge critically on

whether or not there is quantity rationing in the loan market. As a matter of practical reality,

shifts in bank loan supply may well be accompanied by variations in the degree of rationing, but

this is not necessary for there to be a meaningful lending channel.

       Second, much like with the pure money view, the essence of the lending view can

probably be captured in a wide range of models. This may not be immediately apparent,

beuse the lending channel has received much less modelling attention than the money channel.

Indeed, the only recent modelling attempts that we know of are essentially extensions of the IS.

LM framework, most notably Bernanke and Blinder (1988). However, as we will argue below,

the important aspects of the lending view transcend the specific IS-LM style formulation adopted

by Bernanke and Blinder; for example, they could in principle be captured in dynamic
equilibrium/cash-in-advance models also.

       Having defined (loosely) what we mean by the distinction between the money and the

lending channels, much of the remainder of this paper focuses on the following two sets of

questions:

       (Qi) As a matter of theory, what TMmicrofoundations" are required for a distinct lending

channel to exist? Does it appear that the necessary pre-conditions for a lending channel are

satisfied in today's fmancial environment? Are they apt to be satisfied in the future?

       (Q2) Is there any direct evidence that supports the existence of a distinct lending channel?

If so, how important in magnitude is the lending channel?

       Before proceeding however, there is a logically prior question that must be addressed,


                                                3
namely: Why is the distinction between the money and lending channels an interesting or

important one? Although we must defer a complete answer until later in the paper, we can offer

several brief observations:

       1) If the lending view is correct, monetary policy can have important effects on

investment and aggregate activity without moving open-market interest rates by much. At the

least, this suggests that one might wish to look to alternative indicators to help gauge the stance

of policy.

       2) Standard investment and inventory models — which typically use open-market rates

as a measure of the cost of financing -- may give a misleading picture of the extent to which

different sectors are directly affected by monetary policy. For example, most empirical work

fails to find a significant connection between inventories and interest rates. As we argue below,

it is probably wrong to conclude from this work that tight monetary policy can not have a strong

direct impact on inventory behavior.

       3) The quantitative importance of the lending channel is likely to be sensitive to a number

of institutional characteristics of the financial markets (e.g., the rise of "non-bank banks", the

development of the public "junk bond" market, etc.). Thus understanding the lending channel

is a prerequisite to understanding how innovation in financial institutions might influence the

potency of monetary policy.

       4) Similarly, the aggregate impact of the lending channel may depend on the financial

condition of the banking sector. As we argue below, when bank capital is depleted (and

particularly when bank loan-making is tied to risk-based capital requirements) the lending

channel is likely to be weaker. This has obvious implications for the ability of monetary policy


                                                4
to offset particular sorts of adverse shocks.

       5) Finally, the lending view implies that monetary policy can have distributional

consequences that would not arise were policy transmitted solely through a money channel. For

example, the lending view suggests that the costs of tight policy might fall disproportionately

on smaller firms who are unable to access public capital markets. Such distributional

considerations may be important to bear in mind when formulating policy.

       Although this list is far from exhaustive, it hopefully gives some idea of the potential

usefulness of understanding and quantifying the lending view. With this motivation in mind, the

remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives a very brief history of the

thought surrounding the lending view. Section 3 examines its microfoundations. Section 4

reviews the evidence that bears most directly on the lending view.

       2. Early Work on the Lending View

       The lending view of monetary policy transmission has, in one form or another, been

around for a long time. Much of the early work tended to blur together two logically distinct

issues: 1) whether monetary policy works in part by changing the relative costs of bank loans

and open-market paper; and 2) whether such shifts in bank loan supply are accompanied by

variations in the degree of non-price credit rationing.

       Roosa's (1951) "availability doctrine" is a classic example of this line of thinking. He

takes issue with the simple money channel view that: "changes in market rates of interest

provided a satisfactory explanation for cyclical economic disturbance . .     .   The postwar

experience suggests that yield changes of scarcely 1/8 of 1 percent for the longest-term bonds

have considerable market effects." Rather, Roosa argues, "it is the lender, neglected by the


                                                5
monetary theorists, who does most to put new substance in the older doctrine. . . rate changes

brought about by the open market operations of the central bank influence the disposition or the

ability of lenders to make funds available to borrowers. . .   It is principally through effects upon
the position and decision of lenders. . . that central bank action. . . achieves its significance.

Although Roosa's observations came in the midst of the debate over whether monetary policy

effectiveness after the impending Federal Reserve -- Treasury Accord would necessitate large

swings in open market interest rates, the importance of bank credit continued to be a hotly

debated topic long after the Accord was signed.

       Over the next dozen years the argument was refined, and a number of investigators,

notably Tobin and Brainard (1963), Brunner and Meltzer (1963) and Brainard (1964), proposed

models that included as a central feature the imperfect substitutability of various assets including

bank loans. Thus, Modigliani (1963) was able to more precisely summarize the role of banks

in a world of imperfect information. "Suppose the task of making credit available to units in

need of financing requires specialized knowledge and organization and is therefore carried out

exclusively by specialized institutions which we may label financial intermediaries.

Intermediaries in turn lend to final debtors of the economy at some rate. . . (which) adjusts at

best only slowly to market conditions.. . the single rate of the perfect market model is replaced

by a plurality of rates."

       Despite the fact that the Modigliani rendition of the lending view is very close to the one

that we are now advocating, the lending view began to fall out of favor during the l960s. In


'See also Tobin and Brainard (1963) and Brainard (1964) for early general equilibrium models
of financial intermediation with imperfect substitutability across assets.


                                                6
part, this lack of acceptance seems attributable to the fact that many early accounts relied heavily

(and unnecessarily, in our view) on a credit rationing mechanism, while at the same time failing

to provide a satisfying theoretical rationale for such rationing to exist. For example, Samuelson

(1952) rebutted Roosa by arguing that the credit rationing implicit in the availability doctrine was

at odds with profit maximization by lenders. More importantly, as Gertler (1988) points out,

the Modigliani and Miller results on the irrelevance of capital-structure seemed to undermine the

basic premise that lending arrangements could be important. Furthermore, on the empirical

front, Friedman and Schwartz (1963) were supplying strong evidence in favor of the money

view.

        As we will discuss in the remainder of the paper, each of these objections has
subsequently been addressed. For instance, work by Jaffee and Russell (1976), Stiglitz and

Weiss (1981) and many others has demonstrated that credit rationing can occur in models where

all agents are maximizing.2 More generally, as we argue in the next section, research in the

theory of credit market imperfections and financial intermediation has helped put the lending

view on much firmer micro-foundations. Still, the failure of the lending view to be widely

embraced cannot be completely ascribed to theoretical discomfort -- it has also suffered until

recently from a lack of clear-cut, direct empirical support. Thus, perhaps even more so than

the theoretical developments, the recent empirical work reviewed in Section 4 has helped to

renew interest in the lending view.




2lndeed, Blinder and Stiglitz (1983) and Fuerst (1992b) outline models of monetary policy
transmission that capture the credit rationing aspects of Roosa's (1951) availability doctrine.


                                                 7
       3. Building Blocks of the Lending View

       Perhaps the best-known recent formulation of the lending view is a model due to

Bernanke and Blinder (1988). Their model makes it clear that there are three necessary

conditions that must hold if there is to be a distinct lending channel of monetary policy

transmission:

       (Cl) Intermediated loans and open-market bonds must not be perfect substitutes for some

firms on the liability side of their balance sheet. In other words, the Modigliani-Miller capital

structure invariance proposition must break down in a particular way, so that these firms are

unable to offset a decline in the supply of loans simply by borrowing more directly from the

household sector in public markets.

       (C2) The Federal Reserve must be able, by changing the quantity of reserves available

to the banking system, to affect the supply of intermediated loans. That is, the intermediary

sector as a whole must not be able to completely insulate its lending activities from shocks to

reserves, either by switching from deposits to less reserve-intensive forms of finance (e.g., CDs,

commercial paper, equity, etc.) or by paring its net holdings of bonds.

       (C3) There must be some form of imperfect price adjustment that prevents any monetary

policy shock from being neutral. If prices adjust frictionlessly, a change in nominal reserves

will be met with an equiproportionate change in prices, and both bank and corporate balance

sheets will remain unaltered in real terms. In this case, there can be no real effects of monetary

policy through either the lending channel or the conventional money channel.

       If either of the first two necessary conditions fail to hold, loans and bonds effectively

become perfect substitutes, and we are reduced back to the pure money view of policy


                                                8
transmission. If (Cl) fails, Modigliani-Miller corporations will completely arbitrage away any

cost differentials between loans and bonds. If (C2) fails, intermediaries will do the arbitrage.

In either case, the net result will be that loans and bonds will always be priced identically in

equilibrium.

       Although the Bernanke-Blinder formulation is very helpful in illustrating the necessary

conditions that are required for the existence of a distinct lending channel, it does not directly

address whether each of these three conditions can be given solid microfoundations. Nor does

it ask whether any such microfoundations appear plausible given the current fmancial
environment. For example: what sort of technological and/or informational assumptions must

one make about the structure of intermediation to generate (C2)? Do these assumptions seem

reasonable in light of what we actually observe?

       In the rest of this section, we take up these questions relating to microfoundations. To

preview the discussion a bit: We begin by arguing that (Cl) is probably easiest to justify, both

in the context of a widely-accepted, well-articulated theoretical paradigm, and in terms of what

is observed in practice. On the other hand, (C2) is quite a bit trickier — there are a number of

possible factors that could conceivably limit the Fed's ability to affect the supply of
intermediated loans. Our bottom line here is that it is nonetheless highly unlikely that (C2) will

fail to hold completely, although one can imagine circumstances in which Fed policy might have

only a small impact on aggregate loan supply.

       Finally, the question of the microfoundations for (C3) is much broader in scope than just

the lending channel -- this question is central to y account of monetary policy, and has

accordingly received an enormous amount of attention. Thus we do not attempt a detailed


                                                9
treatment here. Instead, we focus on a much narrower issue: the interaction between the

microfoundations for (C3) with those for (Cl) and (C2). In particular, we focus on a class of

models -- those of the dynamic equilibrium/cash-in-advance variety --where the frictions driving

imperfect price adjustment can be one and the same as those driving intermediary lending policy.

We ask whether these sorts of models are likely to be successful in providing a realistic account

of both price adjustment and intermediary lending patterns.

       3.1 Why do some firms "depend" on intermediated loans?

       In the last decade or so, a large theoretical literature has developed on the subject of

financial intermediation. One broad theme of this work, (seen, e.g., in Diamond (1984), Boyd

and Prescott (1986), and Fama (1990)) is that intermediaries can represent efficient vehicles for

conserving on the costs of monitoring certain types of borrowers. The basic idea is this: due

to asymmetric information and/or moral hazard, lending without any monitoring can involve

large deadweight costs. Given these costs, it would be efficient to devote some resources to

monitoring activities. However, if there are a large number of lenders — i.e., if the credit is

extended in public markets — free rider problems will confound attempts to monitor. Thus it

can make sense to create an intermediary to serve as a single "delegated monitor", thereby

circumventing these free-rider problems and conserving on aggregate monitoring costs.

       While ultimately correct, this argument is, by itself, incomplete. Although having a

single intermediary do all the monitoring would seem to represent an obvious cost savings, there

is a potential difficulty, namely the introduction of a second layer of agency. This point is

addressed by Diamond (1984), who asks the critical question: "who monitors the delegated

monitor?" In other words, what is to prevent the intermediary from taking investors' money and


                                               10
squandering it by making bad loans (i.e, by lending without going to the effort of actually doing

any monitoring)? Diamond shows that this second-tier agency problem can be mitigated if the

intermediary holds a large, diversified portfolio of loans, and finances itself largely with publicly

issued debt.

       Diamond's conclusions about the optimal capital structure for an intermediary raise an

issue that is central for monetary policy. Although Diamond argues that intermediaries ought

to be largely debt financed, there is nothing in his model -- or in many of the other models of

financial intermediation -- that suggests that intermediaries must be financed with demand

deposits. Indeed, the institutions in many of these models can equally well be thought of as

"non-bank banksw; i.e, finance companies such as G.E. Capital that make loans but that do not

finance themselves at all with deposits.

       Thus while it seems relatively straightforward to argue from first principles that some

firms -- particularly those for whom monitoring costs are likely to be high -- will be to some

degree intermediary-dependent, it is less obvious that they will necessarily be bank-dependent,

in the sense of relying on institutions who themselves are financed with demand deposits. In

terms of the necessary conditions we have defined above, this distinction implies some initial

doubts about whether one should expect (C2) to hold across a wide range of circumstances. If

intermediation can just as easily be done through institutions that fund themselves with non-

reservable forms of finance (e.g., commercial paper, long-term debt, etc.) then it is unclear how

the Federal Reserve could ever affect the aggregate supply of intermediated loans. This question

will be taken up in detail in Section 3.2 below; for the moment we put aside the important

distinction between deposit-taking banks and intermediaries more generally.


                                                 11
         In addition to the theoretical work, there have also been a number of recent empirical

papers that support the notion that intermediated loans are "special" for some borrowers.

First, Fama (1985) and James (1987) show that bank borrowers effectively bear the cost of

reserve requirements, which suggests that they are getting a service which cannot be replicated

by non-bank providers of finance, such as the public markets. Second, James (1987) and

Lummer and McConnell (1989) find that bank loan agreements are taken as 'goed news" by the

stock market, consistent with the notion that banks provide an information gathering function.

Finally, Hoshi, Kashyap and Scharfstein (1991) show that Japanese firms with close banking

relationships are less likely to be liquidity constrained. This finding fits with the argument that

monitoring by intermediaries reduces the information and/or incentive problems that typically

create a wedge between the costs of internal and external finance.

         It is one thing to believe that certain firms will be dependent on the services of the

intermediary sector. It is quite another to believe that firms may come to rely on a particular

intermediary with whom they have an established relationship -- in other words, that there are

lock-in effects that make it costly to switch lenders. However, as we argue below, if lender-

specific lock-in does indeed exist, it can have important consequences for the transmission of

monetary policy -- such lock-in will tend to make the lending channel more potent, all else

equal.

         A few recent papers, both theoretical and empirical, provide some support for the

hypothesis that banking relationships involve a degree of lock-in. On the theoretical side, Sharpe

(1990) and Rajan (1992) argue that the very fact that a bank does monitoring creates the

potential for lock-in. In the course of a relationship, a bank will acquire an informational


                                                12
monopoly with respect to its client, a monopoly which puts other potential lenders at a

comparative disadvantage.

       On the empirical side, Sushka, Slovin and Polonchek (1993) conduct an interesting event

study of Continental Bank's customers during the period that Continental was in danger of failing

and was ultimately bailed out by the government. During this time, the customers' stock prices

moved in concert with Continental's own fortunes, falling on bad news about Continental, and

rising sharply with the announcement of the bailout. This suggests that these customers were

somewhat locked-in to Continental, and could not costlessly switch to another lender. Further

evidence for the importance of banking relationships comes from Petersen and Rajan (1992).

They find that the availability of credit to a small business is, all else equal, an increasing

function of the length of its relationship with its bank.

       Of course, even if one accepts that (Cl) is both theoretically and empirically plausible,

there remains the question of its aggregate importance, not only today, but looking into the

future. Certainly there are a substantial number of U.S. firms that cannot be considered

intermediary-dependent in any sense. Moreover, the evidence from the U.S. as well as other

countries suggests that there is a strong secular trend away from intermediated finance, and

towards securities markets.

       In spite of such trends, the data show that intermediaries -- and banks in particular

-- continue to play a dominant role in financing U.S. corporations, particularly medium-sized

and smaller ones. (We review some evidence to this effect just below, in Section 3.2A.) Thus

it seems reasonable to believe that shocks to the supply of intermediated loans might have

important aggregate implications, even in today's environment.


                                                13
       3.2 Can the Fed affect the supply of intermediated loans?

       The second necessary condition for the existence of a distinct lending channel is that the

Fed be able -- by manipulating the amount of reserves available to the banking sector --to affect

the aggregate supply of loans made by intermediaries. We examine four factors that could

conceivably weaken or even break the link between reserves and loan supply: 1) the existence

of non-bank intermediaries; 2) banks' ability to react to changes in reserves by adjusting their

holdings of securities rather than loans; 3) banks' ability to raise funds with non-reservable

forms of financing; and 4) the existence of risk-based capital requirements.

        3.2.A The significance of non-bank intermediaries

        As noted above, many theories of financial intermediation leave open the possibility that

lending to information-intensive" borrowers could be accomplished by non-deposit taking

institutions.   If such institutions play an important role, the link between Fed policy and

aggregate loan supply might be weakened, or even severed. First, and most obviously, if non-

bank intermediaries are responsible for most of the lending volume in the economy, the Fed will

be unable to have much of an impact on the overall supply of intermediated loans, even if it can

influence 12nk loan supply.

        Second, and more subtly, one might argue that even if non-bank intermediaries do not

have a large market share, they may effectively be the "marginal" lenders in the economy -- that

is, they may be able to pick up much of the slack if bank loan supply is cut back. However,

we view this marginal lender argument as not completely compelling, particularly with regard

to its short-run implications. It implicitly assumes that there are negligible costs incurred when

borrowers switch from one lender to another. As seen in the previous section, there are both


                                               14
theoretical and empirical reasons to believe that such an assumption is inappropriate -- that there

is indeed a significant degree of lock-in between specific banks and their customers.

       Thus if one is interested in understanding relatively short-run behavior, there may be

something useful to be learned simply from comparing the relative sizes of the bank and non-

bank intermediary sectors.

       Figure 1 addresses this question, showing how the composition of intermediated loans

to non-financial corporations breaks down into bank C&I loans and finance company loans over

the period 1977-91. In addition, the figure also sheds some light on the issue raised above --

the substitution of open market borrowings for intermediated loans — by including data on the

growth of the commercial paper market over this period.

       The figure illustrates that while both finance company loans and commercial paper have

grown very rapidly in percentage terms over the last 15 years, traditional commercial banks still

are by far the most important of these three sources of finance, representing over 68% of the

combined total in 1991. (The share was on the order of 78% in 1977). Thus it would be

premature to say that growth in either the commercial paper market or in the non-bank

intermediary sector has rendered the commercial banking sector of significantly less aggregate

importance than it was, say, a couple of decades ago.

       Table 1 presents some more detail on how corporate financing patterns have evolved over

the last twenty or so years. Using data from the Quarterly Financial Report, we break down

manufacturing firms into three size categories -- small, medium, and large -- and look at how

the balance sheets of firms in each category have changed between 1973 and 1991.

       Again, the most striking finding is that if we take the overall manufacturing-wide ratio


                                                15
of bank debt to total debt, there is virtually no change over time. Bank debt represents 34.4%

of total debt in 1973, and 33.0% in 1991. This aggregate number reinforces the conclusion

drawn above — that one should not exaggerate the extent to which changes in financing practices

have diminished the role of banks.

       Of course, banks have lost substantial ground in some areas. First, if one focuses only

on short-term lending, banks have seen their overall share fall from 78.8% to 44.9%. (This is

offset by the fact that banks have actually gained share in overall long-term lending.) Moreover,

this loss of short-term market share is almost exclusively concentrated among large corporations

-- the one place where the commercial paper market has made very substantial inroads.3 Short-

term bank loans as a fraction of all short-term debt of large manufacturing corporations fell from

64.9% in 1973 to 22.8% in 1991.

       While the gains of the commercial paper market among large borrowers are certainly

impressive, their aggregate impact should not be overstated. Commercial paper has not yet

penetrated the medium and small firm categories to any perceptible degree, and banks' share of

short-term debt for these firms is still overwhelming, at 77.0% and 82.9% respectively.

       3.2.A.1 The future of non-bank intermediaries

       Looking to the future, the rise of non-bank intermediaries documented in Figure 1 raises

a number of difficult questions. At one extreme, some observers -- particularly advocates of



3.These figures may somewhat overstate the true economic extent of disintermediation, as
approximately 8% of commercial paper issues are backed by irrevocable standby letters of credit
from banks -- see Gorton and Pennacchi (1990). In such cases, banks still bear the full credit
risk, and presumably engage in monitoring.- More generally, a number of other financial
innovations — e.g., the loan sales market -- have blurred the lines between intermediated and
public-market sources of finance.


                                               16
"narrow banking" -- have concluded that there is no longer any reason (other than perhaps

historical accident or bad regulation) why the deposit-taking and loan-making functions should

ever be glued together in a single institution, as opposed to being carried out separately, say by

money market mutual funds and finance companies, respectively. What exactly, ask these

observers, are the synergies between deposit-taking and loan-making? If no clear-cut synergies

can be identified, one might expect the non-bank sector to grow rapidly in the future, thereby

diluting the potency of any lending channel of policy transmission. (See Gorton and Pennacchi

(1990) for a forceful rendition of this argument.)

       The work of Diamond and Dybvig (1983) provides something of a counterpoint to the

Gorton-Pennacchi argument. The Diamond-Dybvig model suggests that there may indeed be a

link between the deposit-taking and loan-making functions of banks. In their model, banks

perform a "liquidity transformation" role. All individual investors would like to invest in highly

liquid assets, because they may suddenly wish to consume all of their wealth. But the

economy's productive investment opportunities require tying up resources in long-lived projects.

In this setting, it is optimal for a bank to issue demand deposits -- thereby satisfying individuals'

liquidity needs — and to invest the proceeds in the long-lived assets.4

       Thus a synergy between deposit-taking and loan-making arises out of a fundamental

mismatch between individuals' desire to hold liquid assets and the economy's need to invest in

iffiquid projects. However, the Diamond-Dybvig model probably overstates the importance of

the liquidity transformation synergy, since they simply assume that all investment opportunities



4Diamond-Dybvig show that, in this setting, bank deposits perform a role that cannot be
duplicated by other tradeable claims, such as equity shares issued against the long-lived projects.


                                                 17
are long-term and all savers want to keep all their wealth in liquid assets. In reality, there may

not be nearly as much of a mismatch between savers' portfolio preferences and the underlying

investment technology -- there will be both some investment opportunities that are relatively

short-term, and some investors who are not unwilling to tie up their assets for a longer period

of time. Gorton and Pennacchi present some evidence that bears on this point. One fact that

they emphasize is that the sum of outstanding Treasury bills and non-fmancial commercial paper

is now roughly twice as large as the level of checkable bank deposits. This is a recent

development -- bank deposits were larger until around 1980 -- and it suggests that it might soon

be possible to have a world in which deposit-taking is done largely by institutions (like money

market mutual funds) that invest primarily in high-quality, short-term liquid assets. Inevitably,

however, these sorts of thought exercises run into difficult general equilibrium considerations.

As Gorton and Pennacchi themselves point out, simply showing that the volume of T-bills and

commercial paper greatly exceeds bank deposits is not conclusive proof that there is no role in

equilibrium for traditional, "liquidity transforming" banks in the Diamond-Dybvig spirit. After

all, T-bills and commercial paper outside the deposit-taking system may already be satisfying

some of the economy's demand for liquidity, so it would be wrong to posit that one could take

them and use them as backing for deposits without losing anything.

       Our own view is that while the Gorton-Pennacchi argument has a great deal of merit, it

is hard to predict with any confidence that we will soon see anything like a disappearance of

traditional dual-function commercial banks. Perhaps the greatest uncertainties have to do not

with the economic considerations sketched above, but with regulation. Even if one completely

accepts the hypothesis that there are no real economic synergies holding deposit-taking and loan-


                                               18
making together, government regulations can provide a powerful glue. For example, deposit

insurance subsidies may be effectively larger for those banks that invest in risky loans rather

than T-bills, thereby encouraging a combination of the two activities.

       In this regard, one important regulatory innovation is the introduction of risk-based

capital requirements. As we discuss in Section 3.2.D, these may have the effect of accelerating

any natural separation of deposit-taking and loan-making.

       3.2.B Banks' holdings of securities as a buffer against reserve shocks

       Even ignoring the issues raised by the existence of non-bank intermediaries, it is still

possible that bank lending might be decoupled from open-market operations. Suppose that as

a result of a monetary tightening, a bank finds that its deposits have been reduced by $1. How

will the bank respond? Basically, it can adjust along one of three dimensions: 1) it can cut back

on the number of loans it makes; 2) it can sell some of its securities holdings (e.g., T-bills); or

3) it can attempt to raise more non-deposit financing (e.g., CDs, medium-term notes, long-term

debt, or equity). In order for (C2) to be satisfied, it must be that the bank wishes (for a given

configuration of rates on the different instruments) to do some of the adjustment by reducing

loans. Or said differently, it must be that the bank is not wholly indifferent to variations in the

quantity ofT-bills and/or CDs, and thus does not use such variations to completely "shield its

loan portfolios from monetary shocks. (Note that selling T-bills and issuing CDs are closely

related strategies -- either can be thought of as reducing the bank's net holding of "bonds,

broadly defined.)

       Why might a bank not be indifferent to variations in T-bills or CDs? We start with T-

bills first. The argument here is straightforward, and has been made by many authors. (See,


                                               19
e.g., Bernanke and Gertler (1987)). At any point in time, a bank faces the possibility of random

depositor withdrawals. If the bank holds all its assets (other than required reserves) in illiquid

loans, it will have a difficult time accommodating these withdrawals while still meeting reserve

requirements. In particular, it will be forced to liquidate loans on short notice, which could be

very costly. By holding easily marketable securities such as T-bills, the bank avoids these

illiquidity costs.

        Of course, there is a tradeoff involved in holding T-bills, since they offer a lower return

than intermediated loans. This suggests that for any given level of deposits, and any given

configuration of interest rates on loans and bills, there will be a unique optimal quantity of bill

holdings. In other words, banks will nQL be indifferent to the amount of T-bills they hoId.

       Table 2 presents some data on banks' holdings of securities, taken from the Call Reports.

The data show that there are persistent cross-sectional differences in banks' portfolio

composition. In particular, large banks -- those in the top 1 % as measured by total assets --
hold significantly less in the way of securities than do medium-sized banks, who in turn hold less

than small banks. These well-defined cross-sectional patterns would be very unlikely if portfolio

composition was a matter of indifference to banks. In contrast, they are exactly what one might

expect if banks traded off the liquidity of securities against their lower returns: smaller banks,

with fewer depositors, are more vulnerable to large (percentage) withdrawals, and hence must




5See Greenwald and Stiglitz (1992) for extension of these arguments and a general analysis of
the consequences of risk-aversion by banks.


                                                20
protect themselves by holding more securities.6

       3.2.C Banks' ability to make use of non-reservable forms of finance

       We now turn to the question of why a bank does not offset a loss in deposits solely by

issuing more CDs -- i.e, why it is not indifferent to variations in the quantity of CDs it has

outstanding. Romer and Romer (1990) argue that banks            likely to be indifferent, which

would mean that (C2) fails to hold.

       However, the Romer-Romer argument embodies a highly simplified view of the CD

market. Implicitly, they assume that the supply of CDs available to any bank is perfectly elastic

at the current market rate -- i.e, a bank can issue as many CDs as it wants without paying any

premium. There are a number of reasons why this is unlikely to be true in practice.

       Given that large denomination CDs (or other instruments that a bank might use to finance

itself in the public capital markets, such as medium-term notes, long-term debt, or equity) are

not federally insured, investors must concern themselves with the quality of the issuing bank.

If there is some degree of asymmetric information between the bank and investors, the standard

sorts of adverse selection problems (see, e.g., Myers and Majluf (1984)) will arise. These

considerations will tend to make the marginal cost of external financing an increasing function

of the amount raised.7




6Another reason why one might expect small banks to hold more securities is if information
problems made it more difficult for them to raise non-deposit external finance on short notice.
See the arguments in section 3.2.C just below.


7See Lucas and McDonald (1992) for a recent model of the banking sector in which adverse
selection problems interfere with banks' ability to raise non-deposit external finance.


                                              21
       All the available evidence supports the notion that default risk is important in the pricing

of wholesale CDs. Large banks' CDs are evaluated by five rating agencies, and the rates paid

by different quality issuers can vary considerably. Moreover, there is considerable intertemporal
variation in the spread between average market-wide CD rates and the rate on riskless T-bils.

To take just one example, the troubles of Continental Illinois in 1984 led to widespread worries

about bank health, and an increase in this spread from 40 basis points in April to nearly 150

basis points in   July.'
       The implications of increasing marginal costs of CD financing can be illustrated with a

very simple, partial equilibrium model. (The model also captures the earlier argument that

banks need to hold some securities for liquidity purposes.) Consider a representative bank that

holds as assets reserves (R), loans (L), and bonds (B), and fmances itself with deposits (D) and

CDs (C). The bank seeks to maximize:



       (1) Max rLL + r8B - rC,



where rL,   r, and rc represent the interest rates on loans, bonds, and CDs respectively. (This
formulation assumes that demand deposits are non-interest-bearing.) The bank is a price-taker

with respect to the first two rates, but perceives rc to be an increasing function of C. The bank



'See Cook and Rowe (1986). Fama (1985) documents that CD rates move very closely with
commercial paper rates. Indeed, both appear to rise relative to T-bill rates during times of tight
monetary policy (Stigum, 1990). In the case of CDs, one possible interpretation is that banks
attempt to issue more CDs as a substitute for deposits during periods of tight money, and that
this increased supply pushes up the rates they must
pay.

                                                22
faces the following constraints:



       (2) R kD (Reserve Requirement)


       (3) R + B jD       (Liquidity Constraint)



       (4) R + L + B = C + D (Assets = Liabilities)


       Inequality (2) implicitly assumes that CDs are not subject to any reserve requirement, but

it is easy to generalize the argument to the case where they are just subject to a lower

requirement than deposits. Inequality (3) is meant to capture in as simple a fashion as possible

the sorts of liquidity arguments for holding bonds made in the previous section. To justify it,

one might imagine that a fraction j of the bank's deposits may be redeemed at any point in time,

and that it is prohibitively costly to liquidate loans immediately. Thus the bank must hold

enough bonds so that the sum of bonds and reserves is sufficient to meet redemptions.9 Clearly,

one can develop a somewhat more sophisticated version of this story if one is interested in

making the portfolio demand for bonds less degenerate.

        So long as r8 < rL, all three constraints will be met with equality, and the bank's first

order condition is given by:




9Bernanke and Gertler (1987) derive something very similar to our liquidity constraint in the
context of a much more fully specified model of the banking sector.


                                               23
       (5) rL-rC--CrC


       If, as assumed by Romer and Romer, there are no increasing marginal costs of CD

financing, then the loan rate must be exactly equal to the CD rate in equilibrium -- in other

words, loans and CDs (or, alternatively, loans and bonds) are perfect substitutes from the

perspective of the banking sector, and (C2) fails.

       Things are very different when banks perceive increasing costs of CD issuance. Now,

if the spread between loan and Cl) rates remains unchanged, then the quantity of CDs is pinned

down. Thus the "first-round" response of the banking sector to a $1 decrease in reserves is to

decrease deposits by 1/k, bonds by (j/k - 1), and loans by (l-j)/k, while leaving CDs fixed. Of

course, in general equilibrium, these effects may be attenuated, as the spread between loan rates

and CD rates may widen, thereby encouraging more CD issuance. But in any case, loans and

CDs are no longer perfect substitutes, and the spread between them will be affected by shocks

to reserve&°.

       3.2.D The impact of risk-based capital requirements

       In Section 3.2.B above, we argued that a bank's asset mix of loans and securities was

likely to represent an interior optimum of a portfolio choice problem. The important implication

that follows from this is that the bank will not want to do all of the adjustment to a

contractionary shock by selling securities -- in order to preserve optimality, it will also wish to


'°Tle magnitude of the ultimate general equilibrium effect will depend on the magnitude of r.
If rc is very small, loan rates will rise only slightly, relative to CD rates, and a large volume
of new CD issuance will take place. Conversely, if r is large, loan rates will rise by relatively
more, and fewer new CD's will be issued.


                                                24
decrease its holdings of loans. However, there is an important caveat to this argument. Risk-

based capital requirements (of the sort that have been phased in over the last several years under

the Basle accords) can tie a bank's ability to extend loans to its level of equity capital. If a

bank's lending is constrained by such regulation, then it may do all its marginal adjustments by

buying and selling securities.
       This can be easily illustrated in the context of the model sketched above. Risk-based

capital requirements essentially impose an additional constraint of the form:

       (6) pL E,


where p is the capital requirement on loans, and E is the bank's equity. This simple version of

the constraint implicitly (and realistically) assumes that T-bills are not subject to ny capital

requirement.
        If it is costly (say because of the information problems that accompany new equity issues

-- see Myers-Majluf (1984)) for a bank to adjust the amount of equity financing it has, then (6)

may bind. It is easy to see that in this case, the liquidity constraint in (3) will be slack — that

is, the bank will hold more bonds than it needs for liquidity purposes. This is simply because

it does not have enough capital to support more of the higher-yielding loans. Under these
circumstances, monetary policy will have no effect on the bank's desire to invest in loans.

Loans are tied down by (6), and all marginal changes in the bank's portfolio are accomplished

by buying and selling T-bills. (See Bernanke and Lown (1991) for empirical evidence that bank

 capital can be a constraining factor in lending behavior.)

        Of course, it is highly unlikely that all or even most banks will face binding capital


                                                25
constraints at any point in time. What is the effect of such unconstrained banks? At one

extreme, it might be argued that so long as there are any capital-unconstrained banks, they will

effectively be the "marginal" lenders in the economy, and hence the banking sector as a whole

will behave as if it was capital-unconstrained. However, such an argument runs into the sorts

of problems raised earlier -- it implicitly disregards the potential for switching costs when
borrowers attempt to move from one bank to another. Our view is that even if just a fraction

of the banks in the economy are capital constrained, this will affect the potency of monetary

policy. Essentially, we are saying that if Bank A is capital constrained, then Fed easingwill not

have the same expansionary effects it otherwise might, because Bank A will not lend any more

than it already is, and because Bank A's customers cannot frictionlessly switch to another

unconstrained bank that is easing its lending policy.

       This sort of logic may help to explain why monetary policy was thought by many to be

relatively ineffectual during the 1990-91 recession. To the extent that many (though certainly

not all) banks found their capital positions impaired by large losses on their existing loan

portfolios, and hence found (6) to be binding, the lending channel of monetary transmission

would be weakened. More subtly, if regional shocks were in part responsible for the loan

losses, then monetary policy might have a more powerful effect in some parts of the country --

those less-hard hit by the adverse shocks -- than in others.

        Similar reasoning also suggests that accounting and regulatory decisions can have

 important effects on the potency of monetary policy. If regulators are more aggressive in

 forcing banks to acknowledge loan losses, this will tend to reduce bank capital, and again dilute

 the effectiveness of the lending channel. Conversely, if capital requirements are relaxed,


                                                26
monetary policy might be made somewhat more potent.

       Looking to the future, risk-based capital requirements may also play an significant role

in the evolution of the banking system. We noted earlier that an important open question for

monetary policy is the extent to which deposit-taking and loan-making will tend to grow apart

in the years to come. Risk-based capital requirements would seem to have the potential to
accelerate any natural separation of the two activities. In the past, there was a regulation-

induced reason to keep the two together -- by taking deposits and making risky loans, a bank

could raise the value of the subsidy it received from the FDIC. Risk-based capital requirements

reduce this incentive, as would risk-based insurance premiums.

       3.3 Imperfect price adjustment and the lending view

       As noted earlier, the requirement of imperfect price adjustment is not unique to the

lending view -- it is a prerequisite for ny theory in which monetary policy has real effects.

Accordingly, we do not attempt to survey the enormous literature on the microfoundations of

imperfect price adjustment. Rather, we focus on a much narrower issue: the extent to which

the frictions responsible for imperfect price adjustment might interact with those responsible for

(Cl) and (C2).
       The Bernanke-Blinder formulation of the lending view, like traditional IS-LM models,

implicitly assumes that prices are sticky, without providing any explicit microeconomic

justification for this assumption. Moreover, the sticky price assumption is completely separated

 from the assumptions driving firms' and intermediaries' preferences across loans and bonds --

 one can imagine varying the horizon over which prices adjust without modifying the restof the

 model in any substantive way.


                                               27
       As we have already emphasized, however, the essence of the lending view can probably

be captured in a wide range of models. For example, if one is uncomfortable with simply

assuming that prices are temporarily fixed, one might appeal to the type of "limited

participation" dynamic general equilibrium models introduced by Grossman and Weiss (1983)

and Rotemberg (1984) to generate imperfect price adjustment, while still preserving the other

necessary building blocks for the lending view."

       Although we are not aware of any limited participation models that explicitly set out to

capture the distinction between the money and lending channels, there are a couple that seem

to be quite close to addressing it. Two recent papers by Fuerst (1992a, 1992b) are especially

relevant. In both of these papers the monetary mechanism works roughly as follows: there are

"households", "firms", and "intermediaries". Both households and firms are subject to cash-in-

advance constraints in all of their transactions.

        A monetary shock takes the form of the central bank injecting cash directly into the

intermediary sector. The important distinction between households and firms is that firms are

 "closer" to the intermediary sector, in the sense that they can transact with intermediaries

 without any time lag. Households, in contrast, must wait a period to revise their investment

 decisions. This implies that the immediate consequence of a monetary injection is that the firms

 wind up holding all the extra cash for one period. In other words, the firms are the only

 participants in this limited participation model, and monetary injections are funneled to them via




 "We are unaware of any empirical evidence that supports the limited particiation assumption.
 Thus, both the IS-LM and limited participation models can be criticized for the mechanisms used
 to produce price rigidity.

                                                    28
the banking sector.

       Monetary policy is non-neutral in this setting, (thanks to the limited participation feature)

and it has compositional effects. The interest rate in the firm lending market will be lower after

a positive monetary shock than the (shadow) interest rate in the household market, since the

firms absorb all of the shock in the short-term. In one version of the model, (Fuerst (1 992a))

the interest rate clears the firm lending market; in the other there is some degree of credit

rationing.
       Although Fuerst does not suggest that these models bear specifically on the lending

channel, it seems to us that with a bit of reinterpretation, they might be thought of in this way.

Suppose we relabel Fuerst's "firms" as "bank-dependent firms", and his "households" as "non-

bank-dependent firms." The model would now have very much the feeling of the lending view.

In particular, the effects of monetary policy would be transmitted via bank lending policy, and

these effects would fall more heavily on the shoulders of bank-dependent firms.

        It is interesting to see where our necessary conditions (Cl), (C2) and (C3), would show

 up in such a model. It turns out that all three are actually embedded in a single timing
 assumption -- namely, that only bank-dependent firms and intermediaries can transact with each

 other without any lag. First, note that since bank-dependent and non-bank-dependentfirms are

 effectively "walled off" from each other in the short run, they cannot arbitrage away differences

 in borrowing costs. This is (Cl). Second, intermediaries are also walled-off from non-bank

 dependent firms in the short run. Thus they can only unload a central bank injection on bank-

 dependent firms, and they too cannot arbitrage away differences in borrowing costs across the

 bank-dependent and non-bank-dependent markets. So (C2) is satisfied. Finally, as we have


                                                 29
already seen, the limited participation feature also generates the imperfect price adjustment

required in (C3).
       In one sense, such a formulation of the lending view is quite elegant, since it traces

everything back to a single friction -- the (exogenous) cost that prevents non-bank-dependent

firms from participating continuously in the bank lending market. However, this compact

elegance may come at a cost in terms of empirical realism. For example, banks' portfolio

IpreferencesN in this sort of model are purely a short-run phenomenon --in the short-run, banks

have no choice other than to funnel all of an injection to a subset of firms, but this changes

completely once a "period" elapses. This implies that if monetary policy is ever going to impact

the volume of bank lending, we should see these effects unfold very quickly. As will be shown

in Section 4 below, this implication runs counter to what is seen in the data.

       In contrast, in the Bernanke-Blinder formulation of the lending channel, banks (and firms)

are assumed to have well-defined long-run portfolio preferences between loans and bonds. This

formulation therefore does not carry with it the strong implication that any of the changes in

bank lending volume that accompany a monetary policy shock should be manifested immediately.

Thus on this score at least, it does a better job of fitting the facts.

       We do not at all mean to suggest that the limited participation/dynamic equilibrium class

of models will ultimately be unable to capture the salient aspects of the lending view. Rather,

we are simply pointing out that there may be some problems in interpreting current versions of

these models as providing an accurate and complete description of the lending view, even if they

capture some of its basic essence. Richer formulations — that still use limited participation as

a device to generate imperfect price adjustment, but that provide a more detailed account of


                                                 30
intermediary portfolio choice -- may well prove to be very successful in modelling the lending

view.

        4. Empirical Work on the Lending Channel

        There are a variety of ways to organize a discussion of the evidence that pertains to

the lending channel. We will begin by reviewing some suggestive, simple correlations that

are open to many interpretations and then progressively introduce more focused tests that can

be used to distinguish between competing explanations. Most of the literature either

exclusively considers time-series correlations or cross-sectional correlations. While we too

separate our discussion along these lines, we believe that it is important to keep both bodies

of evidence in mind in assessing the overall plausibility of the lending channel. After

reviewing the evidence, we wrap up with some simple calculations aimed at quantifyingthe

importance of the lending channel.

        4.1 Tests Using Aggregate Time-Series Data

        Perhaps the simplest implication of the lending channel is that bank loans should be

 closely correlated with measures of economic activity. Figure 2 graphs the change in non-

 farm inventories (as reported in the National Income and Product Accounts) along with the

 change in commercial and industrial bank loans. The two series are highlycorrelated -- the

 correlation is 0.4. Similar pictures can be drawn to show a strong correlation between bank

 loans and unemployment, GNP and other key macroeconomic indicators.

          In terms of establishing support for the lending channel, however, such correlations

 are inconclusive, because although they are consistent with the implicationsof conditions Cl

 and C2, they also admit other interpretations. For example, it may be that the correlations


                                                31
are driven by changes in the demand for bank loans rather than the supply of bank loans (as

required by Cl). That is, bank loans and inventories might move together because banks

always stand willing to lend and firms finance desired changes in level of inventories with

bank loans. And even if the evidence does in part reflect the impact of variations in loan

supply, it does not establish that these variations can be attributed to changes in monetary

policy, as required by C2.
       We thus start by reviewing the data that bears more directly on Cl -- the question of

whether shifts in loan supply matter. In fact, there is considerable evidence that disruptions

in the banking sector and the attendant shifts in bank loan supply are sometimes responsible

for significant fluctuations in economic activity. One of the most influential of these studies

is Bernanke's (1983) examination of the Great Depression in the United States. Bemanke

examines the extent to which the money view of monetary policy transmission can account

for the decline in U.S. output between 1930 and 1933. He finds that while a standard

monetary model would predict a large drop in output, a significant amount of the decline

cannot be explained by appealing purely to monetary influences. Moreover, not only can

much of the unexplained decline be rationalized by recognizing the disruptive effects of bank

panics, but these panics (and associated financial crises) also seem capable of explaining the

persistence of the Depression. The Bernanke interpretation has become part of the

conventional explanation for the depth and persistence of the Depression in the U.S. and is

one of the strongest pieces of evidence supporting the view that shifts in loan supply can be

quite important.




                                              32
       Bernanke, in subsequent work with James (1991) has extended this work to analyze

the role of Depression era banking panics in countries besides the U.S. Studying a sample of

24 countries, Bernanke and James (1991) find that there are large output declines during

periods of banking panics that cannot be explained by standard factors, such as trade effects,

interest rates, fiscal policy, etc. Similar results have been uncovered in studies of different

historical episodes in a number of countries.

       The literature on credit controls also suggests that disruptions of the lending process

can be quite important (see Owens and Schreft (1992)). Perhaps the clearest example is the

1980 Credit Controls initiated by President Carter. Although the six-point credit restraint

program was only in place from March 14 through July 3, it had a remarkable effect on

borrowing and purchasing patterns (see Schreft (1990) for details). While the controls sought

to discourage all types of credit extensions, in Schreft's words, "the consumer credit controls

were largely symbolic and without teeth." However, the impact on bank lending was very

powerful. She reports that bank loans, which had been growing at an annualized rate of

between 15 and 20 percent prior to the controls, dropped to an annual growth rate of only

2.5 percent for the month of March. In April, total bank loans outstanding fell 5 percent (at

an annual rate). The decline in activity was equally sharp. Real GDP contracted at a 9.9

percent annual rate in the second quarter of the year. Once the controls were lifted, loan

growth and GDP growth resumed at a healthy pace.

        Finally, evidence from structural vector autoregressions (VAR's) also supports the

notion that shocks to loan supply have significant real effects. A noteworthy example is

Bernanke (1986). Bernanke proceeds by imposing enough covariance restrictions on the


                                                33
disturbance terms in his equations to allow him to identify a structural shock to the

intermediation process. A representative example of his restrictions is that shocks to

aggregate loans are contemporaneously uncorrelated with shocks to military spending and

money. Thus his identifying assumptions permit a direct investigation of whether Cl holds.

As he notes, a change in monetary policy is one of several candidates for factors that might

disturb the lending process. The resulting instrumental variable estimates suggest that

lending shocks do seem to have a sizable effect on aggregate demand. In a similar vein,

Kuttner (1992) also finds that lending shocks are important for spending.

       Of course, for the lending view to be relevant we must go one step further and

demonstrate that condition C2 also holds, i.e., that monetary policy has the power to shift

loan supply. This observation suggests examining the comovements in the stance of

monetary policy, loans and activity -- which in turn requires one to quantify the stance of

monetary policy. Fortunately, the conclusions do not seem be very sensitive to the use of

any particular indicator of policy. For instance, Bernanke and Blinder (1992) find that

increases   in the Federal funds rate (their measure of the stance of Federal Reserve policy)

lead banks to slowly downsize by shedding loans, and that as loans decline the economy

slows. These findings are reproduced in Figure 3,12




 I2 results seem to be a bit sensitive to the choice of loan series. Bernanke and Blinder look
 at a loan series that captures all types of bank lending. If one instead focuses on lending to
 businesses (e.g., Commercial and Industrial loans), loan volume initially increases following an
 interest rate hike, but then turns around and begins to decline. As we discuss later, Morgan's
 (1992) work suggests that this is largely due to the presence of loan commitments.


                                                34
       Others researchers have also found that loans adjust gradually (but noticeably)

following a shift in policy. For instance, Romer and Romer (1990) report a similar finding

when they date shifts in policy by studying the language in Federal Open Market Committee

directives. Thus, there does seem to be solid evidence that loan volume responds (albeit with

a lag) to changes in the stance of monetary policy.

       The slow adjustment of loans to policy may initially seem to undercut the plausibility

of important effects coming through shifts in loan supply. For example, King (1986) runs a

horse race between loans and monetary aggregates and finds that the latter do a better job of

predicting activity; or said differently, money tends to lead output while loans tend to move

roughly contemporaneously with output. Romer and Romer (1990) find similar results, and

interpret them as cutting against the lending view. And recently, Ramey (1992) has

reconfirmed these findings using a horse race based on a set of error-correction models.13

       However, for a couple of reasons we do not think these timing differences are

particularly damaging for the lending view. First, it is natural to believe that the most

immediate consequence of a slowdown would be an undesired buildup of firms' inventories.

This would lead to a short-run increase in the demand for loans to finance the excess

inventories. Thus even if loan supply is contracting, we may not observe a rapid decline in

loan volume.'4



'3Most of these contests show that M2 is the best monetary aggregate for predicting future output
movements. However, from a theoretical perspective, M2 contains many non-transaction
components and therefore is not the most obvious candidate to use to defend the money view.


'4Diamond (1991) also offers a theoretical model that suggests that the demand for intermediated
credit should increase during a downturn.
                                               35
       A second consideration, emphasized by Bernanke and Blinder, is that the contractual

nature of loan agreements limits the speed with which loan volume can shrink. Recent work

by Morgan (1992) confirms that much of the sluggishness in loan volume is indeed due to

loan commitments. Specifically, Morgan contrasts movements in Commercial and Industrial

loans (C and I loans) made under commitment with movements in C and I loans that are

made without any commitment. In Figure 3, we saw that rising interest rates often are

initially followed by slightly lower unemployment (higher activity); and Morgan finds that

the loans made under commitment largely track these movements in activity. In contrast, he

finds that loans that are made to customers that do not have commitments begin to fall

relatively quickly, responding about as fast and as sharply as monetary aggregates. Thus,

the response of loan supply to movements in monetary policy does seem quite plausible.

       However, even taking the effect of loan commitments into account, it appears that

loan supply responds to monetary policy with some lag. This is important to note if one is

interested in applying the LucaslFuerst style models discussed in section 3.3 to capture the

lending view. As noted earlier, current versions of these models generally predict very

rapid responses of loans to monetary policy: the non-participation constraints implicit in these

models are temporary. Thus, one challenge in applying this class of models in this context

will be to come up with a plausible modification that can rationalize the timing patterns

between shifts in policy and changes in lending and output.

       Unfortunately, the observation that changes in monetary policy are followed by

changes in both loan quantities and economic activity still does not prove that condition C2




                                              36
holds. For example, one way to read these results is that tight monetary policy operates

through standard interest channels to depress economic activity and to reduce the demand for

credit. Consequently, there can be an induced correlation between activity and bank lending

even if there is no lending channel) This identification problem means that although

correlations between policy indicators, bank loans and activity are consistent with the view

that monetary policy works through loan supply, such evidence cannot provide unambiguous

support of the lending view.

       One approach to dealing with this identification problem is proposed by Kashyap,

Stein and Wilcox (1992) (KSW). They consider the relative fluctuations in bank loans and a

leading substitute for bank loans: commercial paper. The central KSW insight is that

movements in substitutes for bank financing should contain information about the demand for

bank financing. For example, if bank loans are falling while commercial paper issuance is

rising, then KSW infer that bank loan supply has contracted.

       Having made this identifying assumption, KSW propose testing both conditions Cl

and C2. To verify that the central bank can affect loan supply (C2), KSW examine

 movements in the "mix" between bank loans and loan substitutes following changes in the

 stance of monetary policy.'6 Using both the Federal Funds rate and the Romer's policy




 '5However, this alternative explanation has to be stretched to explain Morgan's findings: one
 must argue that the demand for loans from non-committed borrowers falls much faster than the
 demand of the borrowers with commitments.

 '6KSW define their mix variable to be the ratio of bank loans to the sum of bank loans plus
 commercial paper.

                                               37
proxy, KSW find that when the Fed tightens, commercial paper issuance surges while loans

(slowly) decline -- i.e., the move in the mix indicates loan supply had shifted inward.'7 To

study whether the implied shifts in loan supply are important (conditions Cl and C3), they

add their mix variable to a set of structural equations for inventory and fixed investment.

Their tests boil down to checking whether the proxy for loan supply shifts has any additional

explanatory power for investment once other fundamental factors such as the cost of capital

are taken into account.'

       KSW find that the mix does seem to have independent predictive power for

investment, particularly inventory investment. Since swings in inventory investment are

central to business cycles and because conventional interest rate effects have proved difficult

to find for inventories, these results are noteworthy. In other words, the KSW findings

provide some support for the view that monetary policy and financial factors may be

important for inventory movements even though standard security market interest rates do not

have much predictive power for inventories.




'7Miron, Romer and Weil (this volume) find that movements in the CP-loan mix are less clear-
cut in response to earlier historical episodes of tight policy -- e.g., those in the early part of the
century. However, given the very different institutional makeup of the markets in these periods,
it is unclear whether the results are directly comparable to those of KSW. See also Bernanke's
discussion of the Miron et. al. paper.


 'A similar approach could be used to extend the work by Morgan. For instance, with an
 additional assumption that the demand for credit is the same for firms with and without bank
 commitments, the difference between the loans extended to the two sets of firms could be used
 to isolate shifts in loan supply. The gap between the two types of loans could then be used as
 a proxy for loan supply instead of the KSW mix variable.


                                                 38
       Hoshi, Scharistein and Singleton (1991) conduct an analogous set of tests using

aggregate Japanese data. Specifically, they compare the behavior of bank loanswhich were

subject to informal control by the Bank of Japan and loans from insurance companies which

were the main alternative to bank financing. They find that when the Bank of Japan tightens,

the fraction of industrial loans coming from banks drops noticeably -- confirming condition

C2. They also find that in a four variable VAR (which includes interest rates) the mix is a

significant determinant of both fixed investment and finished goods inventories. Thus, the

Japanese and U.S. data give the basic same message.'9

       An alternative way to use information regarding substitutes for bank loans to resolve

the identification problem is to study movements in relative prices rather than relative

quantities. Specifically, changes in loan supply could be identified by checking if the price

of loans increases relative to the price of an alternative such as commercial paper. However,

some care must be taken here since the non-price terms of bank credit (e.g., collateral,

covenants, etc.) may vary systematically over time. In this case, one might expect data such

as the prime rate to be relatively uninformative about the true cost of bank loans, and hence

 less useful in resolving the identification problem.2°

        Perhaps surprisingly, KSW also find evidence supporting both conditions Cl and C2

 using the gap between the prime rate and the commercial paper rate to gauge loan supply:



 '9Arguably, the Japanese evidence is less surprising since the Bank of Japan appears to exert
 some direct control over loan volume in addition to any indirect control that might come from
 changing reserves.


 20See KSW for further discussion on this point.


                                                 39
when the Fed tightens, the prime rate rises relative to the commercial paper rate.

Furthermore, movements in this spread help forecast investment even controlling for the cost

of capital. In contrast, however, Kuttner (1992), using simple VAR-type causality tests,

shows that the spread between the prime rate and the commercial paper rate is a poor

predictor of output (much worse than the KSW quantity-based mix variable, which continues

to perform strongly in the VAR-type tests.)2' Thus, the tests with price-based indicators

lead to qualitatively similar conclusions as the tests using quantity-based indicators, although

the findings with the rate spreads seem to be less robust.

       Overall, we find the existing results based on aggregate data fairly supportive of the

lending view. We see a coherent body of evidence, starting with very simple correlations

and moving through a fairly precise set of tests, that suggests that monetary transmission

operates at least partially through induced shifts in loan supply. However, we also recognize

some important limitations that accompany this type of time series analysis. For instance,

one difficulty is that there are relatively few episodes where monetary policy shifts. In

almost all these cases, the shifts occur near recessions, so that many of the correlations we




21Work by Friedman and Kuttner (1992a,b) and Stock and Watson (1989) suggests that a
different interest rate spread, the difference between commercial paper and treasury bill rates,
is a very reliable predictor of activity. These results might be interpreted as providing some
indirect evidence on the lending view. For instance, if monetary policy does move loan supply
and thus changes firms' financing patterns, then it seems likely that part of the movement in the
bills/paper spread is due to shifts in monetary policy (see Bemanke (1990) and Friedman and
Kuttner (1992b) for details.) However, in terms of the lending view, it is not clear why the
bills/paper spread would perform so much better than the paper/prime spread in different
forecasting contests. This suggests one area for future work will be to combine the information
in different price and quantity indicators to provide a more complete assessment of the lending
view.


                                               40
have discussed also could be uncovered by contrasting behavior during booms and busts.

Since this sort of ambiguity is likely to be very difficult to resolve using only aggregate data,

we think that it is essential to examine other types of evidence.

       4.2 Tests Using Cross-sectional Data

       There are good reasons to believe that studying cross sectional data might be

particularly helpful in this respect. For one, there is added variation that can be exploited in

cross sectional data. More specifically, there are a rich set of cross-firm implications of the

lending view that are masked at the aggregate level. One key example is that not all firms

are likely to be bank dependent, so some of the hypothesized effects implied by the lending

view should occur for some firms but not for others. The combination of more data and

more precise implications of the theory suggest a powerful set of tests using micro data that

can be used to complement the aggregate findings.

       While tests using cross-sectional data do offer considerable promise, they also come

at higher cost because these data require more effort to work with than do aggregate time

series. At this point there has been relatively less work using microdata to specifically

examine the lending view. A couple of notable exceptions are the recent papers by Gertler

and Gilchrist (1992) and Oliner and Rudebusch (1992) that use information from the

Quarterly Financial Reports, a survey of over 7000 manufacturing firms, to contrast the

behavior of small and large firms. Under the assumption that small firms are much more

likely to be bank-dependent than the larger firms, the comparisons bear on the lending view.

       Gertler and Gilchrist (1992) begin by showing that bank loans to small firms decline

significantly when the Fed raises interest rates, while large firms' aggregate external


                                               41
financing actually rises. One explanation for the Gertler and Gilchrist findings might be that

some large firms issue commercial paper to finance trade credit that they want to offer to

their smaller customers, who have been cut off from bank financing. In this case,

commercial paper and bank loans are aggregate substitutes (as assumed by KSW) even

though only certain firms can directly issue commercial paper.

       Moreover, Gertler and Gilchrist find that the inventory investment of small firms is

much more sensitive to monetary policy shocks than that of large firms. This finding is

compatible with the KSW aggregate evidence on inventories, and we return to it shortly

when we attempt to calibrate the magnitude of the lending channel. Oliner and Rudebusch

(1992) conduct a similar investigation using imputed investment data for small and large

manufacturing firms. They too find that small firms' investment is more sensitive to

movements in a proxy for the stance of the monetary policy.

       While this line of work produces conclusions that fit with the cross-sectional

implications of the lending view, the relatively coarse level of disaggregation leaves some

other possibilities open. For example, it might simply be that for technological reasons,

small firms are more recession-sensitive than large firms. This sort of objection can be



KSW do not commit to any particular microeconomic story to rationalize their assumption of
the substitutability of commercial paper and bank loans. However as long as the substitution of
trade credit for bank loans is imperfect, the KSW story makes sense. In other words, the KSW
story in no way hinges on the existence of marginal firms that shift between borrowing through
banks or borrowing through the commercial paper market.



"See, however, Gertler and Hubbard (1989) who take issue with the view that small firms are
more recession-sensitive than large firms.


                                               42
partially addressed by using firm-level data.

       Several recent papers can be interpreted as firm-level tests of the lending view. In

each case, the authors first identify a set of liquidity-constrained firms and then investigate

whether these liquidity constraints become more binding in the wake of a shift in monetary

policy. To the extent that the liquidity constrained firms are to some degree bank-dependent,

this evidence bears on the lending view.

       Hoshi, Scharfstein and Singleton (1991) (HSS) focus on a set of Japanese firms that

would be susceptible to being cut off from banks during times of tight credit -- firms who are

not part of bank-centered industrial groups. HSS investigate whether these 'independentTM

firms' fixed investment becomes more sensitive to cash flow when monetary policy tightens.

Until recently in Japan, assessing the stance of monetary policy was relatively

straightforward because the Bank of Japan (BOJ) explicitly made suggestions to banks about

how much lending to undertake. When the BOJ wanted to tighten it would urge banks to

curtail their lending. And indeed, HSS find that when monetary policy is tight, liquidity is

 more important for independent firms' investment than in normal times.

        Gertler and Hubbard (1989) conduct a similar study with U.S. data. They build on

 the Fazzari, Hubbard and Petersen (1988) result that the fixed investment of firms that do not

 pay dividends is much more sensitive to cash flow and liquidity, than is the fixed investment

 of firms that have high dividend payout ratios. Accepting the FHP interpretation that this is

 evidence of liquidity constraints, it is possible to ask whether such constraints become more

 severe during periods of tight money.




                                                43
       Studying the FHP sample from 1970 to 1984, Gertler and Hubbard find that the

investment of the low-payout firms does indeed become more sensitive to cash-flow during

the 1974/75 and 1981/82 recessions. Given that tight monetary policy was a factor in both

recessions (see Romer and Romer), these findings lend further support to the lending view.

However, as Gertler and Hubbard note, the following alternative interpretation is also

possible. If information about some borrowers is incomplete, they may be more easily able

to borrow by posting collateral. During a recession, it may be that collateral values fall. In

this case, even if bank loan supply does not shift inward, the decrease in collateral values

would lead banks to lend less in equilibrium. Discriminating between this "coliateral shock

explanation for the Gertler and Hubbard findings and the lending view is not easy. Both

explanations stress the importance of a cutoff in bank lending as a contributing factor to the

decline in investment, and differ only with respect to the source of this cutoff.

       Kashyap, Lamont and Stein (1992) (KLS) conduct a similar set of tests using firm-

level inventory data. They focus on the differences between publicly-traded companies that

do and do not have bond ratings. The non-rated companies are typically much smaller than

the rated companies and are likely bank dependent. Because of the myriad of evidence

suggesting that Federal Reserve policy was restrictive prior to 1982, KLS begin their study

with an examination of the 1982 recession. They find that during this episode, the inventory

movements of the non-rated companies were much more dependent on their own cash

holdings than were the inventory movements of the rated companies. (In fact, there is no

significant liquidity effect for the rated companies.)




                                               44
       In contrast, KLS find that during subsequent periods there is little relation between

cash holdings and inventory movements for the non-rated companies. For instance, during

1985 and 1986, when KLS argue that monetary policy was particularly loose, the correlation

between inventory investment and cash holdings is negative and completely insignificant.

These findings further support the KSW suggestion that financial factors beyond those

captured by open market interest rate play an important role in inventory movements during

recessions.

       As with the Gertler and Hubbard results, however, the KLS finding might also be

interpreted as supporting the importance of collateral shocks rather than the lending view.

KLS present some additional tests that try to distinguish between the two explanations. KLS

reason that if the collateral deterioration story is correct, then the cutoff in bank lending

ought to be more pronounced for firms that have high debt levels (i.e., firms that have

limited amounts of uncommitted collateral available). However, KLS find no systematic

relation between debt levels (relative to total assets) and the sensitivity of inventory

investment to cash holdings.

        Overall, we read the firm-level evidence as echoing the story that emerges from both

the aggregate data and the partially disaggregated QFR data. Several different studies yield

the same basic conclusion: during periods when monetary policy is tight, it appears that

bank-dependent firms' spending becomes more closely tied to the availability of internal

finance.

        43 quantifying the Impact of the Lending Channel

        While we are quite confident in asserting that the lending channel exists, we are much


                                                45
less certain about its overall quantitative significance. The ideal way to assess the strength of

the lending channel would be to estimate a fully-specified structural model that captures both

the lending and money channels and then simulate the impact of tightening of monetary

policy. Unfortunately, at this point no such model exists. As a second best alternative, we

discuss three imperfect but quite different approaches to calibrating the importance of the

lending channel.

       One set of estimates can be inferred from the work by Kashyap, Stein and Wilcox.

Recall that they use a set of standard structural models for inventory and fixed investment --

that already control for open market interest rates and output -- and test whether their

financing mix variable provides any additional explanatory power. The rough idea is that the

mix captures that part of overall financing costs attributable to the lending channel. KSW

find that the coefficients on this the mix are sufficiently big that a shock similar to the one

that followed the Fed's October 1979 shift in policy results in an extra 1 percent decline in

GNP. As noted earlier, most of this extra adjustment takes place in inventories. It is also

worth noting that by construction this estimate ignores any possible effects that might operate

through other channels such as consumers' expenditures on durables.

       An alternative strategy would be to begin with the Gertler-Gilchrist comparison of the

inventory behavior of small and large manufacturing firms. Using a VAR framework, they

find that there is a sharp difference in the way the two types of firms respond to a Romer

date impulse: eight quarters after a Romer date, large firm inventories are usually up by five

percent, while small firm inventories are typically down by about 11 percent. The cumulative

impact of the small firms is significant -- they bring the aggregate inventory accumulation


                                               46
down from five percent to roughly two percent.

       Making the (perhaps strong) assumption that the large-small differential is entirely

attributable to the lending channel, this result suggests that the lending channel causes

manufacturing inventories to be three percent lower than they otherwise would be. This

implies a fairly modest effect in terms of GNP. For example, considering again to the

October 1979 shift in Fed policy, according to the QFR the stock of manufacturing

inventories was roughly 250 billion as of the fourth quarter of 1979. A three percent decline

in this stock, therefore represents about .30 percent drop in GNP. According to Blinder and

Maccini (p. 76) manufacturing firms held an average of about 60 percent of total

manufacturing and trade inventories (between 1959 and 1986). So, if one further assumes

that the inventory behavior of the non-manufacturing firms is similar to that of the

manufacturing firms, then the total economy-wide inventory effect would be about .5 percent

of GNP (.5 = .301.60). Thus, the size of the effect as calibrated from the Gertler-Gilchrist

data is roughly consistent with the effect reported by KSW using aggregate data.

       Finally, to take a different tack, one might ask how much of the potency of monetary

policy can be confidently ascribed to the money view of transmission. In other words, one

might try to calibrate the magnitude of the lending view by working backwards: make an

estimate of the importance monetary policy, decide how much of this can be traced to open

market interest rate effects, and then impute any remaining effects to the lending channel.

Of course this approach puts the "burden of proof" squarely on the money view, and

therefore highlights the choices that one implicitly must make in calibrating the size of these




                                              47
effects.

       This example is particularly provocative because interest rate effects are notoriously

hard to find fçr many categories of investment spending. For instance, Blinder and Maccim,

in surveying the literature on inventories conclude (p. 82) that empirical research geney

fails to uncover any influence of real interest rates on inventory investment, especially for

finished goods in manufacturing." Given the large role of inventories in cyclical fluctuations

this should force a diehard believer in the money view to ask whether it is plausible to

maintain that monetary policy has no direct effect on inventories.

       Similarly, direct attempts to estimate the relationship between real interest rates and

aggregate output (usually under the guise of estimating the slope of the IS curve) often find

that there is little relationship between the two. For instance, Hirtle and Kelleher (1990)

survey the literature on the interest sensitivity of the economy (and how it might have

changed because of financial market deregulation) and note that there is little consensus on

whether real interest rates matter much. For instance, their own results suggest that there is

no significant relationship between (short-term) real interest rates and output. This sort of

finding suggests that one could take an extreme stand and claim that all of monetary policy's

potency comes via a lending channel! While we think this claim is too strong, we think it is

equally disingenuous to tilt a calculation so that the money channel by default gets the bulk

of any unexplained variation.

       On the whole, the literature on the lending channel thus far does not very precisely

pin down the quantitative importance of the effects. Some of this problem arises because




                                               48
there is still no widely accepted theoretical model that both satisfactorily captures all the

important potential channels and can be estimated. Not surprisingly the result is that one can

come up with a wide range of estimates. The KSW and Gertler-Gilchrist numbers suggest a

meaningful though moderate impact, while the "name the residual strategy" -- claiming all of

the non-interest rate effects for the lending channel — suggests a potentially huge impact.

More careful attempts to narrow the range are likely to be one of the leading topics of work

in this area.

        5. Conclusions

        This paper was designed to accomplish three goals. First, we wanted to clarify what

is meant by the lending view of monetary policy transmission. Ultimately, the lending view

boils down to the two part assertion that 1) open market operations affect the supply of bank

loans; and 2) that these loan supply shifts in turn affect both the magnitude of aggregate

output and its composition. The essential ingredient that underlies this mechanism is the

imperfect substitutability of bank loans and publicly issued bonds, both as corporate liabilities

     as bank assets.

        In contrast, quantity rationing in the loan market is not necessary for there to be a

meaningful lending channel, although in practice such rationing is likely to be present to

some degree. Thus, as we have defined things, the lending view of monetary policy

transmission is a subset of the larger literature that connects financial market imperfections

and the real economy. Of course, even if our narrow version of the lending channel does

 not apply, there may be other ways in which financial market imperfections shape the

 consequences of monetary policy (e.g., Bernanke and Gertler (1989).


                                                 49
       Similarly, the lending view need not imply that the more traditional money channel of

policy transmission is inoperative; clearly the two channels can coexist and can be

complementary to each other. Nonetheless, the distinction between the two is an important

one -- as we have stressed, the existence of a lending channel can influence both the potency

and the distributional consequences of monetary policy, as well as the information content of

a variety of indicators that policymakers look to.

       A second goal of the paper was to outline the microfoundations that are needed to

rationalize the existence of the lending channel. The bottom line here is that while the large

existing literature on financial contracting and intermediation already provides much of what

is needed, there remain some thorny problems that have thus far received little formal

modelling attention. One particular area that would appear to require further work is that

corresponding to condition (C2) -- the link between Fed-induced shocks to reserves and the

aggregate supply of intermediated loans.

       Our final goal was to collect the empirical evidence the bears on the lending view. In

our view, the evidence for the existence of a lending channel is already quite strong — there

are a number of papers that document facts that would be very difficult to explain under the

pure money view of monetary policy transmission. Importantly, this evidence comes from a

number of sources, uses both aggregate and cross-sectional data, and for the most part

produces results that complement each other.

       While there is surely more work to be done in terms of building a definitive case for

the existence of the lending channel, a perhaps more important (and difficult) task for future

research is to provide a relatively precise assessment of its quantitative importance. At this


                                               50
point, we remain quite uncertain about the exact magnitude of the lending channel impacts

across a variety of sectors. Learning more about these magnitudes will be of vital

importance if this line of research is ever to provide anything more than qualitative help to

policymakers.




                                               51
References

Bernanke, Ben S. 1983. "Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of

      the Great Depression," American Economic Review, 73: 257-276.

Bernanke, Ben S. 1986. "Alternative Explanations of the Money-Income Correlation,"

      Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 25, pp. 49-100.

Bernanke, Ben S. 1990. "On the Predictive Power of Interest Rates and Interest Rate

      Spreads," New England Economic Review, November-December, pp. 51-68.

Bernanke, Ben S., and Alan S. Blinder 1988. NCredit, Money, and Aggregate Demand."

       American Economic Review. Papers and Proceedings 78: 435-39.

___________________________ 1992. "The Federal Funds Rate and the Channels of

       Monetary Transmission." American Economic Review, 82: 901-921.

Bernanke, Ben S. and Mark Gertler 1987. "Banking and Macroeconomic Equilibrium," in

       William A Barneti and Kenneth J. Singleton eds., New Approaches to Monetary

       Economics. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, pp. 89-111.

_____________________________ 1989. "Agency Costs, Net Worth and Business

       Fluctuations", American Economic Review, March, pp. 14-31.

Bernanke, Ben S. and Harold James 1991. "The Gold Standard, Deflation and Financial

       Crises in the Great Depression: An International Comparison," in R. Glenn Hubbard

       editor, Financial Markets and Financial Crises. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago

       Press, pp. 33-68.
Bernanke, Ben S. and Cara S. Lown 1991. "The Credit Crunch," Brookings Papers on

       Economic Activity 2, Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution, pp. 205-239.


                                            52
Blinder, Alan S. and Louis J. Maccini 1991. "Taking Stock: A Critical Assessment of

      Recent Research on Inventories," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 5(1), Pp. 73-96.

Blinder, Alan S. and Joseph E. Stiglitz 1983. "Money, Credit Constraints and Economic

      Activity," American Economic Review. Papers and Proceedings 73: 297-302.

Boyd, John and Edward Prescott 1986. NFinancjaj Intermediary-Coalitions," Journal of

       Economic Theory, April, 221-232.

Brainard, William C. 1964. "Financial Intermediaries and a Theory of Monetary Control,"

       Yale Economic Essays, 4, pp. 431-82.

Brunner, Karl and Allan H. Meltzer. 1964. "The Place of Financial Intermediaries in the

       Transmission of Monetary Policy," American Economic Review, 53, Pp. 372-382.

Christiano, Lawrence and Martin Eichenbaum 1992. "Liquidity Effects and the Monetary

       Transmission Mechanism," American Economic Review. Papers and Proceedings 92:

       346-353.

Cook, Timothy Q. and Timothy D. Rowe 1986. Instruments of the Money Market, sixth
       edition. Richmond, VA: Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.

Diamond, Douglas 1984. "Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring," Review of

       Economic Studies, pp. 393-414.

Diamond, Douglas 1991. "Monitoring and Reputation: The Choice Between Bank Loans

       and Directly Placed Debt," Journal of Political Economy, 99(4), pp. 689-721.

Diamond, Douglas and Philip Dybvig 1983. "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance and Liquidity,"

       Journal of Political Economy, 9 1(3), Pp. 401-419.




                                              53
Fama, Eugene F. 1985. "What's Different About Banks," Journal of Monetary Economics,

       15: 29-39.

Fama, Eugene F. 1990. "Contracting Costs and Financing Decisions," Journal of Business,

      63:1 (pt2.), pp. S71-S91.
Fazzari, Stephen, R. Glenn Hubbard and Bruce Petersen 1988. "Financing Constraints and

      Corporate Investment," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, Washington, DC:

      The Brookings Institution, pp. 141-195.

Friedman, Benjamin and Kenneth Kuttner 1992a. "Money, Income, Prices and Interest

       Rates," American Economic Review, June, pp. 472-492.

Friedman, Benjamin and Kenneth Kuttner 1992b. "Why Does the Paper-Bill Spread Predict

       Real Economic Activity?," in James H. Stock and Mark W. Watson eds. New

       Research on Business Cycle Indicators and Forecasting. Chicago, IL: University of

       Chicago Press (forthcoming).

Friedman, Milton and Anna Schwartz 1963. A Monetary History of the United States. 1867-

       J.Q.   Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Fuerst, Timothy S. 1992a. "Liquidity, Loanable Funds and Real Activity," Journal of

       Monetary Economics, 29, pp. 3-24.

Fuerst, Timothy S. 1992b. "The Availability Doctrine," mimeo, Kellogg School of

       Management, Northwestern University.

Gertler, Mark 1988. "Financial Structure and Aggregate Economic Activity," Journal of

       Money Credit and Banking, 20 part 2, August, pp. 559-88.




                                             54
Gertler, Mark and Simon Gilchrist 1992. "Monetary Policy, Business Cycles and the

      Behavior of Small Manufacturing Firms," National Bureau of Economic Research

      Working Paper #3892, revised November 1992.

Gertler, Mark and R. Glenn Hubbard 1989. "Financial Factors in Business Fluctuations," in

       Financial Market Volatility: Causes. Consequences. and Policy Recommendations.

       Kansas City, MO: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.

Gorton, Gary and George Pennacchi 1990. "Financial Innovation and The Provision of

       Liquidity Services," mimeo, \Vharton School, University of Pennsylvania.

Greenwald, Bruce and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1992. "Towards a Reformulation of Monetary

       Theory: Competitive Banking," NBER Working Paper No. 4117.

Grossman, Sanford and Laurence Weiss 1983. "A Transactions-Based Model of the

       Monetary Transmission Mechanism," American Economic Review, pp. 871-880.

Hirtle, Beverly and Jeanette Kelleher 1990. "Financial Market Evolution and the Interest

       Sensitivity of Output," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Ouarterly Review,

       Summer, pp. 56-70.

Hoshi, Takeo, Anil Kashyap, and David Scharfstein 1991. "Corporate Structure, Liquidity

       and Investment: Evidence from Japanese Industrial Groups," Ouarterlv Journal of

       Economics, 106, pp. 33-60.

Hoshi, Takeo, and David Scharfstein and Kenneth Singleton 1991. "Japanese Corporate

       Investment and Bank of Japan Guidance of Commercial Bank Lending," mimeo, MIT

       Sloan School of Management.




                                             55
Jaffee, Dwight and Thomas Russell 1976. "Imperfect Information and Credit Rationing,"

      Ouarterly Journal of Economics, 90, pp. 651-666.

James, Christopher 1987. "Some Evidence on the Uniqueness of Bank Loans," Journal of

       Financial Economics, 19, pp. 217-326.

Kashyap, Anil K, Jeremy C. Stein and David W. Wilcox 1992. "Monetary Policy and

       Credit Conditions: Evidence from the Composition of External Finance," American

       Economic Review, forthcoming.

Kashyap, Anil K, Owen Lamont and Jeremy C. Stein 1992. "Credit Conditions and the

       Cyclical Behavior of Inventories: A Case Study of the 198 1-82 Recession," mimeo,

       MIT Sloan School of Management.

King, Stephen R. 1986. 'Monetary Transmission: Through Bank Loans or Bank

       Liabilities?" Journal of Money. Credit and Banking 18: 290-303.

Kuttner, Kenneth 1992. "Monetary Policy and External Finance: The Implications of Short-

       Term Debt Flows," mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.

Lucas, Deborah J. and Robert L. MacDonald 1992. "Bank Financing and Investment

       Decisions with Asymmetric Information About Loan Quality," RAND Journal of

       Economics, 23-1, pp. 86-105.

Lucas, Robert E. Jr. 1990. "Liquidity and Interest Rates," Journal of Economic Theory,

       April, pp. 237-264.
Lummer, Scott L. and John J. McConnell 1989. "Further Evidence on the Bank Lending

       Process and Capital Market Response to Bank Loan Agreements," Journal of

       Financial Economics, 25(1) pp. 99-122.


                                               56
Miron, Jeff, Christina Romer, and David Weil. "Historial Perspectives on the Monetary

      Transmission Mechanism," this volume.

Modigliani, Franco 1963. "The Monetary Mechanism and Its Interaction With Real

      Phenomena," Review of Economics and Statistics, 45(1), pp. 79-107.

Morgan, Donald P. 1992. "Monetary Policy and Loan Commitments," work in progress.

      Kansas City, MO: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.

Myers, Stewart and Nicholas Majiuf 1984. "Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions

       When Firms Have Information That Investors Do Not Have," Journal of Financial

       Economics, 13, pp. 187-221.

Oliner, Stephen and Glenn Rudebusch 1992. "The Transmission of Monetary Policy:

       Evidence from the Mix of External Debt and the Importance of Internal Finance,"

       mimeo, Federal Reserve Board.

Owens, Raymond E. and Stacey Schreft 1992 "Identifying Credit Crunches," mimeo, Federal

       Reserve Bank of Richmond.

Petersen, Mitchell and Raghuram G. Rajan 1992. "The Benefits of Firm-Creditor

       Relationships: A Study of Small Business Financing," mimeo, Graduate School of

       Business, University of Chicago.

Rajan, Raghuram 1992. "Insiders and Outsiders: The Choice Between Relationship and

       Arm's Length Debt", Journal of Finance, 47, pp. 1367-1400.

Rarney, Valerie. 1992. "How Important is the Credit Channel of Monetary Transmission,"

       mimeo, University of California, San Diego.




                                            57
Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 1990. "New Evidence on the Monetary

      Transmission Mechanism." Brookins Papers on Economic Activity: 1990:1.

      Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution, pp. 149-213.

Roosa, Robert V. 1951. "Interest Rates and the Central Bank," in Money. Trade and

      Economic Growth: Essays in Honor of John H. Williams. New York, NY:

      Macmillan.

Rotemberg, Julio 1984. "A Monetary Equilibrium Model with Transactions Costs," Journal

      of Political Economy, February, pp. 40-58.

Schreft, Stacey 1990. "Credit Controls: 1980," Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond

      Economic Review, 76(6), pp. 25-55.

Sharpe, Steve 1990. "Asymmetric Information, Bank Lending and Implicit Contracts: A

      Stylized Model of Customer Relationships," Journal of Finance, 45, 1069-1087.

Shuska, Marie E., Myron B. Slovin and John A. Polonchek 1992. "The Value of Bank

      Durability: Borrowers as Bank Stakeholders," Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Stiglitz, Joseph and Andrew Weiss 1981. "Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect

      Information," American Economic Review, 71(2), pp. 393-410.

Stigum, Marcia 1990. The Money Market, Dow Jones Irwin: Homewood.

Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson 1989. "New Indices of Coincident and Leading

      Economic Indicators," in NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 4, pp. 351-394.

Tobin, James and William Brainard 1963. "Financial Intermediaries and the Effectiveness of

      Monetary Control," American Economic Review, 53, pp. 383-400.




                                           58
U.S. Congress. 1952. Monetary Policy and the Management of Public Debt: Their Role in

      Achieving Price Stability and High-Level Employment. Joint Committee on the

      Economic Report, 82 Congress, 2nd Session, Washington: Government Printing

      Office.




                                          59
                                                                  Table I

                                                     Bank and Non-Bank Sources of Debt
                                                 for Manufacturing Corporations, 1973, 1991



                           1973:4                                                  1991:4
                           Total         Large          Medium        Small        Total        Large         Medium       Small

Bank Debt/
Total Debt

Short-term                 78.8%         64.9%          93.1%         84.0%        44.9%        22.8%         77.0%         82.9%
                           24.6%         17.1%          36.1%         43.3%        31.2%        21.1%         51.7%         59.3%
Long-term                                                                                                                   65.5%
Total                      34.4%         23.4%          49.8%         55.3%        33.0%        21.3%         54.9%


Commercial Paper as % of

                         12.7%           26.1%           2.1%          1.7%         NA          62.8%          6.9%         NA
Short-term Debt
Non-Bank Short-term Debt 59.7%           74.3%          31.0%         10.4%         NA          81.3%         30.1%         NA
Total Debt                2.3%            3.4%           0.5%          0.5%         NA           7.5%          0.9%         NA
                          3.5%            4.5%           1.0%           1.1%        NA           9.6%          1.9%         NA
Total Nonbank Debt



Source: Quarterly Financial Report
                                                                                                                              above $1
In 1991:4, Small was under $25 million (20.6% of total mfg. assets), Medium was $25 million-$1 billion (7.9%), and Large was
billion in assets (71.4%).
                                                                                                                      million (66.9%).
In 1973:4, Small was under $5 million (10.4% of total), Medium was $5-250 million (22.7%) and L.arge was above $250
                                      Table 2


                          Median Securities-to-Assets Ratios.
                         for Banks in Different Size Classes.
                                     1976- 1990



                   LarEe Banks                  Medium Banks         Small Bank,;
                   (Largest 1 %)                (75-99 percentile)   (betow 75%)


76                      8.l%                         26.5%               :7.2%
78                      17.4%                        23.7%               24.0%
'80                     17.2%                        25.3%               26.4%
'82                     15.7%                        24.8%               27.8%
'84                     12.4%                        23.5%               27.6%
'86                     [5.2%                        22.3%                26.5%
'88                     15.0%                        21.8%                28.5%
'90                     15.1%                        22.3%                28.9%




Source: Call Reports
                                 Figure 1
                   Composition of Credit
                         Nonfinancial Corporations
      800

      700-

(1'



o0 500                                 4
I.-
Co
0)
0
      300-
0
      200

      100•

        0—               I   I               I            I   I   I
             777879808182838485868788899091
                                                     I




       j Bank Non-Mtg.           Finance Co. Loans       Commercial Paper
                               Figure 2
C&I Loans and NIPA Nonfarm Inventories
                    Changes, BiLlions of 1987 DolLars
       80
               '4




 Cl)



 0)




       —80 .                                  1 ti I I 1 I I I I I I I I I I
               7475767778798081 82838485868788899091
                        C&l Loans         NIPA Inventories]
              Figure 3
           to increase in funds rate
ResponsesEstimated 59:12 - 90:12




                    Months

  Unemp.    Securities       Loans   Deposits
