                   NIBER WORKiNG PAPER SERIES




                        SAVING, GROWTH.
                       AND AGING IN TAIWAN




                            Angus S. Deaton

                           Christina H. Paxson




                         Working paper No. 4330




          NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                          April 1993




Prepared for the NBER Conference on Aging, Caned Bay, U.S. Virgin
Islands, May 7-10, 1992. This paper is pad of NBER's research program in
Aging. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                             NI3ER Working Paper #4330
                                             April 1993

                             SAVING, GROWflJ,
                            AND AGING IN TAIWAN

                                ABSTRACT

    This paper examines issues of household saving, growth, and aging in
Taiwan. The Taiwanese patterns of high income growth, declines in fertility,
and increases in life expectancy all have implications for life-cycle saving. We
use data from fifteen consecutive household income and expenditure surveys,
from 1976 to 1990, to examine whether observed profiles of consumption and
saving are consistent with life-cycle theory. The patterns of consumption and
saving across households of different ages and cohorts appear to be broadly
consistent with a life-cycle model. However, the data also indicate that
household consumption tracks income closely, and this evidence casts doubt on
simple life-cycle theory.

Angus Deaton                                Christina H. Paxson
Woodrow Wilson School                       Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University                        Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544                         Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
 0. Introduction
 This paper examines issues of life-cycle saving, growth and aging in
 Taiwan. We are mainly concerned with standard issues of life-cycle
 saving, and their implications for the living standards of the elderly. We
 investigate whether saving appears to be motivated by life-cycle factors,
 how income growth has affected the profiles of income, consumption
 and saving, and how changes in the demographic structure of Taiwan
 have influenced saving behavior. We use data from fifteen consecutive
 household income and expenditure surveys, from 1976 through 1990.
Although there is no panel element to these data, the large number of
households surveyed (approximately 14,000 per year) and the large
number of cross-sections allows us to track cohorts of people through
time, and to observe the evolution of their levels of income, consump-
tion and saving.
   Taiwan provides an excellent laboratory in which to study the
determinants of household saving. First, as Table 1 shows, the last four
decades have seen both very rapid growth and very high saving rates.
The annual growth of GNP per capita averaged 4.3% in the 1950's,
7.0% in the 1970's and 6.7% in the 1980's, and although the oil price
shocks of the early 1970's and 1980's were associated with periods of
relatively slow growth, there is no evidence that per capita growth rates
are beginning to slow. Indeed, growth rates in the latter half of the
1980's exceeded any in the previous three decades. The high saving
rates are also documented in Table 1. The National Accounts data show
that gross national saving as a fraction of GNP has increased over the
past three decades, from an average of 18.7% between 1961 and 1965,
to over 32% in the years between 1976 and 1990. Household saving
represents a large fraction of national saving and the national accounts


                                    1
data show that roughly 50% of national saving is done by households,
even if we exclude the savings of private corporations. What is more,
the household survey data that we use yield savings figures that are of
comparable magnitude to those in the national accounts. This situation
stands in sharp contrast to that in many developing countries, where
survey data yield savings estimates that are much lower than those in
the national accounts.
   The second feature of Taiwan that is relevant to life-cycle saving is
its rapid transition over the last several decades from high to low
population growth, see again Table 1. In the 1950's, Taiwan's rate of
population growth averaged 4.13% per year, reflecting the influx of
immigrants from mainland China and then a post-war baby boom. The
rate declined slowly through the early and middle 1960's, and fell
sharply in the late 1960's and early 1970's. The overall decline in the
rate of population growth masks two offsetting factors, both of which
are important to our topic. Life expectancy has increased and there has
been a sharp drop in fertility. In 1961, a sixty-year-old male had a life
expectation of 13.92 years. By 1990, this expectation had increased to
17.93 years, Republic of China (1991). For females, comparable
numbers are 17.85 and 20.51 years. The decline in population growth
rates despite these increases reflect the behavior of fertility, which
began to fall in the late 1960's. The Total Fertility Rate fell from 6.1
in 1958 to 1.9 in 1985. An important implication of this decline is that
Taiwanese who are currently young will, when old, have far fewer adult
children to provide potential support than do those who are old now.
In fact, the fraction of the elderly who live with their children is already
beginning to decline (see Lo, 1987), although this may be due more to
an increase in wealth that makes independent living possible, rather than


                                     2
a decline in the number of children who can potentially provide care.
   High growth, declining fertility, and increasing life expectancy all
have consequences for saving that are predictable by standard life-cycle
theory, and it is these predictions that we examine in this paper. We
first investigate whether the observed patterns in consumption and
saving across different households can be fit into the life-cycle story. In
particular, we examine the basic implication of a life-cycle model that
savings should (at least eventually) decline with age. We also examine
cohort effects in consumption and in saving. Those who are currently
young in Taiwan have life-time earnings that are many times larger than
those of their parents and grandparents, and we test whether their
consumption profiles are shifted in the appropriate way. We also look
for the increased saving rates among the younger cohorts that might be
expected in the face of rising life expectancy and falling numbers of
children. We find reasonable conformity been the Taiwanese facts and
the life-cycle theory; it is certainly possible to interpret the broad
features of the data in life-cycle terms.
   We also look at the familiar implications of the life-cycle model for
the relationship between savings and productivity growth. High income
growth across cohorts should yield high national savings rates, because
younger savers have a much higher lifetime wealth level than do older
dissavers, a mechanism that links growth to saving at the aggregate, but
not at the individual level. We find strong evidence of a link between
growth and saving at the individual level, something that is not
predicted by the theory. We also run a battery of standard excess
sensitivity tests, which do not provide any evidence against the life-
cycle story. Even so, we find a very marked coherence between the age
profiles of consumption and income for different cohorts, a coherence


                                    3
that is consistent with the life-cycle, but strongly suggests a more direct
link between consumption and income. We find it hard to rationalize
such a relationship in the Taiwanese context, so that the life-cycle
model remains perhaps the most satisfactory account of our evidence.


1. The Survey Data
The data used in this paper come from a time series of household
surveys, the Personal Income Distribution Surveys, collected in the
Taiwan area of the Republic of China (ROC), or Taiwan for short, in
the fifteen calendar years 1976 through 1990. In 1976 and 1977, the
sample sizes are a little over 9,000 households, but from 1978 there are
over 14,000 households in each survey. The number of persons covered
varies from around 50,000 in the first two years to around 75,000 later.
New samples are drawn each year, so that it is not possible to track
individual households over time; instead, we shall track individual age
cohorts through the successive surveys.
   The survey design is described in Republic of China (1989). For
income and consumption, data are collected both from interviews and
from diaries. At the single interview, questions are asked about major
items of income and expenditure in the past year, while the diaries,
maintained throughout the year and regularly inspected by field workers,
keep track of all items of income and expenditure. Only a "small
number of households" keep the diaries; these households are also
interviewed, and the results of comparing the two methods are "used to
check and/or correct results of all interviews in the survey." The survey
is a comprehensive one, and collects information on household struct-
ure, on socioeconomic characteristics (including industry, occupation,
and education), on household expenditures in some detail, and on the


                                     4
incomes by source of the household and of each of its members.
Information on assets is also collected, although we make no use of it
in this paper.
   Our impression from the work that we have done and from the
results reported below is that the data are of good quality. One of the
attractions of working with data from a high saving country is the
ability to study saving at the household level. For many developing
countries, it is difficult to find much reported saving in household
survey data, even in those cases where national accounts data indicate
that households as a whole are saving substantial amounts, see for
example Visaria (1982) for several Asian countries, Paxson (1992) for
Thailand, and Deaton (1992) for Côte d'Ivoire. The Taiwanese survey
data do not have this problem, and the high national saving rates are
reflected in the behavior of the individual households. Table I shows
that, according to the national accounts, saving by households has
varied around 20% of household income since 1975, while the figures
from the surveys, although far from identical, are of the same order of
magnitude. Given that saving is the difference between two large
magnitudes, each estimated with error, given that the coverage of the
surveys and the national accounts is different, and given the difficulties
that are typically encountered in reconciling household and national
accounts, we view the correspondence as remarkably close. For
household incomes, which are also shown in Table 1, the survey data
are again close to those from the national accounts, with a maximum
discrepancy of five percent.
   Since we shall be concerned with saving within a life-cycle context,
it is useful to look first at the demographic information in the surveys.
Figures 1 show the age-sex pyramids for each of the survey years; as


                                    5
with all of the summary statistics presented in the paper, numbers are
weighted by the appropriate inflation factors so as to provide estimates
of the underlying population. No inflation factors are available for the
first two years, 1976 and 1977, for which the results are presented in
unweighted form; evidence from the other years suggests that the
unweighted data are unlikely to be misleading.
   Note first that the surveys evidently fail to capture a substantial
number of young males aged between 20 and 25, presumably those in
college or engaged in military service. In the last few years, from 1988
through 1990, a similar phenomenon is beginning to be evident for
young females over a somewhat broader age range. This may again be
related to college, and indeed more than half of college students in
Taiwan are women; it may also reflect employment patterns among
young women. In any case, these people, both male and female, are
'missing' as a result of the survey design, and not because of any
similar feature in the population.
   Another feature of these survey demographics reflects a genuine
peculiarity of the Taiwanese population. In all years, there is an excess
of middle-aged to older men over women in the same age group, see
the sex ratios by age in Figure 2. In the first year, 1976, the number of
males per 100 females is greater than 100 over the range from 40
through 65 years of age, reaching a peak of 140 at age 50. This peak
ages one year per year, and by 1990, there are somewhat less than 140
65 year-old males for each 65 year old female. These numbers are a
consequence of the cohort of predominantly male 'mainlanders' who
came to Taiwan in 1949, and an unusually large fraction of whom have
never married. These people differ in a number of other respects from
the rest of the population, for example, many were soldiers, and a high


                                     6
proportion have government pensions (or pension rights), and so
provide a group whose life-cycle consumption and saving behavior can
be expected to differ from other Taiwanese.
  The changing shapes of the pyramids also shows very clearly the
marked (and remarkable) aging of the population over the fifteen year
period of our sample. Figure 3 shows, for each year, the fractions of the
population older than each age. In 1976, .046 of the population were
over 60; in 1990, the fraction was .092.. The ratio of the elderly to their
surviving children, although still high because of older fertility rates,
will fall rapidly over time. For example, Hermalin, Ofstedal, and Li
(1991) indicate that women aged 61-65 in 1990 had, on average, 5.1
children ever born in their lifetimes. The number of children ever born
is expected to drop to 3.6 for those aged 46-50 in 1990, and to 2.4 for
those aged 3 1-35 in 1990. Although numbers of children ever born is
not the same as children surviving into their parent's old age, the
evidence strongly suggests that many of the current generation ofyoung
adults cannot expect to avail themselves of the traditional Chinese
pattern whereby elderly parents move into their son's home. This idea
is supported by survey evidence from Chang (1987), which indicates
that a growing fraction of currently young Taiwanese women do not
expect to live with their sons when they are old.           Absent state
intervention in the form of social security (and although social security
is being expanded in Taiwan, the coverage and amounts are still very
small), the current generation of young workers has a strong incentive
to save a larger fraction of their incomes than did their parents. One of
our aims in this paper is to see if we can find evidence of such an
increase in life-cycle saving among the young, and whether it can
plausibly be attributed to the effects of the demographic transition.


                                    7
2. Constructing cohorts
For most of the interesting questions about saving and the life-cycle, it
is necessary to track individuals over time, and to observe the changes
in consumption, income, and saving as people age. Although we cannot
track individual households in the data, we can track 'cohorts' of
households, with cohorts defined according to their year of birth. For
each year of data, we average the variables of interest by age of
individuals or age of household head, and then track, not the same
individuals, but the sample from the same cohort one year older in the
next survey. In this way, we can follow cohort means for fifteen years
for each age cohort of households or individuals. We do this both at the
level of the household, with age defined by the age of the head, and at
the level of the person, again using age as the grouping variable. Where
we have individual data, for example on earnings, the (sample
weighted) cohort means of individuals by age provide unbiased
estimates of mean earnings for the underlying population of that age.
For other variables, which can be collected only at the household level,
matters are a good deal less clear. Avenging by the age of the
household head has the inevitable effect of confounding genuine
changes in stable households with changes in both household formation
and in headship. For example, since earnings (eventually) decline with
age, and since older men cease (by definition in these data) to be heads
when they cease to be the main earner, households with older heads will
be an increasingly selected sample of the population, and will therefore
display behavior that increasingly disguises actual patterns of household
change over time. For example, households with older heads will be
those whose head has unusually high earnings compared with others of
his or her cohort, or those who have an unusual amount of wealth that


                                   8
enables the household to survive as an independent unit.           As a
consequence, and if, for argument's sake, savings rates are positively
correlated with earnings, or are positively correlated with wealth
(households who are predisposed to save are typically richer than those
who are not), we may observe that, at high ages, household saving rates
increase with the age of the head even though assets are typically being
run down in old age.
   The alternative, of averaging• over individuals by age, although
minimizing selectivity, is difficult, because so many variables are
reported only at the household level, so that we have to impute
individual consumption or incomes based on those of the household to
which they belong. Old people who live with their children are therefore
attributed some fraction of household income or consumption, an
attribution that is essentially arbitrary when there is no information
about intrahousehold allocation. These problems are not soluble, and
they have to be kept continuously in mind when interpreting the results
presented below.
   Table 2 reports the numbers of households in five selected household
cohorts for each year of the survey data; Table 3 records the same
information for the numbers of people in the 'individual' cohorts. To
save space, we show numbers for only five cohorts, but we have
constructed (and will use) the cohorts at each age, although in some
cases it will be necessary to eliminate the youngest and the oldest
groups. In total, the data allow us to calculate 1,031 head's age/year
pairs for the household data, and 1,161 age/year pairs for the individual
data; only 75 of these are shown in each table. Cohorts are defined by
year of birth, or more conveniently, by age in 1976. Hence, the first
column of Table 2 shows the sample representation of households


                                    9
headed by those born in 1956, who were 20 in 1976, and 34 in 1990.
The   increase in numbers, from 26 households in 1976 to 640
households in 1990, shows not that the cohort of those born in 1956 is
increasing, nor that the sample is incorrectly drawn, but that 34 year
olds are much more likely to be household heads than 20 year olds. For
the older cohorts, the variation in sample size is much less, and it is
these middle years of household headship for which the averages are
likely to be both most accurate, because there are more households in
each average, and because selection problems are less severe.
   Figure 4 shows how the cohort grouping can be used to show both
the life-cycle pattern of family formation and the cohort effects of
falling fertility. The age of the head of the household is plotted on the
horizontal axis, while the vertical axis shows the average number of
children in the household, children here defined according to the official
survey definition, which is 20 years old or younger. The plotted points
are connected when we are following the same cohort through time, but
different cohorts are left unconnected. To avoid complete clutter, we
show only every fifth cohort, so that the first line segment on the left-
hand side of the figure shows the number of children in households
headed by those who were 20 in 1976; by the time these people are 35
in 1990, they are well launched into their child-rearing years, and have
a little under 2 children per household. The second cohort, the 25 year-
olds in 1976, overlap with the first cohort for 10 years, but take us
another five years into the life-cycle, since these people are 40 in the
last 1990 survey. To the extent that these two cohorts and the next one
overlap, the profiles of children by age have similar shapes, with the
maximum number of children attained around age 40, and falling
thereafter, as the oldest leave home, and new children cease to be born.


                                    l0
 However, the falling fertility shows up in the profiles as pronounced
 vertical shifts, or cohort effects, as we move from one cohort to the
 next.
   One way of turning these pictures into numbers is to fit to these
 means a polynomial in age together with a series of cohort dummies,
 one for each date of birth. For Figure 4, we do this only for those older
 than 19 and younger than 61, so as to exclude those cohorts where there
 are few individuals in the means. The estimated cohort effects show
 that, apart from the first five groups, aged 20—24 in 1976, and which we
know to be unreliable both because of the sample design and because
of selectivity, there is an average decline of 0.06 children per year, so
over the 35 year age span, from heads aged 25 to heads aged 60, there
has been a decline in numbers of children per household of 2.3, from
4.71 to 2.44 at the maximum of the profile. Of course, this measure is
neither a measure of the decline in children ever born, nor of children
available to parents in old age, but it nevertheless seems likely that for
those in their mid-thirties now, there will be only half as many sons to
look after them in old-age as there are now for those who are seventy
years old.
   The demographic transition is one remarkable fact about modern
Taiwan; another is its rate of economic growth, and the effects on the
earnings of the different cohorts. Figure 5, which is constructed for
individuals and not for households, shows the cohort earnings patterns
for every fifth cohort, again starting with those who were 20 years old
in 1976. Again we can make out the usual pattern of earnings with age,
but superimposed is very rapid within-cohort growth, at least for some
of the cohorts. For those aged 25 in 1976, real earnings have grown at
the astonishing rate of 12% per year over the fifteen years since. For


                                   Ii
older cohorts, the amount is less, falling with age and eventually
becoming negative for the cohort aged 50 in 1976. The bias of earnings
growth towards the young is plausibly attributable to the much higher
levels of education among young cohorts, and is consistent with
evidence from the United States, where earnings functions frequently
show a positive interaction between education and experience. In the
U.S., much of the growth in earnings among the young is associated
with job changes, and with the greater tendency of young workers to
move from one job to another. The same phenomenon might well hold
true in Taiwan, with young people moving into the new jobs created by
the rapid rate of economic growth.
   Figure 6 shows non-labor income by age and by cohort. In a country
with savings rates as high as those in Taiwan, total income behaves
very differently from earnings, and the figure shows how asset income
and transfers replace earnings with age, so that total income does not
collapse with age nearly as rapidly as does earnings. Lo (1987)
provides more detail on the composition of income of the elderly, and
how it has changed over time.


3. A life-cycle interpretation of consumption and saving
With the demographic and earnings environment described, we turn to
consumption behavior, and the extent to which it fits the standard life-
cycle framework. We are particularly concerned with whether Taiwan's
high saving ratio can be attributed to its high rate of growth through the
traditional life-cycle mechanism, with younger, richer cohorts, being
responsible for the bulk of the saving. We also want to look for traces
of the demographic transition in the behavior of younger cohorts, and
in particular whether they are saving not just large amounts because


                                   12
their earnings are high, but are actually saving at a higher rate than their
predecessors.
   The cohort data are ideally suited for examining these issues. There
are a large number of cohorts, with younger cohorts very much richer
in life-time resources than their parents or grandparents. Even at 10%
per annum real earnings growth, which is less than the 12% average
experienced by the younger cohorts, 25 year olds in Taiwan can expect
real lifetime earnings that are nearly 11 times greater than those of 50
year olds. At the same time, since the data run for fifteen consecutive
years, we observe behavior at the same age for a range of different
cohorts, so that it is possible to separate cohort (wealth) effects from
age (preference) effects. Indeed, as we shall show below, it is even
possible to say something about the effects of common macroeconomic
shocks, as represented by year effects.
   With no income uncertainty, the life cycle model predicts that
consumption is a function of lifetime resources (earnings plus inherited
assets), with the fraction of resources consumed being a function of age,
as dictated by preferences and the life-cycle variation in household size
and composition. We write
                               c = g(a)W                                (1)



where   W is the sum of assets and the discounted present value of
current and expected future labor income, and g(a) is some function of
age a. Taking logs, we have
                           Inc = lng(a)+InW                             (2)


This equation holds at the level of the individual, but given its additive
structure, it can be averaged over all households of the same age (as


                                    13
defined by head's age) in each year, so that the average of the
logarithms of consumption for each age/year combination should be
additively decomposable into a wealth term, which is constant within
cohorts, and an age term. Equation (2) can then be estimated non-
parametrically using the cohort data, by regressing the cohort averages
of the logarithm of consumption against cohort dummies and age
dummies.
   The raw data on total household consumption are plotted in Figure
7 in the same format as the earlier cohort diagrams; the figure shows
the average of consumption, although it is the average of log consump-
tion that will be used in the regressions. (Similar pictures for consump-
tion per head, or consumption per adult equivalent, for various
definitions of the latter, give very similar results.) Figure 7 shows a
remarkable resemblance to Figure 5, for earnings, a resemblance that
will be explored further in the next section. Note again that, while there
is a distinctly visible life-cycle pattern to consumption, rising with age
and then falling, there is also a great deal of within cohort consumption
growth, especially for the younger cohorts. Clearly, old and young
households are not sufficiently altruistically linked for their consumption
to move in lockstep.
   The results can be given an explicit life-cycle interpretation by
estimating equation (2), and the results are given, not in numerical form,
since there are 66 cohort effects and 51 age effects, but graphically in
Figure 8, where cohort effects (age in 1976) and age effects are shown
together. In the left hand ligure, (2) is estimated with age and cohort
dummies only, while in the right hand graph, we show the age and
cohort effects when the (average) numbers of adults and children are
added as additional regressors. (Additional adults markedly increase


                                    14
consumption, additional children have little effect.) As predicted by the
 life-cycle model for a growing economy, the cohort effects decline
steadily from younger to older cohorts; both graphs show that, at the
same age, consumption increases at about 4% per cohort, so that, for
example, the consumption at age 40 of someone born in 1950 is on
average 3.4 times larger than the consumption at age of 40 of someone
born in 1925. As is to be expected, the age effects depend to some
extent on whether or not the household composition variables are
explicitly included in the regressions. In either case, the age profile is
much steeper than is typically seen in the US or even in other LDC's,
flattening out only very gradually with age. In both panels, consumption
falls with age only after age 60, although the decline is less pronounced
in the right hand panel where we control for the numbers of household
members. Note again, however, that the selection effects should make
as very skeptical about conclusions for households with elderly heads.
While steep age-consumption profiles are unusual, they are certainly not
inconsistent with the life-cycle model. In an economy growing as
rapidly as Taiwan, real interest rates are very high, especially in the
large and rapidly developing small business sector, so that there are
strong intertemporal incentives to postpone consumption and for
consumption to grow rapidly over time. Alternatively, it is possible that
Taiwanese are more patient than most other people, or that the Chinese
veneration for the elderly extends to a perceived high marginal utility
of consumption in old age.                                 -



   One  feature of Figure 7 is not accounted for by either the age or
cohort effects in Figure 8. This is the fact that the individual cohort
'tracks' have similar shapes, so that, for example, almost all show a
decline in consumption with age between the fourth and fifth observa-


                                   15
tions. These are clearly caused by the presence of macroeconomic
effects that impinge on all cohorts to a greater or less degree, but which
are located in real time, and which cannot be explained by cohort or age
effects. The obvious extension to equation (2) is to allow for fixed year
effects, so that the consumption equation becomes


                       lflCat   = lng(a)+InW+O,                        (3)


where O is a year fixed effect, and the suffices a, b, and t denote age,
cohort, and time respectively. Note that given age and time, cohort is
determined; indeed we have been measuring b as age in 1976, which is
a —t+ 1976.
   Equation (2) is an implication of the life-cycle model of consumption
when there is no uncertainty, so that cohort wealth levels are never revi-
sed. Once uncertainty is admitted, wealth levels will be revised in res-
ponse to macroeconomic shocks, so that the life-cycle model with un-
certainty provides at least some basis for (3). However, the link between
(3) and the model under uncertainty is not as clean as was the link with
(2) under certainty, since the effects of a common macroeconomic
shock on wealth levels ought to vary with age. While it is possible in
principle to include interaction terms between year and cohort effects,
unrestricted estimation would not be possible even with the current data.
Nevertheless, the year effects are certainly present in the data, and it
seems useful to estimate (3) as an approximation to the more general
 model, if only to ensure that the failure to accommodate the year effects
 does not contaminate the estimates of the age and cohort effects, with
 which the year dummies are strongly correlated.
    The estimation of (3) requires some thought about the relationship


                                     16
between age, cohort, and year dummies. Write C, Y, and A for matrices
of dummy variables of cohort, year, and age dummies; each matrix has
1031 rows, the number of yearlhead's age pairs, while the numbers of
columns are 65 for cohorts (for those aged 11 in 1976 to those aged 75
in 1976), 15 for years, and 51 for ages, from age 25 to age 75. Note
that we have truncated on age of head, eliminating those below 25 to
avoid the 'missing' males below that age group, and above 75 to elimi-
nate the very imprecisely estimated cohort means from households with
very old heads. Of course, there are no heads of households in 1976
who were then 11 years old, but we do include one observation on that
cohort, when they are 25 year-old heads of household in 1990. Equation
(3) can be rewritten in terms of the dummy variable matrices as


                    lnc0,   =t13+Cy÷Aa÷Yiy+e                           (4)

where t is a vector of units, and the vectors a, y, and w are parameters
of age, cohort, and year effects. As usual, one category from each set
of dummies must be excluded, and doing so presents no non-standard
issues of interpretation. However, the dependency between age, cohort,
and year introduces a slightly less standard complication.
   Let      denote the (transpose of the) vector (1,2,3        ,ii). Then,
since cohort is age minus year plus a constant, the matrices of dummy
variables satisfy the exact linear relationship


                        Ca = As -            +                         (5)


where n, no, and     are the numbers of cohorts, ages, and years. To see
that the constant term in (5) equals it,., note that the youngest cohort of


                                    17
people (aged 111 in 1976) will be the youngest age of 25 in the     year.
As a result of the identity expressed by (5), the parameters in (4) are
not identified, even after one category has been dropped from each set
ofdummies.Inparücular,ifthevectornzandqtaxereplacedbye, ti,?,
and   4,, where

                                        f3=P—nic;
                     -                  -                             (6)
                     y=y+ica;
and K is some arbitrary non-zero scalar, then, as is easily checked by
substitution into (4), there is no consequence for the predicted value of
consumption. The way that this works caii readily be seen from the
original cohort-consumption plots in Figure 7. For the first cohort, sup-
pose that there is no cohort effect, so that the first trace is the sum of
age and year effects. Since the cohort ages one year at a time, adding
equal amounts to year and age dummies will leave the trace unchanged.
The trace for the second cohort starts from the same year but one year
of age younger, so that the second trace will also be left unchanged if
the second cohort effect is incremented by one, and so on through the
cohorts according to (6). In effect, any trend in the data can be arbi-
trarily reinterpreted as a year trend, or (since year equals age minus
cohort plus a constant) as trends in ages and cohorts that are equal but
of opposite sign. However, it is clear that the appropriate normalization
is to require that the year effects sum to zero. As an example, consider
a hypothetical case in which there are apparently no cohort or age
effects, but where the logarithm of consumption increases by y per
annum for all age groups. Consider what the cohort diagram Figure 6
would look like in such a case. Each cohort trace would increase by V
per year of age, but each cohort trace would start at the same horizontal


                                   18
level as the previous one, or equivalently, at a vertical shift of iy below
it. A steady growth in year effects simply means that consumption is
growing with age and declining with cohort, and it is appropriate to
attribute the effects to age and cohort, not time.
   In the light of this discussion, we estimate equation (4) with the first
age group, and the fifteenth cohort omitted, so that the reference group
is that for a household headed by a 25 year-old in 1976. The fifteen
year dummies are constrained to be orthogonal to a time trend, and to
add to zero. The 'base year' is thus a timeless average of all years, and
any time trend is attributed to cohorts and ages, not to time.
   The points shown as diamonds in Figure 9 show the resulting age,
cohort, and year effects, with (in the bottom panel) and without (in the
top panel) the addition of the average adult and children variables. The
figures also show the same decomposition for the average of the logari-
thms of total income (earnings plus asset and other income) and shown
as squares, and for the 'saving ratio,' measured here as the difference
of the logarithms of income and consumption, and shown as crosses.
(For Taiwanese saving ratios, the approximation is not particularly accu-
rate, but the logarithmic form is convenient, given that we are working
with the logarithms of income and consumption.) The consumption pro-
files are not markedly different from those in the previous figure, even
though the year effects are quite significant, with an associated F-value
of 59.8 in the basic model and 81.5 in the model with adults and child-
ren. The corresponding F-values for age and cohort effects are 408.8
and 373.1, respectively, in the basic model, and 437.0 and 60.4 in the
extended model, and it is these effects that are our primary concern in
examining life-cycle behavior. Conditional on cohort and age effects,
adults increase income by about as much as they increase consumption,


                                     19
and have little effect on household saving, while children decrease
income with little effect on consumption, and so decrease saving.
   The cohort effects are larger the younger the cohort for consumption,
for income, and for the saving ratio, so that, at the same age, those born
later in calendar time are saving a higher fraction of their incomes. This
is exactly what we might expect from the life-cycle model in the
Chinese context in the face of rapidly declining fertility and rapidly
rising life-expectancy. Although the cohort differences in saving ratios
are too large to be plausible in the model without the addition of
numbers of adults and children, the extended model shows a flatter
profile of savings rates across cohorts. For example, the saving cohort
effects in the second figure in the bottom panel show a difference of -
0.23 in ln(ylc) between the cohort aged 11 in 1976 (aged 25 in 1990)
and the cohort 35 years older, aged 60 in 1990. The average value of
ln(y/c) in 1990 for households headed by 25 year olds was 0.276, a
saving rate of 24%, so that the model predicts a saving rate of a 4.5%
for the older cohort at the same age, i.e. in 1955. As we saw above, this
is exactly the comparison group for which the number of children has
fallen by a half, and the increase in the saving rate is perhaps ofthe
order of magnitude required to replace family by autarkic old-age
insurance.
   The age effects in the left hand panels are also not obviously
consistent with the life-cycle story. The rising age-profile of consump-
tion is matched by an even more rapidly rising age pattern of income,
so that the saving rate, instead of being positive at young ages, and
negative later, shows a steady increase with age. If such a result is
correct, an increase in the rate of growth of productivity would
decrease, not increase aggregate saving, since it would redistribute


                                   20
income towards the young, who have the lowest saving propensity, at
least provided cohort effects are eliminated, as would be expected when
the demographic transition is complete. However, it is quite likely that
the age effects on saving are contaminated by the selection processes for
headship, certainly at old ages, and perhaps also at young ages. As
already discussed, it is entirely plausible that those households headed
by older people are those with an unusually high propensity to save, so
that the right hand panels in the Figure are revealing only the selection
effects, and not the true patterns of saving ratios. Nor can this problem
be resolved by switching from a household to an individual basis, as is
done in Figure 10, which repeats Figure 9, but with averages taken over
individuals, not households. The problem is that here we are still
looking at house/told incomes, consumption, and saving, only the
household magnitudes have been attributed to individuals. The age
effects on saving are now even more extreme, because the old individu-
als on the right of the diagram are now predominately located in
households headed by younger adults, so that we lose the flattening of
income, consumption, and savings profiles with age that is observed in
the household level data.
   Our results can thus be interpreted in terms of a more-or-less
standard life-cycle model, at least provided we are allowed to choose a
desired consumption profile that rises rapidly with age, which indeed is
theoretically plausible in the circumstances. Saving rates are system-
atically higher for the younger cohorts, and the effect is consistent with
the increased need to provide for old age. And if we fail to observe any
life-cycle profile in saving rates by age, there are statistical grounds that
can perhaps explain what we see.




                                     21
S. Alternative explanations: tracking and growth
   The ability to give a life-cycle interpretation to the data does not
mean that the life-cycle is in fact correct, and in this section we look at
some more negative evidence. In particular, we consider whether there
is evidence in these data that consumption 'tracks' income by more than
would be expected if the life-cycle model is correct, and we look more
closely at the relationship between saving and growth.
   Tracking has been found in other data, see particularly Carroll and
Summers (1990) for the United States, and Deaton (1992) for Thailand
and Côte d'Ivoire. However, in all these examples, the large mass of
households accumulate little or nothing, and saving is used to buffer
short term fluctuations in income; in the absence of accumulation,
consumption and income must move together in the long run. However,
there is certainly no lack of accumulation by households in Taiwan, so
that we should expect to observe a greater decoupling of consumption
and income, even over long life-cycle spans. Taiwanese households
have demonstrated their ability to accumulate enough assets to
accomplish even 'low frequency' consumption smoothing. Although the
evidence in the previous section is consistent with the life-cycle story,
it does not immediately follow that much long-term smoothing is being
done, since the preferred profile of consumption may not call for it. It
is therefore necessary to look at the data in a different way.
   Figure 11 shows the same data on consumption and income by age
as in Figure 5, but with a separate diagram for each cohort, and with
income and consumption shown together. Once again, we see the
marked differences in the shape of the profile between the younger and
older cohorts, with much more rapid growth for younger households.
We also see the growing saving ratio as a widening between consump-


                                   22
don and income over time. But the most marked feature of Figure 11
is the extraordinary coherence between, the patterns of consumption and
income for each of the cohorts. The shape of each changes with age, but
they change together, with consumption tracking income, year by year,
and age by age. Such a picture suggests a crude Keynesian consumption
function, with consumption strongly linked to income. And yet we have
seen in the previous section that the data, which are the same as those
used here, are consistent with a life-cycle interpretation. The key to the
reconciliation is the fact that in the earlier analysis, in Figure 9, the
cohort effects, the age effects, and the year effects, have very similar
shapes, across cohorts, age, and time, for both consumption and income.
While this is consistent with the life-cycle model, only the coherence
between income shocks and consumption shocks is directly predicted by
it, although it could also be argued that in a rapidly growing economy,
real returns will be high, so that optimal intertemporal planning should
generate rapid consumption growth to match rapid income growth. Even
so, Figure 1 1 is strongly suggestive of some simpler model embodying
a much more direct link between consumption and income. That said,
it is no simple matter to think of a coherent alternative. Liquidity
constraints make very little sense in an environment in which so many
people are saving so much. Nor do buffering models seem relevant
here, whether with borrowing constraints as in Deaton (1991), or with
precautionary saving and large shocks, as in Carroll (1992). Both of
these models work by supposing that people generally wish to accumu-
late little or nothing, but use saving to buffer consumption against short-
term fluctuations in income. For such people, consumption tracks in-
come because, in the long run, consumption is identical to income. That
is not the case here. Perhaps the life-cycle model still provides the best


                                    23
theoretically consistent account of the facts.
   Before accepting that position, consider the positive relationship
between saving and growth, perhaps the most celebrated prediction of
the life-cycle model. We have already seen that the estimated models
do not clearly support this prediction in the Taiwanese case, since the
saving rate appears to increase with age, although we cannot use this to
reject the model because of the increasing selection of household heads
with age. Even so, the fact that there is a connection between saving
and growth seems hard to dispute. Taiwan, like Korea, Japan, Hong
Kong, and Singapore, are among the most rapidly growing and highest
saving economies in the world, and the cross country relationship
between saving and growth has been repeatedly documented. Further-
more, the productivity slowdown in the OECD countries has been
accompanied by a reduction in national saving ratios, essentially without
exception, see Modigliani (1991). However, there is still far from
general acceptance that the mechanism is that of the life-cycle model,
whereby slower growth redistributes national income away from
younger, saving cohorts1 to their lower saving or dissaving elders.
Indeed, for the United States, Bosworth, Burtless, and Sabelhaus (1991)
have undertaken the very difficult task of interpreting the time-series
evidence from the various Consumer Expenditure Surveys, and have
provided strong evidence that the decline in saving in the U.S. has been
a decline that has affected all age groups; it is not the aggregation
phenomenon that the life-cycle model requires. This evidence suggests
that there is a mechanism linking growth and saving within cohorts, and
it is this possibility in Taiwan to which we now turn.
  The top panel of Table 4 shows regressions of the 'saving rate'
(defined as before by the logarithm of the ratio of total income to


                                   24
consumption) against growth rates of earnings. These are run on the
same averaged data displayed in the household diagrams above, with
each observation corresponding to an age/year pair, and once again
include only ages from 25 through 75. As appropriate, averages are
averages of the logarithms of the underlying household data, not the
logarithms of averages, and all regressions are weighted by (the square
root of) the number of households in the cohort average. The regression
of the saving rate on the current rate of change of earnings, i.e. the
growth of current earnings over last period's earnings, is not shown; it
produces a strong positive coefficient, but such a result tells us little,
since measurement error will induce a positive correlation between
current saving and current income. Instead, the first line shows the
regression of the saving rate on the first four lags of earnings growth;
all the coefficients are positive and significantly different from zero.
The second line explores the possibility that the relationship is between
saving and current earnings growth, but using instrumental variables
estimation to purge the measurement error. Since measurement error
will induce a spurious correlation between successive lags of earnings
growth, we use only the second and third lags as instruments. This
regression shows no relationship between the saving rate and predictable
earnings growth, and the overidentification tests rejects the hypothesis
that lagged growth rates affect saving rates only through their ability to
predict current growth. (Indeed they have little ability to predict current
earning growth.)
   The rest of the top paneL explores the same regressions but with the
addition first of cohort dummies, then of cohort and age dummies, and
finally of cohort, age, and year dummies. Given the relationships that
exist between earnings growth, age, and cohorts, we would argue for


                                   25
including these dummies, but for excluding the year dummies, since the
latter should be subsumed in the effects for which we are testing.
Although the coefficients are smaller than in the first row, the positive
association between lagged growth of earnings and saving rates remains,
at least until the year effects are introduced. None of the results suggest
that the effect is working through anticipated earnings growth. These
results show a positive relationship between saving rates and growth, a
relationship that is not an aggregation effect, but holds for specific
cohorts over time. Tracking the same group of people as they age, we
find that their saving rate is higher in the years following rapid earnings
growth. Because this effect is from lagged earnings growth, it has
nothing to do with the standard response of saving to transitory income,
and it is not an effect that is predicted by life-cycle theory.
   These effects of within-cohort growth on within-cohort savings are
a good deal smaller than those that are typically predicted from the
aggregation effects of life-cycle saving, or that are typically found in the
cross-country or long time-span evidence. Those findings, and again see
Modigliani (1991), typically show an effect of growth on savings of
about 2, so that a shift in earnings growth from 5% to 10% will
generate an increase of JO percentage points in the saving rate. If we
take the results from the third row of Table 4, the effect is 0.137, which
is less than a tenth of the typical cross country estimates. Even the first
row estimates, which condition on neither cohort nor age effects, add
up to only 0.33. Hence, while the within cohort growth effects are
present, and while they cast doubt on the life-cycle model, they
probably cannot account for a major share of the relationship between
saving and growth in Taiwan.
   The second half of the panel reports similar regressions, but with the


                                    26
dependent variable the rate of growth of consumption. These correspond
closely to the standard 'excess sensitivity' tests in the macroeconomic
consumption literature, see for example Campbell and Mankiw (1991),
who look for a relationship between consumption growth and anticipat-
ed growth in labor income. The only difference between the top and
bottom panels, apart from the dependent variable, is that the first lag of
earnings growth is excluded from the unrestricted regression; if con-
sumption growth is correlated with unanticipated growth in earnings, as
the life-cycle supposes, and if earnings are mismeasured, there will be
a spurious correlation between consumption growth and lagged earnings
growth that does not contradict the model. The results provide no
evidence of excess sensitivity in Taiwan, although there are good
reasons to question the power of the test. Lagged earnings growth has
little predictive power for consumption growth in any of the regressions,
but it also has little predictive power for current earnings growth. With
little ability to anticipate earnings growth, we cannot tell whether the
component of earnings growth that might be anticipated is or is not cor-
related with changes in consumption.


6. Summary and conclusions
   Where do these results leave us, and what is their implication for
saving in Taiwan, particularly for retirement saving in a rapidly aging
population? We have found it a good deal harder to find fault with the
life-cycle theory than we supposed would be the case. Although
consumption seems to move very closely with income, the Taiwanese
save a great deal, and the comovement can be explained in terms of
earnings shocks, which induce a short mn correlation between consump-
tion and income, together with a taste for rapid consumption growth


                                  27
with age, which itself might be attributed to the intertemporal incentives
generated by very high rates of return in a rapidly growing economy.
We also find that younger cohorts have higher saving rates, as is to be
expected given falling fertility and rising life-expectancy. If we accept
such a picture, we can attribute at least part of Taiwan's high saving
ratio to farsighted young consumers making preparation for a 'modern'
old-age in which they will be thrown on their own resources, rather than
on those of their married sons.
   We are not entirely convinced that the picture is quite so simple,
although we have no really coherent alternative to offer. The life-cycle
explanation for the coherence between consumption and income seems
farfetched compared with some simpler and moreparsimonious story in
which consumption is directly linked to income, although we also
recognize that it is difficult to explain why people should behave in this
way, especially in a high saving economy where liquidity constraints are
unlikely to be a problem. There is certainly no evidence of excess
sensitivity in our results, though better and more powerful tests might
yield different results. We also found evidence that saving responds to
growth within cohorts, something that is consistent with the importance
of habits in consumption. Even so, the effect is not nearly as large as
that delivered by simple life-cycle stories, and is small compared with
other empirical evidence on the relationship. Our data do not show
dissaving or even decreased saving among older households; indeed the
estimated age effects in saving behavior increase steadily with age. Of
course we recognize that this evidence is severely contaminated by the
processes of household dissolution and combination as individuals age.
Nevertheless, such results are hardly overwhelming evidence in favor
of the life-cycle model.


                                    28
   We therefore hesitate to endorse the position that the life-cycle model
is alive and well, and living in Taiwan, especially if such a position is
taken to imply that there is no need for public action to supplement
social security among those who will be old 25 years from now.


7. List of works cited:

Bosworth, Barry, Gary Burtless, and John Sabelhaus, 1991, 'The decline
  in saving: some microeconornic evidence,' Brookings Papers on
  Economic Activity, 1, 183—256.
Campbell, John Y., and N. Greg Mankiw, 1991, 'The response of
  consumption to income: a cross-country investigation,' European
   Economic Review, 35, 715—721.
Carroll, Christopher D., 1991, 'Buffer stock saving and the permanent
  income hypothesis,' Washington D.C., Board of Governors of the
  Federal Reserve System, processed.
Carroll, Christopher D., and Lawrence H. Summers, 1991, 'Consump-
  tion growth parallels income growth: some new evidence,' in B.
  Douglas Bernheim and John Shoven, editors, National Saving and
   Economic Performance, Chicago. Chicago University Press for
   NBER.
Chang, Ming-cheng, 1987, 'Changing familial network and social
  welfare in Taiwan,' Conference on economic development and social
  welfare in Taiwan (II), Taipei. The Institute of Economics, Academia
  Sinica.
Deaton, Angus S., 1991, 'Saving and liquidity constraints,' Economet-
  rica, 59, 1221—1248.
Deaton, Angus S., 1992, 'Saving and income smoothing in Côte
  d'Ivoire,' Journal of African Economies, 1, 1—24.
Deaton, Angus 5., 1992, Understanding consumption, Oxford and New
  York. Oxford University Press.
Hermalin, Albert, Mary Beth Ofstedal, and Chi Li, 1991, 'The kin
  availability of the elderly in Taiwan: Who's available and where are
  they?' Population Studies Center, University of Michigan, processed.
Lo, Joan Chi-chiung, 1987, 'The changing patterns of household struct-
  ure and economic status of the elderly: 1976 to 1985,' Conference


                                   29
 on economic development and social welfare in Taiwan (1), Taipei.
 The Institute of Economics, Academia Sinica.
Modigliani, Franca, 1990, 'Recent declines in the savings rate: a life
  cycle perspective,' Frisch Lecture, Sixth World Congress of the
  Econometric Society, Barcelona, August.
Paxson, Christina H., 1992, 'Using weather variability to estimate the
  response of savings to transitory income in Thailand,' American
  Economic Review, 82, 15—33.
Republic of China, 1989, Report on the Survey of Personal Income
  Distribution in Taiwan Area of The Republic of China, Tapei.
  Directorate=General of Budget, Accounting and Statistics Executive
  Yuan.
      1991, Statistical Yearbook of the Republic of China, Taipei.
Directorate-General of Budget, Accounting and Statistics Executive
Yuan.




                                  30
Table I: Statistics on income, growth, saving and population
 Year           GNP/     Growth    Income/Household           Gross       Household Savings       Population                    Pop
               capita     GNPI     (base=1986)                Saving      Rate                    (milions)                     Growth
             base=86      capita                              /GNP
                                   Nat'nI       Survey                    Nat'nl      Survey      Nat'nI       Survey
                                   Accnts                                 Accnts                  Accnts
 61           25,408        ...    ...          ...            18.4       ...         ...        11.149        ...              ...
 65           33,386       6.83    ...          ...           20.7        ...         ...        12.628        ...              3.03
 70           47,710       7.14    143,088      ...           25.7        ,..         ...        14.676        ...              2.38
 75           63,428       5.69     193,062     ...           26.7        20,0        ...        16.149        ...              1.88
 78           84,316       9.49    250,100     248.854        34.4        20.7        14.1       17.136         16.482          1.92
 79           89,605       6.08    271,363     279,332        33.4         19.8       15.6       17.479         17.012          2.01
 80           92,098       2.74    288.934     288,173        32.3        17.9        17.1       17.805         17.694          1.86
 81           94,374       2.44    294,759     286,102        31.3        20.2        19.0       18.135         18.224          1.86
 82           96,944       2.69    294.322     287,190        30.1        20,1        16.7       18.458        18.645           1.78
 83          104,130       7.15    310,414     308,659        32.1        21.4        17.3       18.733        19.181           1.49
 84          114,903       9.84    326,692     331,271        33.8        22.9        16.2       19.013        19.494           1.49
 85          119,581       3.99    331,193     338,155        33.6        23.9        17.1       19.258        19.548           1.29
 86          137,992      14.32    341.728     359,387        38.5        28.5        18.6       19.455        19.916           1.02
 87          154,838      11.52    364,700     380,111        38.5        28.3        19.1       19.673        20.080           1.12
 88          164,229       5.89    404,138     423,080        34.5        23.6        20.5       19.904        20.169           1.18
 89          174,407       6.01    443,866     465,652        30.8        19.5        22.1       20.107        20.716           1.02
 90          180,053       3.19    478,296     507.242        29.2        20.0        23.3       20.353        20.958           1.22
Notes: All numbers are from National Accounts statistics unless otherwise indicated. The National Accounts household savings rate includes private
institutions serving households. All money figures are in N.T. dollars, base year=1986.
Table H: Numbers of persons in selected person cohorts
                                cohort!    cohort 11     cohort 21   cohort 31   cohort 41
       age in 1976                   20          30            40          50          60
 Numbers of persons in year:-
              1976                  788         521           608         461         249
              1977                  648         602           535         422         186
              1978                 1008         854           738         629         287
              1979                 1126         796           708         574         269
              1980                 1238         834           723         625         268
              1981                 1261         794           720         624         293
              1982                 1401         771           695         655         273
              1983                1368          737           718         597         292
              1984                1392          825           711         541         291
              1985                1426          766           651         596         238
              1986                1305          725           659         549         263
              1987                1347          634           632         513         254
              1988                1366          674           617         548         196
              1989                1331          672           600         519         202
              1990                1330          601           575         508         219
Table III: Numbers of households in selected household cohorts
              cohort 1    cohort 11     cohort 21   cohort 31   cohort 41

    age in          20             30         40          50          60
     1976

 Numbers of households in year:-

     1976           26         203           304         275          113
     1977           35         274           280         237          71
     1978           70         401           380         344          106
     1979          133.        352           383         300          88
     1980          188         393           359         329          82
      1981         261         375           372         318          87
      1982         363         372           370         327          74
      1983         394         364           376         278          71
      1984         463         410           347         237          70
      1985         519         400           296         242          48
      1986         543         398           303         222          53
      1987         563         367           281          191         65
      1988         604         390           260         208          49
      1989         636         364           256          184         41
      1990         640         299           228          196         59
 Table IV: Saving rates, consumption growth, and earnings growth
                          dine         dlne•3      dlne2        dlny.3       dine4           OlD
                                                                                          F-test

  saving rate regressions, lny — Inc

  effects:
  none                            0.0793         0.1049       0.0888       0.0632
                    0.6995       (8.3)          (9.2)        (7.7)         (5.8)
  cohorts          (1.6)                                                                   10.75
                                  0.0302         0.0483       0.043!       0.0321
                    0.2150       (4.1)          (5.5)        (4.9)         (3.9)
  cohorts.         (0.9)                                                                   10.36
  ages                            0.0187         0.0421       0.0430       0.0329
                    0.2881       (2.3)          (4.1)        (4.2)         (3.5)
  cohorts,         (1.5)                                                                    3.09
  ages.                          -0.0136        -0.0114     -0.0099        0.0075
  years             0.0318       (1.7)          (1.0)       (0.9)         (0.8)
                   (0.7)                                                                   0.56

  consumption growth regressions, dlnc

  none                                          -ooiss      -0.0116        0.0064
                   -0.0354                      (1.8)       (1.0)         (0.6)            2.37
                   (0.3)
  cohorts                                       -0.0307     -0.0260       -0.0062
                   0.0552                       (2.8)       (2.2)         (0.5)            4.80
                  (0.3)
  cohorts,                                      -0.0158     -0.0033        0.0260
  ages             0.1510                       (1.4)       (0.3)         (2.1)            4.16
                  (1.1)
 cohorts,                                       -0.0005      0.0024        0.0071
 ages,             0.0258                       (0.1)       (0.2)         (0.6)            0.03
 years            (0.4)

Notes: The regressions in the top panel have the cohort average of the individual saving rates'
ln(y/c) as the dependent variable, where y is total income and c is consumption. In the first
regression, In(jVc) is regressed on four lags of earnings growth dine; in the second, saving growth
is regressed on current earnings growth by instrumental variables, with the second through fourth
lags of earnings growth as instnjrnents. The regressions are repeated with the inclusion of cohort
effects, cohort and age effects, and cohort, age, and year effects. The bottom panel repeats the
regressions with consumption growth as the dependent variable. All consumption regressions, OLS
and lyE, exclude the first lag of earnings growth. All regressions include theaverage numbers of
adults and children, and all are weighted by the square root of the number of observations in each
cohort. When computing the cohort avenges of log earnings (used to construct earnings growth),
the few households with no earnings are assigned a value of earnings equal to one.
   C
   0
           1.5




          -'1.5

           1.5

             0
                  yearzlg76




                  year= 1979
                               year1977




                               year= 1980
                                                 r
                                                 year=1978




                                                 jear=1981



   .4—A
   (0
          -1.5

   a
   0       1.5
                  year= 1982   year= 1983        year= 1984
   a                           A,tt-
   .4-       0
   0
          -1.5
   U-)
   0)
   (0
   C              year= 1985   year= 1986        yeart 1987
           1.5
   a-)
   U
   C-        0
   a -1.5
   U-)




                  yeer= 1988   year 1969         jear= 1990
           1.5

             0                                            I—
          -1.5
                  025507599    0255075      99   025507599
                               age




Figure 1: Age-sex pyramids
                          year'= 1g77

                                          I'
                                         year 1978
             year= 1976
       150
       100
        50
                          s&._



                              7'7uP      \A
                                          S
             year1979     year1980       year= 1981




                          .r:. T.'
       150
       100
                          L1
 (1)   50
 a)
 (0
 E           year 1982    year'= 1993    year 1984




                                         r1
  0)




                                            r
 '4-   150

 0
 0
 C-
 0)
       too
       50    ytd\
 a           yearzlYB5    year19B6       year= 1987
       150
 0)
 (0
       50


             year= 1988   year= 1969     yearz 1990
       150
       too        aiLIk                           A..
                                                      U
       50
             Tr. ¶
             0 20406080   0   20406080
                                         \r&1r
                                         0 20406080
                              age




Figure 2: Sex ratios
C-
00)
0      75 -
Ui

.4-I
to
C
C       .5 -
0
4-,
 (U
v-s
a.
0
a      .25 -
.4-
C


        0-
               6   ib   2b   3b   4b     sb   Lb   7b   ab
                                   age




Figure 3: Age distribution of the population, by year
       4




 C)
 L
 U
 -ri
 C
 C-)

 ..—   2
 0
 C-
 ai
 nE
 :i
 C




       C

           20                       60          80
                            HeacYs age




Figure 4: Number of children in the household
      300000 -


UI

z
      200000 -


C,)
CD
C
rl
C
C.
(0
° 100000 -
r1
(0
C
C
(0



           0-
                       I           I            I

                 2b   40          60           80   100
                           age of individual




Figure 5: Individual earnings, by age
        60000 -
 I-
 z
 -I(a
  0)
  C.
        40000 -
  C
  0
  (1
  C
 —4

  C.
 n0'a
 7C     20000 -
  0
  C
  (0
  D
  C
  C
  (U
            0-
                       I            I            I
                  2b   40          60           80   ida
                            age of individual




Figure 6: Individual non-labor income, by age
       600000 -
  I-
  z
  cc
  4,
  C-

  C
  400000 -




       200000 -




                  I    I
                  20   40        Gb                    ido
                             Head's age




Figure 7: Total household consumption, by age of household
head
                         -I- --     I                                                              I    I
                    I.                                                       2               I—                                                      2
                                  cohort effects
                                                                                                        cohort effects

                                                                             '.5                                                    '-¼ '._/         i.5
              4.
              U     0-
              4,                                                                 —
                                                      eQe   effects                U    S                                  /   age effects
                                                                                   4    —                                                                  U
              4,                                                                                                                                           4'
                                                                                        S
                                                                             1o,        —
              0                                                                    a,                                                                    S
              C                                                                  a
                                                                                                                                                     Ita
              a    —t                                                            40     0                                                                C
              U                                                                         u1
                                                                            .3

                   —2                                                       '0                              I
                                                                                            -2
                         10       20    3h    ib      sb    sb    7b   aS                         ib   20       3b    tb       b           ib   ab
                                        age and age   in   197G                                                 age and        In   1976
                                                                                                                         age




Figure 8: Age and cohort effects in consumption (Controls for numbers of adults and children included in
right-hand panel.)
                    3               basic   mode]                          I                 basic     mood                     .2      basIc mode)

                                                                                                                           a,
               U    2                                                'I                                                    U
               I,                                                                                             -w           4'
                                                                     a.
               a'                                                                                                          a'
               4'                                                    L                                                     C.
               0I                                                    0                                             S       a
               ft                                                                                                          a,
                                                                          —2


                    0    I-                                               —3
                        20     30   4050         &o   ib    eà                  0       10 20 30      ib so so     70 so


                    3         adults   C    kids included                  I             adults   C   kids included             .2   acuits   £   kids Included
                                                                     a
                                                                                                                           a,
               U    2                                                2                                                     U    .1
               4'                                                    .-                                                    I'
               4'
                                                                     •    —1                                               4'
               a'                                                                                                          C.
                                                                                                              4.           a    0
                                                                                                      '' ''
               '5                                                                                                          a'

                                                 -
                                                                     -2
                                                                     'I
                                                                     zoN,                                          '.,
                    0                                                     -3
                        20    30    ib      sO
                                           so 70            sO                  6       I'o2b 30405060 ;bao                               nO
                              age Of household head                            age Of household head             In 1976                          year


                                                      ] n( y)
                                                      lri(c)
                                                                 =                  —
                                                       sly           iricy)              ln(c)

Figure 9: Age, cohort, and year                  effects     in consumption, income, and saving rates, for household heads
                                   basic     model                               basic   model                                basic   mode]
                     3                                                                                       .2
                                                               S
                                                               4-    0
                                                               U                                        4-
                U    2                                         S                                        UI
                ii                                                                                      lb
                                                               S                                 1'
                S                                                                                       a'
                                                               4-
                S                                              C.
                0                                              a                                        C.
                C                                                   —2
                                                               I.
                     0                                              —3                                       .
                         2b   3b   do       50   sb   ;b so              d                                        7•5
                                                                             20203b4b5b5b7b56                                 80          85     gO
                               adults   C   Kids included                    adults   S kiøi included                   idu]ts £ kids Included
                     3                                                                                       .2

                                                                     0                                  a,
                     2                                                                                  U
                                                                                                        là   .1

                                                                    —i                                  là
                                                                                                        C.
                                                                                                        S    0
                                                                    -2                                  Ii

                     0
                                        —-                          —3
                         20   30   40       sO
                                           so         o   so             O ib 2b 30 40 50 60 ib16                             sO          eb
                               age of individual                         age of individual in 1975                                 year
                                                                                                                                                 i
                                            ln(y)

                                            lri(c)
                         —-                                     —   inCc)
                                             s/y= ln(y)
Figure 10: Age, cohort, and year effects for consumption, income, and saving rates, for individuals
 born In    1956    born in 195       born IA 1954     born lfl 1953     bOfl Ia 1952



 P
 born In    1951
                    1
                    born   In 1950
                                      Li
                                      born In 1949
                                                       P
                                                       torn   In 1946
                                                                         L'
                                                                         born In 1947




 v7                 I)                                             75

 born In 1916       born IA 1945      born   In 1941   born IA 1913      born In 1912




 Jo)
 born In 1941
                    L17
                    born in 1940      born In 1939     born IA 1936
                                                                   75    tin
                                                                         Darn In 19]?




 LI
  born In
                    tin
                    born In 1935
                                      Li
                                      born In 1934
                                                       tin tin
                                                       born              born   In *932



                                                                         tn
            1936                                              11% 1933




 t       In tn
  born In 1931      born   In 1930
                                      tIn
                                      born   In 1929
                                                       I
                                                       born In 1920      born In 1927




 ii                 t                                  lb           fl   I
  born in 1926      born In 1925      born In 1924     born   IA 1923    born In 1Q22




 I                                    20          75   20                20

  born IA 1921      born In 1920      born In 1919     born   IA 19*6    born In 1917




  2*           75   20           75   a                2b           75   2*          75

  born   In 1916    born   In 1915    born in 1914



                                                 'C
  a                 2*           75   2b



                                      age



Figure 11: Consumption and income, by age of household head
