                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               KEEPING PEOPLE OUT:
                           INCOME DISTRIBUTION, ZONING
                                AND THE QUALITY
                               OF PUBLIC EDUCATION




                                    Raquel Fernandez

                                    Richard Rogerson




                                 Working Paper No. 4333




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   April 1993




The authors acknowledge financial support from National Science Foundation grant
SES-9122625. The author gratefully acknowledges support from a National Academy of
Education Spencer Fellowship. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                            NBER Working Paper #4333
                                                            April 1993


                                 KEEPING PEOPLE OUT:
                             INCOME DISTRIBUTION, ZONING
                                  AND ThE QUALITY
                                 OF PUBLIC EDUCATION

                                          ABSTRACT

    This paper examines the effect of community zoning regulations on allocations and welfare

in a two-community model. Each community uses a local property tax to finance public

education. Tax rates are determined by majority vote within each community, and individuals

choose in which community to reside. We study exogenously imposed zoning regulations as well

as the case where the regulator is endogenously determined by majority vote. Our analysis

indicates that a number of outcomes arc theoretically possible. Several interesting results emerge

from simulations of the model. Although zoning tends to make the rich community more

exclusive, this need not increase the quality of education in the rich community relative to the

poor community. Welfare effects are not monotone in income; some lower income individuals

benefit and some higher income individuals are made worse off when zoning is introduced.


Raquel Fernandez                                            Richard Rogerson
Department of Economics                                     Department of Economics
Boston University                                           University of Minnesota
Boston, MA 02215                                            Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER                                                    and NBER
                                     —1—




1. Introduction

    A striking feature of US public education, as illustrated in Table lA, is

the large disparity that exists across communities in spending per student.

Any explanation of this outcome and any attempt to change it must contend with

two factors. First, US public education is financed to a large degree by

local property taxes.' Second, the process by which individuals choose where

to reside results in great differences in average income across communities,

even within the same metropolitan area. The goal of this paper is to examine

the role that one pervasive institutional feature in the US--community zoning

regulation—-plays in-producing this outcome via its interaction both with the

property tax and with the creation of communities that differ with respect to

average income.

     Our analysis starts by providing a benchmark of a two-community model

without zoning in which each community taxes the housing property of its

residents and uses the proceeds to fund public education. Tax rates within

each community are chosen by majority voting. Individuals differ only in

income and derive utility from housing, the consumption of a private good, and

the quality of public education they obtain. Individuals decide in which

community to reside. All equilibria of this model in which the quality of

education varies across communities are stratified, i.e., they are

characterized by the existence of a rich community with a high tax rate and

high spending per student, and a poor community with a lower tax rate and


     10n average 45% of spending on primary and secondary public education is
financed by local taxes.
                                      —2—




lower spending per student. All individuals in the rich community have income

st least as great ss those in the poor community.

     We then examine the effects on equilibrium allocations and welfare that

result when the rich community imposes a zoning regulation. The only zoning

regulation we examine is one that requires individuals to purchase a minimum

level of housing as a condition for residence in the community. We analyze

both an exogenously imposed zoning regulation as well as one endogenously

determined by a process of majority vote.

     At a general level the analysis suggests a wide range of poasible

outcomes, ao we explore some of them via simulation. As might be expected, in

all of our simulations. ;e find that the introduction of zoning results in the

rich community becoming more exclusive (i.e. smaller and richer) and the

poorer community becoming larger. The outflow of the least wealthy

individuals of the rich community from that community into the poor one

necessarily increases average income in both communities.

     Several interesting results are associated with the change in equilibrium

community composition. We begin with the implications for welfare. Whereas

there may be a general presumption that zoning benefits the rich at the

expense of the poor, the actual welfare effects tend to be more subtle than

this. While indeed zoning tends to make the poorest individuals worse off and

the richest indviduala better off, the highest income individuals that reside

in the poor community (in the no-zoning equilibrium) are also made better off,

and the lowest income individuals that reside in the rich community )in the

no-zoning equilibrium) are in fact made worse off. Of the individuals that

actually move as a result of zoning, those with the highest income are made
                                       —3—




worse off; those with the lowest income sre msde better off. Thus, it is the

welfsre effects of zoning on those individuals that sre somewhere in the

"middle" of the distribution that are the most complex. This is due to the

effect on individual welfare of the interaction of two factors Ci) the

increase, at esch tax rate, of each community's property base, and (ii) the

existence of a new, wealthier median voter in each community. In general, the

effect of zoning on the absolute gap in spending per student between

communities is ambiguous.

     Finally, zoning allows the rich community to be characterized both by

higher spending per student and by lower tax rates, in contrast with the no-

zoning model which required both equilibrium spending per student and the tax

rate to be higher in the rich community in equilibrium. This is significant

since in reality there is not a perfect correlation between average income and

tax rates across communities.

     Endogenizing the level of zoning significantly complicates the analysis

since it is not possible to identify the outcome of majority vote )if    it
exists)   with the level of zoning preferred by the individual with median

income. We provide two examples where equilibrium exists but the individual

with median income is no longer the decisive voter in the rich community. The

effects of the endogenously chosen zoning level on equilibria follow naturally

from the comparative statics exercises of the exogenous zoning model.

     Although various aspects of zoning have been studied extensively, there

has been little work done on zoning in the context of publicly provided goods

in multi-community models.2 In Hamilton )1s75), communities use property


     2See Pagodzinski and Sass )1990,1991) for reviews of the theoretical and
empirical literatures on zoning.
                                         —4—




taxes to finance locally publicly provided goods. In this model, communities

are formed costlessly.3 Hence, endogenous zoning expressed as a minimum

housing requirement allows individuals to perfectly separate themselves out by

income and thus delivers, not surprisingly, an efficient allocation of

resources. Durlauf (1992) presents a dynamic community model in which

communities provide a local public good——education——and impose minimum income

restrictions as a requirement for residence in a community (there is no

housing market) .   His   analysis, however, is concerned exclusively with the

long-run properties of the income distribution in a framework with local and

global peer effects. Henderson (1980) and Epple, Romer and Filimon (1988)

analyze the endogenous choice of zoning regulations in multi-community models.

Their focus, however, is on implications for the pattern of land use given the

existence of residents concerned about the characteristics of potential

entrants into the community. There are no publicly provided goods in this

model.

     The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 studies a multicommunity

model with no zoning. Section 3 introduces zoning into the rich community and

analzyes the comparative statics implications of different exogenous levels of

zoning.   Section 4 endogenizes the zoning restriction and section 5 concludes.


2. The Model

     In this section we study a model of two communities with no zoning which

will serve as a benchmark for the subsequent analysis in which zoning is


         our model we do not allow new communities to be formed (e.g. there is
an infinite cost to forming new communities) . Reality undoubtedly lies
between these two extremes.
                                        —5—




introduced. Multi—community models have been analyzed by several authors.

Westhoff (1978) and Epple, Filimon and Romer (1984) examine the existence of

equilibrium in multi-community models with local publicly provided goods.

Epple and Romer (1991) analyze redistribution by local governments in a multi-

community setting. Fernandez and Rogerson (1992) examine educational policies

in a two-community model in which education is publicly provided at the

community level. de Eartolome (1991) and Benabou (1991) study different

versions of a multi—community model with peer effects.

     There is a continuum of individuals with identical preferences given by


                             u(c,h) +   v(q)                          (1)



where c is consumption of a private good, h is the amount of housing purchased

by the individual, and q is the quality of public education. We assume that

u(c,h) is twice continuously differentiable, c,ncave, with u(O,h(=- Yh, and

that c and h are normal goods. Individuals differ with respect to their

endowed income y whose distribution is characterized by a continuous density

function g(y) with support [y,y(, aO. We normalize the mass of individuals

to equal one.

     There are two communities (indexed by j=1,2) .   Each community is

characterized by a proportional tax rate t on the value of housing and by a

quality of public education. We let c be the numeraire and p be the relative

(pre-tax) price of housing. For simplicity we assume that p is constant and

equal in both communities.4 Each individual must choose a community in which

to live. The budget constraint faced by an individual in community j      is

     4A variable p would introduce additional complications without increasing
the insights available from the analysis.
                                               —6-.




                                      c+ir.h=y                           (2)




where ir1=p(i+t1)

     Given residence in community j, the indirect utility of an individual

with income y is


               V(sr1,q.,y) =   u(y—ir.h(irr.,y),h(n.,y))     +   v(q.)   (3)



where h(irr1,y) is the individual's housing demand function.

     The quality of education is assumed to equal the amount of spending per

resident within the community.5 Thus,


                               q. =    tph.                              (4)

where h. is the average amount of housing consumed in community j (henceforth

denoted C.), Le.


                          -           H.      J.h(s. ,y)dy
                                      N.          N.


N1 equals the mass of individuals located in C, N1 ia the total amount of

housing purchased in C, and .1 indicates the integral over those individuals

that reside in C.

     We assume that the game among individuals and between communities is

played in the following fashion. In the first stage individuals


     5Linearity of q is chosen solely for simplicity of exposition; it can
easily be extended to increasing concave functions of expenditures per
student. The relation between expenditures and quality has been the subject
of much controversy. See Card and Krueger (1992) for a review of this debate
and evidence in favor of a positive effect of spending per student on quality.
                                          —7—




simultaneously choose a community in which to live. Once this choice is made,

they are unable to move in any subsequent etage. In the second stage, each

community's tax rate is (simultaneously) decided upon by majority vote within

that community and individuals consume the private good, purchase housing, and

obtain education.

     Denote the equilibrium tax and quality outcomes in each community by

)t,q) and )t,q) .     Taking these outcomes as given, therefore, in any
subgame-perfect equilibrium of the above game each individual must reside in

the community in which her utility is highest. Note that, when voting,

individuals are aware of the effect of different choices of tax rates on the

groaa price of housing ,r and on the quality of education (via the community's

budget constraint as expressed in equations 4 and 5)

     It is difficult to characterize the equilibria to this game without

imposing an additional assumption on preferences. This is done in Assumption



AsaumotiOn 1: S =                  +            +          c 0
                    ucch)1_irhy)       uchhhy       urhy
     The significance of this assumption is eaaily understood by noting that

the slope of an individual's indifference curve in q-t apace is:


                              v'
                                                                     (e)
                             uph


     6This is in contrast with Rose-Ackerman (1979) and Epple. Filimon, and
Romer (1984) who assume that voters do not take into account the effect of tax
changes on the aggregate housing stock demanded in a community.
     7westhoff (1977) provides the first use of this kind of (single-crossing)
condition to characterize equilibria in a multi—community model. Different
versions of this condition have been employed by Roberts (1977) , Epple,
Filimon and Romer (1984) , and Epple and Romer (1991)
                                           —8—




Thus, Assumption 1 guarantees that the slope of an individual's indifference

curve (in q—t space) is increasing in initial income (i.e. ucph is decreasing

in y) .    The power of this assumption to characterize equilibria is apparent in

Proposition 1. First, though, we establish that in equilibrium no community

can be empty.

Lemma 1: In equilibrium no community is empty.

aQQ:       If   a community were empty then an individual with y=y could, by moving

into that community, obtain the same quality of education there at a lower tax

rate since the that community would possess a strictly higher average housing

demand than the other community. Hence, this individual would be made

strictly better off than before. Consequently, the initial allocation could

not have been an equilibrium.

Pr000sition 1: If in equilibrium communities have different qualities of

education, then:

(U (q,t>>(q,t)
(ii) The income of every individual in C1 is at least as great as that of any

       individual in C2,

where C1 is arbitrarily defined as the community with the larger q*•

Qgj: )i) If q>q then necessarily t>t otherwise all individuals

prefer C1 to C2.        (ii) By Assumption 1, if an individual with income y

prefers (q,t) to (q,t) then so does every individual with income

fly.   I




       Thus these equilibria have individuals stratified into communities by

initial income. C1 will be characterized by a higher tax rete, a higher

quality of education and by higher income residents than C2. We refer to an
                                        —9—




equilibrium with these properties as a stratified equilibrium. Hereafter we

will focus only on those equilibria in which the qualities of education are

different across communities.                               -




Pr000aition   2: Majority vote within a community results in t equal to a tax

rate preferred by the voter whose income is median within the community.

Proof: This follows directly from Assumption 1. The argument is illustrated

in Figure 1. Let     be the median income in the community. Consider the tax-

quality possibility frontier faced by the median voter. Let z*=(q*,t*( be the

(q,t( pair preferred by the median voter. Any other (q,t( pair that lies in

the ares A (that is to the left of the median voter's indifference curve

through z and with t>t( will be rejected in favor of z by at least 50% of

the voters (i.e. at least by all voters with ys'( .       Similarly   any (q,t( pair

that lies in area S (that is to the left of the median voter's indifference

curve and with tct*( will be rejected in favor of z by at least 50% of the

voters (i.e. at least by all voters with ysç'( .     Any point in C must lie

outside the tax-quality frontier. Hence z is the majority vote outcome.8

      All potential stratified equilibria can be parametrized by the level of

income of the "boundary" individual,          where the latter defines a partition

of the population int the two communities such that all            reside in C1 and

all       reside in C2. We define W(y( to equal the utility of an individual

with income     that resides in C given the partition defined by          and the

tax rate and quality that result from majority vote given such a partition.


     8spple and Homer (1991( use this reasoning very nicely to show that even
if individuals were free to move between communities in response to different
tax-quality outcomes, majority voting must result in the preferred tax rate of
the median voter.
                                       —10—




      If a stratified equilibrium exists there must be an individual with

      who is indifferent between the two communities, i.e.


                                                                      (fl




To check whether the allocation specified by y=y is an equilibrium, an

additional necessary (and sufficient given (7)) condition is t>t since

Assumption 1 then ensures that all        prefer   C1 over C2 and the opposite for



      To trace out the utility of the boundary individual as a function of

we differentiate W (y( with respect to           This yields



       =
             (P(j(       (dE/dyb)] +   v' ((ôq/Ot.(   (dE./dy(+)ãq./öy)( (8)



where E indicates the tax rate chosen by majority vote within the community

with an allocation of the population as specified by           i.e.         is the

preferred tax rate of the median voter in community j given a boundary

individual       Note that q=q(t,y(

      Thus, to establish the properties of the        curves we need to determine

how    and q react to changes in         There are two important effects at

work when     increases: )i) The income distribution in both communities is

shifted rightward so that the median voter corresponds to an individual with

greater income than previously and, (ii) The average housing consumed in each

community increases at each ir.   Consequently, evaluating the effect of a
marginal increase in     corresponds to )i) evaluating how the preferred tax

rate (and hence quality) changes with an increase in the income of the median
                                              —11—




voter, ceteris paribus, and (ii) evaluating how a given median voter'a

preferred tax rate (and hence quality) changea with an increase in average

housing consumption.

        Given a distribution of income within a community,              the    preferred tax rate

of an individual with income y is found by maximizing (3) with respect to t

subject to the community's budget constraint as specified in (4) .                     The first

order condition for an interior maximum is:


                         —uph(s,y) +     v' )aq/ât)      0                              (9)



where the community subscript is omitted.

        Recalling' that the identity of the median voter is a function of                         the
equation that implicitly defines the median voter's () preferred tax rate E

as a function of         is thus:


R)yt ) =       —u   )c)y)—;h);c)Y))h);c)y)HphGc)y))+ v')&g/Ot) =                         0    (10)



Using the implicit function rule on (10) to solve for the effect of a marginal

increase in         on t yields:



dt          —pS )dc'/dy) +   (v"tp)Oh/Oy)   )ôqIôt) +    v'p I   )dh/Oy) +E
                                                                              )S2h/c3tOyb)
        =                                                                                            (11)
                                     — ÔR/OE


where S is defined in Assumption 1 and aR/at=Iucch)h+shm)_uchhhs_uchs)pO +

v'   )aq/ôt)2+v' )82q/0t2, .   In   order for the second order condition for an

interior maximum to be satisfied dR/dt must be negative. The following two

assumptions are sufficient to ensure that this condition is satisfied.

Assumption 2: u(c,h) is concave in it,         i.e.,    ucch)h+lrhs)_uchhhs_uchs             0.
                                         —l2-




Assumption 3: q(t,y) is concave in t.

     Hence the denominator in (11) is positive        The numerator is more

difficult to sign. As argued previously, it is possible to decompose (11)

into two distinct reactions to the marginal increase in              For a given

median voter, the latter's reaction to an increase in average housing demand

(brought on by the marginal increase in         is denoted by (at/oyb) Ic. and is

equal to


                      v' (q/y) (Oq/ôt) +
                                                                            (12)



Noting that                    and that a(aq/at)/ay p[(a/oy) +

E(2h/otay)],   it is easy to see that the numerator of this expression

corresponds to the terms that appear within the curly brackets in (11)

Furthermore, oh/ayb>O and aq/at=ph+tp2h, also is strictly positive since

otherwise the median voter (and indeed all individuals) could be made better

off by a marginal decrease of the tax rate. After some further manipulation

the numerator in (12) can be expressed as


       p(v"q+v'] (àh/ôyb) +   vE2p3h(ôh/âyb)    +
                                                    v'tp(o2h/otay)    ,     (13)


with o2h1/atay=p                           and 2h2/atoy =

                              Note that these last two expressions are positive
_p[h5_h(7r,y)]g(y)/N2.
if h,>O. Hence, if in addition -v"q/v'sl, then the numerator in (12) is
                                        —13—




strictly positive and ôE/Oy>O. That is, a given median voter's preferred

tax rate increases with

     The second effect, &.e. the effect on a community's tax rate due to a new

median voter with a higher income than previously (for the same given average

housing demand at each it   as before( is, by Assumption 1, to increase the tax

rate. This effect is captured by the first term in expression (ll( and is

strictly positive.

     Lastly, the effect of a marginal increase in          on the quality of

education is:                     -




         =
                bb          (pS+Ep(Oh/Ot() (dE/d( + £p(Oh/OY(             (l4(




If dE/dy>0 then necessarily q must increase. If, however, dt/dycO then

the effect on quality is ambiguous.10

     Returning to expression (8( ,    it is possible to rewrite dW/dyb

                             (ôq./Ot(] (dE./dyb(] + uc +   v' (Oq./ô)     (15)




The last two terms in this expression are always positive. In addition, note

that _ucph+v' (Oq/ât( (evaluated at y=y( is, by Assumption 1, negative for j=1

(since ycy1( and positive for j=2 (since y>y2) .      Thus, if dE/dyb is

positive, expression (l5( is positive for j=2 and ambiguous for j=l. Of


     91f u(c,h( is homothetic then ôE/8y (for s given '( is positive
(negetive) if -v"q/v' is less (greeter) than one. Furthermore, the dq/dy
(for a given median voter) is positive regerd'ees of the sign of

 -
     101f u is homothetic then dq/dy is positive regardless of the sign of
dt/dy.
                                      —14—




course, if dE/dyb<O snd dq/dy>O thsn (15) is necessarily positive for

j=l,2.

      In general, as our preceding discussion indicstes, it is impossible to

sign (15) without imposing further restrictions on preferences. In sll our

simulations, however, we found dwj/dYb to be positive. Furthermore, without

additional assumptions it is impossible to guarantee existence or uniqueness

of equilibrium.11 In our simulations we restrict our choice of utility

functions and parameter values such that equilibrium exists and is unique.

     Figure 2 depicts a possible configuration of the W() curves.

Equilibrium id given by

3. The Model with Exogenous Zoning

     This section studies the effects on welfare and allocations of an

exogenously imposed zoning regulation in C1. The regulation requires all

individuals residing in C1 to purchase at least M>O units of hnusing. Section

4 then studies the case where the level of required housing purchases is

endogenously determined. There are two reasons for considering an exogenously

imposed H. First, once lot sizes have been determined and houses built it may

be difficult to change a zoning regulation. Hence, zoning regulations in

place today may reflect decisions that were made previously. Second, the

analysis of exogenously imposed zoning and the effect on various variables of

changes in its level provides insights for the analysis of an endogenous N.


           introduction of a local housing supply function that endogenizes
--the price of a unit of housing in C.--generates simple conditions that
ensure the existence of a stable stratilied equilibrium )see Fernandez and
Rogerson )1993)) .
                                         —15—




     Zoning regulations are only introduced in C1, the wealthy community.

This asymmetry serves to highlight the possible effects of zoning regulations

on allocations across communities. A natural interpretation of this situation

ia that of a central city and its suburbs, where C1 corresponds to the suburb

and C2 represents the central city.


3.1 General Properties

     In order to examine the effects of zoning on the equilibrium described in

section 2, we must first establish that our propositions regarding

stratification and the median voter continue tn     hold.   The following result

and two additional assumptions allow us to establish both.

Pr000sition 3: For a given allocation of individuals in s community and a

given H, dV(ir,q,y;H(/dt is continuous and increasing in y for y>irH.

Proof:   For   individuals for whom the housing constraint is binding, i.e.

h(n,y(cH, (but with strictly postive consumption of the private good).

dV/dt--u0pH÷v'3g/Ot which is increasing in y. For unconstrained individuals,

dV/dt-uph+v'Oq/ât which, by Assumption 1, is strictly increasing in y. Note

that these last two expressions are identical at the y level st which en

individual is just constrained (i.e. for y such that h)w,y)=M) .     Hence dV/dt

is a continuous increasing function of y. I     I



     If y/ircH then an individual with that level of income cannot afford to
purchase H units of housing et the given (after tax) price level. It is

assumed that in such a case the individual is forced to spend her entire

income on housing. This yields her V=-m end thus dv/dt=O fr alLy and t         in
this range.
                                        —16—




     Propostion 3 allows us, for any given H, to identify the tax rate chosen

in C with the preferred tax rate of the individual whose income is median in

the community. A statement and a proof of this is provided in the next

propositon. It is assumed throughout that an individual faced with a choice

between two tax rates each of which (because of the zoning constraint(

exhausts her entire income on housing, votes for the lowest of the two tax

rates.

Proposition 4: Majority voting in C1, at any given level of H, generates a tax

rate preferred by the median voter.

Proof: A tax rate t' greater than that preferred by the median voter (0)

will be blocked by those individuals with ys. To see this note that if the

median voter prefers £ to t' then f(dV(ir,g,;M(/dt(dt (integrated from £ to

t'( is negative. By Proposition 3, then, f(dV(a,q,y;M(/dt)dt is also negative

for all y such that Mcycç and is zero for those individuals with ysM.

Similarly, any tax rate t'smaller than £ will be rejected in favor of 0

since if f(dv(s,q,;H(/dt(dt (integrated from t' to 0) is positive, then (by

Proposition 4) S(dV(s,q,y;M(/dt(dt is necessarily positive for all y>. 1

     Two things should be noted from the preceding propositiona. First, in

equilibrium yv7r1M since otherwise, by our assumption on preferencea,       would

prefer C2 to C1 if residing in the latter implied zero consumption of the

private good. Second, note that the proof of Proposition 4 does not rely on

the indirect utility function being single-peaked with respect to t. This is

important since, as we show further on, V(.( is not neceasarily single—peaked.

     In order to establish stratification in this model we need to impose two

additional conditions on preferences:
                                             —17—




    Assumption 4: du)y-.wh,h)/dir a    0.

    Assumption 5: uCh a o.12

    The significance of these assumptions will be made clear in the proof of the

    next proposition.

    Proposition 5: If in equilibrium both communities are non-empty and q'q,

    then the equilibrium must be stratified, i.e. all individuals with income

    above some cutoff level reside in C1 and the remainder reside in C2.

    jgg: This argument is less straightforward than that employed in the proof

    of Proposition 1 since now individuals may be constrained in C1. Suppose that

    in equilibrium an individual with income y' is indifferent between both

    communities. If that individual is unconstrained, normality of h implies that

    no other individual in C1 is constrained and the result then follows from

    Proposition 1.    If, on the other hand, the indifferent individual is

    constrained, there are two subcases to examine depending on whether t is

    greater or smaller than t (note that y' must have strictly positive

    consumption of the private good in C1 in both cases) .   We   take up each of

    these possibilities in turn.

    Ci). Suppose t>t. We want to show that individuals with income greater

    than y' prefer C1 to C2. Note that the change in utility due to the increase

H   in quality incurred by moving from C2 to C1 is the same for all individuals.

    Consequently, we want


                                       >
                     Ou)-s1MM)/OIy,         ôu(ir2hh)/ãIy     i.e,

                                    a u)y'-s2h,h)
                     u(y'-ir1M,M)


         12Note that Assumptions 2 and 3 combined imply that nh is an increasing
    function of it.
                                       —18—




Since 711>52 and M>h(s1,y'(, Assumptions 4 and S imply that the above condition

is met. Furthermore, since V(ir1,q1,y)-V(s2,q2,y)=fu0(y—ir1M,M)dy-fu0(y-

ir2h,h)dy >0, where the integral is from y' to y" and y" is defined as the

level of y such that h(s1,y)=M), these assumptions guarantee that all

constrained individuals with y>y' prefer C1 to C2. Note that in particular

Assumption 4 implies V(1T11,q1,y";M)aV(7rr2,q2,y"). Assumption 1 then ensures

that all individuals with y>y" also prefer C1.

(ii) Given zoning, sn equilibrium in which C1 possesses both a greater quality

and a       tax rate is feasible. Since, absent the zoning constraint, all

individuals would prefer C1 to C2, it must be that y' is constrained in

equilibrium. In order for other constrained individuals with y>y' td prefer

C1 to C2, we require (as before) u0)y'—ir1N,M)>u0)y'-s2h,h) .   Note that

implies M>h)ir2,y'). Thus, for y' to be indifferent between the two

communities we must have c1=y'-ir1Mcc2=y'—ir2h)1r2,y'). Assumption S then

guarantees u0(y'—,r1M,M)>u0)y'—1r2h,h( snd similarly that

V)m2,q2,y)=fu0(y-ir1M,M)dy-5u0(y-n2h,h)dy >0 for any y euch that y'cycy".

Thus, all constrained individuals (with y>y') prefer C1 to C2 as do, of

course, all unconstrained individuals.


3.2 Preliminary Analysis

     In order to examine how zoning and changes in the level of zoning affect

the equilibrium, we first turn to an analysis of the effect on the          curves

of changes in N. Note first that only the N1 curve is affected by M and that

if, for a given allocation of individuals between communities, the

housing/consumption choice of any individual in C1 is affected by zoning, then
                                              —19—




so is Yb's. Furthermore, in order for the equilibrium with zoning to differ

from the no—zoning equilibrium, the restriction must be sufficiently large

that y is constrained by M.

     We now define Wl)yb;M) as the utility of the b individual in C1 given a

zoning level of M in C1. W2(y) is defined as before. Differentiating

Wl(yb;M) with respect to M for the range of values such that y>1rM and

h)7r,yb)cM yields:



        = -u(m+pM(OE/OM))   +        +   v   [)Sq/Ot) )dE/ÔM)+Oq/OM]          (16)
                                uh


where the preferred tax rate of the individual with median income is now

indicated by t(yb;M) and quality is written as q(ty;M). Individual housing

demand, h)ir,y;M), now also depends on Wand is equal to h)ir,y) if the latter

is greater than or equal to M and is equal to M otherwise.

     It is difficult to sign expression (16) .          To do so it is necessary to

examine the effect of changes in M on the median voter's preferred tax rate

and quality for a given value of b• Algebraically, E)y:M) solves:

              Max u(y-sh,h) + v(q)                                     (17)
               t

     When M=O, Assumptions 2 and 3 guarantee that this is a concave

maximization problem, but when M>O they are no longer sufficient since q is no

longer a concave function of t. In particular, q)t,y;W) has an inflection

point at the tax rste that separates two regions: one of low taxes in which no

individual is constrained end one of higher taxes such that at least some

individual is constrained. Thus, depending on the utility function, there is

no guarantee that the maximization program is concave.
                                                     —20—




       The first order condition for the preferred tax rate of the individual

with median income is


           —up(h+irh) + uhph             +   v'aq/at        0
                                                                   (18)




Note that if h>M, then _Uc1T+Uh=O whereas if h=M then h5=0.

      When the median voter chooses a tax rate such that she is unconstrained,

use of the implicit function rule on (18) yields:13


                    dt                 (p/N1) (v'A+v"B)
                               —                                   (19)
                                             aR/at
where R(t,M,y)=..uph+v' (ôq/ôt) and the second order condition implies aR7at<0.

Furthermore,


A =   a2q/aMat =                   -
                                       tph (y,s)g(y) (ày/aM) > 0
                   JYcg(y)dy

                                                       2
B = )ôq/àM) (ag/at)      tPJcP(Y)dY. tph+tp ) > 0

and        -
      1
  =
      — J h(7r,y)dy      <   0.
           yc


Note that yc(5M) is defined as the income level such that h)y7r)=M.

      As should be apparent from the definitions of A and B above, the sign of

aE/oM is ambiguous without further assumptions. It is straightforward to

show however, the implied quality increases with M independently of the effect

of M on t as long as q is locally concave in t at t. Clearly, if t


     13The above discussion implies that the preferred tax rate may have a
point of discontinuity. The comparative statics results that follow are
obviously not valid at such a point.
                                      —21—




increases then so does g. If t decreases Assumption 2 implies that uch

decreases, whereas local concavity of g and the increase in N both imply that

Oq/Ot increases. Were q to decrease this would imply an increase in v', in

which case (18) cannot be satisfied. Thus, q must increase.

     A similar exercise for a median voter that chooses t such that she is

constrained yields:


                aE      — (ulruh]PMuP+ (p/N1) [v'A+v"E)         (20)
                                      OR/at



As before, the second order condition implies 3R/OtcO. Note that the

additional terms in the numerator of this expression as compared with (19) are

all negative. Thus it is quite likely that the effect of a marginal increase

in N is to increase the preferred tax rate of the median voter when the latter

is unconstrained and to decrease it when the median voter is constrained.

     To illustrate the effect of zoning on t and g we simulate the model for

the following functional forms: u)c,h)=Nc°-l)÷)h°-l))/)3o) ,   v)q)=)g1-1)/)3y)
and g(y)=a0+a1y, g(y)'o =1 and p=l. For this utility function u(0,h)=-r,

ucho. and Assumptions 1 snd 4 reduce to mc0.

     Figure 3 examines the median voter's utility as a function of t for given

values of N (keeping    constant) for two different sets of parameter values

of the utility function. In Example 1, m=-10 and y"1x104 whereas in Example

2, o-lxl04 and y=.5. In both cases y=20, a0=.1l08, and 5l=0055• We will

make continued use of these particular examples to illustrate various

properties of this model and hereafter refer to them as Example 1 and 2

respectively. For both examples in Figure 3, at the lowest value of N
                                     —22—




portrayed all individuala are unconatrained for all values of t indicated.

For all other values of M, the V(ir,q';M) curves coincide with the

unconstrained curve at sufficiently low tax rates and diverge from it as soon

as any individual becomes constrained.

     Note that the patterns portrayed in Example 1 and 2 are different. All

the V(.) curves in Example 2 are double peaked. One peak corresponds to the

tax rate that maximizes utility for the unconstrained curve. The other occurs

where a large number of individuals (including the median voter) are

constrained. In this example the preferred tax rate is discontinuous at the

point at which the maximum switches from the first peak to the second peak.

In Example 1, on the other hand, the curves appear to be single peaked and

thus there is no discontinuity in t. In both cases, for small values of N,

E is equal to the tax rate that maximizes utility for the unconstrained

curve. For N sufficiently large, though, the optimum is attained at a lower

value of t but one sufficiently high that the median voter is constrained.

     Figure 3A summarizes for Examples 1 and 2 t)yb;N) and g)ty;M) as a

function of N. As Eximple 1 shows, E and q need not follow the same pattern:

E can decrease even when the median voter is unconstrained while q continues

to increase. Example 2 has E and q moving in sync.

     It should be clear that for sufficiently small values of N, Ot/ÔN=O

since the value of t that maximizes the median voter's utility remains

unchanged by small changes in N if no individual was constrained at the

previous preferred tax rate. As N continues to increase, it takes

progressively smaller tax rates for the median voter to be constrained and

this will shift the preferred value of t. To explain this behavior, note that
                                       —23—




for small values of H it takes far too large a t to completely eliminste the

free rider effect (i.e. to get all individuals with ycy to consume H units of

housing) .   Hence the preferred t in this range will either be the

unconstrained value of t or one that has only some individuals with yc

constrained. Increases in H allow the median voter to completely eliminate

the free rider problem at "reasonable" values of t (and, of course, also to

obtain greater quality at lower tax rates) .   Hote also that if t did not fall

once the median voter were constrained, higher values of H would impose

progressively greater disutility on that individual as consumption of the

private good would continue to decrease. Hence it is quite understandable

that once the median voter is constrained, further H increases tend to have

the effect of decreasing the preferred tax rate.


3.3 Equilibrium

     The main questions of interest are: 1. How does zoning affect the

allocation of individuals between communities? 2. How does zoning affect the

equilibrium qualities of education in both communities? 3. How are

equilibrium taxes affected by zoning? And, most importantly, 4. How is

individual welfare affected by zoning?

     Hot surprisingly given our previous discussion, the effect of an increase

in H on W1)y;H) is ambiguous. In all our simulations, however, W1(y;H) fell

for a marginal incresse in H in the vicinity of y.14 Hence, in all our

simulations an increase in H is associated with an increase in y(H)


     14An example where W(y;H) increases for an interval of       that does not
include y is for the parameter values of Example 2 for H=7.
                                         —24—




     Figure 4 shows, for two exsrnples )psrsmeters are indicated on the

Figure) , how the equilibrium value of          is affected by changes in N. Each N1

curve shown corresponds to a different value of N and is labeled accordingly.

Also shown is the N2 curve which, of course, is independent of N. For both of

these examples, increases in N have the effect of shifting the N1 curve

downwards, resulting in each case in progressively higher equilibrium values

of y, )i.e. y)N) is an increasing function of N) .        Thus the effect of

zoning in these examples is to increase the number of individuals that live in

C2 )and hence decrease the number of individuals in C1) .       Despite the
ambiguous nature of our theoretical result, this is not surprising. If y is

to differ as a result of zoning, it must be the case that at the t*(N) chosen

by the median voter,      is constrained. Ceteris paribus, this has the effect

of making    worse off.

     Table 1 presents, for the same two examples aa Figure 4, the equilibrium

tax rates, qualities of public education, y, and the mean and median incomes

across communities as a function of different levels of N imposed in C1.

      A few things should be noted from Table 1.        First, as suggested by our

previous discussion of the effect on Eyb;r.U and q)t,y;N) of an increase in

N, equilibrium tax rates and quality in C1 are not generally monotonic

functions of N. Quality first increases and then decreases with N and the tax

rate behaves similarly )though not necessarily in sync) .       In   C2, the tax rate

and quality are both increasing functions of N.15         Again, the intuition

behind these results is easy to understand: The effect of a median voter with


     15Theoretically it is possible for both taxes and quality to decrease.
For the utility function and the parameter values chosen, however, they must
increase as indicated in the footnote that follows equation (13)
                                       —25—




greater income is, ceteris paribus, to increase the tax rate (and hence

quality) .   The effect of greater average housing (brought about by the

increase in y) for a given median voter, however, has ambiguous effects on

the tax rate and consequently on quality. It is interesting to note thst in

both examples the ratio of q to q decreases as M increases.

     Lastly, note that as indicated by the last row in both examples, it is

possible for an equilibrium to result in C1 possessing not only a greater

quality of education but also a lower tax rate. A sufficiently high level of

zoning ensures that lower income individuals keep out due to the large

sacrifice in consumption of the private good that their residence in C1 would

entail.

     The effect of zoning on individual welfare is quite interesting. Figures

S)a,b) and 6)a,b,c,d,e) show, at various levels of detail, the effect of

different values of N imposed in C1 on the welfare of individuals in both

communities for the same two examples as in Figure 4. At each N, for each

income level, individual utility has been calculated at the new equilibrium

allocations of individuals, given the new equilibrium quality and tax rate in

each community. In all cases the new level of y brought about by a change

in N can be discerned in the figures by the sharp increase in the slope of the

corresponding N1 curve.

      In both of our examples, the effect of an N increase is to make the

poorest individuals worse off. Why is this? Note that in all cases the

effect of higher N is to increase t and q. If any residents in C2 sre to

be made worse off as a result of this, they must be the poorest ones since

these are, by Assumption 1, the least happy with a tax increase for a given
                                     —26—




quality increase. This is seen clearly in Figures 5(a) and 6(b). This

interval of poor individuals that reside in C2 and that prefer no zoning to

any level of zoning is followed by another income interval, likewise residents

of C2 for all levels of M, that prefer some level of zoning to no zoning.

These are individuals that have benefited from either one or both of the

following elements: )i) 5 new median voter that is closer to them in income

than was the case previously and, (ii) a greater average housing consumption

at each after-tax price than previously.    Note, however, that within this

interval individual's ranking of which level of N they prefer may differ since

these two effects will vary in strength according to the level of N imposed.

Next is an interval of individuals (of length depending on N) that reside in

C1 when N=O but with zoning reside in C2. Individuals in the lower part of

this interval prefer some zoning to no zoning, whereas individuals in the

upper part of this interval are' worse off and prefer no zoning. This is to be

expected. If any individual that moves from C1 to C2 as a result of an N

increase is to be made worse off, it should be those with the highest income

level since these are the ones whose q,t tradeoff is most different from that

of the median voter in C2. Finally there is an interval of individuals (again

of varying length) who reside in C1 both before and after zoning is imposed.

For N sufficiently large, all of these individuals may be worse off, but for

smaller values of N the lower income individuals are worse off with zoning and

the higher income indHidusls sre better off with zoning. The lowest income

individuals who remain in C1 benefit from s possibly higher g but suffer from

low consumption because of the zoning constraint, Of course, all individuals

in C1 must purchase N units of housing, but the disutility from so doing is
                                     —27—




greater for the lower income individuala in C1.

     In summary, the introduction of zoning tends to make the rich community

more exclusive, lowers utility of the poorest individuals and raiaea the

utility of the richest individuals. For individuals in the middle" of the

income distribution, however, welfare changes are not monotone in income. In

particular, a group of individuala that leave C1 are made better off at the

same time that a group of individuals that move to C2 and a group that remain

in C1 are made worae off.


4. Endogenous Zoning

     The previous section treated M as an exogenous parameter and studied its

effect on the equilibrium. This section allows the zoning restriction to be

endogenously determined and illustrates the properties of equilibrium through

some examples. The game played by communities and individuals is accordingly

modified. As before, in the first stage, all individuals simultaneously

choose a community in which to reside. Once this choice is made, individuals

are unable to move in sny subsequent stage. Zn the second stage, individuals

in C1 determine a level of required housing N through a process of majority

voting. In the third stags, individuals in both communities choose tax rates,

also by majority voting, and individuals make their housing and consumption

purchases and obtain education.


4.1 Preliminary Anslysis:

     Zn order to shed light on the general equilibrium analysis that follows,

it is useful to start by analyzing the problem of endogenoua zoning within a

simple, partial equilibrium context that allows us to highlight some of ita

main properties.
                                        -28—




     Table 2 presenta information for the choices made by an individual with

income ç=12.9289 when this individual is able to dictate the choice of tax

rate and zoning level. In this one community example y=l0, the density has

support on (1,20], and NI indicates no zoning choice allowed, whereas Z

indicates the      is able to zone. The subscripts indicate various intervals

of the income distribution: I (Identical) ,    B   (Bottom) , TR (Top Truncated) ,     T

(Top), and A (All) which correspond to the intervals (',] ,           [1,c.)   [,l5J
(ç',2o] and [y,20] respectively.

     As a first step, assume that all individuals are identical and have

income y: Note that, as illustrated in the second row of Table 2, were these

individuals able to choose a zoning level, they would choose N such thst

h)ir,)cN. A binding level of N would be chosen since, in its absence, the

equilibrium would be inefficient given that each individual's contribution to

the average housing demand is infinitesimal and hence housing demand is too

small,

     If individuals are not identical, however, an additional consideration is

introduced. In particular, in the absence of zoning an individual with income

  is making an implicit transfer to all individuals with income lowsr than

since these purchase less housing. Thus, as shown by the third and fourth

rows of Table 2,     would choose to impose the same zoning level as before and

thus achieve the same allocation as with identical individuals.

     If   is faced with individuals with income greater than y, yet another

consideration is introduced. The desire for '       to   enjoy an implicit transfer

from individuals witi' income strictly greater than .         This,   however, is

accomplished via the tax rate chosen, not the level of zoning, although of
                                      —29—




course, ss shown in the lest four rows of the table, there is an interaction

between the tax rate and the level of zoning chosen. Note that in the case TR

the    individual prefers some zoning even though they are at the bottom of

the income distribution and that the highest values of N result in cases I and

B. Another common feature is that when a binding zoning constraint is chosen,

the preferred tax rate also falls.


4.2 Equilibrium

      As before, an equilibrium can be depicted graphically as the intersection

of two curves, W1(y) and W2(y), where W2(y) is unchanged and W1(y) is now

the utility obtained by an individual with income     when residing in C1 given

that N, t and q are chosen according to the two-stage procedure outlined

above. Note that Proposition 5 implies that any equilibrium in which quality

differs across communities must be stratified. Furthermore, Proposition 4

implies that the third stage voting over tax rates results in a preferred tax

rate of the individual with median income. What differs from the previous

analysis is the addition of a stage in which individuals vote over the zoning

level N. In this stage individuals take as given the function t(yt;M) which

will determine tax rates in the third stage conditional on the level of N

chosen.    The preferred level of N of an individual with income y is defined

by:


               Max                                                  (21)




      Assuming that ir and q are differentiable at the preferred pcxnt, the

first order condition for this problem is:
                                                —30—




                      -   uC (y-wh,h)hOir   +   v' (q)Oq      if h>N
                                      ON               ON
                                                                                 (22)

                 -u(y-irN,N) (MOe +11]     + u(y-1rNN)      +v' (q)Oq   if heN
                                ON                                ON



     Figure 7 displays implied preferences over N for different levels of y as

wall as E and the implied quality as a function of N for the case of o-2,

y=.000i (as in the second panel of Table 1) when y=J.3.B. This example

illustrates two features. First, the preferences over N are not single peaked

and, second, the preferred value of N is not a monotone function of y. The

two highest incomes indicated on the diagram have preferred values of N that

lie to the left of the preferred value of N for yl7. As illustrated by the

tax and quality curves in the bottom panel, this preference for a lower N by

individuals with higher y indicates their preference for a higher tax rate and

higher quality.

     Recall that preferences over tax rates for any given N are not generally

single peaked. Nonetheless, it was shown that a majority voting equilibrium

always exists and that the individual with median income was decisive, A

similar result is not available for the case of voting over N; it is easy to

provide examples in which the individual with median income is no longer the

decisive voter. In general there may be cases where a majority vote

equilibrium does not exist. Below we provide two examples where a majority

voting equilibriumdoes exist (though the decisive voter is not the one with

median income)

     In particular, for each of the two specifications in Table 1 we have

computed the subqame perfect equilibrium for the three-stage game described
                                       —31—




above. The results appear in Table 3. In both caaea voting over H results in

a value     auch that half the individuals have a preferred value of H no

greater than      and half the individuals have a preferred value of H no less

than M. In both examples M* is smaller than the level of H preferred by the

individual whose income is median in C1.

     A few points are worth noting about Table 3. In each case the

equilibrium has both higher tax rates and higher quality of public education

in C1, as is true in the equilibrium without zoning. Table 3 also indicatss

the degree to which the zoning restriction is binding for the boundary

individual and the individual with medisn income. In both examples a majority

of individuals are constrained. A comparison with Table 1 indicates how the

outcomes with endogenous zoning compare with those in which there is no

zoning. In particular, in each case the rich community becomes more

exclusive, and both the tax rate and the quality of public education increase

in both communities. The welfare analysis in the previous section indicates

the pattern of those whose utilities increase and decrease as a result of the

introduction of zoning.



s.   conclusion
     It is important to understand the role played by various factors in

generating the large disparities across communities in per student spending on

public education. Community zoning regulations undoubtedly affect this

outcome although just how zoning regulations interact with income

distribution, community composition, tax rates, and the provision of local

public goods is far from clear cx ante. This paper sims to provide some
                                     —32—




insights into these interactions by studying the effects of zoning in a two—

community model in which each community uses a local property tax to finance

public education. Tax rates are chosen by majority vote and individuals

decide in which community they wish to reside. We examine both the case of an

exogenously imposed zoning regulation as well as one which is determined

endogenously through majority vote at the community level.

     Zoning affects outcomes through several channels. First, the imposition

of zoning changes the allocation of individuals across communities, thereby

affecting each community's distribution of income. Second, for a given

allocation of individuals, zoning affects the tax base available to that

community. Third, zoning affects the property tax chosen, via majority vote,

within a community.

     Theoretical analysis indicates a wide range of possible effects.

Simulations revealed several interesting results. First, the rich community

becomes more exclusive, increasing mean income in both communities. Second,

the tax rate and quality increase in both communities under endogenous zoning

but not necessarily under exogenous zoning. Third, welfare effects are not

monotone in income. Although the richest people are made better off and the

poorest people sre made worse off, high income individuals in the poor

community are made better off and low income individuals in the rich community

ere made worse off. Fourth, zoning leads to greater spending per student in

the poor community, and may either increase or decrease the differences in the

quality of education across communities. Fifth, an individual's preferred

level of zoning is not monotone in her income. Thus majority voting over

zoning need not result in the preferred level of the individual with median

income.
                                     —33—




     Many questions remain open to analysis. It would be of great interest to

                                                                able to make use
change the form of the game analyzed so that individuals were

of zoning (and taxea( directly as an instrument to attract certain segments   of


the population or keep others out.16 The introduction of private schooling.

while it would complicate the analysis considerably, would also add greater

realism and thus prove to be of interest. Additional insights would be gained

by allowing the number of communities to be determined endogenously but not

coatlessly.




     16For a paper that uses thia alternative extensive form, see Epple and
Romer (199l(
                                       —34—




                                   References




 Benabou, R., "Workings of a City: Location, Education and Production," mimeo
 MIT 1991)


 Csrd, D., and A. Krueger, "Does School Quality Matter? Returns to Education
 and the Characteristics of public Schools in the United States, " Journal of
 Political Economy 100 (1992), 1—40.


 de Bartolome, C., "Equilibrium and Inefficiency in a Community Model with Peer
 Group Effects," Journal of Political Economy 99 (1990), 110—133.


Durlauf, S., "A Theory of Persistent Income Inequality", mimec, Stanford
 (1992)



Epple, D., Falimon, R., and T. Romer, "Equilibrium Among Local Jurisdictions:
Toward an Integrated Treatment of Voting and Residential Choice," Journal of
Public Economics 24 (1994), 281—308.


Epple, D., Romer, T. and R. Filimon, "Community Development With Endogencus
Land Use Controls," Journal of Public Economics 35 (1988), 133-162


Epple, D., and T. Romer, "Mobility and Redistribution," Journal of Political
Economy 99 (1991), 828—8S8.


Fernandez, R., and R. Rogerson, "Income Distribution, Communities and the
Quality of Public Education, A Policy Analysis, " NBER
                                                       Working Paper, 1992


Fernandez R., and R. Rogerson, "Existence of Equilibrium in Multi-Community
Models, " work in progress, (1993)


Mamilton, B., "Zoning and Property Taxation in a System of Local Governments,"
Urban Studies 12 (1975), 205—211.



Menderson, V., "Community Development, The Effects of Growth and
Uncertainty," American Economic Review 70 (1980) , 894-910.
                                     —35—




Pogodzinski, J.M., and T. Sass, "The Economic Theory of Zoning: A Critical
Review," Land Economics 66 (1990), 294—314.


pogodzinski, J.M. and T. Sass, "Measuring the Effects of Municipal Zoning
Regulations: A Survey," Urban Studies 28 (1991) , 597—621.


Roberts, K.W.S., "Voting Over Income Tax Schedules," Journal of Public
Economics 8 (1977), 329—340.


Rose-Ackerman, S., "Market Models of Local Government: Exit, Voting and the
Land Market," journal of Urban Economy 6 (1979), 319-337.


Westhoff, F., "Existence of Equilibria in Economies Mith a Local Public Good,"
journal of Economic Theory 14 (1977), 84-112.
A


    C
         ty)




vs



     a
   FIGURE 3
   EXAMPLE    1:a'=-1O   '1X1O4




 lax tate

EXANPLE     2: o(=-IXIO4 I'. S




   20

 tax rate
                                 FIGURE 3A

1.   a—O         •v=1 X IO




         is corstrained for 1.1

2.   Q1X1O4




     -\
     y   is corstrair.e for )•>.75
                        FICtJRE 4




                           yb
                  (1) (=—1o Y1=1x1o4




0.5




      2   4   6     8     10    12     14   16   18

                          yb
                  (ii) ( =—2 =1xio—4
             FIGURE 5
        0< =-1O




                   3.5

                    y

                  5(a)




6   8   10        12       14   16   18   20



                    5(b)
             FIGURE 6
             -2 Y=ixio4




-0.5


  -1


-1.5


  -2


-2.5




                y
              6(a)




       1.4     1.5   1.6   1.7   1.8   19   2




               6(b
           FIGURE 6 (CONT)




    -0.1
=
    -0.2

    -0.3

    -0.4

    -0.5




                 y
                 6(c)




>




                 6(d)
FIGURE 6 (CaNT)




     y
   6 (e)
                           FIGURE 7




                              M




V
Ct




Ct
C.   7


     6

     5



         1.2   1.4   1.6       1.8
                                 TABLE 1A

              Total Spending ($) Per Student for 1986—87 Academic Year
                        (Primary and Secondary Schooling)




    Boston Area              Detroit Area                  New York Area


Quincy       3,693      Dearborn            2,6814     Mount Vernon   6,328
Lynn         3,788      Highland Park       3,105      New York City 6,433
Somerville   4,693      East Detroit       3,740       Levittown      7,210
Maiden       4,820      Detroit            3,854       Baldwin        7,251
Jaltham      5,207      Pontiac            4,553       Hempstead      7,462
Newton       5,515      Royal Oak          5,172       New Rochelle   7,970
Brookline    5,887      Grosse Pointe      5,705       Syosset        9,125
Boston       6,773      Birmingham         6,668       White Plains 11,045
Cambridge    7,244      Bloomfield Hills   6,976       Great Neck    12,868




Source: 1987 Census of Governments
                                          TABLE 1

                               (i) o—10 i—1X10
         b*       *
                 q1
                         *
                         t1
                                  *
                                 q2
                                      *     *
                                             t2     S]
                                                           *
                                                           Y1     2
                                                                   *     ,*

14—0    7.28    8.86    7.37    1.45        1.21    12.40 11.94   4.48   3.59


14-1    12.36   12.33 10.63     2.92        2.09    14.89 14.58   5.86   4.33

14—5    18.35   12.60   2.52    3.95        2.55    18.90 18.83   7.25   4.90


14—10   18.70    7.85    .79     3.97       2.55    19.15 19.10   7.28   4.91


                               (ii)       a—2 i—1X1O

           *
          Yb
                   *
                  q1
                          *
                         t1       q2
                                      *       *
                                             t2      l *
                                                      *
                                                           Yl
                                                                    *
                                                                   P2
                                                                          *
                                                                          Y2    -

M—0      2.36    4.38   2.92      .28        .43    8.27   7.56   1.70   1.61



M—1      5.80    6.45   4.23      .98        .96 10.53     9.96   3.28   2.82


M—2     13.87 11.42     5.64     2.64       1.71 15.91 15.67      6.34   6.55


M—5     15.00    9.35   1.87     2.81       1.76 16.67 16.46      6.69   4.68


M—10    16.70    5.05    .59     3.02       1.82 17.80 17.67      7.01   4.82
                          TAZLE 2

                          a—]. •y—1
        t     q           N      h(w,y)    V(r,q,yM)

       1.11   4.02    —             3.64    1.4288

        .99   4.30   4.32           3.79    1.4346

       1.19   3.68    —             3.53    1.4178
NZB

Z       .99   4.30   4.32           3.79    1.4346

       1.07   4.23    —             3.69    1.4347
NZTR

ZTR    1.04   4.27   4.08           3.73    1.4349

       1.01   4.50    —             3.78    1.4420
NZT

Z.r
       1.01   4.50    0             3.78    1.4420

       1.09   4.11    —             3.66    1.4314
NZA

ZA     1.02   4.38   4.12           3.76    1.4376
                   TABLE 3



         Example   1         Example 2



           18.0B              13.90
            1.23              2.09
           13.07               5.37
           2.54                1.71
           16.19             11.36
            3.93              2.64
h(w,y)      1.17               1.69

            1.21               1.91
