NBER Working Paper No. 4355, May 1993

Currency

Hedging Over Long Horizons

*

Kenneth A. Froot
Harvard and NBER

April 20, 1993

Abstract
of inThis paper reexamines the widely-held wisdom that the currency exposure
ternational investments should be entirely hedged. It finds that the previouslyreturn variance holds at short
documented ability of hedges to reduce portfolio
horizons, but not at long horizons. At horizons of several years, complete hedging

not only does not lower return variance, it actually increases the return variance
minimize long-run return variance are
of many portfolios. Hedge ratios chosen to
The paper
not only low, they also have no perceptible impact on return variance.
their
reports and explores these results, their apparent causes, and investigates
implications for hedging practice.

• 1 thank Bob Merton, André Perold, and Jeremy Stein for helpful discussions, and am grateful
of Research at liar-yard Business School for generous research support.

to the Department

Currency Hedging Over Long Horizons

1. Introduction
There is considerable disagreement about how international investors should
think about currency risk. Should investors hold the currency components of their

foreign investments, or should they hedge them out? What is the right currency
hedge ratio in the absence of any special information? These questions are being
posed repeatedly today, just as the international diversification question was posed
a decade or two ago.

On the face of it, there is a simple and compelling argument in favor of hedg-

ing which has recently gained wide acceptance among practitioners. It says that
investors should hedge fully because currency hedges do not lower expected returns,

yet substantially reduce the risks of international investment.1 Empirical evidence
(using high-frequency data) indeed suggests that exchange—rate changes in excess of

the forward discount average about zero, and have virtually no correlation with almost any variable, including local-currency returns. It therefore appears as though
the currency aspect of international investment is pure roulette — lots of independent risk which provides no additional average reward. International asset managers

should therefore think of currency hedging as a foregone policy conclusion, or, in
the words of Perold and Schulman (1988), as a "free lunch."2

This paper reexamines the logic and evidence behind this popular argument.

I argue that the "free—lunch" case for hedging is a short-horizon argument, and
that it generally applies only if real exchange rates follow random walks. If, on the
other hand, real exchange rates and asset prices display mean reversion, investors'
optimal portfolio policies will generally depend on investor horizon. Investors with

relatively long horizons may prefer to hedge a good deal less than the free-lunch
1Throughout the paper, the return on a currency hedge denotes the nominal return from holding short-term
domestic bills less the domestic-currency cost of short-term, foreign-currency-denominated borrowing.
3While there are a number of papers that make this argument, the most influential have been those of Perold and
Schulman (1988) and Black (1989). Their studies (as well as those by Madura and Wallace (1985), .Jorion (1989),
Adler, Granito and Lee (1990), Bunk and Enni. (1990), Kaplanis and Schaefer (1991), Nesbitt (1991), and Glen and

.Jonion (199)) demonstrate that currency hedging can improve the risk-return tradeoff of a broad range of foreign
portfolios using monthly and, in some cases, quarterly returns.

1

argument would imply.3

horiI argue below that currency hedges have very different properties at long
that while over short horizons
zons compared with short horizons. The data show
often does not reduce
hedging reduces risk substantially, over long horizons, hedging
fully-hedged international investments

risk at all. hi fact, at long horizons, many
actually have greater return variance than their unhedged counterparts.
The properties of currency hedges vary with horizon in part because hedge
At relatively short
returns at different horizons are driven by very different factors.
dominated by changes in real exchange rates, i.e., in the
horizons, hedge returns are
reversion
purchasing power of one currency compared with another. However, mean
toward parity, so
in real exchange rates implies that these purchasing powers tend
remain roughly constant.4 At long horizons,

that real exchange rates over time

differences in

hedge returns are instead dàminated by fluctuations in cross-country
latter
unexpected inflation and real interest differentials. The importance of this
component grows the longer the hedge remains in place.5
and inflaThis decomposition of hedge returns into real exchange rate changes
have very diftion/real_interest-rate surprises is useful because most asset classes
ferent exposures to the components. Unfortunately, common hedging instruments
it impossible to hedge each exposure
bundle the two components together, making
for investors priseparately. The result is that hedge ratios must strike a balance —
moments, hedge ratios should primarily reflect
marily concerned with long-horizon
while for those concerned
exposure to relative inflation and interest rate surprises,

continuously then horizons will not matter either if investor preferences
3if investor, can trade costlessly and
(i9) and
random
walks and investor preferences are iso.elastic. (Samuelson
are logarithmic, or if returns follow
follow a random walk,
returns
when
allocation
Merton (1969) show that investor horizon ha. no impact on asset
investors are myopic. i.e., that the solution to their

and Sasnuelson (1991). among others, shows that logarithmic only one period to live.) Section 6 below shows how
multiperiod investment problem is the same as though they had
mean.reverlion in asset prices. See also Froot (1993), which
investor horir.ons generally matter in the presence of
and investor
provides an equilibrium model of exchange.rate hedging that explicitly incorporates mean reversion
horizon.
purchasing power parity.
'See footnote 17 below for citations to the empirical literature
that on
expected real returns (in domestic.cumml) on
5Mean reversion in real exchange rates generally implies therdore wish to revise their portfolio allocations as

international investments change over time. Investors may
reversion in real exchange rates does not imply that expected
expected returns evolve. Note, however, that mean
returns on currency hedges are time-varying.

2

with short-horizon moments, hedge ratios should primarily reflect real-exchangerate exposure. In this sense, appropriate hedging policies can be quite sensitive to
investment horizon.

To see this logic at work, consider the following example. Suppose that a US
university endowment buys UK real estate. Suppose also that real-estate prices

are linked to the local CPI, at least over the longer run.6 Furthermore, in order
to avoid a "speculative" motive for hedging, assume that the expected return on
hedge positions is zero. Should the endowment hedge the currency component of
the real estate?

If there is a sudden fall in excess demand for the pound, both a nominal and
real depreciation will result in the short run. To the extent that local real estate

values are linked to the CPI, the real value of the UK real estate will also fall.
In other words, real estate is highly exposed to real exchange rate changes. And,
because real exchange-rate changes dominate hedge returns over short horizons,
hedging can reduce the return variation of the real estate. Thus, the endowment
should hedge if it wants to lower short-horizon return volatility.
This policy does not work, however, at long horizons. Over time, purchasing

power parity (PPP) holds. Subsequent

to the shock, the real value of the pound

must rise, through some combination of higher-than-expected UK inflation or lowerthan-expected UK interest rates. Either way, the dollar value of the real estate will

eventually be restored. In other words, at long horizons real estate is "naturally
hedged" (for a given value of the real exchange rate) against inflation and interest
rate surprises. Hedging thus does little to reduce long-horizon return volatility.
volatility. To see
In fact, complete hedging may. actually add to long-horizon
this, imagine that the endowment had hedged its investment in the financial mar-

kets. Years later, the value of the real estate would be the same as above, but the
financial hedge would have yielded an additional profit from the pound's unexpected
depreciation. If the opposite had occurred — that is, if the pound had appreciated
and dennitionailY (CPIs
6The assumption that real estate is linked to the CPI appears reasonable, both empirically
clear below, if this assumption is relaxed there ta
are constructed using real estate price). However, as will become
little reason to hedge even over short horisona.

3

due to a similar disturbance in the US — the hedge position would show a loss.
Thus, while the real estate is naturally hedged against inflation and interest rate
surprises, these surprises dominate hedge returns at long horizons. In this way, the
financial hedge can actually raise the volatility of real estate returns.

An identical set of arguments holds for UK stocks, which —

as

the results

below suggest — appear to have exposures to real-exchange rate changes and past

inflation/interest-rate surprises that are similar to those of real estate. That is, the
real domestic value of foreign stocks is not very sensitive to such surprises, given
the real exchange rate.7 On the other hand, the dollar value of UK stocks is highly

sensitive to the real exchange rate. This exposure pattern implies that hedging can
help reduce return variation at short horizons (where real-exchange rate changes

dominate hedge returns), but not at long horizons (where relative inflation shocks
dominate). Thus, a strategy of hedging international equity investments does not
by itself reduce long-horizon return variance.
The critical implication of these examples is that a wide variety of international

investments should probably not be hedged as aggressively when investors have

long horizons.8 The data presented below support this idea, and suggest that
while complete hedging is the best strategy for investors who care primarily about

short-horizon moments, no hedging at all is likely to be best for those who care
primarily about long-horizon moments. The case for "going naked" becomes even
stronger if one considers the transactions costs and counterparty risks that hedging
inevitably adds. In practice, it may be that over long horizons, unhedged portfolios
yield both lower long-horizon risk and higher average return than their fully-hedged

counterparts.
In addition to shedding light on hedging policy, our analysis has implications
for the appropriate benchmark against which the performance of foreign portfolios
should be measured. For example, pension investors with a long investment horizon
TBoudoukh and Richardson (1993) show that while domestic stocks are approximately uncorrelated with domestic
inflation over short horizons, they are highly positively correlated with domestic inflation over long horizons.
'A similar argument hold, for Snominal• assets, such as foreigTl-cUrrenCY-deflomiflated bonds sad bills. For details,
see the discimsion below.

4

may wish to use an unhedged portfolio benchmark for evaluating their portfolio
manager's performance. Investors with medium or short horizons, may prefer a
partially or fully hedged benchmark. More generally, the formulation of hedge ratios
should explicitly account for specific asset exposures and investment horizons.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses measurement and data
issues. Section 3 then examines the effect of currency hedges on return volatility
of different asset classes at different horizons. Section 4 decomposes hedge returns
into their two components — real interest differentials and changes in real exchange
rates — and examines the properties of each. It also reports

estimates of the asset

exposures to the individual hedge components. In order to help understand what
the long-horizon results imply for hedging practice, section 5 provides a theoretical
examination of how optimal hedging demands are determined by investor horizon,
preferences, and mean reversion in real exchange rates. Section 6 discusses several
other implications of the results. Finally, section 7 concludes.

2. Preliminaries
2.1. Notation and Methodology
Consider a domestic investor with an investment, X, denominated in a foreign

currency. Her k-period (log) real return can be written as:
(1)

the investment

where 4 is the continuously-compounded return in local currency on
between time t and t + Ast is the change in the log of the domestic-currencY
price of foreign exchange over the same time period; and r is the change in the
log of the domestic CPI.

An exchange-rate hedge involves short-term borrowing in one currency and
lending in the other. Denote the k-period domestic-currency log return on such a
hedge. by:

k—i

=

i4, )4 =
5

+ If t —

(2)

the foreign onewhere 1j,t is the continuousiycompounded local-currency return on
period riskless asset, and 1dt is the analogous return on the domestic riskless asset.

Naturally, these hedge returns can be synthesized in the futures market or in the
forward market by rolling over one—period contracts.9
Combining equations (1) and (2) yields the k-period return on a hedged invest-.
ment:
(3)

where

is the hedge ratio. If

> 0, the domestic investor is short the foreign

currency, i.e., has borrowed in foreign currency and lent out the proceeds in domestic
currency; if c 0 then the investor is short domestic currency. A value of 4 = 1

corresponds to a complete beginning-of-period hedge of the foreign investment; i.e.,
borrowings of foreign exchange equal to the initial value of the investment X.

Hedging has an effect on average returns to the extent that the unconditional

mean of h is different from zero. There is a large literature examining the apectation of h, often referred to as the exchange risk premium- (For surveys see,
for example, Froot and Thaler (1989) and Levich (1985).) The basic facts about
this risk premium can be fairly summarized in two statements. First, empirical
estimates of average risk premia are not significantly different from zero, either economically or statistical1y.0 (This is also true of the particular data sets used in this
paper — see the results below.) There is thus no average foreign exchange premia

that is comparable to the average premia on equities or bonds.11- Second, these
empirical results are in agreement with most theoretical models of the exchange
risk premium, which suggest that premia ought to be small.12
contract. (or with k-period

°lt is also possible to hedge a k-period investment with k-period borrowing and lending
forward contracts). However, in this paper we assume that the hedge employs only one-penod instruments.
10For studies which discws this result see, for example, Froot and Frankel (1989) and Rogoff (1979).
"At quarterly or monthly frequencies, conditional expectations of h' (based on regression.) have been found to
be statistically different from gero. However, while these conditional expectations are quite large and variable, they
oscillate betwem negative and positive, averaging about gem. It remains an unresoived question as to whether these
high-frequency movements in conditional expectations are best interpreted a. changes in risk (given investors' portfolio
holdings), or as opportunities for some tradem to earn excess returns on marginal investmentsin foreign exchange.
For a discussion of these issues in light of recent theory and statistical modeling, see Froot and The.ler (1990). will

'2For example, Frankel (1988) demonstrates that in a mean-variance framework, foreigs exchange premia

generally be limited to a few basis points for major currencies. Giovaanini and Jorion (1988) reach

6

similar conclusions.

Taken together, these two facts suggest that we do little harm to the data or
our priors if we assume that expected hedge returns equal their unconditional mean

of zero (i.e., uncovered interest parity (UIP) holds). If UIP does not hold, so that
conditionally expected hedge returns vary over time, use of the total return /4 in
(3) remains appropriate for investors who nevertheless wish to select a constant
hedge ratio.13

To estimate the effects of hedging on the variance of real returns at different

horizons, I first compute the k-period variance ratio of unhedged to fully hedged

returns:
=

var(r)
k
var(r —he)

(4)

A second, and related, approach is to estimate the minimum-variance hedge
through a regression of the k-period unhedged return on the contemporaneous hedge

return:
(5)
where

k is the minimum-variance hedge ratio.

The second approach allows for a straightforward test of the hypothesis that
unhedged and fully hedged return variances are equal, i.e., that Vk = 1. Under this

hypothesis, var(r) = var(rt — hp), which implies var(ht') = 2cov(r, h). if (3 in
'.!
(5) is given by the OLS estimator, /3 = coy
var

, the hypothesis that Vk = 1 can

be written as /3 = 1/2. Thus, a test of whether the minimum-variance hedge ratio
equals 1/2 is also a test of the hypothesis that unhedged and fully hedged return
variances are equal. if (3 > 1/2, the variance of hedged returns is smaller than that

of unhedged returns, and if /3 c 1/2 the reverse is true.
The 11s from the regressions can be interpreted as the amount of risk eliminated by the minimum-variance hedge. In a sense, this measure of hedging efficacy
'31n order to see whether the results are sensitive to the assumption of UIP, I ran the tests below using several
specifications For time-varying expected hedge returns. The results were qualitatively unaffected.

'The estimates of k.period variances below include an adjustment for small sample bias under the hypothesis
that the return processes are random walks with drift. Specifically, variances for all k are taken aroundthe same,
one-period mean. An unbiased estimate of each component of (4) also requires a multiplicative degrees-of-freedom
for example,
adjustment of T/T — k + 1. where T is the number of return observations during the sample period. See,
Cochrane (1988).

7

is more important than the point estimate of fi. If minimum-variance hedging has
little effect on the variance of unhedged returns, then regardless of the magnitude
of the minimum-variance hedge ratio; the case for hedging is weak.

2.2. Data
To learn about long horizon hedging, it is necessary to employ a long historical

data sample. This paper uses data on US stock prices and US and UK interest
rates from. 1802 to 1990 obtained from Schwert (1990) and Siegel (1992). Since the
longest and best-quality time series available are for US stocks and bonds, we focus

on real returns on US instruments from the perspective of UK residents.
The stock index for the US is a total return index intended to resemble a broad
group of individual stocks.15 The long-term-bond rate series is from Siegel (1992) ,16

as are the short-term interest rates.17
Exchange-rate data are from Diebold, Husted, and Rush (1991) and the original

citations therein. The sample period spans a number of different exchange-rate
regimes — gold standard, bimetalic standard, and floating currencies. During the

early part of the sample the US was initially on a variety of metallic standards (1802
- 1862); it then left the gold standard and issued inconvertible paper currency, or

greenbacks (1862-1879); the US then reinstated the gold standard and remained on
it until 1913. Over this same period, the UK issued inconvertible paper (1802-1820),
"The index provides rathc limited diversificaLion prior to 1870; until that lime the index was comprised primarily
of bank and railroad stocks.

The series is a mixture of Treasury bond and high-grade municipalbond yields from 1802 to 1917. Alter 1917, US

government bonds are used. Holding period returns are calculated from the yield data using a linearited model of the
term structure. This was done by computing McCaulay's (1936) measure of duration (D).as.uming that long-term

yields represented, on average, 15-year maturities, with coupons equal to the yield:
—
—

1— (ll-it,e)T
i—(1+(1+ie,Y"

where i,s represents the time-I yield on bonds, and 1' = 15. (None of the results appear sensitive to the assumption
that T = 15 years.) Next, the one-period holding return on bonds was calculated as:

=

— (D — i) (it+t.n + !2(i.+ —

i,,. is the time-I yield on one-period bills. Shiller, Campbell, and Schoenholts (1983) show that this simple
linearised model gives close approximations to various nonlinear models.
Prior to 1920, there was no short-term govermnent or Treasury bill rate. Siegel therefore attempts to remove the
risk premium from ,hort4erm US commercial paper rates during this period by using information from bond rates
and the UK term premium.
where

8

Between
then remained on the gold standard for the rest of the period (1820-1913).
1913 and 1973, both the US and UK retained fixed exchange rates, except during

brief periods when the exchange rate was

allowed to float. During most of the 1973

- 1990 period, both currencies floated freely.

The main advantage of such a long sample period is that differences in the
behavior of nominal and real exchange rates are easily detected. Studies which
conclude that the real exchange rate is well-described
rate — a ranby the same stochastic process that describes the nominal exchange
dom walk)-8 This description of the real exchange rate may be approximately coruse shorter samples typically

rect over short horizons. But over long horizons it is has a somewhatimplaU5ible
that arbitrarily large deviations from purchasing power parity
implication —
i.e.,

maintained indefinitely.
(PPP) among countries with similar income levels can be
longer
A number of studies are able to reject this hypothesis, but they need to use

alternative.'0
time-series samples to gain power against the random-walk
well as
Of course, the use of this long time-series sample has disadvantages as
advantages. One potential disadvantage is that prevailing monetary arrangements
nominal and
changed several times. During periods of fixed exchange rates, both
real exchange rates tended to display considerably less short-horizon variability

they did during floating-rate periods?°

than

be least

However, the long-horizon properties of the real exchange rate should
—
most economists believe,
affected by the nature of monetary arrangements which,
the main bias created by the presence of

should have no long-run effects. Thus,

fixed-rate periods in our sample is that hedging will appear relatively less important
exclusively of
at short horizons than would be the case for a sample which consisted
findings.
floating rates. Note that this bias actually works toward strengthening our
less useful
That is, our results — which suggest that hedging is disproportionately
1Studi which examine the random-walk behavior of real

and nominal exchange rate include Roil (1979). Meese

(1989).
and the citations
and Rogoff (1988), Muss. (1986), and Baille and McMahon
and Diebold, Husted, and Rush (1991)
t9See, for example, Frankel (1986), Huitinga (1987), movements at between S and 5 years.
therein. Their data put the half-life of real exchanrrate
short-horizon exdjang&rate behavior, see Muss.
20For more documentation of the effect of exchange-rate regime on

(1986).

9

at long horizons than at short horizons — would probably apply even more strongly
existence for almost 200 years.
if the present system of floating rates had been

2.3. Summary statistics
Tables 1 and 2 present summary statistics for the entire data set and two
sub-samples.21 The tables help make several points. First, the pound/dollar real
exchange rate has fluctuated considerably, but has not changed much on average
over the last 180 years.22

Second, note that the real exchange rate is quite variable. Its standard deviation is about 9 percent per annum over the full sample, rising to 16 percent during

the 1973-1991 floating-rate period. In addition, the real exchange rate exhibits
horizons,
strong (and statistically significant) negative autocorrelation at longer
even though it is approximately uncorrelated at one-year horizons. (This pattern
is suggestive of how hard it is to reject the random-walk hypothesis using highfrequency data.)

Third, the pound return on US stocks in Table 1 seems to inherit some of
the real exchange rate's negative autocorrelation, particularly at longer horizons.
much less
(The negative autocorrelation. of real dollar stock returns in Table 2 is
bonds
pronounced at long horizons.) Table 1 also shows that this is not the case for
and bills.

3. Hedged versus Unhedged Portfolios
Table 3 compares the variance of unhedged and hedged real returns. Reported
in the top panel is the variance ratio, Vk, for several US investments (from the

perspective of UK residents) at short and long investment horizons. The middle
and denominator of Vi',
and bottom panels display, respectively, the numerator
i.e., the variances of both unhedged and hedged returns (units are in percent per
floating rate

The commencement of the recent
2tthere are many natural' break points are in this data sample.
of
been relative to the average experience. Because

period (1973) is useful to detect how different floating rates have
to about 1880, we also break the sample
the a number of problems with the stock index and the US price data prior
with little evidence of parameter instability.
there. Al! of the tests below were run using these same breakpoints,
in the UK (Table 1, line 1) at the rate of only
22Consumption in the US ha. become more expensive relative to that
in US prices ocèurred in the 19th century,
12 basis point. per annum. Moreover, almcet all of this relative increase
US
was
catching
up
to
the
UK
in
terms
of
economic
development.
when the

10

annum). The investments are: US "rear assets whose nominal returns are given by

changes in the US CPI (these assets might be thought of as a diversified portfolio
of durables, including real estate); US stocks; US bonds; and US bills. The nominal
returns on these asset classes are then converted into pounds and deflated by the
change in the UK CPI.
Table 3 shows that the relative variance of unhedged returns declines as holding horizon increases. At one-year horizons, unhedged stock portfolios exhibit 13

percent more real-return variance than their hedged counterparts. However, when
the horizon is increased to just three yearn, the variance of unhedged returns falls to
a level marginally below that of hedged returns. Foreign bonds and bills also show
a substantial decline in the relative variance of unhedged returns as the horizon
increases.

Table 4 presents results from the estimation of equation (5). The top panel
reports minimum-variance (MV) hedge ratios at various holding horizons. As expected from Table 3, the MV hedge ratios for all assets decline almost uniformly

as the holding horizon increases. Hedge ratios for stocks decline more rapidly in
the first few years than do those for other assets. In addition, the drop in point
estimates is large from a policy perspective: while the short-horizon estimates sug-

gest that variance is minimized through nearly complete hedging, the long-horizon
estimates point toward MV hedge ratios of between 13 and 42 percent.23
At standard levels of statistical significance, it is possible to reject the hypothesis that the one-year MV hedge ratio equals one (which would imply that 13k = 1)
for real assets and bills, even though the point estimates are economically close to

one. As one would expect, however, the standard errors increase markedly with
the holding horizon. In spite of the long time-series sample, the data provide little

power against the hypothesis that /3 = 1 at very long investment horizons — we
can reject this hypothesis at 7- or S-year horizons only in the case of real assets.
'3As mentioned above, we might expect the short-horiaon coefficient estimates to be closer to one during sample
example, using data

periods which consist exclusively of floating exchange rates. indeed, this seems to be the case; for
are 0.87 (0.06), 1.20 (0.22), 0.74 (0.21), and 0.96 (0.08) for
from the 1973-1991 sample only, the point estimates of
real assets, stocks, bonds, and bills, respectively (standard errors in parentheses).

11

However, at more intermediate horizons of 3 and 4 years, there is enough power to

reject 0k = 1 for real assets, stocks, and bills. (For bonds it is possible to reject
= 1 at the 10 percent level only at six-year horizons.)
The large standard errors make it even harder to reject the hypothesis that
the variance of fully hedged and unhedged portfolios are equal, i.e., that

of =

= 1/2.

1/2 cannot
For all of the asset classes at long horizons, the null hypothesis
< 1/2. However, it is possible to
be rejected in favor of the alternative that

reject this null hypothesis at short horizons, albeit in favor of the alternative that

/3>1/2.
If hedging becomes less effective at longer horizons, we would expect not only

that MV hedge ratios fall, but also that they reduce variance by less. This implies

that the R2s from (5) ought to decline as holding horizon rises. Table 4 reports
these R2s in the middle panel. While hedging reduces return variation substantially
at short horizons, the R2s fall dramatically at longer horizons. At horizons of 8

years, even the minimum-variance hedge has virtually no impact on real-return
variation. Minimum-variance hedging remains most useful for real assets, where it
leads to a 7 percent reduction in variance (versus a 42 percent reduction at one-year
horizons). For stocks, bonds and bills, minimum-variance hedging has a reasonably

large impact on short-horizon variance, but has essentially no ability to reduce
long-horizon return variance.
To sum up, this section looked at two measures of currency hedging efficacy —
the magnitude of the MV hedge and the variance reduction the MV hedge affords.

By both measures, currency hedging appears less effective at long horizons than

at short. There is no evidence at relatively long horizons that currency hedging
provides a reduction in return variation.

4. Explaining differences between long- and short-horizon hedges
This section explores the reasons behind the above results. The explanation
posed in the introduction has two parts. It states that: 1) realexchange-rate changes
dominate hedge returns over short horizons while relative inflation and interest-rate
12

surprises dominate over long horizons; and ii) asset exposures to real-exchange-rate

changes are larger than exposures to relative inflation surprises (at least for "real"

assets and stocks). In this section we look at both parts of this hypothesis.

4.1. Decomposing hedge returns
By adding and subtracting relative inflation on the right-hand side of (2), the

hedge return can be rewritten as the change in the real exchange rate plus the
cumulative short-term real interest differential:

=

+

—

(Akst +

—

r},t+j)

—

(1d,t+y — k+))

(7)

A"S +i4,
where

=

E:

I = f, d, is the k-period realized inflation in country 1;

AkSt is the k-period change in the log of the real exchange rate; and lit is the
k-period cx post real interest differential.

If purchasing power parity holds in the long run, then real exchange rate
changes are temporary, i.e., St is mean-reverting. This implies that the per period variance of the real exchange rate will decline toward zero as horizon increases:

lim Var(&Sti =0.

(8)

jc.

Equation (8) will not generally hold for the other component of hedge returns,

the cx post real interest differential. To see this, note that the interest differential
can be .written as the sum of an cx ante real interest rate plus a period-by-period
relative inflation surprise,

=

1((if,t+j

—

— &d,t+j

— ,+5H (kt+r

—

,t+j))'

(9)

where

is the time-t+j expectation of inflation between time t +5 and t +5 + 1.

Redefining the two terms on the right-hand side of (9), we have:
(10)
where

D is the sum of the cx ante real interest differentials between times t and

t + k, and c is the sum of the one-step ahead errors made in predicting the actual
inflation differential between times t and t + k.
The second right-hand-side term in equations (9) and (10) is a random walk,
so its average variance does not vanish as k increases:

lim Var(c)
k
k—'oo

=,

(ii)

where u is the unconditional single-period variance of relative inflation surprises. In

many models first term on the right-hand side of (10), D, also contains permanent
components.24 Either way, the variance of R will have a component — that of
relative inflation surprises — which grows linearly with k.25 The presence of these

relative inflation surprises therefore suggests that the long-horizon variance of h

will be dominated by variation in R.
Is this characterization of hedge-return components borne out by the data?
Table 5 examines the variances and cross-correlations of the hedge return and its

components, &'s and R. Note that the variance of R does indeed grow more
quickly with k than that of tJSt: At ten-year horizons, the variance of lit increases
to approximately 10 times the variance of R, while the corresponding variances of

tiS increase only about 5 fold. Furthermore, note that in Table 5, the correlation
between real-exchange-rate changes and hedge returns (n,2) declines with increases

in horizon, falling from 0.65 at 1-year horizons to 0.21 at 10-year horizons. Mean-

while, the correlation between real interest differentials and hedge returns (pt,s)
increases from

0.27 to 0.41.

24The simplest description of the cx ante real interest differential is probably the international Fisher hypothesis,
series of cx
which holds that Dt = 0. In more compla monetary models, such as that of Dornbusch (1976), the time
ante real interest differentials is stationery (following a moving average process), so that pk (the k-period cumulative
sum of cx ante real interest differentials) is nonstationary.
25This requires that the cumulative cx ante real inta'est differential is not cointegrated with the cumulative relative
uifiabon surprises with a cointegraling coefficient of negative one.

14

Table 5 therefore provides some evidence in support of the first part of the
hypothesis above — that as horizon increases, the real-exchange-rate component of

hedge returns increases and the inflation/interest-rate-differential component decreases.

4.2. Decomposing asset exposures
The second necessary link for explaining the behavior of hedge ratios concerns

the nature of asset exposures. Clearly, if most assets have the same degree of
exposure to both components of the hedge return, then our decomposition is not
very useful for understanding why MV hedge ratios change with horizon. However,

based on the logic above, we would expect most assets to have different exposures
to the hedge components. For example, it would seem natural for both "real" assets

and stocks to be more sensitive to the real exchange rate than to relative inflation
shocks (at a given real exchange rate).
To see this point, let us return to the endowment's purchase of UK real estate.

If the dollar price of the real estate tracks the cost of living in the UK, the real
dollar price will be influenced by the real exchange rate. However, because the real

exchange rate is mean reverting, the long-run value of the real estate is essentially

independent of current shocks to relative inflation and real interest rates. Thus,
we expect to see greater exposure of real assets to the real exchange rate than to
relative inflation or interest rate shocks. To the extent that equities behave like real
assets, this long-horizon behavior ought to hold for stocks as well.
Fixed-income investments, on the other hand, are likely to be exposed to rela-

tive inflation shocks as well as to the real exchange rate. The magnitudes of these
exposures will depend on the relative importance of domestic versus foreign inflation
shocks.

To see this, suppose that the endowment buys a k-period zero-coupon UK bond.

From (1), the k-period return on this foreign bond is
the change in the real exchange rate is LS.!St =

+

=
—

+ Es's

and

For a given level

of UK inflation (irj, the bond return moves one-for-one with shocks to the real
15

exchange rate. This means that if there is a shock to [iS inflation, the real return
on the foreign bond will be affected only to the extent that the real exchange rate
changes. At long horizons the foreign bond is "naturally hedged" against domestic
inflation shocks. Hedging will be helpful at short horizons, however, when changes

in real exchange rates are large.
This situation is reversed if inflation shocks are primarily foreign. In that case,
unexpected UK inflation depreciates the pound and causes a loss to the endowment

even if the real exchange rate remains unchanged. In other words, the foreign
bond's exposure to relative inflation shocks will be driven by the importance of
foreign inflation shocks. When foreign inflation shocks dominate, hedging provides

protection at short as well as at long horizons.
In sum, the component exposures of fixed-income investments will be determined by the source of inflation shocks. Larger foreign inflation shocks will increase

the exposure to relative inflation surprises, and larger domestic inflation shocks will

increase exposure to real exchange-rate changes.

4.2.1. Measuring asset exposures
The.next step is to measute these component exposures empirically. We there-

fore regress the foreign asset's real return on the two components of hedge returns
—

real interest differentials and real exchange rat.e changes:

=+
where

and

+

+ c,

(12)

f3 measure asset exposures to real interest differentials and real-

exchange-rate changes, respectively.

Note that the /3 coefficients can be interpreted as hedge ratios if we think
of R and E&kSt as returns on component hedge contracts. In fact, it is possible
as the return on a "real" hedge contract, i.e., the return from
to interpret
borrowing and lending in each currency at "real bill" rates, which are indexed to

actual inflation.26
To make this interpretation work, it is necessary to assume that the Fisher hypothesis holds, and that the premium
16

Under this interpretation, &S can be thought of as the return on a "real"
hedge, and R = h_&cSt is the noise introduced by using nominal instead of "real"
hedging contracts. While nominal and real magnitudes are often tightly linked at
short horizons, their linkages are at best loose at long horizons. Thus, by looking

at asset exposures to A1S and R, we can determine whether our hypothetical
"real" currency hedging contracts would provide better hedging vehicles than their
nominal counterparts.27

4.2.2. Estimation
Table 6 displays estimates of equation (12). We report the j3 coefficient estimates, their standard errors, and the regression 112. As before, we can interpret the

f3s as MV hedge ratios and the R2s as the percentage reduction in return variances

provided by the MV hedges?
The results in Table 6 contrast strikingly with those in Table 4. First, note
= 1. These
that exposures to real exchange rate changes are about full, i.e.,
estimates are even slightly higher than the hedge ratios reported in Table 4. Furthermore, the exposure levels do not fall for stocks and bills as horizon increases.

(Exposures do fall for bonds, albeit slightly.) The estimates of

are generally

statistically indistinguishable from 1, significantly greater than zero, and in many

cases significantly greater than 1/2. One interpretation is that complete hedging
using real contracts would minimize variance regardless of horizon. Furthermore,
portfolios hedged fully with our hypothetical real hedges exhibit significantly less

return variance than do unhedged portfolios.
on short-t&,n real bills over short-term nominally Skless bills is constant. Using these two assumptions, the return
on the one-period reaP hedge, h,, equals the change in the real exchange rate (plus a constant):

= A'S, ÷ c.
37j aiso tried to estimate exposures to 5real hedge returns using specifications for expected inflation of other than
the Fisher effect. For example, it might be reasonable to assume that expected next-period inflation is a linear function
of current inflation,

=

where a i. the first-order autocorrelation coefficient of actual inflation. This assumption is realistic to the extent that

actual inflation is closely approximated by an AR(1) process. The results reported below are not importantly effected
by using this .lternative specification.
25
this specification, the real return on US real assets I. both the dependent variable and one of the regressors.
i.e., r1 = A&S,. As a consequence, no results are reported in Table 6 for real assets.

17

Second, note that the R2s do not decline with increases in horizonas substantially as they did in Table 4. Indeed, the R2 for stock returns actually riseswith k.

This suggests not only that real exchange rate exposures remain large as horizon
increases, but that hedging them would continue to result in substantial variance
reduction.

Third, note that exposures to

are positive at short horizons and become

negative at longer horizons. The point estimates, however, are never statistically
different from zero. The decline occurs most rapidly in stocks — at three-year hori-

zons the estimate has already become negative — and much more slowly for bonds

and bills. As we argued above, we would expect stocks to have relatively little
relative-inflation-differential exposure to the extent that they behave like "real" assets. Bonds and bills, on the other hand, ought to have some real-interest-differential

exposures, at least to the extent that the source of CPI shocks is domestic. The low

estimates of

for bonds and bills suggest that, in the sample, most CPI shocks

originate in the UK.

Fourth, note that stocks do indeed behave like other "real" assets. That is,
when the foreign currency depreciates, the price of foreign equities does not rise in

the short run, even though it does rise in the long run. The fact that estimates of

/3 remain constant at about one suggests that the local currency value of stocks
does ultimately rise, and that it does so at the same rate at which the real exchange

rate returns to its long-run mean. In this sense, domestic stock prices behave like
the relative domestic CPI — when consumption is relatively cheap in a country, its

stocks are relatively cheap too.
Similar conclusions emerge from Table 7. It reports the results from a regression

of asset returns on the real exchange rate (or return on a "real" hedge contract)
alone:
k

k
k
= &k + P2l
s

k
+ e.

13

Once again, the estimates of I3, remain near one as k increases. This might be also
be interpreted as showing that MV "real" hedge ratios are not affected by horizon.
18

"Real" hedges also appear to substantially reduce return variance, even at long
horizons.29

5. Incorporating "long horizons" into investor asset demands
While it would seem intuitively important for investors to consider both longand short-horizon moments of the data, standard finance theory provides relatively

little guidance about impact of long-horizon moments on optimal asset allocation.

This is partly because the results are sensitive to both the statistical properties of
returns and investor preferences, and partly because the results are often compli-

cated. The goal of this section is to provide a very simple example in which it is
possible to see clearly the effects of mean reversion, investor horizon, and investor
preferences on optimal hedging policy.

Consider, then, a 2-period niodel with a domestic investor who is concerned
with the distribution of wealth at the end of date 2. Suppose that this investor can
choose between foreign stocks and a domestic riskless asset, and that he allocates a
fraction of wealth — wj at date U and ca2 at date 1 — to foreign stocks. Assume also

that these fractional allocations are continuously maintained between dates 0 and

1, and dates 1 and 2, respectively. During these periods, the local currency price
of the foreign stock, p(t), yields a geometric excess return (above the local riskless

rate) of:

dp(t) =

+ a,1p(t)dz, I = 1,2 V t E L — 1,11.

(14)

We assume that the investor can hedge a fraction, 4,, of the foreign exchange

exposure of the stocks by borrowing in foreign currency and lending in domestic
currency. The excess return on the hedge evolves according to:

dh(t) = Ch,Ih(t)dzh, I = 1,2 V t E [I — 1,1],

(15)

where we assume that the instantaneous correlation between the local-currency re-

turn on foreign stocks and the hedge return is given by p. Equation (15) implies
°5inillar results emerge when using estimates of reaF hedge returns other than tskSt. This suggests that the
results axe not very sensitive to the particular assumptions needed to

19

interpret tks, as the return on a 5rear hedge.

that hedge positions have zero expected returns from domestic investors' perspective. At time 0, the investor also chooses a hedge ratio, , which is continuously
maintained until time 1. Also, assume for simplicity that the domestic interest rate
is zero and that domestic consumption prices are fixed. The price of foreign con-

sumption is fixed through date 1, so that we can interpret

as the change in the

real exchange rate through date 1.
In this setting, mean reversion in real asset prices can easily be added by making
the expected future local-currency return on stocks, Pj,,2, a declining function of the

That is, subsequent to a current appreciation

past real-exchange-rate change

(depreciation) of the real exchange rate, the expected future local-currency return
—
=
on stocks will be low (high). Specifically, we assume that
where a = _c.1P2; i.e., a = 0 implies that there is no correlation between current

exchange-rate changes and future local-currency stock returns, and a = 1 implies
that the entire increase in the current real exchange rate between dates 0 and 1 is on
average offset through slower domestic-currency stock-price appreciation between

dates 1 and 2.

Under these assumptions, the instantaneous return on the investor's wealth
expressed in domestic currency, R(t), can be written as:

= w(ii,,1 + pch,Ic1)dt + o (aj + (1— h)2c + 2(1 — h)pah,cP,1) 2dz,

(16)

which in turn yields an expression for the compounded full-period return on wealth

from date 0 to 1,
.11

R(1)
R(0)

1—

—
—

(p(1)\W1 (h.(1)\W1(1) x

kp(0))

17

kh(o))

(wø(1h,1ap,1+(1—#)
and a similar expression for the return on wealth from date 1 to 2,
—

R2=

R(2) =

R(1)

2\
fp(2)\W2 fh(2)\W2(1#) f2
exp--(1—wz)cP,2)
'..Kii)
20

(18)

where we have assumed (without loss of generality) that there is no exchange_rate

uncertainty between times 1 and 2, i.e., ch2 = 0.
Next, let investor preferences be iso-elastic over tinie-2 wealth,

E[U2] = E[(R1R2)1/j/?e',
with 'y =

0

(19)

representing the case of logarithmic utility. The first-order condition

with respect to the hedge ratio, ,

is:

E[!] =E[(RiR2y::] =0.

(20)

Straightforward computations and equations (14)-(19) allow us to solve (20) for the

optimal hedge ratio, ', which is given by:

i=1+chch'.1 —-( cov[ln2M},lnR2]
2*
)'

(21)

ChW1

where crh,1 = PChUp,1 is the instantaneous covariance between local-currency stock

returns and hedge returns between dates 0 and 1.
Equation (21) shows how horizon and preferences enter into the determination

of the optimal hedge ratio. A single-period investor will not care about R2, and
thus will regard the second term on the right-hand side of (21) as irrelevant. That
is, a short-horizon investor will choose
(22)

Note that (22) is independent of the coefficient of relative risk aversion, . Add this

to the fact that over short horizons h,p1

0, and

represents the "free-lunch"

result — i.e., that regardless of preferences, the optimal hedge ratio is near one.

As is well known, either of two conditions are sufficient to make the shorthorizon hedge ratio,

optimal for investors who have longer horizons. First, if

investors have logarithmic utility (i = 0), then they behave "myopically" regardless

of their horizons. Second, if the investment opportunity set is constant (so that
21

a = 0), then the covariance term in (21) is zero, and the short-horizon hedge ratio
is optimal, even for non-log preferences.
In order to see how much long-horizon moments matter for non-log preferences,

it is possible to rewrite (21) as:

'1
4 =i+1 +l()(a+a'
Wj

(23)

),

where w is the fraction of wealth in stocks between dates 0 and 1,30 &
median optimal fraction of wealth in stocks between dates 1 and 2,31

is

the

a 0hji2

a parameter indicating the degree of mean reversion in real stock prices, and a1 is
a measure of how aggressively w is expected to respond to the mean reversion in

the real exchange rate (a' = a indicates an optimal response to changing expected
stock returns, whereas c/ = 0 indicates no response at all). That is, a1 measures
how aggressively portfolio managers trade foreign equities on the basis of current
deviations from PPP.

There are several points to note from (23). First, the hedge ratio declines
as mean reversion is stronger (i.e., as a is greater) and as preferences are more
risk averse (i.e., as '1 is more negative).32 Second, note that the investor hedges
less when future holdings of foreign equities respond more aggressively to mean
reversion in the real exchange rate (i.e., fP, < 0). Third, note that even if a = 0,
mean reversion still tends to reduce the hedge ratio.

Finally, note that by increasing the amount of "time" between dates 1 and 2,
we can increase the effective "horizon" of the investor. When we do so, a (and
50The optimal fraction of wealth in stocks, ta, follows from the other first-order condition of equation (19), and is

givenb

Pp,l + Ck,pI

—
—

(°,L + (1— #)2a3 1-2(1 — )pce,jap,i)(1 —
of domestici.e., the instantaneous expected domestic.currency return on foreign stocks divided by the variance
equation
(23) applies
of
relative
risk
aversion,
1—.
Note
that
limes
the
coefficient
currency returns on foreign stocks
regardless of whether w is set optimally.
5tThis is computed by taking the median of the date-2 optimal fraction of wealth in stocks:
2

—

M(ss,.,]

=

0,,2(1 —i) a,3(1 —i)'
between
where Al implies the median operator, which is taken at date 0 with respect to the exchange-rate change
dates 0 and 1, 141)/Iz(0). Note that, for plausible parameters, 0/w > 1.
"This result is even stronger than it might appear, as when # decreases, so does the ratio

22

possibly a1) increase, as more of the return to PPP occurs on average by date 2.

Thus, further increases in time horizon further lower the hedge ratio (given that
preferences are more risk averse than log, i.e., that y <0).

It may be useful to calibrate this model. This will give us a sense for how
sensitive optimal hedge ratios are to changes in preferences, horizon, and mean
reversion. Suppose for a moment that 'y = —1 (this is the "Samuelson presumption"

that the coefficient of relative risk aversion equals 2). Also, think of date-i as a
"short" horizon (perhaps a year) and date-2 as a "long" horizon equal to the average

half-life of a deviation from parity (about 3 to 5 years). This would imply f1

0

cTII

and

a

0.5. Finally, assume that a1 = a, so that portfolio managers respond

optimally to any change in expected domestic-currency returns on foreign stocks.

These assumptions imply that the optimal hedge ratio is considerably less than
0.25! Clearly, the optimal hedge ratio will be very sensitive to assumptions about
risk aversion and length of horizon.

The optimal hedge ratio will also be sensitive to equilibrium returns on hedge

contracts. In a one-period equilibrium model, Black (1989) shows that log-utility
investors do not hedge at all (as compared with (23), which for plausible parameters, says they hedge completely). In Black's model, there is a greater temptation to
bear foreign-exchange risk than in the model above because such foreign exchange

exposure generates positive expected returns due to Siegal's paradox. Thus, investors in that model hedge fully only when they are considerably more risk averse

than the log case. Froot (i993) provides an equilibrium model which allows for
long-horizon mean-reversion of real exchange rates. In that model, optimal hedge
ratios (for investors more risk averse than log) are lower than those implied by the

Black model. This is because, in the presence of mean reversion, investors must
bear considerably more risk if they wish to take advantage of the positive expected

returns generated by Siegal's paradox.

23

6. Some additional implications
6.1. The timing of foreign investments
The results above suggest that, in the short run, foreign stocks become cheaper

in domestic terms when the foreign currency depreciates. However, over longer
periods this effect disappears; these investments appear to "catch up" with the
depreciation of the local currency. Thus, subsequent to a depreciation of the local
currency, expected returns on foreign stock appear relatively high. Note that — as
in the model of the previous section — the increase in expected returns need not
come from an opportunity to buy the currency cheap. That is, uncovered interest
parity can still hold.33

One might worry that this feature of stock returns is an artifact of such a
long historical sample. In the rapidly-integrating international capital market of
today, perhaps this effect has disappeared. However, to this day, high frequency
correlations between local-currency stock returns and the domestic exchange rate
remain about zero. If, in the long run, PPP still holds — and greater international
integration suggests that, if anything, it does so more strongly today — then this

characterization of changing expected returns still persists. Furthermore, if we
reach a day in which high-frequency currency fluctuations and local-currency returns

become more highly correlated, then even the "free-lunch" case for hedging will

disappear. That is, if there is little exchange-rate exposure (even over the short
run) in foreign assets in the first place, then there is clearly less impetus to hedge.

6.2. Corporate risk management
Corporations which make physical investments abroad often borrow in local
currency. "Currency hedging" is frequently given as the rationale for such localcurrency borrowing, although there are other good explanations for it (e.g., hedging

the risks of expropriation).
What are the implications of the above results for such financing decisions? .To
Thi. paper has not attempted to sort out how much of the increase in expected returns is attributable to currencies
vnus the assets themselves. I leave that for future work.

24

see this, consider a multinational corporation which wishes to borrow to finance a

long-term investment abroad. Suppose that the expected cost of local- and homecurrency debt are the same, and that the company wishes to choose a debt structure

that minimizes return volatility of the entire foreign operation.34 What fraction of
the borrowing should be in local currency?
If purchasing power parity holds, then over time the physical assets are likely to

be naturally hedged. And, if the assets have little long-horizon currency exposure,
the currency composition of debt does not help to hedge the physical assets. To the

extant that this is true, the problem of hedging the returns on the entire foreign
operation comes down to that of hedging the fluctuations in real borrowing costs.

At this point, the logic from above can be applied directly. If the foreign
country is known for its unpredictable and highly volatile inflation rate, then over

long periods, it is likely that local-currency debt will have relatively high realreturn volatility, If, on the other hand, it is the home-currency's inflation rate that
is volatile and unpredictable, then the home-currency debt will have relatively high
real-return volatility. The fraction of borrowing in local currency should therefore be

an increasing function of the volatility of real borrowing costs in the home country

relative to that in the local country. In general, the mix ought to be part of the
corporation's overall risk management strategy.

7. Conclusions
This paper has argued that currency hedges are less useful at reducing real-

return variance at long horizons than they are at short horizons. In a data set of
US financial returns over 200 years we showed that this intuition is borne out over
the sample from the perspective of British international investors.

The data show that at short horizons, full hedging reduces return volatility.
"According to Modigliani-Miller, firms cannot create value by changing the structure of their liabilities, and
therefore should not be concerned with the return volatility implied by a particular debt structure. However, there
are a number of reasons why firms may wish to hedge out return volatility. Froot, Scharf.tein and Stein (1993) review
several motivations for corporate hedging policies and develop a theory of corporate hedging based on costly external
finance.
This example contrast, local- and hoxne.currency debt. However, it .hould be clear that the logic is easily extended
-

to include debt denominated in third currencies.

25

However, for horizons of five years or more, foreign stocks display greater return
volatility when hedged than when unhedged. For foreign bonds the cross-over point
is about eight years. I also report minimum-variance hedge ratios at different horizons. This ratio falls from almost 100 percent hedged at short horizons to an average
of about 35 percent at horizons of 5 to 10 years. Moreover, at these longer horizons,
even the minimum-vB.riance hedge cannot reduce return volatility below that of the

unhedged portfolio. Thus, if hedging involves even small transactions costs and
counterparty risks, the optimal hedge ratio will decline rapidly toward zero as the
investment horizon increases.

There are several caveats to these results. First, this paper has focused primarily on how hedging effects the variance of an individual asset class. However,
hedge ratios — like other asset allocation decisions — should always be determined
according to their effects on the entire portfolio.35
A second caveat concerns the applicability of the long-horizon moments which
are discussed and measured above. A single long-horizon data base is surely better

than none at all, but alone it is insufficient. It would clearly be helpful to have
additional long-horizon data from other country experiences.

360ther work has demonstmted that over short horizons, currency hedging can reduce the vo$atility of widely
diversified portfolios which contain domestic as well as foreign components. See, for example, Glen and

26

Jorion (1092).

8. References

Adler, Michael, M. Granito, and A. Lee, "Should International Portfolios Be
Permanently Hedged?" in The Currency Hedging Debate, L. Thomas, ed.,
London: IFR Publishing.
Baillie, Richard T., and McMahon, Patric C., The Foreign Exchange Market:
Theory and Econometric Evidence. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1989.

Black, Fischer, "Universal Hedging: How to Optimize Currency Risk and
Reward in International Equity Portfolios," Financial Analysts Journal,
July/August 1989, Vol. 45, No. 4, 16-22.

Boudoukh, Jacob, and Matthew Richardson, "Stocks Are a Good Hedge for
Inflation (In the Long Run)," University of Pennsylvania, Wharton School,
forthcoming American Economic Review, 1993.

Bunk, Paul and Ennis, Richard, "Foreign Bonds in Diversified Portfolios: A
Limited Advantage," Financial Analysts Journal, March/April 1990, 46-2,
31-44.

Cochrane, John, "How Big is the Random Walk in GNP?," Journal of Political
Economy,96 (October 1988), 893-920.
Diebold, Francis, Steven Husted, and Mark Rush, "Real Exchange Rates under
the Gold Standard," Journal of Political Economy, 99 (December 1991),
1252-71.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal
of Political Economy, 84 (December 1976), 1161-76.

Frankel, Jeffrey A., "International Capital Mobility and Crowding out in the
US Economy: Imperfect integration of Financial Markets or of Goods Markets?," in How Open is the US Economy?ed. by LW. IHafer, Lexington,
Mass: Lexington, 1986.

Frankel, Jeffrey A. "Recent Estimates of Time Variation in the Conditional
Variance and in the Exchange Risk Premium," Journal of International
Money and Finance, 7 (March 1988).
Froot, Kenneth A., "Another Universal Hedge Ratio," (in progress) Harvard
University, 1993.
27

Froot, Kenneth A. and Jeffrey A. Frankel, "Forward Discount Bias: Is It an Exchange Risk Premium?," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 416 (February
1989), 139-161.

Froot, Kenneth A., David S. Scharfstein, and Jeremy Stein, "Risk Management: Coordinating Corporate Investing and Financing Policies," Harvard
University, February 1993.

Froot, Kenneth A., and Richard Thaler, "Anomalies: Foreign Exchange," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 4 (Summer 1990), 179-192.

Giovannini, Alberto, and Philippe Jorion, "Foreign-Exchange Risk Premia
Volaility Once Again," Journal of International Money and Finance, 7
(March 1988).

Glen, Jack, and Philippe Jorion, "Currency Hedging for International Portfolios," Columbia University, 1992.

Huizinga, John, "An Empirical Investigation of the Long-Run Behavior of
Real Exchange Rates," in Empirical Studies of Velocity, Real Exchange
Rates, Unemployment, and Productivity, ed. by Karl Brunner and Allan
H. Meltzer, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol.
27, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1987.

Jorion, Philippe, "Asset Allocation with Hedged and Unhedged Foreign Assets," Journal of Portfolio Management, 15 (1989), 49-54.
Kaplanis, E., and S Schaefer, "Exchange Risk and International Diversification
in Bond and Equity Portfolios," Journal of Economics and Business, 43
(1991) 287-308.

Levich, Richard, "Empirical Studies of Exchange Rates: Price Behavior, Rate
Determination and Market Efficiency," in W.R. Jones and P.B. Kenen,
eds., Handbook of International Economics, Volume 2. Amsterdam: North
Holland, 1985.

Madura, J., and R. Wallace, "A Hedge Strategy for International Portfolios,"
Journal of Portfolio Management, 12 (1985), 70-74.
Macaulay, F.R., Some Theoretical Problems Suggested by Movements of Interest
Rates, Bond Yields and Stock Prices in the United States Since 1856, New
York, NBER, 1938.

28

Merton, Robert C., "An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model," Econometric; 41 (September 1973), 867-87.

Merton, Robert C., "Lifetime Portfolio Selection Under Uncertainty: The
Continuous-Time Case," Review of Economics and Statistics, 51 (August
1969), 247-57.

Meese, Richard, and Kenneth Rogoff, "Was it Real? The Exchange RateInterest Differential Relation over the Modern Floating-Rate Period," Jourj
no! of Finance, 43 (September 1988), 933-48.

Mussa, Michael, "Nominal Exchange Rate Regimes and the Behavior of Real
Exchange Rates: Evidence and Implications," in Real Business Cycles,
Red Exchange Rates and Actual Policies, K. Brunner and A.ll. Mèltzer,
eds., Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 25. Amsterdam: North Holland, 1986.
Nesbitt, Stephen, "Currency Hedging Rules for Plan Sponsors," Financial Anal ysts Journal, March/April 1992, 47-2, 73-81.

Perold, André, and Evan Schulman, "The Free Lunch in Currency Hedging:
Implications for Investment Policy and Performance Standards," Financial
And ysts Journal, May/June 1988, 45-50.
Roll, Richard, "Violations of Purchasing Power Parity and their Implications
for Efficient International Commodity Markets," in International Finance

and 2}ade, volume 1, M. Sarnat and G.P. Szegö. Cambridge, Mass.:
Ballinger, 1979.

Rogoff, Kenneth, "Essays on Expectations and Exchange Rate Volatility,"
Ph.D. Dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1979.

Samuelson, Paul, "Lifetime Portfolio Selection by Dynamic Stochastic Programming," Review of Economics and Statistics, 51 (August 1969), 23946.

Schwert, William, "Indexes of Stock Prices from 1802 to 1987," Journal of
Business, 63 (ioo), 399-426.
Shiller, R.J., J.Y. Campbell and K.L. Schoenholtz, "Forward Rates and Future Policy: Interpreting the Term Structure of Interest Rates," Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 1873, 223-242.
Siegel, Jeremy, "The Real Rate of Interest from 1800-1990: A Study of the US
29

and UK," Journal of Monetary Economies, 1992.

30

Table 1

Summary Statistics:
Cross-Currency Returns., at Different Investment Horizons
1802-1991

Return on:
foreign stocks
(real domestic return)

Variable mean

s.d.

6.02 19.60 0.05

4,
4,

30.44

0.55

7.54 0.01

0.56

1.95
3.25
7.83
0.12

10.36 0.36
12.41 0.53
13.17 0.51

1.65
2.75
5.51

14.13 0.22
20.20 0.42

8.74 0.04
0.56 13.99 0.18
0.86 19.55 0.38

0.29

8.62 0.01

1.13

12.79 0.14
13.84 0.07
23.00 0.77

(real domestic return)

8.96 19.17 0.06

(real domestic return)

46
4,6

r6

rt

r'°
Currency hedge
(nominal domestic return)

Real exchange rate

h

s.d.

27.90 0.03
43.87 0.15

foreign bills

foreign bonds

mean

21.81 0.09
19.50 33.99 0.25
32.49 40.95 0.15
64.99 69.01 0.60
2.55 11.37 0.18
7.55 21.01 0.03
12.58 28.81 0.17
25.16 53.68 0.16
1.46 11.03 0.25
4.58 20.57 0.01
7.63 25.66 0.18
15.25 46.83 0.34

31.99 0.19
30.28 42.71 0.25
60.27 44.93 0.40
3.34 10.65 0.19
10.12 19.42 0.12
16.97 28.50 0.07
31.89 45.18 0.10
2.91 10.46 0.24

rfl

1880-1972

18.25

14.91

2.91

20.50 0.52

6.46

1.89
3.78

8.03 0.03
9.23 0.10

1973-1991

mean s.d.
3.08 24.16 0.24
10.49 31.05 0.02
17.49 44.77 0.39

NA NA NA
0.48 17.26 0.18
1.69 32.80 0.21
2.82 27.03 0.19

NA NA NA
0.95 16.41 0.13
1.54

30.65 0.28

2.57 31.94 0.64

NA NA NA
1.91

16.29 0.10

2.99 30.56 0.64
4.99 27.84 1.74

NA NA NA
2.47 14.61 0.04
5.93 22.82 0.52
9.89 26.85 1.11

NA NA NA

+ A,cst,
Notes to Table 1: Variables are defined as follows: h >i (i,,t+i —
where ij, I = d, f denotes the continuously compounded one-period interest rate at time t in the

domestic and foreign currencies, respectively, and aks is the log of the k-period change in the
+ A's+5,
domestic price of foreign currency from time t to t + k; :.
i: x+1. —
where x, denotes the continuously compounded one-period return on an portfolio of U.S. stocks,
and X:d is the continuously compounded one-period change in the log of the U.K. CPI; jb
—
+
where Xb denotes the continuously compounded one-period return
+ As+1,
on U.S. government (and sometimes commercial) bonds; r E
where x denotes the continuously compounded one-period return on U.S. government (and some-

x:

—
times commercial) short—term bills; and
E
+ A'8t+a is the continuously
compounded one-period change in the log of the real exchange rate.

Table 2

Summary Statistics:
U.S. Real Returns at Different investment Horizons
1802-1991

Return on:
foreign stocks
(real foreign return)

Variable mean
Vt'.

y,

5.90 17.32 0.01
17.69 30.70 0.30

y 29.42 37.57 0.42
y 57.37 38.22 0.07
7.48 0.43
9.56 17.69 0.16
16.11 23.11 0.15
3.22

foreign bonds

(real foreign return)

s.d.

Y,b

y 28.98 35.99 0.36

y 2.79

6.16 0.53

(real foreign return) y 8.41

15.09 0.21

foreign bills

14.06 18.34 0.43

y 27.54 32.07 0.43

1973-1991

1880-1972

mean s.d.

Pi

19.09 0.02
18.36 32.09 0.30
30.60 35.91 0.29
61.21 53.14 0.48
6.17

2.26
6.42

mean

s.d.

p1

15.66 0.32
16.43 16.68 0.46
5.55

27.38 30.87 0.32

NA NA NA

6.06 0.53

1.99

14.81 0.16

4.24 29.19 0.40
7.07 32.38 0.19

10.69 24.14 0.11
21.38 42.24 0.02
5.07 0.66
1.17
3.44 13.12 0.21

12.30 0.33

NA NA NA
4.20 0.61
4.39 11.04 0.34
1.51

19.87 0.21

NA 14.07 0.43

11.48 34.83 0.08

2.74 NA NA

5.74

E—

where
Notes to Thble 2: Variables are defined as follows: W.
denotesthe continuously compounded one-period return on an portfolio of U.S. stocks, and

the continuously compounded;one.period..change.in:the log of the U.S. CPI; y6 E

x,

is
—

where Zb denotes thecontinuously compounded one-period return on U.S. government (and
denotes the continuously
where
sometimes commercial) bonds; and y

zh

compounded one-period return on U.S. government (and sometimes commercial) short-term bills.

Table 3

Real Returns on Foreign Investments:
Unhedged versus Fully Hedged
Horizon (k years)

Variable

2

1

3

4 56 7

8

Variance Ratios
foreign real assets-fl T,k
"to

foreign stocks
foreign bonds
foreign bills

-

V/•

iç6

foreign real assets Var(r0)
foreign stocks
Var(r)
foreign bonds
Var(r)
foreign bills
Var(r)

1.71 1.43. 1.33 1.23 1.07 0.95 0.86 0.82
1.03 0.99 0.97
1.55 1.39 1.32 1.25 1.12
1.38 1.27 1.21 1.13 1.02

1.13

1.04

0.96 0.96

Variance of Unhedged Returns (% per annum)
0.80 0.83
3.79 3.63 3.23 3.26 3.15 3.01 3.01 3.02
1.12 1.38 1.49 1.56 1.54 1.53 1.54 1.59

Variance of Hedged Returns (% per annum)

foreign real assets Var(r, — h)
Var(r - h)
foreign stocks
Var(r'b. foreign bonds
foreign bills
Var(r --hfl

0.47 0.58 0.59 0.61 0.63
3.35 3.52 3.27 3.35 3.31
0.72 0.99.. 1.13 1.25 1.38
•0.88 1.17 1.31 1.46 1.59

0.65 0.64 0.63
3.15 3.09 3.08
1.47 1.55 1.63
1.69 1.76 1.83

VSX(r.)
k
Notes to Table 3: Variables are defined as follows: V = vtr(r: ,—h)'

where rt denotes the

real return in the U.K. on U.S. CPI-linked real assets over a k-period horizon from a UK investor's

= Vsr(r, —h:) '
perspective, and h denotes the return on a pound hedge against the dollar) V'
t.s
UK
denotes the real return in the U.K. on U.S. stocks over a k-period horizon from a
where
investor's perspectiveS vk — var(r6) where Ttb denotes the real return in the U.K. on U.S.

r,

t,b — Var(r'6—h)

var(rLj, where
over a k-period horizon from a UK investor's perspective; and VV
t.n = Vsr(r__h,)
denotes the real return in the U.K. on U.S. bills over a k-period horizon from a UK investor's
perspective.
bonds

Table 4

Real Return on Foreign Investments:
Estimated Minimum-Variance Hedge Ratios
Holding Horizon (Ic years)

Variable

foreign real assets;;
foreign stocks
foreign bonds
foreign bills

fik
C
pk

p.,.

pk
'Jo

2

1

0.750;
0.920
0.820

3

4

5

6

Minimum-Variance Ratios
068O 0.680 0.690 0.630 0.570
0.620 0.390 0.370 0.330 0.340
0.800 0.820 0.820 0.720 0.600

7

8

0.520
0.370
0.520

0.420
0.370
0.390

Percentage Variance Reduction from Minimum-Variance Hedge
foreign real assets
foreign stocks
foreign bonds
foreign bills

(R2)
(R2)

I' J

(p2\k

0.420 0.340 0.320 0.3(X)
0.120 0.060 0.030 0.020
0.350 0.280 0.240 0.210
0.250 0.180 0.140 0.110

0.250 0.190 0.140
0.020 0.010 0.010
0.140 0.090 0.050
0.050 0.020 0.010

0.070
0.010
0.020
0.000

Standard Errors of Estimated Minimum-Variance Ratios
foreign real assets
foreign stocks
foreign bonds
foreign bills

0.080 0.090 0.100 0.1(X) 0.110 0.120 0.140 0.170
I
0.190 0.180 0.210 0.240 0.260 0.290 0.370 0.510
I
.0.110 .0.140.0.170 0.180 0.200 0.230 0.280 0.370
.1
\k. 0.120 0.160 0.180 0.190 0.210 0.230 0.270 0.360
'.qfljn
(ofi)

to Table 4: Minimum-variance ratios are estimates of fi from the regression r', =
+ flh + c, where r1 is the domestic k-period real return from holding foreign asset 1,
and h is the k-period return on the currency hedge (the domestic currency return of borrowing
in domestic currency to hold foreign deposits). Standard errors of estimated fls are computed
Notes

a

using the largest of several measures, including OLS, Newey-West serial-correlation consistent and
Newey-West serial-correlation and heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors.

Table 5
Decomposition of Hedge Returns
Into:

Real Interest Differentials and Changes In Real Exchange Rates

&'S +R

—

— a1h8) +

E((4,+

(1)

(2)

I1

0.006 0.008 0.005
0.012 0.016 0.012
0.016 0.023 0.017
0.019 0.030 0.023
0.022 0.035 0.029
0.022 0.038 0.035
0.021 0.040 0.039
0.017 0.040 0.043
0.018 0.042 0.046
0.019 0.043 0.050

2
3

4
5
6
7
8

9
10

Notes to Table 5: The term h = Et

r

—

E

Ms +

—

(if.+ —

(3)

h ohs

1

—

Cross-correlations:

Variances:

Horizon

—

P1.2

P1,3

0.647
0.585
0.562
0.549
0.496
0.430
0.368
0.271
0.232
0.206

0.272

(&st + i÷ — 'd

0.315
0.301
0.283
0.3 13

0.342
0.349
0.367
0.390
0.414

is the k-period hedge return;

is the k-period real interest differential, and
w&+1))
is the k-period change in the log of the real exchange rate.

rj1.1) — (id,t+j

—

Table 6

Real Return on Foreign Investments:
Estimated Exposures to
Real Interest Differentials and Real Exchange Rate Changes
Holding Horizon (k years)
Variable

Asset

2

1

5

4

3

6

7

8

-0.398

-0.350

-0.257
-0.259
-0.038

Differentials

foreign stocks
foreign bonds
foreign bills

foreign stocks
foreign bonds
foreign bills

foreign stocks
foreign bonds
foreign bills

fit.

0.226 0.014 -0.234 -0.414

fit,,

0.099

fit,,

0.164 0.200

fi

fi,,

fi

0.105

0.087
0.210

0.011

0.170

-0.449
-0.097
0.108

-0.160 -0.218
0.055

0.005

0.895
0.690

1.040
0.660

1.020

1.0€XJ

1.240
0.665
0.997

0.337
0.246
0.372

0.364
0.243
0.347

Exposure to Real Exchange Rate Changes

1.150 0.894
0.887
1.080

0.919

1.040

0.683
0.876
1.110

0.720
0.841
1.110

0.787
0.743
1.070

Percentage of Variance Explained by Exposures
0.234 0.274 0.304
0.223 0.171 0.165
(R2)
0.344 0.297 0.262
0.508 0.413 0.364
(R2)

(R2)

0.580

0.661

0.532

0.509

0.459

0.406

StandardvErrorsof?EstlinatedExpOSure to Real Interest Differentials
0.349
0.257
0.234

0.419
0.320
0.301

Standard Errors of Estimated Exposure to Real Exchange Rate Changes
0.235 0.288
0.235 0.224
0.219
0.147 0.178
foreign stocks
(op)
0.202 0.246
0.151 0.172
0.156
0.082 0.131
foreign bonds
(ap)
foreign bills
(op) 0.060 0.083 0.102 0.109 0.128 0.153 0.195

0.363
0.322
0.276

foreign stocks
foreign bonds
foreign bills

(u)

0.229

(op)

0.136

(cp)

0.121

0.237
0.169
0.143

0.258
0.188
0.164

0.285

0.200
0.176

0.283
0.209
0.186

0.293
0.224
0.201

Notes to Table 6: Exposure ratios, fit1 and fi are OLS estimates from the regression

=

a?

+ fitIR' + fiiACSt + c, where

ing foreign asset 1, 1 = s,b, it;

interest differential; and ts'St

>I
A's + w —

is the domestic k-period real return from hold— (ia.t+i —

is the k-period real

is the k-period change in the log of the real

exchange rate. Standard errors of estimated fls are computed using the largest of several measures,
including 01.5, Newey-West serial-correlation consistent and Newey-West serial-correlation and
heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors. The panel entitled "percentage variance explained
by exposures"represents the fl2 from the above regression.

Table 7

Real Return on Foreign Investments:
Estimated Minimum-Variance Real Hedge Ratios

Holding Horizon (k years)
Variable

stocks

foreign stocks
foreign bonds
foreign bills

1.050
0.968
0.875

'-'S

foreign bonds
foreign bills

2

1

Ak

(R2)t

(R2)

0.887
0.981
0.834

3

4

5

6

Minimum-Variance Ratios
0.808 0.953 1.060 1.160
0.995 1.010 1.000 0.987

7

8

1.3(X)

1.450

0.998

1.030

Percentage Variance Reduction from Minimum-Variance Hedge
0.219 0.171 0.159 0.216 0.253 0.289 0.327 0.359
0.653
0.505

0.568 0.521 0.503 0.456 0.405 0.372
0.410 0.362 0.344 0.295 0.257 0.239

0.347
0.235

Standard Errors of Estimated Minimum-Variance Ratios
foreign stocks
foreign bonds
foreign bills

0.145 0.160 0.170 0.170 0.169 0.178 0.187 0.199
0.080 0.106 0.121 0.123 0.129 0.138 0.150 0.170
0.090 0.124 0.140 0.142 0.157 0.178 0.199 0.220

(

I
(

Notes to Tble 7:-Minimum-variance ratios areestimates:of fl -from the regression r1 =

+ €t,
a + pkk= Aks
+

r is the domestic k-period real return from holding foreign asset 1,
is the k-period change in the log of the real exchange rate (which
and AkS
can be interpreted as the return on a real currency hedge under the assumption that cx ante real
interest rates are constant). Standard errors of estimated fis are computed using the largest of
where

—R

several measures, including 012, Newey-West serial-correlation consistent and Newey-West serialcorrelation and heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors.

