NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO HISTORICAlLY BLACK INSTITUTIONS
OF HIGHER EDUCATION CONpp
UNIQUE ADVANTAG ON BLACK STUDENTS:
AN INITIAL ANALYSIS

Ronald G. Ehrenberg
Donna S. Rothstejn

Working Paper No. 4356

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusens Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1993

Irving M. Ives Professor of Indusuiaj and
Labor Relations and Economics at Cornell University
and Research Associate at the National Bureau of Economic
Research, and Ph.D. candidate at
Cornell University. We are grateful to Dan Goldhaber and Michael
Schultheis for their research
assistance to the Andrew W. Mellon and William Fl. Dormer Foundations
for financial support,
and to Alan Fechter and his staff at the National Research Council for
providing us with the data

used in section III of the
paper. The views expressed here are solely our own and do not
represent the views of Cornell University, the
National Bureau of Economic Research, either
foundation, or the National Research Council.
This
paper is part of NBER's research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions
expressed
are
those
of
the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

Working Paper #4356
May 1993

DO HISTORICALLY BLACK INSflTUTIONS
OF HIGHER EDUCATION CONFER
UNIQUE ADVANTAGES ON BLACK STUDENTS:
AN INITIAL ANALYSIS
ABSTRACT
Do Historically Black Institutions (HBIs) of Higher Education confer

unique advantages on black students?

Our paper consists of two separate analyses that begin to address
this issue.

The first uses data from the National Longitudinal Study of the High School Class of 1972 to ascertain
whether black college students who attended ifflIs in the early 1970s had higher graduation rates, improved early
career labor market success and higher probabilities of going on to graduate or professional schools than their
counterparts who attended other institutions. The econometric methods we employ conuol for the characteristics of
the students, characteristics of the institutions, and the process by which black students decided to enroll (or were

prevented from enrolling) in different types of institutions. We find that attendance at an NB! substantially enhanced
the probability that a black student received a bachelor's degree within seven years. however it had no
apperent affect
on the student's early career labor market success and probability of enrolling in post-college
schooling.
The second uses data from the 1987 to 1991 waves of the National Research Council's Survey of Earned

Doctorates to provide evidence on the patterns of black citizen doctorates with respect to their undergraduate
institutions, their graduate institutions, and whether they achieved academic positions in major American liberal arts

and researcwdoctonte institutions. Among the major findings is that black doctorates who received their
undergraduate degrees at lffiIs were much less likely to have received their graduate degree at a major research

institution than those black doctorates who attended a major research or selective liberal arts undergraduate
institution. Similarly, among the black doctorates who entered academic careen, those with graduate degrees from
HBIs were less likely to be employed in major American research or liberal arts institutions than those who received
their graduate degrees from major research institutions.

Ronald 0. Ehrenberg
ILR-Cornetl University
Ithaca, NY 14853-3901
(607) 255-3026
and NBER

Donna S. Roibstein

ILR-Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853-3901
(607) 255-3026

L Introduction
Throughout most of the late nineteenth and early twentieth century the majority of
black American citizens lived and were educated in the south. They were formally excluded

from southern segregated white institutions of higher education and found higher
educational opportunities only in the Historically Black Institutions (HEIs) of higher
education.1 Some of the latter (for example, Morehouse, Speliman and Fisk) were private
institutions that were initially established by church-related organizations. Others (for
example, florida A & M, Grarnbling and Morgan State) were public institutions established

in the southern states after the Civil War to provide separate education for black youths.
In the absence of allowing blacks to attend the same institutions as whites, the establishment

of the public HEIs was necessary if the southern states were to meet the requirements of
the second (1890) Morrill Act. As pan of providing funding for land grant institutions, the

Act required that the states provide educational opportunities for all of their citizens.
As the black population began to move to the north in response to urban industrial
employment opportunities, the relative importance of the HBIs for the education of black

college age students began to decline. The famous 1954 Brown v. Board of Education
Supreme Court decision, which outlawed separate but equal public schools, actually had very

little impact on many of the southern states and formally segregated higher educational
systems remained. When integrated at all, the white institutions often did so only as a result

of suits pursued by the NAACP in the courts.2 It was not until the passage of the .1254
Civil Rights Act, Title VI of which prohibited the allocation of federal funds tosegregated

public educational institutions, that any real progress at integration was made. However,
this progress was very slow and in a 1973 Supreme Court decision, Adams v. Richardson,

2
the southern states were formally finally ordered to dismantle their dual higher educational
systems.

As recently as 1964, over half of all bachelor's degrees granted to black Americans

were granted by I-IBIs. By 1973, with the continued black migration to the north and the

beginnings of integrated higher education in the south, the HBI share had fallen to about
one-quarter to one-third, a range in which it remains today. The 106 institutions officially
classified as I-IBIs that exist today are listed in Table 1. Over 90 percent of the institutions

are 4-year institutions and over 95 percent of the students enrolled in HBIs attend 4-year
institutions. While more HBIs are private than public, the former are often quite small and

about three-quarters of the students at HBIs are enrolled in public institutions.
Approximately twenty percent of all black college students are now enrolled in the HBIs.

Despite the declining relative importance of the HBIs in the production of black
bachelor's degrees, in recent years they have become the subject of intense public policy

debate for two reasons. First, court cases have been filed in a number of southern states
that assert that black students continue to be underrepresented at traditionally white public
institutions, that discriminatory admissions criteria are used by these institutions to exclude

black students (e.g., basing admissions only on test scores and not alsoon grades) and that
per student funding levels, program availability and library facilities are substantially poorer

at the public I-IBIs than at other public institutions in the state.3 In one 1992 case, United

States v. Fordice, the Supreme Court ruled that Mississippi had not done enough to
eliminate racial segregation in its state-run higher educational institutions4 Rather than
mandating a remedy, however, the court sent the case back to the lower courts for action.

3
What should the appropriate action be? Should it be to integrate more fully both
the historically white and historically black institutions by breaking down discrizninatoiy
admissions practIces at the former and moving to (or newly establishing at) the latter some

unique programs? Should the HBls be eliminated and their campuses either folded into the
historically white institutions or abandoned? Or should effort be directed at

equalizing per

student expenditure levels and facilities between campuses and not at worrying about the
racial distribution of students at each campus, even if suchpolicies might result in "voluntary

separate but equal" institutions?

From an economic efficiency perspective, the appropriate policy responses will at
least partially depend upon the answers to a number of questions. Do HBIs, per se, provide

unique advantages to black students that they could not obtain at other institutions? Ifthey
do, do they do so because of the racial composition of their faculty or the racialcomposition

of their students? If they do, would enrolling more black college students in higher
expenditure/pupil integrated institutions actually leave these students worse off?

There is a long literature that stresses the importance of HBIs to black students,
especially those from poorer socioeconomic and academic backgrounds.5 This literature
suggests that students at HBIs are likely to have better self-images, be psychologically and

socially more well-adjusted, and to have higher grades than their counterparts at other
institutions. Although it is asserted that HBIs graduate a larger proportion of the black

students that enroll in them than do other institutions, only a much smaller number of
studies have addressed (with mixed findings) whether HBIs continue to appear to enhance
black student degree probabilities once one controls for differences in the characteristics of

4
the students that attend HBIs and other institutions. Only a handful have addressed
whether attendance at an HBJ, per se, enhances black students' subsequent labor market
and educational success; these studies typically find that they do not. None ofthese studies
takes account of the process by which black students decide to enroll (or are prevented from

enrolling) in different types of institutioni.

To shed some light on these issues, the next section presents econometric analyses

of whether black college students who attended HBTs in the early 1970s had higher
graduation rates, higher early career labor market success and higher probabilities of
attending graduate school, than their counterparts who attended other institutions. These

analyses use data from the National Longitudinal Study of the High School pass of 1972
(NLS72). The econometric methods we emply control for characteristics of the students,

characteristics of the institutions and the above mentioned matching process between
students and institutions.6

The second subject of policy debate relates to the production and employment of

black doctorates.' Despite vigorous (or nonvigorous?) affirmative action efforts, the
proportion of faculty that is black at major American universities is typically quite low. In

part, this reflects the small number of black doctorates that are produced annually, and
many p&ople stress the need to increase the production of black doctorates to overcome this

problem. Projections of forthcoming overall shortages of doctorates also reemphasize the
need to increase black doctorate production to help avert these shortages, independent of

concerns about the need for black faculty to serve as role models for black students.

5

What is tle best way to increase the flow of black students into doctoral programs?

Do HBIs currently serve disproportionately as the source of the black undergraduate
students who go on for doctoral degrees? Should new doctoral programs be set up or
existing programs strengthened at HBIs to enhance the flow of black doctorates? Or, should

attempts be made to recruit more black students from HBIs, or more black students from
other institutions, into existing doctoral programs at leading Research I institutions? Inpart,

the appropriate policy responses depend on the answer to another question — do black
undergraduate students from HEIs who go on to doctoral study and black students who get

doctoral degrees at HBIs, do as well in the academic labor market as their counterparts
from other institutions?

Section III provides partial answers to some of these questions using special
tabulations prepared for us from the National Research Council's Survey of Earned
Doctorn. A brief concluding section summarizes the implications of our findings and
suggests directions for future research.

IL

Did Historically Black Institutions of Higher Education Confer Unique
Advantages on Black Students in the 1970s?
This section presents a detailed description of our analyses of data on black college

students from the National LonEitudinal Survey of the High School Class of 1972 (NLS72).
We focus on students who first enrolled in a 4-year HBI or other 4-year college within three

years after their June 1972 graduation from high school? Our interest is in learning
whether attendance at an HBI per se increased the probability that these students received

6
a bachelor's degree by 1979, improved their early (1979) labor market outcomes (as

measured by earnings and an index of occupational prestige), and increased the probability

that they subsequently enrolled in an advanced degree program?
These questions are all addressed in the context of models that permit the students'
choice of college type (MB! or non-MB!) to be treated as endogenous. In places the models

also control for the process that determined whether an individual was employed in 1979.
The sensitivity of our findings to the statistical models used are stressed throughout.

A) Descriptive Statistics
Descriptive statistics for the 638 black students in our sample are found in Table 2;

298, or 47 percent of these students, attended HBIs, while the remaining 340 students
attended other institutions.

Mean SAT test scores (SAT) were substantially lower and high school ranks
(HSRANK) were somewhat poorer for the students at HBIs. These students also tended
to come from families with lower incomes (PARINC) and their parents were slightly less
likely to have earned bachelor's degrees (DADBA, MOMBA). Not surprisingly, they were

much more likely to have gone to high school in a state in the southeastern region of the
country (SOUTH), where the majority of the HBIs are located. Indeed, the proportion of

full-time equivalent undergraduates enrolled in HBls (SLOTS) in the states in which
students went to high school was typically twice as large for students who subsequently
enrolled in HBIs than it was for students who did not subsequently enroll in I-iBIs.
Characteristics of the high schools that the students attended also differed between
the two groups. Students enrolled in HBIs were more likely to have attended a public high

7
school (PUBHS), to have greater proportions of black high school classmates (P851-IS) and

black high school teachers (PBFFIS), but were less likely to have gone to high school in an

urban area (URBHS).
The characteristics of the colleges the students attended also differed. Mean SAT
scores at the college or university in which the students enrolled (CSAT) were over 300

points lower in the MB! sample, while expenditures per full-time equivalent student
(EXPST) averaged about 10 percent lower. The proportions of black students (PBSTIJ) and

black faculty (PEFAC) at the students' institutions were both much higher in the RB!

sample, and students at HBIs were more likely to be attending a private institution
(PRIV)?
Turning to some of the outcomes that will be of interest to us, the proportion of
students that had received a bachelor's degree by the 1979 survey data (BA79) was .04
higher in the HBl sample. In contrast, average hourly earnings for the roughly 85 percent
of both samples that were employed in 1979 (WAGE79) was almost 10 percent lower in the

MB! sample. An index of employed individuals' occupational prestige (SE179) was also
slightly lower at HBIs.'°
One goal of our study was to estimate the effects of characteristics of colleges, other

than whether they were HBIs, on students' educational and labor market outcomes. Of

interest were questions such as; were outcomes higher at institutions that had greater
expenditures/student and/or greater student test score selectivity? Were the advantages,

if any, that can be attributed to HBIs due to the racial composition of the faculty or the

8
racial composition of the students? Given that they historically have had different missions,

did private HBIs benefit black students by more or less than public HEIs did?
Our ability to answer such questions is limited by the high correlations that existed

among these college characteristics; these correlations are tabulated in Table 3. It is clear

that in the pooled sample we could not hope to disentangle the effects of I-IBIs from the
effects of other variables. Similarly, in the non-HBI sample, the high correlations between

CSAT and EXPST and between PBSTU and PBFAC made it uniikely that we could
estimate these variables' effects. Correlations are substantially lower in the HEI sample and

hence, throughout the paper, we attempt to estimate the effects of the various institutional

characteristics on the different outcomes attained by students enrolled in HEIs.

B) The Decision to Attend an HBI

Prior attempts to estimate whethçr attendance at HBIs improve black students'
graduation probabilities or labor market outcomes have, for the most part, treated whether

a black student attended an HBI as exogenous." If students are not randomly assigned
to I-IBIs, such a procedure may lead to biased coefficient estimates. As a first step, this
section analyzes students' decisions to attend HBIs.
Given that a black student enrolled in a 4-year institution, what determines whether
it was an HBI? The answer is a complex one because it depended not only on the student's

preferences and resources, but also on the policies pursued by institutions. For example,
a number of southern states have required scores on standardized tests that exceed a critical

level as the sole criterion to gain admission to their historically white public institutions of
higher education, in spite of the facts that black students often did poorly on these tests and

9
that even the generators of the tests recommend that they .nQr be used as the only criterion

for admissions decisions."
In the absence of being able to estimate a structural model in which we can identify
both the admissions decision rules of.aiJ institutions and the preferences of each student, we

adopt a simpler reduced form approach. A student's choice of institutional type, which
resulted from his or her preferences and the constraints imposed by various institutions'
decision rules, is assumed to have depended on the student's high school rank and SAT
scores, characteristics of the student's family and the high school that he or she attended,
and the characteristics of the HBIs and the other higher educational institutions in the state

in which the student attended high school.

Why consider the characteristics of only institutions in a single state? It is well
known that nationwide the vast majority of students attend college in the same state in
which they went to high school. As Table 4 indicates, this was true in the 1970s for students

who attended HBIs as well. In 1976, 58 percent of the students enrolled in private HBIs

and 84 percent of the students enrolled in public HBIs were in-state students.'3 Since
roughly three-quarters of all students in HBIs attended public institutions, the overall instate percentage was around 78.
Table 4 also contains a set of regression equations that seeks to explain the variation

across HBIs in the proportion of freshmen that were in-state students. One key finding is
that, holding the tuition level for out-of-state students constant, the lower was the tuition
level for in-state students, the higher was the proportion of in-state students. In addition,

other variables held constant (including tuition), private JIBIs tended to attract a greater

10

proportion of in-state students, and more selective HEIs tended to attract a smaller
proportion of in-state students. These findings suggest several state-level institutional
variables that should have influenced whether in-state students enrolled in an HBI in the
state and, as described below, we include several in the model.

Table 5 presents probit estimates of our model of the determinants of whether an
individual in ou sample attended an HBL'4 The only state level variable included in the

analyses reported in column (1) is SLOTS, the proportion of full-time equivalent
undergraduate students in the student's high school state that were enrolled in HBIs.'5
The specification reported in column (2) adds three additional measures. RELTIJI is the
average (weighted by ETE enrollments) tuition in HBIs in the state relative to the weighted

average tuition for other institutions in the state. RELFAC is the weighted average
proportion of faculty in Hilts in the state that were black relative to the weighted average
proportion of faculty in other institutions in the state that were black. Finally, RELSAT is
the weighted average SAT score in HBIs in the state relative to the average weighted SAT

scores of other institutions in the state. Our expectation is that these variables in turn
should be negatively, positively, and positively related to the probability of enrollment in an

Hill.
The estimates in Table 5 suggest that students with higher test scores were less likely

to attend Hills. Students from public high schools and high schools with a greater
proportion of black teachers were more likely to attend Hills. Males were more likely to

attend Hills than females. Finally, parents' educational backgrounds and income do not
appear to have influenced whether students attended an Hill.

11
The fraction of full-time equivalent undergraduate student slots in a state that were

available in HBIs also mattered. While the other state level variables proved to be jointly
significant when included in the model, individually only RELTIJI approached statistical
significance and its coefficient was positive. Higher levels of RELTUI may have signified
increased relative quality of HBIs in a way not captured by SAT scores, and thus may have

led to an increased probability of black students' enrollment in an NB!.
C) The Characteristics of the Colle2es Students Attended

Characteristics of colleges, other than whether they are HBIs, may influence a
student's educational and early labor market outcomes. The quality of an institution, as
measured by its expenditure per student, or the quality of its students, as measured by their

average test scores have been shown to matter.16 Within the NB! sector, the proportions
of students and faculty that were black varied considerably and if HBIs did prove to confer

unique advantages on black students, it is important to learn whether it was the racial mix

of the students and/or that of the faculty that was responsible." Finally, as noted in the
introduction, private and public HBIs may have had differential impacts on students. Thus,

in some specifications, we include each of these variables in the educational and labor
market outcome equations that appear in subsequent sections.
'Of course, the characteristics of institutions chosen by students are not random and

it is of some interest to understand how individuals are matched to institutional
characteristics. To the extent that these characteristics enter into outcome equations, and
we want to estimate the difference in an outcome that an individual would have achieved

in the two sectors, it is also necessary for us to be able to predict the values of the

12
characteristics for each individual for the choice (HBI or non-HBI) not taken.18 For both

of these reasons, we require estimates of the determinants of the characteristics of the
institutions that the students attended.
Table 6 provides such estimates for individuals enrolled in HBIs and those individuals

enrolled in other institutions. The characteristics analyzed are the average SAT score in the
institution (CSAT), institutional expenditures per student (EXPST), the proportions of black

faculty (PBFAC) and students (PBSTU), and whether the institution was private (PRIV).'9

In each case, the characteristic was assumed to depend on the weighted mean value across
institutions in the sector in the state in which the individual went to high school of the same

characteristic, as well as a vector of characteristics of the individual, his or her family, and

the high school that he or she attended.
Not surprisingly, given that most individuals remained in the same state for college,

the mean values of the state/sector characteristics prove to be important predictors. In

addition, more able students, as measured by higher test scores and lower class tank,
enrolled in institutions with higher average test scores and higher expenditures/student. For

students not enrolled in HBIs, an increase in their test scores also were associated with
lower proportions of black students and black faculty in the institution that the students
attended. For students enrolled in HEIs, an increase in the proportion of black teachers in
their high school was associated with an increase in the proportion of black faculty in their

college. Finally, if a student graduated from high school in a state that had no HOIs and
he or she attended an HBI, other variables held constant, the student tended to be enrolled

in an HBI with higher average test scores, expenditures per student, proportions of black

13
faculty and black students, and probability of being private. These latter
findings suggest

some of the institutional characteristics that black families that sent their children out of
state to HBIs were interested in obtaining.

D) ReceiDt of a Bachelor's De2ree by 1979
The proportions of students who received bachelor's degrees by 1979 were 354 in the

1161 and 315 in the non-HBI sample respectively (Table 2). What happens to the
difference in these proportions once one controls for differences between the two groups
in the characteristics of individuals and the schools they attended, as well
as the process by

which students enrolled in HBIs or other schools?

Table 7 presents probit estimates of the probability that a bachelor's degree was
received by 1979. Equations were estimated for students who attended HBIs, students who

attended other institutions, and the pooled sample.

In the separate sample cases,

specifications were reported in which the probability was assumed to have varied with
measures of the individual's ability and family background, and then these variables plus the

characteristics of the college the individual attended. The pooled analyses included

a

dichotomous variable for whether the individual attended an MB! and also specifications in

which this variable was treated as endogenous. To accomplish the latter, instruments for
the student's institutional type were obtained from the choice of sector equations reported

in Table s?0
Turning first to the estimates by sector, students whose high school class rank was

lower (better) were more likely to have received a degree in both sectors. Higher SAT

scores were associated with higher completion probabilities, but the relationship is

14

statistically significant only for students who did not attend HBIs. Students from wealthier
families, as measured by higher family income or higher fathers occupational prestige, had

higher completion probabilities, as did students from families where the mother had a
bachelor's degree.

When one adds the set of institutional characteristics, they prove not to be
statistically significant as a group in each sector, and individually no individual characteristic

was statistically significant either.2' One can .j infer from these results that increasing
either institutional selectivity, expenditure per student or the proportions of students or
faculty that were black, increased black students completion probabilities in either sector.
Nor were private institutions associated with higher completion rates than public institutions.

Turning to the pooled analyses, the results in column (la) clearly indicate that,
holding other factors constant, the probability that a bachelor's degree was received by 1979

was significantly higher if the student attended an HBI than if the student attended another
institution. Indeed, one can make use of the coefficient estimates from column (Ia) and the

values of the explanatory variables for each individual to compute bow much higher the
probability would have been for each individual if he or she attended an HB1?2 When this
is done, the mean value of these differentials is seen to be .090 and the standard deviation
of the differentials only .015. This is strong evidence that these black students' probability

of receiving a bachelor's degree by 1979 was higher if they attended HBIs than if they

attended other institutions3
The estimates in column (Ia) do not control for the fact that enrollment in an HBI

was not a random occurrence. To do so, we compute instrumental variable estimates for

15
the probability a student was enrolled in an HBI from each of the two enrollment models

found in Table 5. We then reestimate the graduation probability model twice replacing the

dichotomous RB! variable in turn by each of the instruments. The resulting estimates
appear in columns 111 and 112 in the table.
The latter two sets of coefficients prove to be virtually identical. The coefficients of

the HUt instrument in both cases are much larger than the original MB! coefficient found

in column (la). Indeed, when one computes the implied impacts of attending an JiB! in

these models, as described above, one finds that the mean probabilities of obtaining a
bachelor's degree by 1979 were over 20 higher in each of these two models if the individual

attended an RB!. That is, controlling for the endogeneity of whether these students
attended an RB! substantially increased our estimate of the RBI/non-HB! probability of
graduating by 1979 differential.

Given that we obtained virtually identical estimates when the two different
instruments for attendance at HUTs were used, for simplicity, in the remainder of the paper

we report results only for the instrument derived from the specification that excludes the
relative characteristics from the enrollment equation (Table 5, column 1).
E) Early Career Eaniinzs
Table 8 presents estimates of the logarithm of 1979 hourly earnings equations for

individuals who initially were enrolled in 1-IBIs, but who were employed in 1979 and not
enrolled full-time in college. Missing from this sample then will be full-time undergraduate

or graduate students and/or individuals who were unemployed or not in the labor force.

16

Table 9 presents similar estimates for individuals who were initially enrolled in other
institutions.

Equations were estimated that both excluded and included whether the individual
had received a bachelor's degree by 1979. For each of these cases, since enrollment in an
HE! was nonrandom, specifications were also estimated that controlled for the factors that

determined whether an individual enrolled in an NB!, using the sample selection bias

correction method suggested by Heckman (1979)?' As is well known, this involves
computing, and then adding, an estimated correction factor (the inverse Mills' ratio) to the

model and then reestimating the models.
Since being employed in 1979 was also a nonrandom event, specifications were also

estimated that controlled for the probability that each individual was observed employed.
These latter specifications made use of estimated employment status equations and were

estimated under the assumption that the correction factors for attendance at an HE! and
being employed in 1979 were independent of each other?

The explanatory variables included in these models were personal and family
characteristics of the individual, the area unemployment rate in 1979 and, to control for
price differences across areas, a vector of regional dichotomous variables and a dichotomous

variable'that indicates whether the individual attended an urban high school. The high
school urbanization variable served as a proxy for the extent of urbanization in the area in
which the individual resided in 1979. Some specifications also included the characteristics

of the college that the student attended. However, in neither sector did any of these college
characteristics appear to significantly influence early career wages.

17
Our interest in these equations is primarily so we can compute estimates from them

as to whether individuals who attended HBIs earned more than they would have earned if

they had attended other institutions. We make such estimates in a later subsection. For
now, we note only two findings. First, the return to earning a bachelor's degree by 1979 was

higher for individuals who attended HBIs than for other individuals (more on this below).
Second, correction for both types of sample selection bias appear important for individuals

who did not attend HBls, and correction for selection bias associated with employment
status appears important for individuals who attended HBIs.

Table 10 presents estimates of wage equations when the data for individuals who
attended both HBIs and other institutions were pooled together and a dichotomous variable

for attendance at an HBI added to the model. The -.02 1 coefficient of this variable in
column (1), which is statistically insignificantly different from zero, suggests that enrollment

in an HBI did jgj lead to an increase in early career earnings for black college students in
the sample. This conclusion continues to hold when the sample selection bias correction
method is used to control for being employed (column (la)), when enrollment at an HEI
is treated as endogenous and an instrumental variable estimate used instead of the actual

value (column (Ib)), and when the instrumental variable and the sample selection bias
corre&tion method are used simultaneously (column (ic)). That is, we find no evidence that

attendance at an HBI led, on average, to increased 1979 hourly earnings.2'

What if we add whether an individual received a bachelor's degree by 1979 to the

model, treat the degree attainment and wage equations as recursive and estimate the
augmented wage equation? The coefficient of Hf! becomes -.036, and remains statistically

18
insignificant. However, attainment of a bachelor's degree raises the logarithm of earnings
by a statistically significant .214. Since individuals who attended HB!s were more likely to

graduate, one may ask whether this positive indirect effect of 1-iBis on earnings was larger

than the negative direct effect of attendance at an HBI.
The answer is no! The analogous (single equation) estimate of the marginal impact

of attending an HBI on degree attainment by 1979 was .090 and thus the total effect of
attendance at an HE! on 1979 earnings is estimated in percentage terms to have been -.017

((.214)(.090)-.036). Similar findings occur (column (3c)), when we control for both the
endogeneity of HBl and for sample selection (employment) bias. With attendance at NB!

treated as endogenous, the estimated mean impact of attendance at an HE! on degree
attainment we obtained was .215. Hence, the estimated total effect of attendance at an HE!

on earnings in percentage terms was the direct effect (-.131) plus the indirect effect
(.200)(.215) or -.088.
Finally, column (3) reports the results of allowing the effects of attendance at an HE!

on earnings to vary with whether the individual actually graduated by 1979. The pattern of

coefficients suggests that, holding other variables constant, individuals who had not
graduated from HBIs earned less than individuals who had not graduated from other
institutions. In contrast, other things held constant, graduates of HBIs earned more than
graduates of other institutions. There may have been a larger payoff to attending an HBI,
but only if the student succeeded in graduating.

19
F) Early Career Occupational PrestlEe
Tables 11, 12, and 13 replicate the analyses of the previous three tables replacing the
logarithm of hourly earnings by the index of occupational prestige in the occupation in which

the individual was employed in 1979. The rationale for using this alternative variable is that

individuals may trade off earnings earlyin their careen for training opportunities. Thus,
occupational prestige may be a better measure of early career success than earnings.
The results obtained when this alternative success measure is used are very similar

to the earnings results, although neither correction for sample selection bias due to the
nonrandom nature of employment status nor for attendance at an HBI mattered here. Once

again, the analyses conducted with the pooled sample (Table 13) suggest that attendance
at an HBI did not lead to an increase in black students' early career occupational success.27
G) Enrollment In Graduate Education
Historically, HBIs graduated many of the black Americans who went on to graduate

and professional schools and who ultimately assumed professional positions in the black
community. We discuss the role HRIs play in the production of black doctorates in the next

section. Here we ask whether, conditional on having received a bachelor's degree by 1979,

was it the case that graduates of HBIs in our sample were more likely to have enrolled in
a master's, doctoral, or professional degree program by 1979?
In the aggregate, 33 percent of the individuals who received a bachelor's degree by
1979 were enrolled in such programs by 1979. The comparable percentages for graduates
of HBIs was 27 and for graduates of other institutions 38. These raw percentages, however,

ignore differences in the two groups in students' academic ability or family backgrounds

20
(e.g., income), both of which might influence their propensities to attend graduate or
professional school.
Table 14 presents estimates of probit probability of enrollment in graduate programs

by 1979, conditional on having received a bachelor's degree, equations. The simplest
model (column (1)) included measures of a student's academic ability at the time he or she

graduated from high school, the student's family background at that time, and whether the
student attended an Nfl. A student's academic ability and parents' income are seen to have
both positively influenced the probability of having been enrolled in postgraduate education,

but attendance at an JIB! per se did .j significantly increase this probability. Use of an
instrument for attendance at an HBI, to control for its nonrandom nature (column (2)) did
not change any of these findings.

When the data were stratified by whether the students attended an JIB!, the
characteristics of the institutions the students attended can be entered into the models. This

is done is columns (4) (non-HBIs) and (6) (HBIs). In each case, an increase in the
proportion of black students in the institution's undergraduate student body is seen to have

been associated with an increase in the probability of enrollment in graduate education.

H) Did Attendance at an HBI Matter?
Table 15 compactly summarizes the predicted mean (across individuals) proportional

differential impacts of enrollment in an MB! on the probability of having received a

bachelor's degree by 1979, on hourly earnings (if employed) in 1979, and on the
occupational prestige index (if employed) in 1979.

21
In addition to the single equation (pooled sample) estimates that have already been

discussed, estimates are presented for when separate "outcome equation? were estimated

for individuals attending HBIs and other institutions. In these latter cases, estimates of

mean differentials are reported for individuals initially in eich sector. In addition, to
ascertain the sensitivity of the findings to the statistical model used, estimates arereported
for models in which attendance at an MB! was treated as exogenous, attendance at an HE!

was treated as endogenous, and (where relevant) being employed was treated as
endogenous. In each case, the models used are those that excluded the vector of
institutional characteristics and (for wages and occupational status) excluded receipt of a

bachelor's degree by 1979. In each case, the predicted impact was computed for each
individual in the sample and then the mean of the individual responses reported?

Table IS makes clear that attendance at an HBI jJIJ substantially increase the
probability that black students in the sample received a bachelor's degree by 1979.
Depending on the specific model and statistical method used, the mean probability was
between 9 and 29 percent higher if a student attended an MB!. In contrast, the impact of
attendance at an HBI on early career labor market success, as measured by 1979 earnings

or occupational prestige, was much smaller. In many cases the estimates were negative,
although given the statistical insignificance of the underlying coefficients, all of these impacts

on early career labor market success are probably insignificantly different from zero.

How could HBIs have improved black students' graduation probabilities, but not
improved their early career labor market success? At least two explanations come to mind.

On the one hand, the quality of education received by black students may have been lower

22
at HBIs and graduation standards lower at the HBIs also lower. On the other hand,
employers may have discriminated more against black graduates of FIBIs than they did
against black graduates of other institutions.30 The data we have used do not permit us
to distinguish between these two explanations.

Ill. The Producflon and Early Career Attainment or Black Citizen Doctorates
Historically, HBTs have provided many of the black college graduates who have gone

on to earn doctoral degrees in the United States. In recent years, approximately 40percent
of the new doctorates granted to black citizens have gone to individuals who have received

their undergraduate degrees from HBIs, even though the HBls grant only about 30 percent

of the bachelor's degrees received by black Americans. Thus, the HBIs are asserted to be

an important component of the pipeline for the production of black doctorates.3'
This section investigates the role of HBIs in the production of black doctorates, using

special tabulations prepared for us by the National Research Council from the Survey of

Earned Doctorates (S). Each year when doctoral candidates submit their dissertations
to their graduate schools and receive their degrees, they are asked to respond to the .SP.

Of primary interest to us here are their responses relating to their field of doctoral study,
the institutions at which they received their undergraduate and graduate degrees, and their

plans for future employment or study. Because of the small number of doctoral degrees
granted to black citizens in any one year, most of the tabulations that follow are based on

data from a recent five year period.

23
Table 16 presents data on the share of black citizen doctorates granted by HBIs and
the share that went to individuals who received their undergraduate degrees from HEIS, by
field, over the 1987-1991 period. Focusing initially on the latter, in the aggregate the share
of black citizen doctorates granted to individuals with undergraduate degrees from HBIs was

39. However, this aggregate figure masks considerable variation across fields. Over 47

percent of all black citizens doctorates during the period were granted in the field of

education and the share of black education doctorates going to individuals with
undergraduate degrees from HBIs was .48. While the analogous shares for the professional

fields, the life sciences, and the humanities were all greater than .3, the shares in the
physical sciences, engineering, social sciences, and psychology were less than 3. In these

latter fields, at least, undergraduates from HBIs are not over represented among black
citizen new doctorates.

Perhaps another way to convey this point is to tabulate the share of black citizen
doctorates granted in various fields, by institutional type. This is done in Table 17, where
the first column again indicates that about 47 percent of all black citizen doctorates during
the 1987-91 period were in the field of education, while the comparable percentage for black

citizen doctorates who graduated from undergraduate HBIs was .55. Indeed, the shares of

black citizen doctorates in each of the science, engineering, social science, and humanity
fields were lower for undergraduate degree holders from HBIs than they were for graduates

from the other types undergraduate institutions.

Returning to Table 16, it also indicates that the share of black citizens doctorates

granted by HBIs was .09 during the period. The number of 1-IBIs that grant doctorate

24
degrees in any year is actually very small. For example, as Table 18 indicates, in 1991 there

were eight such institutions and over two-thirds of the total number of degrees they granted

were granted by Howard and aark Atlanta University. If one excludes doctorates granted
in education, the number of HBIs producing doctorates falls to four. The small number of

doctorates produced annually by many of the doctoral programs in HBIs leads to the

concern that these programs may be too small to reach the critical mass necessaiy to
efficiently train doctoral students?2

What types of graduate institutions do graduates of HBIs attend for doctoral study
and how do they compare to the institutional types that other black doctorates attend? This

question is of some importance because, as we show below, where one attends graduate
school heavily influences a new black doctorate's employment prospects. To answer this
question, Table 19 presents cross-tabulations, by field, of black doctorates' undergraduate

and graduate institutional types. The graduate institutions are broken down into HEIs,
Research I doctorate granting institutions (the institutions that produce a large number of
doctorates in a number of fields and whose doctoral programs often are highly rated), and

other institutions.33 The undergraduate institutions are broken down into HBJs, Liberal
Arts I (selective Liberal Arts) and Research I institutions, and other institutions.

In the aggregate, 9 percent of black doctorates during the 1987-91 period were
granted by HBIs, 45 percent were granted by Research I Institutions and 47 percent were
granted by other institutions. For those black doctorates whose undergraduate degrees were

earned at HBIs, the comparable figures were 16, 36, and 47 percent respectively, while for
black doctorates from Liberal Arts I and Research I undergraduate institutions, the figures

25

were 5, 41 and 54 percent respectively. That is, black doctorates whose undergraduate
degrees were earned at HBIs were much more likely to attend HBIs and somewhat less
likely to attend Research I institutions for their doctoral study. Perusal of the field specific
data suggests that the same pattern holds for each of the doctorate fields, although in some

cases the differences are not as large as the overall ones.
Why do black doctorates who received their undergraduate degrees fromHEIS tend

to bi less likely to wind up in elite Research I doctoral programs than graduates from
Uberal Arts land Research I institutions? In part, itjjy reflect differences in the ability
levels and undergraduate training of students from HBIs vis-a.vis their counterpart.s from

Research I and Liberal Arts institutions. In part, itjny reflect their personal preferences
to remain for graduate study in what they perceive to be a supportive environment. In part,

it .my reflect ignorance about the HEIs, discriminatory attitudes towards the graduates of
HBIs, or the failure of faculty in the elite graduate programs to aggressively recruit potential

graduate students from HBIs, most of which are located in different areas of the country

than are the elite graduate programs.

The

data do not permit one to distinguish between these various hypotheses.

However, the fact that average test scores of black students tend to be lower at HBIs than

at other institutions (see, for example, Table 2) and that over a recent seven year period
only 20 percent of National Science Foundation Black Minority Graduate Fellowship

winners received their undergraduate degrees at HBIs (Table 20), suggest that perceptions

of differential ability or training are at least part of the problem. Indeed, 67 percent of

26
these fellowship winners from HBIs came from four institutions and 45 percent came from

Howard alone. The perceived quality of HBIs and their students may fall off quite rapidly.

The final 'information in the .ED that is useful to us comes from the question that
asks doctorates at the time their dissertation is approved, if they have already made definite

employment plans? For those that have, additional questions are asked about whether

academic or another form of employment, or a postdoctoral appointment, has been
obtained. Finally, for those entering academic appointments, the name of the academic
institution at which they will be employed is reported.

The tabulations reported in Table 21 indicate that, in the aggregate, 69 percent of
all black citizen new doctorates during the 1987-1991 period had definite employment plans

at the time that they received their degrees and that 58 percent of these had definite plans

to work in academia or in postdoctoral positions. The comparable percentages are both
higher for doctorates from Research I institutions than they are for doctorates from HBIs
however, once one breaks the data down by field, a consistent pattern of results does not

emerge across. That is, once one controls for field, on balance doctorates from HBIs are

roughly equally likely to have definite plans at the time they receive their degrees and

equally likely to have a postdoctoral or an academic position, as are doctorates from
Research I institutions.
What is different, though, is the type of academic position doctorates receive ifthey

do enter the academic sector. Table 22 provides data on the shares of black citizen new
doctorates with definite plans in the academic sector that go on to employment in HBIs
(including Howard), Research I or Liberal Arts I institutions, and other institutions. In the

27
aggregate, these shares are .23, .21, and .56, respectively. However, new doctorates from
HBIs are much more likely to wind up in HBIs and much less likely to wind up in Research

I or Uberal Arts institutions than are new doctorates from Research I institutions?
Similarly new doctorates whose undergraduate degrees were from FIBIs are much more

likely to wind up employed in HBIs and much less likely to wind up employed and in
Research I or Liberal Arts I institutions than are new doctorates whose undergraduate
degrees came from Research I or Liberal Arts I institutions?5 Similar results hold for each

of the seven specific fields for which data are tabulated in Table 22.
Again one can not ascertain if the sorting by institution type that occurs in these data

are due to inherent differences in the ability or training of black doctorates who attended

HBIs as undergraduate or doctoral students, vis-a-vis their counterparts at Research I or
Liberal Arts I institutions, to lack of information about and effort to recruit students from
the HBIs by the Liberal Arts I and Research I institutions, or to discriminatory preferences.

If, however, a social goal is to increase the flow of talented black students into PhD
programs and ultimately into academic positions in elite teaching and research institutions,

a number of actions are possible.

First, one could increase the number and size of doctorate programs in HBI5.M
Second, one could more aggressively recruit graduates of HBIs into Research I institutions'

doctoral programs and pursue extra efforts to retain these students until graduation. Third,

one could more aggressively recruit black students who otherwise would attend HBIs to

attend undergraduate programs at Research I or Uberal Arts I institutions. The third
option is likely to have adverse effects on the "better" undergraduate HBIs and, without

28
other policies, the first option appears likely to continue the current segmentation of black

doctorate employment. Hence, building "pipelines" between the HBIs undergraduate
programs and the Research J institutions' doctoral programs appears to be the preferred
strategy.

IV. Concluding Remarks
What should public policy be towards the Historically Black Institutions of higher

education? In an increasingly multicultural society, should public policy encourage their
integration and/or incorporation into the larger and often better funded Historically White
Institutions? Or should public policy facilitate the HEIs "specializing" in the education of
blacks and other underrepresented minorities on American campuses, by providing the HBIs

with improved facilities and increased annual support?

At the outset, it should be stressed that the only real question relates to the status
of public HBIs. There is a long tradition in American private education of institutions being

established by particular religious groups and then continuing to draw the majority of their

students from members of these groups. No one objects to Catholics voluntarily attending

Notre Dame or Georgetown, Mormons voluntarily attending Brigham Young, or Jews
vo1untai1y attending Yeshiva or Brandeis. If voluntary association with predominately
members of one's own group in a private nondiscriminating institution is deemed by an
individual to be in his or her best interest, this choice should be permitted. Hence, no one
should question the importance to black Americans of the private HEIs, those institutions

29
that receive much of their support through private fund raising activities conducted by the
United Negro College Fund.

What should public policy be towards the public HBIs? Our empirical analyses in
section 11 focused on all HBIs as a group, however, we did not find that the public/private
distinction was an important predictor of the benefits of attendance at an I-rB!. For black
students attending college in the early 1970s, attendance at an MB! did substantially enhance

their probability of receiving a bachelor's degree within seven years, however, it had no
apparent effect on their early career labor market success and probability of enrolling in
post-college graduate or professional schools. Furthermore, for none of these outcomes did

it appear that attendance at an MB! yielded larger benefits for students from low-income
families or students with low test scores than it did for other black students.
Of course, "early success" is not the same as "career success" and in future work we
will examine if data from later waves of the NLS72 provide any evidence of larger gains for

students who attended HBIs.37

In addition, to contemplate making policy

recommendations for the 1990s, up-to-date evidence is required on the effects of attendance

at HBIs. Given that one needs data for at least seven to ten years after entrance to college

to conduct any meaningful analyses, about the best one can do is to use data on students
who entered college in the 1980s. In subsequent work we will conduct such analyses using
data from HiEb School and Beyond (HSB), a national longitudinal survey of students who

graduated from high school in 1980 and 1982?

Our analyses in section III of the National Research Council's Survey of Earned

Doctorates provided evidence on the patterns of black doctorates in recent years with

30
respect to their undergraduate institutions, their graduate institutions, and whether they

achieved academic positions in major American liberal arts and research/doctorate
institutions. To the extent that one wishes to increase the flow of black doctorates to get
more black Americans into faculty positions at major American colleges and universities,

our tabulations suggest the need to increase the flow of black students into doctoral
programs in major research institutions.

Of course, this presumes that hiring practices at American universities will remain

the same and that perceptions of the quality of students at lesser programs, as well as the

quality of training they receive, will remain unchanged. If federal funding for doctoral
programs at HBIs could lead to high quality programs that attract high quality students, such

funding may provide a viable option. Given the likely small scale of these programs and the

complementary resources (e.g., libraries, faculty quality in other closely related fields) that

they will have available (or unavailable) to them, one must question whether this option
makes sense. Building better pipelines between the undergraduate FIBIs and the Research

I institutions' doctorate programs appears to be a preferred strategy.

31

References

Allen, Walter. Gender and Campus Race Differences in Black Student Academic
Performance. Racial Attitudes and College Satisfaction (Atlanta, GA: Southern Educational

Foundation, March 1986).

Allen, Walter and John Wallace. "Black Students in Higher Education: Correlates

of Access Adjustment and Achievement" (paper presented at the annual meeting of the
Association for the Study of Higher Education, St. Louis, MO: November 1988).
Anderson, Ernest F. and Freeman A. Hoabowsk. "Graduate School Success of Black

Students from White Colleges and Black Colleges", Journal of Higher Education 47
(May/June 1977): 294-303.
Astin, A. Predictin2 Academic Performance in College (New York: The Free Press,
1971).

Astin, A. Preventing Students From Dropping Out (San Francisco: Jossey•Bass,
1978).

Ayres, 0. Whitfield. "Student Achievement at Predominantly White and
Predominantly Black Universities," American Educational Research Journal 20(2) (Summer
1983): 291-301.

Baratz, Joan C. and Myra Ficklen. "Participation of Recent Black College

Graduates in Labor Market and Graduate Education" (Washington, DC: Educational
Testing Service, 1983).

32

Bowen, William 0. and Neil L Rudenstine. In Pursuit of the PhD (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1992).

Chiro, Susan. "Ruling May Force Changes at Southern Universities", New York
Times (June 27, 1992): 10.
Christy, Ralph D. and Lionel Williamson eds. A Century of Service (New Brunswick,

NJ: Transaction Publishers, 1992).
Cross, IC and H. Astin. "Factors Influencing Black Students' Persistence in College"

in 0. Thomas (Ed.), Black Students in Higher Education (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press,
1981).

Davis, James E. "Differential Academic Progression of Black Students at Historically

Black Public and Private Colleges and Universities" (Cornell University, Ph.D. disser.ation,

Ithaca, NY, 1988).

Ehrenberg, Ronald 0. 'The flow of New Doctorates", Journal of Economic
Literature 30 (June 1992): 830-875.

Featherman, D. and 0. Stevens.

"A Revised Socioeconomic Indicator of

Occupational Status" in R. Hauser ci a!. eds. Social Structure and Behavior (New York,
Academic Press, 1982).

Fleming, Jacqueline. "Sex Differences in the Impact of College Environments on

Black Students" in P. Perun (Ed.), The Undergraduate Woman: Issues in Educational
Eouicv (Lexington, MA: D.C. Heath, 1982).
fleming, Jacqueline. Blacks in College: A Comparative Study of Students' Success
in Black and White Institutions (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1984).

33
fleming, John E. Blacks in Higher Education to 1954: A Historical Overvjew' in
G. Thomas ed. Black Students in Hi2her Education: Conditions and Experiences in the
1970s (Westwood, Cl: Greenwood Press, 1981).
Heckman, James. "Sample Bias as a Specification Error", Econometrica 47 (January

1979): 153.162.

Hill, Susan T. The Traditionally Black Institutions of Higher Education: 1860 to
J.2L2 (Washingion, DC: National Center for Education Statistics, 1984).
Hoffman, Charlene M., et al. Historically Black Colleges and Universities. 1976-90

(Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics, 1992).

James, Estelle, et al. "College Quality and Future Earnings: Where Should You
Send Your Children to College?," American Economic Association Paoers and Proceedings
79 (May 1989): 247-252.

Johnson, Julie. "Are Black Colleges Worth Saving', Time (November 11, 1991): 8183.

Maddala, G. S. Limited-Dependent and Oualitative Variables in Econometrics New

York: Cambridge University Press, 1983).

Mingle, James R. 'The Opening of White Colleges and Universities to Black
Student? in G. Thomas ed. Black Students in Higher Education.
Pascarella, E., J. Smart, S. Ethington and M. Nettles. "The Influence of College on
Self-Concept: A Reconsideration of Race and Gender Differentials," American Education
Research Journal 24 (1987): 49-77.

34
Pascarella,

B., J. Smart and I. Stoecker. tollege Race and the Early Status

Attainment of Black Students," Journal of Higher Education 60 (1989): 82-107.

Pascarelta, Ernst T. and Patrick T. Terenzini. How ColleEe Affects Students:
Findin2s and Insights from 20 Years of Research (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1991).

Peterson, M. et al. Black Students on White Campuses: The Impacts of Increased
Black Enrollments (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Institute for Soda] Research, 1979).

Rowan, Carl. Breakiiw Barriers: A Memoir (Boston: Little Brown, 1993).
Stoecker, J., E. Pascarella and L Wolfe. "Persistence in Higber Education: A Nine
Year Test of the Theoretical Model," Journal of College Student Development 29 (1988):
196-209.

Thomas, Gail E. and Jomills H. Braddock II. Determining the College Destination
of Black Students (Atlanta, GA: Southern Educational Foundation, 1981).

Thomas, G. "College Characteristics and Black Students' Four-Year College
Graduation," Journal of Nero Education 50 (1981): 328-345.
Thomas, 0. and S. Gordon. Evaluating the Payoffs of College Investments for Black

White and HisDanic Students (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Center for Social
Organizations of Schools, Report No. 344, 1985).

U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Education and Labor, Hearing on
Issues and Matters Pertaining to Historically Black Colleges and Universities(Washington.

DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1991).

Willis, Robert J. and Sherwin Rosen. "Education and Self-Selection," Journal of
Political Economy 87 (October 1979):S7-S36.

35
Footnotes.

1. See Ralph D. Christy and Lionel Williamson (1992), John fleming (1981), Susan
Hill (1984), Charlene M. Hoffman, et al. (1992), and James R. Mingle (1981) for more
complete discussions of the formation and history of HUIs.

2. Many of these are vividly described in Carl Rowen (1993).

3. See Julie Johnson (1991).
4. Susan Chira (1992).

5. See Pascarella and Terenzini (1991) for a summary of the literature. Noteworthy
studies include Allen (1986), AlIen and Wallace (1988), Anderson and Hoabowsk (1977),
Astin (1978), Ayres (1983), Baratz and Finklen (1983), Cross and Astin (1981), Davis
(1988), Jacqueline fleming (1982, 1984), Pascarella., et al. (1981), Pascarella, Smart, and

Stoecker (1989), Peterson, et al. (1979), Stoecker, et al. (1988), Thomas and Braddock
(1981), Thomas (1981) and Thomas and Gordon (1985).

6. In later years, when black students became more common on white campuses, the
effects of attendance at an HBI may have changed. As such, in future research we will
present similar analyses for black students who entered college in the early 1980s, using
data from High School and Beyond.

7. See Ronald Ehrenberg (1992) for a discussion of these issues.

8. Over 95 percent of undergraduate enrollments in HBIs are in 4-year institutions.
Hence, the restriction of the sample to students initially in four-year institutions is not a
major one. Eighty-one percent of both the 1-TB! and other college sample were first

36
enrolled in September of 1972 and roughly 10 percent of each first enrolled in each of
the next two years, so using a three-year "entrance window" should also not cause us any
problems.

9. Data on the proportion of faculty at each American college and university that is
black have been collected eveiy few years since 1976 by the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission as part of their "Higher Education Staff Information" (EEOo).
Citing confidentiality and budgetary restrictions, the EEO formally declined to provide us

with data from the early years of the survey. Data for 1989 had been provided to the
U.S. Department of Education and they kindly permitted us access to a version in which
confidential data (earnings) had been removed.
The use of 1989 racial composition of the faculty data obviously provides us with

an estimate of the racial composition of the faculty in the 1970s that contains

considerable measurement error. As such, this reduces our likelihood of observing that
this variable significantly influenced the outcomes of black students.

10. The index of occupational prestige is the revised Duncan index and is found in

D. Featherman and 0. Steven (1982). The index is defined at the three-digit census
occupation level and spans the range 143 to 87.4 in our sample. Prior research has
established that this index is highly correlated with the national median earnings and
median education levels of individuals employed in the occupation.

11. See, for example, Thomas and Gordon (1985), Cross and Astin (1981),
Pascarella, Smart, Ethington and Nettles (1987), and Pascarella, Smart, and Stoecker
(1989).

37
12. See Scott Jaschik (1992).

13. As Table 4 also indicates, these percentages declined by 1988. This mirrors a
national trend in which, faced with a declining applicant pool, more and more
institutions recruited their students from wider geographic markets.

14. An appendix that is available from the authors, spells out the formal statistical
models used here and throughout the paper.
15. SLOTS is zero if no HBLs were present in the state.

16. For example, see Estelle James, et al. (1989).
17. For example, as indicated in Table 2, the standard deviations of the proportions
of black students and black faculty at HBIs that students in the sample attended were
.131 and .106 respectively.

18. See the appendix for a more complete description of this point.
19. For simplicity, we treat whether an individual enrolled in an HBI as given here.

It could, as we do later in the paper, be made endogenous, or determined simultaneously
with the other characteristics.

20. See G. S. Maddala (1983) for this dummy endogenous variable method. In
future work, we will consider addressing the endogenous nature of sector choice in the

context of the separate sector models using a bivariate probit model.

21. Recall the discussion above about the high correlation of these variables in the
non-Hifi sector.

22. See the appendix for details.
23. Similar calculations using the separate sample estimates, which we report below,
yield similar findings. We note that in specifications not reported here we found jg

38
evidence that the effects of HOIs on bachelor's degree attainment were larger for
students who had low test scores or came from low-income families.

24. See the appendix for details.

25. Again, see the appendix for details. The employment status equations included
all of the variables that entered into the earnings equations, as well as variables
reflecting the individual's marital status, number of children, and (if married) spouse's

income, all in 1979. Each of these latter variables' effects were allowed to differ for men
and women.

26. Furthermore, in specifications not reported here, we found no evidence that
attendance at an HBI was associated with increased 1979 earnings for either low test
score students or students from low-income families.

27. Again, as in the previous footnote, no unique gains were observed for students
from low-income families or students with low test scores who attended HBIs.

28. Future drafts may experiment with correcting for sample selection bias due to
the nonrandom nature of having received a bachelor's degree.

29. Again, see the appendix for details.
30. In addition, students in 1979 were no more than three years post-college
graduation; labor market outcomes this early may not be good measures of their career

labor market success. In future work we plan to use data from the 1986 wave of the
NLS72 to address this issue.

31. See, for example, the statement of
Congressman William Gray in U.S. House of

Representatives (1991).

39
32. See William Bowen and Neil Rudenstine (1992) for a discussion of the relative
ineffectiveness of small doctoral programs.

33. Howard University is classified throughout this section as an HBI, not as a
Research I institution, which in fact, it also is.

34. The two percentages are respectively for doctorates from HEIs 58 and 4, and for
doctorates from Research I institutions 18 and 31.
35. Similarly, the two percentages are, respectively 41 and 14, and 12 and 36.

36. For example, some federal funding for selected graduate programs at 16 HUIs in
science, engineering, mathematics, and professional fields is provided in fields in which

African Americans are underrepresented under Section 303 of PL1O2.325, the Hi2her
Education Amendment of 1992.

37. The last wave of NLS72 was conducted in 1986. Unfortunately, the sample size
was substantially reduced, which decreases the likelihood that we will be able to observe
HBIs having any statistically significant effects then.

38. BSD initially surveyed students who were high school seniors and sophomores in
1980. The former were last resurveyed in 1986 (6 years after high school graduation)

and the latter in 1990 (8 years alter high school graduation). So again, at best one can

focus on jJy career labor market and educational success with them.

HodaEy act Colleges .nd lJnMnltics

- Ye.1 Ibded
IU-Palie. ft-Private, Z-l-Yeas 5-19% P.8 Ea,Slm C

- In

Ajaban,. MM Univ. (Hvntsville)
Alabama State Univ. (Mooiomety)

U

- 1874

Frerld State Tech. Colic ge

(Tusal)

Dhllani Univ. (New Orleans) - 1869
Onmbuing State Univ. (Ommbling) -1901

U
U25

Caner Stale T.S College (Mobile)- 1962
ConcoSi. College (kIm.) - 2922

R

- 1963

Sotithern Univ. A&}4 College (Same Rouge) - I
Southern Univ. d New Orleans - 1959

1)25

J.F. Dnke State Tech. College (Huntsville). 296!
S.D. Bishop Suit Junior College (Mobile). 1927
Ln.oe Sate College (Binniag?tam) - 1963

U25

Xsi6er UnMet Louisiana (New Orleans) 1913

MARYLUO

Miles College (Birmintem) - 15

U2
PS

DoMe Stale College (DoMe) - 1363

O.t-'ood College (Huntsville) - 2896

ft

Sethis Univ. (Seitna) - 1876
54111mm College (flasealoota) - 1816

PS
PS

t.Il.dep Univ. (flhiadega) - 1867

PS
1)25

ARXAIGnS
Atkins.. Baptist College (Utile Ron)- 1901
Philander Smith College (Link Rock) - 1877

orter College (little Rock) - 1886
Univ of Añ.naas (Pine Bluff). 1873

ft

nna
cc WWMBU.
fawns
Univ. - 1867

Univ. of ike District of Columbia. 1851

PS
PS
P23

U
U

ft
U

FLORIDA
Betbune Cookm.n College (Ds1oeta Bead,). 1904
EdwiS Water, College (Jacksonville) - 1866
florid. ARM UnI% (Tsllshanee) - 1877
Florida Memorial College (Miami) . 1879

Carl College (Atlanta). 1869
Fo,i Villey Staie College (Port Valley). 2895
bieMenornjnaijoq.a Theot Center (Atlanta). 1958
Morehoisse College tlans). 1867
Monis B.oe'n College (Atlanta).1881
Paine College (Augusta) - 1882
S.nnnah Sante College (Savannah) -1890
Speintan College (Aiisnta) - 1881

U

MIUIIGAN
Len College ot Bialo (Dctioit) -1814
-

Aicorn Sate Univ. (lonnes). 1811
Caho..,a Junior College (OuUtle). 2949

U

Jackson Sanie Univ. (Jackson) . 1877
Mary Holmes College (West Point)- 1892

U
P25
U

Mismnsippi Valley State Univ. (Itta Ben). 1946
Pnntis Norman a Industrial Institsie (Prentiss). 1907
R&c College (Holly Springe) - 1866
Touploc College (Tovploo) - 1869
Rinds Juainr College (lilies Jr. Cot) (Raymond) . 1914

Lincoln Univ. (Jeflenon Cty) -1866
Rsnis-Siose Sate College (St Levi)- 1857

rcpm CAROLSIA
Barber-Scotia College (Concord) - 1867
Bennett College (Greensboro) - 1873

It
U

It
ft
U

P

ft
ft

1)2

P2

R
PS

Un

,COURJ

PS
U

Dinbetk Coy State Univ. (Dbabeth Coy) - 1891
P.yettev4lle Stat. Univ. (Payenevilk) - 1817
Jotsrson C Smith Univ. (Qarlone) - 2867

U

U
P.S

PS
U
U

ft

LMnptone College (Salisbury) - Ifl

PS

North Carolina ART Sate Univ. (Greensboro) -1891
North Cajolmn. Ceatal Univ. (Dwtasn) - 2910
Saint Avgumes College (Raleip). 1867

U
U

Saw UnMisity (Raleip). 1863

ft
ft

Winton.S.Jem State Univ. (Winston Salem) - 1892

U

CentS Staie Univ. (Wilberfone). 1887
Wilberforee Univensty (Witetforee) - 1836

U
PS

PS

U

It

uwnny
Kenlucky Stale Univ. (Prankfun) -1886

I)

Moipn Sale Univ. (Baleimon) - 1867
Univ. cC Maqlarsd-Easteni Shore (PSe Anne) - 2886

P

GEORGIA
AThany State College (Albany). 2903
Atlanta Uarv (Atianta) - 1863

U
U

Coppin Sate College (Bsltimote). 1

rn

PflAWARE
Detm,e Staie College (Dover) - 1891

ft

-

1)2

Trenbolm State Tech. College (Montgomery)- 1966
TtsUegee Univ. (Tuskegee) -1881

ft
U
U
U

OKLMJIOMA

U

l.aogsion UnMSty (tiptoe)- 1897

U

TthK 1 (cS
Cheyney State Univ. (O.ey..ey) - 2838

lincoln UnIversity (lincoln) - 2854

U
U

soirni caoupa
Allen UnNetsity (ColumbIa). 1870
Benedici College (Columbia) - 1870
Oallia College (Onngeburyj. 1869
anton Junior College (Pock Pill). 1894
Denmaik Tect. College (Denmark). 1948
Morris College (Sumler) - 19
South Cstolina State Uni (Onngebunj. 2896
Voo,t,ee. College (Denmark) - 1897

PS

P
PS
R2S

1)25

PS
U
PS

Bishop College (DtlI.a). II
Iluslon-flllotson Colkge (Dallas) - 1876
Paul Quinn College (Waco). 2872
Pnirie View A&M Univ. (Pnirie View). 1876
Saint flhilips College (San Aatomio) - 1927

Soulhwatcm astian College (Terreli). 1949
Texas College (T$er) 2894
Tess. Southern University (Houston) 1947
Wiley College (Marshall). 1873

P2

Ps

U
PS

US. VIRGDq IA14DS
College ot the Vi,pr Island. (St. Thomas). 190

U

VmGINLA

flk University (HaUMlk). 1867

PS

Knoxville College (lCnox'4ile)- 187$

p

Lane College (Jackson). 12
LaMoe.O.tn College (MemphIs). 1862

PS
R

Saint Paura College (lawnnevvijle). 18
Virginia Slate University (Peler*urg). 12

Morristown College (Morristown). 1I

Ri

Vupnia Union University (Richmond). 1863

Tennessee State University (Nasiwille) . 2912

U

WT WROO4IA

Mehan7 Medical College (Nashville) . 1876

p

p

Hampton University (Hampton). 2868
NOrfolk Sate University (Norfolk) . 1935

Bluelield Stare College (Bluer.eld) .1895
West Virginia State College (Institute). 1891

P

U
PS
U

p
U
U

Source: 43 Code o( Fedenl Rsgvlations 6i (Revised a. o( July 1,1991), 'Wbar Instirutiors An
flipbk to Receive. Orsnt Under the HBCU
PsvgnnC and Ola$ecn U. Hoffman. cml. HisuorirsIPy Black
Colleses arid Universities 1976. (W.ahington. DC National Canter for Education
Stastia. 2992), Tale to.

Tible 2
Descdptlve Statistict NL512 Sample
1181

Sample

Non-liSt Sanipte

I

Ysriable

N

Mean

S.D.

SAT

189

69.137

HSRAJqX

239

MALE

N

Mean

S.D.

13264

237

76.024

16.186

.402

262

297

372

262

298

.399

.491

340

.368

.483

FARINC

233

70.990

51.048

273

80.745

54.023

DADSA

294

.092

.289

335

.099

.298

MOMBA

295

.108

212

338

.112

.316

DADSE!

243

30.432

18359

289

29.4

18273

PUBHS

298

.919

.273

340

.882

323

FBSHS

279

.621

.318

308

.478

325

FBFHS

279

.4(X)

.253

308

.235

.213

COLL24

279

.445

.215

308

.448

.211

IJRBHS

279

237

.426

308

289

.454

SLOTS

298

.127

.077

340

.L0

.078

SO.TTH

298

.718

.451

340

323

.469

(SAT

298

69.986

7.791

340

102.128

11.052

PBFAC

255

.617

.131

317

.037

.043

PBSTU

298

.925

.106

340

.100

.110

EXFST

298

27362

12.005

340

31295

212)9

PRIV

298

332

.472

340

.274

.446

WAGE79

253

5.807

3.047

288

6298

4.076

SE179

253

43.415

17.067

288

41829

17.641

8479

298

354

.498

340

313

-501

f

-

Table 2(coatlntjed)

then
SAT

indlvid.ar, total SAT icon (dMdcd by 10)
convenioq, method)

scores convened so SAT Icons using Aiim's (1972)

I4SRANK

indMdu.r, high schoo4 i.t.t (I a loa'at, 0— highest)

MALE

1.msk 0-female

PAR1NC

parents pre-tas incom, in 1972 (dMded by I)

DADBA

1 Slather hu. Bachelor's Degree, 0-tither does not have a Bachelon'

MOMB.4

I a mother hats Bachelo?. Degree, 0- mother does not haves Bachelofa

DADSEI

I- idMduaJ attended a pblse high .chcol, 0-other

P85115

proponio. of black students in the individual's Light school

PBFHS

propouio.. of black leaches', in the Individual', high school

UREI-IS

SLOTS

Degree

Isihc?s index of upalionai prestige (10. low, %-bigh.)

PUBHS

Coifli

Dept.

proportion of 1971 graduates at the individuar. high school who atm io2 or 4 year colleges
1-ua,ban high ttool, OaOthtT
proportion of full-time equiw.knt undea'p.ds.at, enrollment in HBIs in the individual's his). school state

SOLID!

I-went to high school In the southeast legion, OocheT

aAT

ticrege total SAT score of incoming freshmen .t the individual's college (divided by ID)

PBFAC

proportion of Wad fsculiy as the indndduars college in 1%9

PBSTtJ

D(PS7

proportion of fufi-lime equiv.lemt bled underduase students at the individual's

eduational and geneS eapendilurti per Full-lime equrvalenc sn.dcnt tithe individual's

PRAY

I -individual attended S private college, 0-public college

WAGE79

individual's hourly eamingi in 1979

5E179

individual's rider Cl' vp.tiotsal prestige in 2979

BA79

toflege

college (divided by 1)

1.mdividual reetiveda bachelo?s degree by 1979, 0-did not received. bachelor's degree b 1979

So.js'ftay I972 -HGlS: EXPST, PRAY, S1,OTSç 2916 -HEels: PBSTL 19
Other variables.

-: PBFAC 1972 - aAT 11

Table 3
College Cbaracterlstics Correlation

ALL

(n-63)
HBI

£6

CSAT
EXPST
PESTU
FBFAC

AT

Matrke#

-ii

97

.40

.95
-.83

4$

-.86

-.16

-11

32

.96

.08

.06

EXPST

PBSTU

-.17
-.29

-.1.3

34

-.17
.56

30

PEFAC

—

0 (n—340)
CSAT
EXPST

7U

PESTU
PBFAC

-.06

EXPST

PESTU

33

-.29

-.18

-.25

-.04
.44

PBFAC

PRIV

}{BI — I (n—298)

aAT

EXPST
EBSTU
PBFAC

.43
.14

-.01

EXFST
A11 variables aye defined ira Table 2.

.05

PBSTU

PBFAC

PRIV

Table 4
Dctztsioaats 011k ?topottioa 01 flhinca M I1otic.Dy
Slack Iaalilucioaa That Wcn In-Stale Stu&aat

(abaluic nlue I fta1ia)

IOtrliQJ wIiii
(I)

(4)

tNT

.963(161)

.E3 (9.5)

.740 (3.7)

A47 (23)

.939(183)

.760(63)

?RIV

.095 (1.0)

.219 (1.9)

.064 (0.7)

.m (to)

.169 (2.5)

.240 (1.7)

.153 (1.4)

flJ11P

.247 (2.7)

-361 (2.0)

.238(33)

.314 (22)

.236(33)

-.461 (4.0)

.253(22)

-.461 (34)

-.256 (21)

-.310 (0.4)

.069 (1.1)

.031 (0.4)

.075 (1.2)

IFS (1.0)

.233 (14)

.235 (2.2)

.071 (2.1)

It (0.6)

03

no

no

ya

11)0111

RATh

.096

(1.2)

.233 (14)

139 (3.1)

392 (24)

19 Stale
Dummies

no

no

Induded
89

94

69

94

69

9t

.395

.412

.39i

.426

326

.468

yea

yea

.31.5

.458

aAhO included an dummy nñabln for nonreponing of tuition Ic.ck and in (2) and (4)). absens of.

ntgftiied mean p'oportionj of gudenia thai nn tntaie nuder. S 1976 (1988) nfl 38(37) and .84.ekctMty fling The
(.74)5 the p.w,ie and
public Hflha. teapecti.

attn
?RIV

I -peMle Stltulion, 0. public

ThIN

tuilion level If pt$nhe, bate tuition level If public

TtJOLT

nailS Intl If piMie. ow.of.aale tuition if public

Mm R.no,'s 2984 KIecIMty ,vim of the Institution (4- eon.petitive.
PSAME

• Ieaa npeiitive, 6- noncompeiiii.t)

ptoponion of Irnhmen thai an hi-stale students

Sou,,ea:

1) Sanon'a PiollIe of Mierin Cotter. (Woodbury NY: 1964). Mm
2) Nalional Canter for Eduoijon Staisnia. 2916 Ulster ?dialion General Infonnaijon Survey fl{EGIS) and I Intrerated
Ponaccondary Eduotional Dii. SsIem. (IPEDSI: Residence and Minion of Coheir Students - PS&ME
3)2976 HECIS and IPEDS Institutional Otannenscjcs. PRJV. ThIN, n)Ottr

.r*b S
Fycbii Faimalc. S the Dceo. to AntS

I lo&sD .ck t.o&gê
(abaSing ..he I
(1)

(2)

aor

3.780 (72)

3112(31)

HSRANI(

.310(12)

.292 (1.1)

PUBHS

.134 (2.3)

.354(11)

PDFHS

- 2420(2.3)

1016(22)

PDSHS

-

.216 (0.7)

.217 (0.7)

COUld

fl (0.9)

412(1.9)

IJRBHS

.129 (0.9)

.Z0 (12)

MT

-.027 (3.4)

-.OIS (3.4)

Mil)

-1.111 (3.2)

.1.241 (3.2)

MALE

.202 (2.7)

.202(1.7)

MOMBA

014 (0.1)

-.077(04)

DAVRA

-.019(02)

.111 (0.3)

DADSEI

. (1.2)

.1 (1.4)

PARINC

-.®l (0.4)

r (0.1)

REI.1U1

.491(1.9)

RELFAC

.9(12)

RELSAT

-.7)8(04)

'/DOF

1*112 (20)

197S6 (25)

N

638

6)8

Mso ir,ctuded in 'he eqtaation an diehotomoeg nrinbka ror nonreponu.g
other high school ch.nclennia, mother and lathe?. ediation. Isthef.

of high scttaS rant,
.iioral ai.ss.

nnu family income In 2972, and (in (2)). the absence Ibe HBI. S 'he it,adeni. malt of
znidence in 1977 sad

.ite re
SAT

the absence of data on black f.ctdiy S a state that has ai least one HB1

SdMduars iota!

MT aeon (ACT watts converted to SAT

1St) reported. 0 MT nor nFmed
54Th

1-MI riot reported, 0-SAT leported

RELTU!

enrage (weighted by Fit enrollments) tuilion in HBl'. in Ihe
indent', high school Mate nlainc to .nre (sciflied)
tuition in other iintiuvlions in the mate

RELPAC

avenge (stifled) proportion of black facvlry in HBI'. in the
state nlatk.e to the avenge (aeiØtted) p.vçcraon of black
Iacvlty in other tnnkvtton. in the nate

RELSAT

avenge (weighted) SAT aeon of HB1, in the mate relative to
the avenge (weighted) SAT aeon of other ins*ittsTh S the
male

MI other nrinbks ire defined rn Table 2.

C. t . C. C. t C.

c.

ç
:
a a;

a

•z-aaC.tac.C.

I

2

i.

ci

0

;
C

g

o
a -

t.t. a

C. C.2.a

1.

(

2

to
t
2

I
I

a

a

I

5'

1f
Li It
s

Q

g

p
c

I
I

aadaaaaaac..

roflO

,.

a.
I-

CU
S
a

1'

tln:c.

S.

aaa

C
a

•-

I

a:

C!
i-i
CI

'I

2

t. a

E1ES

S

,cg

i

I

C

v5zx t

I I
jt
0
I Ft!3

0

&

2•S

*0.11

!'f2

1

1cs;cit
'tfl-2

1•3

!

-I flifl'
tW.t;.v
L&flfl
![3t2"
s.tt;f
.
r !flfl
an&t
.g
;c,
PC

tSC.tC.tatjaaaa
•

—

SI-

S.

a
C

C.

tI
S.,'

I
a
I,
a

I ••t•S.7C•—

I.,

.t

flhlifa.
.rc.ZZE
0
.PPPPPS d

. ititug
It I

sfl;r
Lt

n

§

uub

.
•-"'
,.
1q
Ill

S

C
C

II
0
S

I

.328 (1.7)

40573(19)

-.179(0.2)
-.000 (0.7)

-.015(1.3)
.174 (0,9)

.367 (1.8)

•.

...,..a

57.544 (13)

-.095(0.6)

.014 (2.5)

-.118(04)

j

(2.1)

(0.2)

)6)

06. (IV)

.063

-1.009(1.1)

.144 (0.8)

.

-.000 (0,7)

.014 (2.4)

-149(05)

.400 (1.4)

-l.Ofl

.016 (2.3)

•.238 (1.5)

1

83.641 (*4)

.008 (07)

217(1.2)

.449(2.3)
'.159(01)

.015(3.1)
-1.005 (4.6)

-.132 (1.2)

uscn

by Ins

PMd-M

k.d
I
I

(1.4)

84.457 (Ia)

.106(0.8)

.

..Ifl7)

(1.4)

.016 (3.5)
-1.077 (4.5)
.43? (2.2)

—.151

posw - M

.

85.438(14)

.102(0.8)

(1.4)

-.177(00)

-1.079(43)
.435(2.2)

.016 (3.5)

-.149 (1.4)

in &4.w.a

1101

d.qtnd
Icon,

7.1$. 5 cohinin (I).

vadabl..n d.nn.d In Tabs.
2.

l.rud.nl att.nd.d a hstodeay black ln.lIlulmn, 0-fljd.nt atI.nd.d .nolh.c

MI 0th,!

1105

tbI*t,,,taSoc 1101 d.!tv4d 1rom 7.1$. 5, hjrnq (2).
wtc.

Ma

Inithullon

lndud.d In .ad. .qvallon a. dltholomoo.n.1.bln So,
CI SAT,
adios rank, molt,.. .nd t.wwe. adatIon Sans., lath,,'. ooaip.tlons
p.,.nt. boom., and In (2), p'opofllon Of black lacully In 1990 SI Ill. IASIIMIOO. h9ti
pintlg. Inda*,

EPST

PUSTU

P8FC

P1W

CSAT

36.mr (13)

(0.3)

-(02(0.4)

DADSEI

(3.1)

(1,4)

.354 (1.3)

PAMINC'
HO)

MOMBA
DADBA

.
(2.9)

I

jaa

TSt 1
th. flJ.JSylbs a D_i.A,C Cgraa
(aInoIavsiaI -r

-1.275 (3.5)

.493(1.6)

.010(1.2)

-.238(01)

(1.0)

(210
-.013 (Dl)

•.236(D.7)

.

-.061 (0.3)

(Iii
-1.239 (3.4)
.533 (1,7)

H$RAN,c

SAT

tIQE

J

s

jn in.

Fd,4Oöm4...

