                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             HOW HIGH ARE THE GIANTS'
                        SHOULDERS: AN EMPIRICAL ASSESSMENT
                           OF KNOWLEDGE SPILLOVERS AND
                            CREATIVE DESTRUCTION IN A
                            MODEL OF ECONOMIC GROWTH




                                      Ricardo J. Caballero

                                         Adam B. Jaffe




                                    Working Paper No. 4370




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 1993



Respectively: MIT and NBER; Harvard University and NBER. This paper was prepared for the
NBER Macroeconomic Annual Meeting, March 14, 1993. We thank Philippe Aghion, Roland
Benabou, Andrew Bernard, Olivier Blanchard, Zvi Gri1iches, Charles Jones, Paul Joskow, Boyan
Jovanovic, Sam Kortum, Michael Kremer, Arid Pakes, Michael Piore, Manuel Trajtenberg, and
seminar participants at MiT, NYU, Georgetown, the Productivity group at the NBER, and the
NEER Macroeconomic Annual 1993 meeting for their comments. Caballero thanks the National
Science Foundation. Sam Kortum graciously shared his data on U.S. priority patents. We are
particularly indebted to Manuel Trajtenberg, who created the patent citation data extract used in
section 3.2, and did so under extreme time pressure. We thank Olivier Blanchard for instigating
our collaboration. This paper is part of NBER's research programs in Economic Fluctuations,
Growth and Productivity. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                   NEER Working Paper #4370
                                                                   May 1993


       HOW HIGH ARE THE GIANTS' SHOULDERS:AN EMPIRICALASSESSMENT OF
       KNOWLEDGESPILLOVERSAND CREATIVEDESTRUCTIONIN A MODEL OF
                            ECONOMICGROWFH


                                                ABSTRACT

        The pace of industrialinnovationand growth is shaped by many forces that interact in complicated
ways. Profit-maximizingfirms pursue new ideas to obtain marketpower, but the pursuit of the same goal
by other means that even successfulinventions art eventuallysupersededby others; this known as creative
destruction. New ideas not only yield new goods but also enrich the stock of knowledge of society and
its potential to produce new ideas. To a great extent this knowledgeis non-excludable,making research
and inventions the source of powerful spillovers. The extent of spillovers depends on the rate at which
new ideas outdate old ones, that is on the endogenoustechnologicalobsolescenceof ideas, and on the rate
at which knowledge difJises among inventors.
        In this paper we build a simple model that allows us to organize our search for the empirical

strengthof the conceptsemphasizedabove. We thenuse data on patents and patent citations as empirical
counterparts of new ideas and knowledgespillovers, respectively, to estimate the model parameters. We
find estimates of the annual rate   of creative destruction in the range of 2   to 7 percent for the decade of
the 1970s, which rates for individual sectors as high as 25 percent.    For technologicalobsolescence,we
find an increase over the century from about 3 percent per year to about 12 percent per year in 1990, with

a noticeable plateau in the l970s. We find the rate of diffusion of knowledgeto be quite rapid, with the
mean lag between I and 2 years. Lastly, we find that the potency of spillovers from old ideas to new
knowledge generation (as evidenced by patent citation rate) has been declining over the century: the
resultingdecline in the effective public stock of knowledge available to new inventorsis quite consistent
with the observed decline in the average private productivityof research inputs.



Ricardo J. Caballero                                               Adam B. Jaffe
Departmentof Economics                                             J.F.K. School of Government
MIT                                                                Harvard University
Room E52-25lB                                                      79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02139 and NBER                                       Cambridge, MA 02138 and NBER
                          1    INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY
   There has been a rapid growth in recent years in the theoretical literatureon industrial
research as an engine of economic growth.2 At a gross level, two key concepts are at the
heart of the growth process in this literature. First, profit-seeking firms try to achieve
market power by producing a better good than their competitors. Over time, new goods
displace old ones, earn profits for some period of time, and are then displaced in turn. This
process of "creative destruction" generates the incentive for and limits the private value of
industrial innovation:
           The fundamental impulse that sets and keeps the capitalist engine in mo-
      tion comes from the new consumers' goods, the new methods of production
      or transportation, the new markets, the ncw forms of industrial organization
      that capitalist enterprises creates.... [examples]... [these examples]illustratethe
      same process of industrial mutation that incessantly revolutionizesthe economic
      structurefrom ssithiss, incessantly destroying the old one, incessantly creating a
      new one, This process of Creative Destruction is the essential fact about capi-
      talism..." [Joseph Schumpeter, Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy (1942)].

    Thus Schumpeter recognized that innovation was the engine of growth, and that innova-
tion is endogenously generated by competing profit-seeking firms. The second key feature
of models of this process is that public-good aspects of knowledge create economy- wide
increasing returns. In the process of creating new goods, inventors rely and build on the
insights embodied in previous ideas; they achieve their success at least partly by "standing
upon the shoulders of giants."3 The public stock of knowledge that accumulates from the
spillovers of previous inventions is thus a fundamental input in the technology to generate
new ideas. This     is   clearly reflected in Schmookler's description of the inventor's problem:

   2See Grossman and llelpman (1991a) and the references titerein. In particular, Romer (1990), Grossmas
and llelpman (1991b), Aghion and Howitt (1992), Segerstrom (1991).
    "If I have sees further (than you and Descartes) it is by standing upon the shoulders of Giants." Sir Isaac
Newton, letter to Robert Hook, February 5, 1675. Nea'ton'saphorism was popsiarised by Robert K. Merton,
On Ike Shualders sf Giants, New York (1965)

                                                       3
              The joint determinants of inventions are (a) the wants which inventions sat-
         isfy, and (h) the intellectual ingredients of which they are made. The inventor's
         problem arises in a world of work and play, rest and action, frustration and sat-
         isfaction, health and sickness, and so on.... [I]n order to analyze the problem, to
         imagine possible solutions to it, to estimate their relative cost and difficulty, and
         to reduce one or more to practice, the inventor must use the science and tech-
         nology bequeathed by the past..." [Jacob Schmookler, Invention and Economic
         Growth (1966)].

   The rich theoretical development of the growth literaturecan thus be seen as combining
the insights of Schumpeter and Schmookler and embedding them in a general equilibrium
framework. This modelling advance has not, however, been accompanied by the develop-
ment of a parallel empirical literature.4 While there has been significant empirical work on
different aspects of the microeconomics of technological change, there has been relatively
little attempt to integrate individual micro empirical results into an overall framework for
understanding growth. Our aim in this paper is to create a framework for incorporating
the microetonomics of creative destruction and knowledge spillovers into a model of growth,
and to do so in such a way that we can begin to measure them and untangle the forces that
determine their intensity and impact on growth.

   We develop a model in the spirit of Grossman and Helpman (1991) and Aghion and
Howitt (1992) that gives a simple relationship for the effect of new products on the value of
existing ones. At any given time, the economy consists of a continuum of monopolistically
competitive goods indexed by their quality, q E (—cc, Ni]. The newest goods are always the
best, i.e., the process of research advances the frontier by increasing N. Due to the quality
ranking implicit in this process, constant marginal cost producers see their profits — relative
to those of the (new) leader — decline over time. The rate of decline depends (positively)
on   the   degree    of substitutability between   new and old goods and on    the pace at which

     4A notable exception is Kortunt (1993)


                                                   4
new goods are introduced. This captures the endogenous process of creative destruction
described above and, after a few algebraic steps, yields intuitive equations relating the rate
of growth in a firm's value relative to that of the industry to the firm's number of new
ideas relative to the industry average. By relating the concept of new ideas to that of new
patents, it is possible to use these equations to gauge the empirical magnitude of creative
destruction.
   In order to estimate these equations, we use market value and patents data on 567 large
U.S. firms. The data are annual for the period 1965-81, and the firms are assigned to 21

technological sectors. We estimate 21 sectoral panels and find that, on average (over time
and sectors), creative destruction is about 4 percent per year. That is, in an average sector
at an average year a firm that does not invent sees its value relative to that of the industry
erode by about 4 percent. This number varies widely across sectors; Drugs has the largest
average creative destruction, with about 25 percent per year.5 Due to both, the endogenous
variation in creative destruction and changes in estimated parameters, we also find a sharp
decline in nverage (across sectors) creative destruction over our sample period, from a high
of 7 percent per year in the mid 60's to a low of 2 percent in            the late 70's.

    Turning from Schumpeter to Schmookler, we focus on the technology by which new ideas
are produced, using as inputs private research effort and the public stock of existing ideas.
We focus particularly on this ideas-stock, the process by which it accumulates, and the way
in which it conditions the production of new ideas.
    It is well known that the standard form of the kind of "quality ladder" model that we are
using embodies a strong form of research spillovers, because the same amount of resources
are consumed producing the blueprint for product q =                 N1    at time t   as   were consumed

producing the blueprint for product q = Ni_di at time t                   dt, even though the former is
                                                                     —


strictly superior to the latter. To pursue Newton's metaphor, today'sinventors stand on the

   5We srgue that, at least in part, this dispersion is due the difficulties in measuring dens, since patents
play different roles in protecting innovation in different sectors. In other industries other mechanisms of
appropiations, such as secrecy, learning curve advantages and marketing and product support efforts are more
important than patents as means of securing rents (Levin et al 1987).

                                                     5
shoulders of giants that keep getting taller and never get old and weak. In order to move
to a spillover formulation that can be implemented empirically, we specify how the height
of the shoulders is endogenously determined by the path of previous invention.
    We postulatea simple linear technology at the firm level, mapping research-inputs into
new ideas.This mapping changes over time as a function of the stock of public knowledge.
That is, the productivity of private inputs in research varies as a function of aggregate
knowledge,which is outside the control of any individual firm. We proceed to specify in some
detail the process by which previous knowledge accumulates and feeds into the generation
of new ideas. We postulatethat it takes time for additional knowledge to diffuse sufficiently
to be of use to other inventors; this tends to limit the usefulnessofvery recent knowledge in
generating new knowledge. On the other hand, old knowledge eventually is made obsolete
by the emergence of newer, superior knowledge. We call this phenomenon "knowledge" or
"technological"obsolescence,and distinguish it from the obsolescence in value represented
by creative destruction. That is, new ideas have two distinct effects on the current stock of
ideas. They make the products represented by those ideas less valuable (creative destruction
or value obsolescence) and they make the knowledge represented by those ideas less relevant
in the production of new knowledge (knowledge or teclmological obsolescence).The strength
of knowledge spillovers, and hence the growth of the economy, will depend on the parameters
of the processes of knowledge diffusion and knowledge obsolescence.
    At any point in time, we define the stock of knowledge available to the production of
new ideas as the sum of the contribution of all previous ideas. These contributions are the

product of the number of ideas in each cohort and the usefulness of the average idea in that
cohort to current inventions. We describe the usefulness of an idea generated at time s for
the production of new knowledge at time t (i s) in terms of a citation function. In order
to capture knowledge obsolescence,this function declines with the distance between t and s
in ideas-space — that is, withthe number of inventions that occur between the recipient and
source cohorts. In order to capture gradual knowledge diffusion, the usefulness of old ideas
increases with the calendar time between these two cohorts. We also allow for a source-


                                             6
cohort specific multiplicative constant that indexes the potency of the spillovers emanating
from the average idea in the given cohort.
   In order to estimate the citation function we use a 1 in 100 random sample of all patents
granted in the U.S. from 1975 to 1992, and track all their citations to previous patents
hack to 1900. We assume that patents are proportional to ideas and that citations are

proportional to ideas used, and we estimate time-varying proportionality factors for each
along with the model parameters. Our sample contains 12,592 patents and over 80,000
citations.
   Several interesting findings emerge from estimating the citation function and from con-
structing the stock of public knowledge implied by this function. First, we find that ideas
diffuse quite rapidly, with a mean lag between one and two years, which is consistent with

previous estimates by Mansfield (1985) derived from survey results. Second, as postulated,
knowledge obsolescenceis clearly an endogenous function of the number of new ideas, rather
an exogenous function of time. The sum of squared residuals falls by about 30 percent when
straight time depreciation is replaced by endogenous obsolescencelinked to the number of
new ideas. Third, the average annual rate of knowledge or technological obsolescenceover

the century is about 7 percent, but both its secular and high frequency (endogenous) changes
are quite large. It rises from about 3 percent at the beginning of the century to about 10
to 12 percent in 1990, with a noticeable plateau during the 70's. Fourth, the average size of
patents (measured in terms of the average number of new ideas embodied in each of these)
increased over the century until the 60s or 70s and has declined since then. A patent in 1990
seems to contain about three times more ideas than a patent in 1900, but about 10 percent
less   than a patent in 1970. Fifth, the potency of the spillovers emanating from each cohort
seems to have declined dramatically over the century: controlling for obsolescence, we es-
timate that the average idea at the beginning of the century generated about 5 times the
                 as the average recent idea. Finally, as a result of this decline in spillover
level of spillovers

potency, we esthnate that the effective (or marginal) public knowledge stock declined by
about 30 percent from 1960 to 1990, suggesting that private research productivity should

                                               7
 have fallen by that amount.
     This last result
                    is subject to a number of caveats relating to assumptions about the exact

 nature of the relationship between spillovers and citations. Its implications are, however,
 remarkably consonant with the data on the observed productivity of inputs in research. The
 observed decline in the productivity of private research, as measured by patent production,
 has been a subject of much research.6 The ratio of patents to research
                                                                          inputs has declined
 steadily since the 50's, almost regardless of the way research-input is measured (e.g. R&D
 expenditures, number of scientists and engineers engaged in research).7 It is certainly in-
teresting, if not surprising, that our independent measure of research productivity, which is
based on knowledge flows as measured by citations, has about the same trend as
                                                                                     directly
measured productivity. Put differently, the fit of the aggregate innovation function — that
is, the function that relates aggregate (private) research inputs to total innovations — im-
proves markedly once we include our measure of the public stock of knowledge ore the
                                                                                     right
hand side.
    In the last step of the empirical section we relate aggregate consumption
                                                                              growth to the
rate of new idea creation. In effect, this amounts to finding the normalization constant
that allows us to estimate the overall average size of a patent — a parameter that is not
identified from the citation estimation alone. With this, we have
                                                                  empirical estimates of all
of the important model parameters. Combining these estimates with a free
                                                                            entry condition
in the research sector and a labor market equilibrium condition, we close the model and
calibrate it to fit the averagerate of growth of the U.S. duringthe postwar
                                                                            period. The model
can then be used to perform several positive and normative experiments.
                                                                               Though we are
uncomfortable making too much of results that depend on a long sequence of
                                                                           assumptions
and approximations, we note that the model's behavior: (1) is quite consistent with the
aggregate productivity slowdown in the 1970s; (2) is also consistent with the stock market

   6See Gritiches (1989 and 1990); Kortum (1993); and Evesson
                                                              (1991)
   7See Kortom (1993). Schroookler (1966) suggests that patents
                                                                  per research effort has been declining
throoghoot the century.


                                                  S
boom of the l9SOs (because the estimated decline in the productivity of research implies an
increase in the value of existing ideas); and (3) suggests that the optimal subsidy to private
R&D expenditures is around 30 percent.

      We dp not view these specific results (which are perhaps better categorized as provocative

conjectures) as the main contribution of the paper. Rather, we have shown that it is possible
to construct an overall modelling framework into which the key microeconomicpieces of the
processes of industrial innovation and growth can be fit, and empirical estimates of the
model parameters do allow the model to mimic the economy's gross growth behavior.
   The next pages describe the details behind this summary. We begin in Section 2 with
the complete presentation of the model itself. Section 3 presents the empirical methodology
and results; for reasons explained therein it is organized in a different order than this
summary and the model presentation, beginning with the citation function and ending with
the creative destruction equation. Section 4 calibrates the model, and studies the impact
of different policy and structural changes on growth and research incentives. Section 5
concludesthe paperwitha discussion of the overall significance ofthe results and suggestions
for future   work.



                                    2     THE MODEL

2.1       Goods markets
There  is a representative agent endowed with a stock of ideas, .t units of labor, which have

no direct utility value, an instantaneous utility function that is logarithmic in an aggregate
consumption index, C, and a discount factor, p. Using aggregate consumption as numeraire
and letting   r represent the real interest rate, weobtain the standardcondition on the growth
rate of consumption, C:
                                          C=r—p.                                             (1)

   At any point in time, the aggregate consumption index         is   a composite of the quality

                                                9
 weighted output of a continuum of monopolistic competitors, which produce goods indexed
 by their quality: x2(q) for q E (—co P12]. Quality rises monotonically over time, so newer
 goods are better:8
                                           N,
                               C2
                                       f        {xj(q)ee)adq           0        1.                            (2)

    Given aggregate consumption and the prices of each of the components of it, pt(q).
 consumers choose x2(q) so as to minimize the cost of that level of aggregate consumption:


                                                     p2(q t(q) dq.


 The first order condition for this problem yields the system of demands for goods of different
 qualities:
                                           x2(q)   = p2(q)iterP5Ct.                                          (3)

    At eachpoint in time, producers take these demand functions, as well as factor (labor)
prices, ni1, as given. For simplicity, let the production technologybe linear and assume that
process innovations have no distributive impact:9


                                                 x2(q)   = qjL]'(q),                                         (4)

where L'(q) is labor allocated to production of zt(q) and 'it is labor productivity in the final
goods sector at time t. More generally,this may be taken as the reduced form of a constant
returns to scale technology including other factors of production. In the latter case the
rental price of other factors would combine to add a multiplicative constant to the reduced
form production function.
    The linearity of technology, together with the common level of productivity and elas-

    51t is important to realize that the quality ladder aspect is in sddiUsn to the menopolistically competitive
structure of the market. Stokey's (1992) elegant and general representationof preferences includes a discrete
state space version of ours.
    51.e. these innovations affect £he technologies of goodsof all qualities similarly.




                                                          10
ticities of demand faced by the infinitesimal producers of the different qualities, determines
that at any given point in time all prices are identical and obey a standard markup rule:'°

                                                              1 m1
                                                 pi(q) = a


Replacingthis expressionin (3) and the results of it in (2), determines the consumption
wage:
                                        oJg   = aq f1—a\ eN
Thus the price can also be expressed in terms of labor's productivity in the goods sector,
m and    the quality level of the leading        good,   N:

                                         p1(q)   =                   e".


   Profits accruing to a producer of a good of quality q can now he easily determined from
the equilibriunsvalues of xi(q), pi(q) and wi:"


                                                 =

    It is interesting to notice that profits do not fall with a for all levels of q. This is due
to a scope effect. As goods become more substitutable, the profits generated by having a
new  —the best — good increase in spite of the reduced markup since the new product has
a larger potentialmarket. The other side of this is that goods become obsolete much faster
(for a given rate of entry) since many newer goods can substitute them away: Simply put,
a stronger creatjve destruction environment — indexed by a — is better for those that are

  '5llecause of their lower quality, older goods will have smaller market shares, but because of the assumed
desire for variety they never disappear completely (except in the limiting case a = 1).
   iNote that if the number of varieties is "small," as is the case in the standard varietymodelwithout quality
ranking where q c [O,?i], profits would be ir1(g) =      acir1t('/(l e-').    —            The ranking aspect of
quality introduces a "discounting-like" component to the aggregatorsso we can work immediately with as
"infinite—variety" model. This eliminates a host of short run dynamics issues that ace standard io vaciety
models. Also see Stokey (1992).

                                                         11
 creating and worse for those that have created in the past.


 2.2       Valuation, Innovation and Labor Market
The fundamental       value   of a new market created at time I   is:


                                        =
                                            f   (N)e L rs ds dr.
                                                                  a
Dividing both sides by aggregate consumption, letting V v1/C, differentiating this ratio
with respect to time, and recalling (1), yields a differential equation characterizing the
dynamic behavior of the value of an innovation in terms of units of consumption:


                                  V= /                   •\
                                                a             ir(N2)


Replacing    the expression for profits in this equation, yields:

                                                                                             (5)

which is to be compared with the change in the value (in terms of units of consumption) of
the idea that has just been left behind the frontier, V°:


                                            V7=pV—o.                                         (6)

      Comparing (5) and (6) shows that the "obsolescence" rate faced by owners of blueprints
is   1-°N, which we call the rate of creative destruction. It is proportional to -the rate of
advancement of the knowledge frontier. It also depends on consumers' demand for variety;
as a approaches unity, the market share of the newest product approaches unity, so we truly
have   a "gale"   of creative destruction. One focusof our empirical work will be to provide
estimates of this term for different industries and periods. We return to this below.

     The other side of the value of an innovation is the cost of generating it. As is standardin

                                                    12
the literature, we postulatea simple linear research technology at the firm level. A firm that
invests L, units of effort in the time interval di generates O,L,dt new blueprints.'2 These
blueprints are worth 8,L,V,C,dt to the inventing firm, thus free entry guarantees that:

                                                 ,     G,V,C,,


with equality if there is positive innovation.

    Aggregating over all innovators yields the demand for labor by the research sector:'3

                                                      —    N,



    Similarly, we can obtain       the demand for labor         by goods producers, Lç:



                                                -
                                        L' =1 f1-1dq =
                                                      17



    Full employment equilibrium in the labor market               is   then obtained by letting:


                                                L+L=L.                                                       (7)


2.3      Spillovers, Knowledge Diffusion and Knowledge Obsolescence
The innovation function described in words above corresponds to the demand for labor in
the research sector, rearranged:
                                                  N,=O,L.                                                    (8)
                                                                                             below as a function
   129, is assumed to be deterministic at the aggregate (sectoral) level; we will model it
of past knowledge accumulation in the sector. We will assume that 9, is independentof current and previous
actions by i, so the value of any pscticular firm is just the goods marketvalue of its blueprints. In other words,
firms do not have private stocks of past knowledge. We discuss this issuefurther in Section 3.2.
   '°Note that 9, may depend on aggregate quantities, ,ncluding L, although in the latter case the notation
is less useful.




                                                       13
 This equation hides in O most of what              is of   interest to economists.      It
                                                                              is the average

 productivity of research in generating new blueprints; it may contain standard aggrcgtUc
 factors of production (e.g. capital and labor)'4 as well as spillovers from past knowledge

 production. We will focus on the latter but discuss briefly the former in the empirical
section.
    With few exceptions, the standsrd endogenous growth model treats 9, as an arbitrary
given constant. Such a specificationconveys a strong form of intertemporal spillover, where
the quality of new goods builds one for one on the top of the quality of the previous gen-
eration of goods. Labor productivity in research — i.e. 8, — is independent of the level or
pace at which ideas emerge, and is disconnected from the spillover process itself.
    In this section we explicitly model several aspects of the process of diffusion of informa-
tion that should influence 8,. In particular, we consider threetypes of factors. First, there is
the concept of endogenousobsolescence. Very old ideas are unlikely to contain much inde-
pendent information that is usefulfor generating new ideas. Unlike the traditional notion of
"depreciation," the obsolescenceof old ideas ought to be connected to the distance between
ideas in the state rather than the time dimension. That is, it is not the passage of time
that makes old ideas less useful, it is the accumulation of new ideas. Second, inventors take
time in seeing others' inventions, which suggests that there are diffusion lags. Unlike obso-
lescence,we treat the diffusion of knowledge as a function of time rather than accumulated
inventions." Third, the spillover intensity between cohorts of ideas may vary independent
of the effect of obsolescence of old ideas.
    We capture these factors of the transmission mechanismby means of a "citations" func-
tion, a(t, s) for it               that this function depends on the probability of seeing
                        s. We assume
or knowing about an idea (it — .s) years old, and the usefulness of old ideas in generating
new ones. We take the probability of seeing an idea (1 — s) years old to be (1 — e''1).

  t4With either positive or negative coefficients; thus with incressingor decressiog aggregatereturns to scale
in the research technology.
  "Some state dependency of knowledge diffusion is likely, but it seems plausible that time would he the
primary factor.

                                                     14
As   '    m, diffusion becomes instantaneous; y = 0 means that all old blueprints are un-
         —*

available, so each inventor starts from scratch. In order to capture the first and last factors
mentioned above, we assume an index of usefulness of the form 86_0(N,-N4 The term in the
exponential reflects the notion that the usefulness of old ideas in the generation of new ideas
depends on how far the technology has moved since the old idea. The parameter 8 could
capture two distinct effects. it could represent the "potency" of the spillovers emanating
from each cohort of ideas. It could also represent an "absorption" parameter, measuring
the intensity of use of old ideas by new ideas. The former interpretation implies that 8
might vary over s; the latter interpretation suggests the possibility of variation over t. In
principle, one could imagine interaction effects, i.e. variations over (a, t) pairs. In the em-
pirical section we focus on variation in 8 over a, that is, variations in the potency of the
spillovers emanating from different cohorts of old knowledge. There are a combination of
conceptual and practical reasons for this, as will be discussed below. For now we simply
treat 8 as a constant, since this simplifies the explanation of the basic elements of the process
of knowledge accumulation.

     The citations function is the product of the          usefulness   of old ideas and the probability
of having seen them:'6


                            a(t, a) = Sc_0(N_Ns) (i —         e'))         I     a,                        (9)

with      0, /3 >.0 and 0 8 1.
     We let 0, be the sum over all the potentially "citable" cohorts of ideas:'7

                                       N,
                                            a(t, s(q)) dq =      o(t, s)N, da,

  "We have saved on notation by working with a single sector model, but it would be straightforward(from
a modelling perspective)to add multiple  sectors, with differing rates of obsolesceace and diffusion within and
across sectors. Empirical implementation of the multi-sector version would not be trivial. We will comment
further on this in Section 5 below.
  irIt is easy to add othec standard ingredients to 0,, including, e.g. decressing returns to current labor in
research See eg. Kortum (1993), Stokey (1992), Jones (1992). We also comment on this possibility in Section
3.3 below.


                                                      15
 which can   be written as:

                                   =    —   5e('2)          ds+ys(e) q•                         (10)


This specification of the productivity of research effort,      0, has several interesting features.
First, as the speed of diffusion goes to infinity,     8 converges to a constant:

                                                                                               (11)

The insensitivity of the research productivity parameter to the rate of invention in this
limiting case is the resultof two offsetting factors. The increased obsolescence of the existing
knowledge stock that is inhereot in an economy moving (inventing) at a faster pace is
exactly offset by the increased rate at which new knowledge is added to that stock. This
is illustratedin Figure 2.1. There, we depict two economies — A and B —
                                                                                  starting with
the same level of knowledge (normalized to 0) but in A inventions occur at twice the rate of
B (for reasons other than parameters of the innovation function). An inventor standing at
11 in A has a larger number of inventions behind her, but the more rapid rate of invention

means that a larger fraction of that stock is now obsolete. Equation (11) says that these
forces exactly cancel each other when information diffusion is instantaneous, so that the
marginal productivity of research in the two economies would be the same.5 Put differently,
with instantaneous diffusion the right "clock" for spillovers is determined by the number of
inventions: if the pace at which these occor increases, so does the speed of the economic
clock, bringing aboutoffsetting obsolescence,whichleaves         the amount of spilloverunchanged
at the margin.
   Second,  for given {N},<2, 8 is proportional to 5, which is the fraction of total knowledge
that is of potentialuse for new inventions. Also, if diffusion is instantaneous, 0 is inversely
proportional to the rate at which new ideas outdate old ones, /1. Thus, putting aside

  '5That is, s given amount of research labor would generatethe same N in the two economies.


                                                  16
diffusion lags, the strength of spillovers depends directly on          the exogenous usefulness of old
knowledge, 8, and inversely on the rateat which it is made obsolete, /3.
   The third important feature of our formulation for 8, is that lags in the diffusion of
information — i.e. 7 finite — change the relation between the pace of inventions and the
productivity of labor in research by introducing a form of dynamic decreasing returns.
Returning to Figure 2.1, if -y is finite it is no longer true that the marginal productivity
of labor in research at t1 is the same in economies A and B. Because of diffusion lags, an
increase in the rate of innovation does not add to the stock of knowledge fast enough to
offset the higher rate of obsolescence. The fraction of the stock of knowledge observed by
inventors in an economy where the rate of inventions is relatively high is limited by the fact
that a large amount of inventions have occurred only recently, when things are difficult to
observe. In other words, in this case there is a second and exogenous clock that anchors the
economy.'9 Thus the productivity of research 8, decreases with the rate of invention.

    The next step in presenting the model is to descnbe the dynamic equilibrium behavior
of the model. We postpone this until after estimating the key parameters of the model, for
then the examples used to characterize equilibrium can be made more meaningful.


                                3      EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS

3.1     Overview
The previous section presented a general equilibrium model of the processes of knowledge
accumulation, research, innovation, product market competition, and economic growth. To
estimate the parameters of the model, and to test its predictions against economic experi-
ence, requires finding measurable empirical constructs that correspond to the elements of
the model. In this section, we plunge in and make attempts to estimate each of the impor-

   "Although the model makes a stack distinction between lags (which occur by the "time clock") and obso-
lescence (which occurs by tbe "invention clock"), the effects discussed here will occur ss long as the speed of
diffusion is less responsive to changes in the rate of innovation than is technological obsolescence.

                                                      17
tant blocks of the model. We do not attempt to estimate the overall system of equations
implied by the model as a whole, because the theoretical and empirical compromises that
are necessary to find empirical counterparts to the model constructs cannot really be applied

consistently across the different parts of the model. For example, the model has a highly
stylized notion of "firms" who own no assets other than blueprints. The creative destruction
equation (5) describes the time path of the value of blueprints or ideas. To estimate this
equation we will use data on real firms.2° To do this, we will derive the model's implications
for the value of a firm, conceivedas a collectionof blueprints. This will involve assumptions
that we believe are reasonable, but we do not go back and work out the overall implica-
tions of these assumptions for the model as a whole. Similarly, confronting the data will
require us to allow for lags between invention and patent applications, patent applications
and patent grants, invention and new product introduction, etc. We try to allow for these
lags in reasonable ways, but we do not formally incorporate them into the overall model.
To say it differently, we recognize that the loose correspondencebetween the model and the
data prevents us from interpreting the model too literally.
    In the following subsections we will discuss measurement issues in some detail. Overall,
we will use patents as corresponding to ideas, implying the number of patents in a period,

country, sector, etc. can be taken as proportional — sometime with lags — to the corre-
sponding       We treat firms as agglomerations ofideas, represented by their patent holdings;
we take their market value as representing the value of their idea portfolio. We use counts
of Research Scientists and Engineers to represent research labor, though we explore the use
of R&D expenditures as well. Finally, we use consumption expenditure from the National
Income Accounts to measure total expenditure.
   We present the empirical results in approximately the reverse order from the model

   25The closest thing to an empirical analogue nf the value of an ides is the work of Schankermanand Fakes
(1986), Fakes (1986) and Pakes and Simpson (1989) on the value of patents. As these authors emphasize,
however, they are estimating the value of patent protection, i.e., the dzffereace between the value of the idea
if it is patented and its value if it is not. Fakes (1985) estimatesthe stock market response to the "news"
represented by a new patent. Thus his estimates of the value of a patent exclude the portion that was
predictable based on past patents asd R&D.


                                                      'S
development. We begin with the construction of U, the productivity of labor in research.
To do this, we use a randomsample of all U.S. patentsgranted since 1975, and the complete
history of previous patents cited by our sample patents. We take a citation as evidence
that the earlier knowledge was used in the later invention, suggesting that the frequency of
citation can be used to measure e(t, s) in equation (9). Since we obsen'e many (t, a) pairs,
we can estimate the parameters S and -y of equation (9), while at the same time estimating
a (time-varying) proportionality factor between patents and pAT.    From this estimation, we

construct an estimate of U (up to additive and multiplicative factors).
   Next, we move to the innovation function, equation (8). Using the constructed U, from
the citation distributions, we estimate the relationship hetween patents and corporate re-
search at thc aggregate level in the U.S. We show that by converting patents to N using the
parameter csti,nates from the first step, including U,, and normalizing the research measures
in the way implied by the model, we can improve the fit between patents and research, and
shed light on the puzzle noted by many researchers of the falling patent/R&Dratio in the
last several decades (Griliches (1989); Kortum (1993)). In Section 3.4, we look at the aggre-
gate U.S. relationship between N and the growth rate of consumption, and compare it to
the prediction of equation   (21). We find that   the low-frequencymovements in consumption
follow   a pattern very similar to those in N, though displaced in time by a few years.   We

conjecture that this is consistent with the model if there is a lag (not in the model) be-
tween the act of invention and the product market introduction of new goods. Finally, we
return to the value side of the model. We estimate a version of equation (5), the "creative
destructinn" equation, using data on firms assigned to technological sectors. We construct
estimates of the rates of endogenous obsolescence or creative destruction for these sectors
during the decade of the 1970s.




                                                  19
 3.2        Knowledge diffusion, technological obsolescence and patent
           citations
 As discussed in Section 2.3, the limiting form of the model has a strong form  of spillovers
 in which the incremental innovation always comes at the same cost, regardless of how far
 knowledge has advanced. More realistically, inventors can build on the existing stock of
 knowledge, but there are limits on its usefulness in creating the next idea. Equation (10)
 captures the more general case in which the research productivity parameter8 depends on
 the stock of existing ideas, with each existing idea weighted by the probability that it is
 useful in generating new knowledge at time           it.   These probabilities are, in turn, dependent
on the likelihood that the previous idea is known to a current inventor, and the likelihood
 that   it is useful.
    To implement this approach, we use patents as an indicator of the creation of new ideas,
and the "citations" (also called references) that patents make to previous patents as an
indicator of "existing ideas used in the creation of new ideas.". There is a vast literature
on the virtues and vices of patent data, which addresses such issues as the large number
of inventions that are never patented; variations in the "propensity to patent" of different

institutions, diffçrent industries and over time; and the large variability in the "size" or
importance of individual patents.21 For our purposes, we will simply assume that N, is
proportional to the rate of patenting at time it, with the proportionality factor treated as a
(time-varying) parameterto be estimated.
    When a patent is granted, the patent document identifies a list of referencesor citations,
which are previous patents upon which the current patent builds.22 The citations serve the
legal function of identifying previous patents that delimit the property right conveyed by
the patent. Since citations indicate that a current invention builds on an older one, we will
use the total number of citations from patents issued in year it to patents issued in year s as

  21
   For a recent survey, see Geiliches (1990).
 22References are also made to non-pstent materials such as scientific articles: we are not using this infor-
mation. For an application that does, see 'ttajtenberg, Hendeeaon and Jaffe (1992).


                                                     20
an indicator of the use of knowledge of vintage s in the production of new ideas at time t.
Of course, not all citations represent spillovers; it is possible, for example, that the inventor
was not even aware of the earlier work at the time the invention was made.23 As with
variations in the number of new ideas represented by the average patent, we will deal with
variations in the relationship between citations and spillovers by allowing a (time- varying)
proportionality factor between "ideas used" and citations, and estimating this factor as a
parameter. Not surprisingly, the need to allow for this "slippage" between citations and
spillovers will limit to some extent the conclusions that we can draw; we return to this issue
below.
   Thus the empirical strategy of this subsection is to collect citation frequencies between
patent cohorts, and use these to estimate o(t, s) for many I and s. We then estimate econo-
metrically a version of Equation (9), obtaining estimates of the parameters S and     the               ,
"potency" of old ideas and the diffusion rate of knowledge, as well as the proportionality
factors that map patents into ideas and citations into "ideas used." Producing these esti-
mates allows us to do two things. First, we can use our estimates of the proportionality
factor between patents and ideas to construct a time series for N from the patent series.
Second, we use the estimates of the parameters from the citation function, combined with
the   N2   series, to construct &, the predicted contribution of old knowledge to the production

   25The final dscisioa as to what citations must appesr belongs with the pstent examiner, but it is ths result
of sn interactive process involving the inventor, the inventor's attorneys, and the examiner. All of these
parties can identify potential citations by searching the relevant "prior art." Until the late 1970s this was
done by hand, using as a guide the Patent Office classification of the patent. Today, all parties have access
to on-line text-searchcapabilities. The incentives faced by each of these parties are complicated. First, the
applicant bears a legal obligation to disclose any prior art of which she has knowledge; the primary sanction
for non-performance appears to be the danger of losing the good will of the examiner (who also makes the
decisions as to whether the patent will issue, what claims will be permitted, and so forth). Second, the
applicant would, in a sense, prefer fewer citations, since citations may limit the scope of the property right.
On the other hand, omission of important references can be grounds for invalidation of the patent, giving
the applicant an incentive to make sure that citations appear. For the exanuner, identifying citations not
provided by the applicant is time-consuming. It appears that it is just as common for applicants and their
attorneys to press for the inclusion of additional references as it is for them to resist inclusion of references
                                                                                                               of
(personal communication, Ms. Jane Myers, U.S. Patent Office). For more discussion on the interpretation
citations as evidence of knowledge flows, see Trajtenbsrg, Henderson and laffe (1992) sod Jaffc, Trajtenberg
and Henderson (1993).



                                                      21
 of new ideas.

    Our data consist of a 1 in 100 random sample of all patents in the U.S. granted between
 the beginning of 1975 and the fall of 1992. Simple statistics on these data are shown in
Table 3.1. They consist of 12,592 patents containing 81,777 citations. The sample varies
(due to variations in the overall grant rate) from a low of 443 patents in 1979 to a high of
935 in 1991. We have valid citations going as far back as 1871.25 Thus we have observations
over  'f' from 1975 to 1992 and "s" from 1871 to 1992. As can be seen from the Table, the
distributions over (t — s) have extremely long tails. The mean lag in years is about 16 years;
the median is about 10 and the mode is about 3.
    We want to use these citation frequencies to estimate o(t, 3). Let Ce,, be the observed
citations in the sample from patents in year 2 to patents in year ,26 Let S2 be the number
of sample    patents in year t, and P5 be the number of total patents in the U.S. in year                      s.
Define



                                               a(2,s)   E   ts
    Thus,   a(t, s) is   an estimate
                                  of the probability that a patent in year 2 cites a patent
in year s. Panel (a) in Figure 3.1 shows the distribution of o(t,s) over s from 1900 for
each 2. We restrict ourselves to the distributions since 1900; before that date the citation

   24lnventors from every country in the world take out patents in the U.S. Of course, othsr countries also
grant patents. We will use the phrase "patentsin the U.S." to refer to patents issued by the U.S. patent office,
 regardless of the nationalityof the iaventor or other considerations. In this subsection, we utilize a sample of
 all such patents. In the next subsection, we will use the phrase "U.S. patents" to mean patents (in the U.S.)
 that derive from research in the U.S.
   25The citations are identified by patent number in a commercial database produced by Micropatest. Inc.
 Patent numbers can be used to assign grant years for the patents, because numbers are used sequentially; the
patent number of the first patent issued each yearback to 1836 is published in the Hislerical Slotistics of tile
 U.S. The Micropatentdata contain a small but significant number (about .3%) of 5-digit cited patents, which
if correct would be patents issued before 1871. On inspection of the actual patent documents, we determined
that maay of these are, in fact, not patent numbers at all but "reissue" numbers. Thus, without manual
inspection there is no way to know if any of these 5-digit citations are actually valid early patents. 'l'hus we
have simply dropped them from the datsset summarized in Table 3.1. Citations with 6-digit or greater patent
numbers appear to all be valid. Since patent number 100,000 was issued in 1870, we treat all citations 1871
or later as valid.
   26Pateots are dated here by the time of grant. We will discuss timing issues further below.


                                                      22
frequencies are often zero or one, and hence are very noisy estimates of the true frequency.2T
Panel (b) shows the function o(t, s) for an arbitrary year (19S5). The distributions shown
in the Figure have the expected "double exponential" shape. Moreover,the increasing part
is quite short, suggesting that speed of diffusion is fast. We return to this below.
    To go from o(t, s) to o(t, s) we must be explicit about the relationships between (i)
citations and "used ideas" and (ii) patents and N. We assume that citations are proportional
to "used ideas" with a proportionality factor 73t. That is, the patent office and its examiners
have a set of rules and practices that determine what patents actually get cited. These do
nut affect the actual use of old knowledge in the generation of new, but they do affect the
number of citations. Further, these practices can change over time. We also assume that
/3N is proportional to  patents, with proportionality factor 528 We can think of 7//3 as
the "average size" of a patent.29 Many interpretations can be given to this "size" and its
variation over time. One can think of each patent as encompassing a set of distinct ideas.
Alternatively, since not all ideas are patented, one can think of s/i/fl as the reciprocal of the
probability that'any given idea is patented. Since we care about s/i only to the extent it
lets us use patents for N, we will consider these different interpretations only to the extent
that they help us think about the plausibility of the estimates. Using C,,3/s/1 for "ideas
used" and (s/'//3)P for N, we can write         an expression for o(t, s) in terms of observablea and
parameters:


                        o(t a) =
                                          l.s          = (/32/&)s/'—I bb —i o (t s).
                                                                             —

                                                                                                        (L)
                                                                                                          9
                                   (1/fl2)/1514,p
    Since    is purely a measurement parameter, we will absorb 1/732 into it and simply
write    from now on. This gets us almost to the point of being able to rewrite equation (9),

  2TWe could, of coarse, estimate the variaace of a(t, a) sad weight accordingly, hat thcsc cstioiations take
very bag to raa as is. We decided that say additional information present ia the noisy early years was aot
worth the increase in computationaltime necessary to include them.
  28We choose this parameterization to emphasize that the parameter is not idcatifled by the patent eqaation.
We will identify it using the growth equation below.
  29The inverse of the "propensity to patent" (Griliches (1990)).



                                                     23
(the expression for the probability than an idea will be used as a function of elapsed time
and elapsed N) in terms of observables. The only additional step is to note that (N1 — N,)
— the number of ideas between s and t — is, under our assumptions, just the number of

patents granted between s and t, weighted by the appropriate b,/fl. Equation (9) can be
rewritten:


                o(t,s) =        1,5,erp
                                           (—fl     9) (i       —
                                                                    e')),          t s.              (13)

    Equation (13) is the key empirical construct of the paper. Because of the multiplicity
of parameters and unfamiliarity of this sort of data, it requires several comments before
we proceed to the results. First, because of the need to estimate the proportionality factor
between patents and N, we cannot estimate from the citation data. That is, we can
use Equation(13) to recover from the citation data the relative size of patents in different
cohorts in terms of ideas, but we cannot estimate the overall average size without bringing
in additional information.35 (We will use the relationship between N and growth for this
purpose.) Second, because we have multiple observations over both s and t, the parameters
in this equation are all identified in principle, up to a normalization that sets one 5,31
    Third, though the parameters 4 and 5, appear symmetrically in Equation (13), we
interpret them very differently. We treat   — the
                                                  proportionality factor between "ideas
used" and citations — as a pure nuisance parameter, because the citations process holds
nu interest for us other than as a window on the spillover process. We need to allow
to vary over t because citations per patent have been rising rapidly, and there are good
reasons to believe that institutional changes are the reason. On the other band, 5, is a
key model parameter; its variation over time captures changes in the potency of knowledge
spillovers. As already mentioned, we find  a significantfall in this potency over the century,
and associate this fall with the observed reduced productivity of private research.

  30Equivalently, we can estimate fiN but not N.
  3tTo see this, it is important to understand that and b, ace not different parameters;for any given year
we have the same "propensityto patent" whether we are looking at that year as a citing or cited year.


                                                   24
    It is, of course,
8st and
                        crucial for identification that we do not have parameters S and
            That is, we do not allow the potency of spillovers to depend on the receiving
                                                                                          ,   or


cohort, and we do not allow the proportionality factor between citations and "ideas used"
to vary with the cited or "used" cohort, and we do not allow "interaction terms" in either.
Each of these restrictions requires comment. By not allowing S to vary over t or st we
are saying that new-invention cohorts do not vary in their ability to use the knowledge
of the past, and that the potency of a given histori: cohort in generating spillovers is a
once-and-for-all attribute that does not vary over the succeeding cohorts. In other words,
today's inventors may have available to them more or less knowledge than was available to
yesterday's inventors, but there is nothing intrinsic about the nature of today's inventions
or inventive process that makes previous knowledge more or less useful to today's inventors
than yesterday's knowledge was to yesterday's inventors. Further, (holding obsolescence
constant) the potency of, e.g., 1920 inventions for facilitating new inventions was the same
in 1960 as it is thday. In our model, in which quality is a unidimensional attribute so that
the "nature" of inventions never really changes, these seem like natural restrictions. In a
richer model, in which there were multiple quality dimensions,then one might imagine that
the focus of invention today might be more or less similar to that of 1920 than the focus of
invention was in 1960, suggesting that potency would vary with i and/or st. Of course, to
the extent that variations in citation practices make it necessary to allow for variations in
,   it is not clear how variations in S across t could be identified.
                          ,
   The restriction on though not empty, seems more innocuous. What we are saying is
that the "propensity to cite" past patents does not vary over the different historic cohorts,
and that patent office practices may change over time and this may change the number of
citations (holding spillovers constant), but that these changes do not affect past cohorts
differentially. Both of these propositions seem to be consistent with our impressions of the
examining process. The biggest changes have been computerization of the patent database,
allowing on-line text searches to facilitate identification of citations, changes in the proce-
dures for bringing citations to the examiners' attention that have made it easier for the

                                               25
 examiners to include citations in the patent document, and a perceived increase in the
 enforcement of the legal obligation on inventors to disclose knowledge of prior art.32
     A fourth observation on Equation          (13) relates to the way the parameter           b—     number
 of ideas   per patent over time — enters the equation. Because the flow of new ideas is not
observed, any attempt to pin down variations in the propensity to patent requires having a
second indicator (besides the rate of patenting) of the rate of knowledge generation.33 In this
case, our second indicator is the rate of decline in the citation of old knowledge. That is, if
the patents during some historical period were unusually large, in the sense of incorporating
many ideas in each patent, then they should have made previous knowledge obsolete to
a greater extent than would be expected based on the number of patents. This will be
reflected in the data in the form of a reduced number of citations to these previous periods.
Of course, a period with larger than average patents would also receive more citations itself,
and that is captured by the presence of fr, in front of the exponential.31 Because of the
presence of the and parameters, however, this effect probably contributes less to the
estimation of the 5s than the exponential term.35
    Thus the model has two distinct parameters that relate to the average "importance,"
broadly speaking, of patents of a given eohort.ae The variation over time in the parameter
   captures any differences in the number of new ideas embeded in the average patent.
The variation over time in the parameter fi captures variations in the potency (in terms of
spillover generation) of the ideas themselves.
    Finally, we note that the diffusion of knowledge is assumed to occur at a rate that is
measured in time rather than elapsed inventions. This seems natural. It is less obvious that

  32Personal communication, Jane Myers, U.S. Patent Office.
  See Pakes and Griliches (1984).
  °4Similarly, if a period's patents are bigger than average, they will make more citations; this is captured by
                'i
the presence of out fcnnt.

                                         '
  351fwe estimated the model with a free and complete set of the parameters8,, there would be no contribution
to the estimation of the time pattern of fromits presence out front. Since, however, we constrain the Ss to
follow particular functional forms, this is not the case.
  36Note that the "size" of ideas themselves, in terms of the product qualityimprovementthey allow, does not
vary except in the specific way defined by the exponential form in which q enters the aggregate ronsumption
good (Equation (2)).

                                                      26
the diffusion parameter need be constant over time, but we did not explore its variation.
   We estimated variations of equation (13) by non-linear least squares on the set of ob-
servations consisting of (s, 1) pairs with t varying between 1975 and 1992 and £ varying
between 1900 and t.37 Though a model in which all of the Ss and                  's
                                                                      are allowed to vary
over all   s and t  identified in principle, we did not attempt to estimate it. Rather, we
                      is

followed a strategy of (1) always allowing a full set of multiplicative constants to control ,,
for changes in citation practices, and (2) using a combination of dummies over longer time
periods and polynomial functions of time to capture variations in both S and b over time.
   The results are presented in Table 3.2. The first column shows the simplest model one
could imagine estimating, in which we ignore the "two clocks" and estimate both diffusion
arid depreciation off of the lag in years between s  t. Not surprisingly (having seen Figure
                                                          ancP

3.1) this model fits the data reasonably well. We get an estimate for of about .8, and an
estimatc for the "obsolescence"rate of about .075 per year. As would be expected from the
rising average citations made per patent shown in Table 3.1, the estimates of th rise from
1975 to 1992. This is        a result that
                                      apparent in all specifications. Next, we substitute
                                             is

elapsed patents for time in the depreciation term, while still maintaining constancy over
time in    S.   and   5,. To facilitate interpretation of the results, we use       for the terms in the
summation in Equation (13) the number of patents in each year divided by the sverage
(over the whole sample, 1900-92) number of pateuts per year. This makes the parameter
in front of the term (N, — N5) the average annual obsolescence rate; it is therefore directly
comparable to the time-obsolescencerate estimated in Column 1. Estimating obsolescence
based on patents rather than time improves the fit markedly, and also reduces the average
obsolescencerate to just over 6 percent per year. Since the number of patents is greater in
recent years, the observed prevalence of early citations is consistent with a lower average

  37Because the a(t, s) are estimated and the frequencies differ greatly, the model is heteroskedastic. We
did not deal with this problem explicitly, but dropping the early observations can be interpreted as limiting
ourselves tu that part of the data in which the heteroskedasticity is likely to be less. The standard errors
reported are heteroskedasticity consistent,however.
  35The sum of squared residuals is reduced by about 30 percent.



                                                     27
 annual obsolescence rate than when the rate is held constant over time.
     The third column of the Table "frees up" the parameter b to vary over both t and s,
i.e., it allows for variations in the propensity to patent over time (while still keeping the


ways to represent the movement in
give similar overall results. The version
                                           .
spillover potency of ideas constant over time). Needless to say, there are many different
                                          We explored a number of these, and they generally

                                          reported in Column 3 of Table 3.2 models 1' with a
single dummy for the years 1900-1919; a second dummy for 1920-1939; a third dummy for
1940-1959; and a cubic equation in the log of I for the period 1960-1992. This improves the
fit further, and the parameter estimates are quite significant. The time path of y implied
by these estimates can be seen in Figure 3.2a. Generally speaking, the path rises over the
century, reaching a peak somewhereduring the 1970s, and then begins to decline. Again,
the patent counts have been divided by the average patents per year so that the magnitude
of s/ can be interpretedas the annual rate of obsolescence created by an average year's worth
of patents.3°
     Column 4 builds on Column 3 by freeing up 6,. The parameterization of 6, is parallel
to that for tb,, with dummies for long periods early in the century and s cubic equation
in I for the period 1960-1992. This yields a similar pattern for      to what we had before,
except in the very beginning of the century. But 6, moves significantly in the opposite
direction, as shown in Figure 3.2b, falling significantlyfrom the start of the century until
about 1960, and then leveling off into a slower decline. As we will see below, the decline
in 6, shown in Figure 3.2b translates into a secular decline in the predicted productivity of
research, O. In other words, knowledge from successive patent cohorts over the century is
being incorporated in current patents at rates that imply that the potency of later cohorts
in facilitating new knowledge generation is markedly less than the potency of earlier cohorts.
Sincemore recent cohorts get more weight (they are less obsolete) in current knowledge,the

  39The numbsrof patents per year also changes over time, of course, causiog the variation in the yearly rate
of obsolescence to be much greater than the variation in  ,.
                                                           See Figure 3.3.




                                                     28
predicted effective spillover rate (and hence research productivity) falls over the century.4e
   As noted above, the estimate of the diffusion parameter y is not very sensitive to these

specification issues. It is consistently about .7 to .8, suggesting an average lag until knowl-
edge has diffused of between one and two years.
                                    ',
   For obsolescence,it is not that matters,but rather i,b,P1, which is equal to N' 9N.
Figure 3.3 shows different estimates of N', compared to the overall patent series itself.
What the picture shows is that first, the variations in b over time are small relative to the
movements in patents. None the less, the "corrected" series does show a noticeably different
pattern, particularly at the beginning of the century and from the end of World War II until
the late 1970s. In this latter period, our estimate of N' increases almost 40 percent more
                                                               ',
than the patent series itself. After the early 1970s, begins to decline, exacerbating the fall
in the rate of patenting itselfthat occurs between 1970 and the early 1980s. Then patenting
                                    ',
picks up again, and although is still falling, N' picks up as well. In the next subsection,
we turn to a more detailed analysis of trends in N' versus trends in patents.
    The last output of the citations analysis is the construction of the series 8,, our estimate
of the productivity of labor in research. From equation (10), 8, is the integral over all past
ideas q of o(t, s(q)). We do not observe o(t, s) but the estimated citation equation can be
used to construct predicted values of n(t, a), using the parameters 'y, 6, and g, and the data
series   P,. This is easily done by replacing equation (13) in (12).
     Our estimate of 8, (up to a constant) is then easily obtained from a discrete representtion
of the definition of   8:'
                                           8,     a(t,s),P,.
                                                           ,
    In the formulation described above, in which enters the relationship between o(t,s) and
n'(l, a) but does not affect a(t, a) itself, the parameters gi do not enter into the construction

   '0Ose manifestationof this pheeomenon is the presence of fat tails in the distrihutionof the & (t, a)'5. This
is  not enough, however: allowing for fat tails in estimation improves the fit but it leaves — to a large extent
— unaffected the declining path of 6,.
   41The fact that the summation starts from 0 rather than minus infinity is empirically irrelevant since the
first I we study is sufficiently large (00) so the value of the excluded nO, a)I'J, is negligible.


                                                      29
of o(t, s) or 9. We also explore a variation in which we interpret the parameters           as

representiog something   real about the use of knowledge rather than a citation artifact. This
will change the estimated path of O after 1975.
    Two potential estimates of O from the citation function are plotted in Figure 3.4. The
solid line corresponds to Column 4 of Table 3.2, in which 8, is allowed to vary over time. It
shows a dramatic fall in the predicted productivity of research labor, very rapid from the
1950s to the early 1970s, and then somewhat slower after that. The heavy dashed line in

Figure 3.4 corresponds to Column 2 of Table 3.2; that is, it holds 6, constant over time.
It shows a much flatter pattern of research productivity. In the next subsection, we will
relate the estimated 8 to the observed productivity of research in the U.S. For now, it is
important to emphasize that this time series is not generated from data on the productivity
of research. Rather, it is the model's prediclion about the path of research productivity,
based on the pattern of old knowledge used, as represented by citations, in the production
of new knowledge. What is driving the trend is the path of 8,. In a nutshell, the citations
data show that recent cohorts of patents are less cited than older ones (controlling for ob-
solescence), suggesting that they are less potent in generating spillovers. Since obsolescence
makes recent patents more important in the overall stock, the current stock is less potent
overall than the stock that was available to previous inventors. With shorter shoulders to
stand on, current inventors have to spend more on telescopes in order to see as far as their
predecessors did.
   Note that the estimated decline in O is conditional on our assumption that the parameter
ô, captures only citation behavior and not any change in the actual use of old knowledge. If,
on the other hand, one believed that the increase in the raw citation rate that can be seen
in the data is a real (exogenous) increase in the use of old knowledge, then we would expect
this increase to feed through into rising research productivity. It seems likely, a priori, that
the large increase io citation intensities reflects primarily a change in citation practices. In
additioo, as we will show below, actual research productivity shows oo evideoceof iocreasiog
after 1975 as would be predicted if 0, were rising steeply.


                                              30
3.3      Tn INNOVATION PRODUCTION FUNCTION
Equation (8) above describes the production ofinnovations as a function of the research labor
force L and a research productivity function or paranseter 8. In the previous subsection

we have developed a method for constructing         an estimate of 8 based on the "use" as
evidenced by citations, of older knowledge. In this subsection we will incorporate this
estimate into estimates of the innovation function itself.42 We estimate the innovation
function on aggregate time series for patents and two measures of research inputs                        —



spending and research scientists and engineers for the period 1957 to 1989. If the data
                                                             —



and model are interpreted literally, equation (8) leaves large serially correlated disturbances
unexplained. Orre possibility is to correct for serial correlation, leaving this dynamic pattern
in the disturbance unexplained. Another possibility is to modify the theory so innovations
are a direct function of current and laggedresearch. Doing the latter modifies our model only

slightly if the lagged research that matters is the aggregate one, while it makes the theory
more cumbersome if lagged research is private. From the point of view of estimation in this
section, however, this distinction does not matter. Moreover, this common specification
is indistinguishable from a third explanation where the serially correlated disturbance is
attributed to the timing of research, innovation and patenting. We explain and adopt the
latter, but it should be clear that we have no strong position on the relative importance of
these sources of serial correlation.
    /Te will treat the fundamental innovation equation (8) as holding with respect to unob-
served new ideas. These ideas do not, however, lead instantaneously to patent applications.

Rather, patent applications P2 are given by:


                                               =   ot = (1-p)'i
    Thus, as above, we allo;v for a time- varying propensity to patent or proportionality

  42We will also sse the estimates of         from the previoas subsection to convert patents to N'. Given the
large inflow of foreign patents, this is likely to underestimate the change in sire of U.S. patents, for on average
there will be more inventions in between subsequent U.S. patents.

                                                        31
constant between ideas and patents; we call this il' and we will use the estimates from the
previous subsection to convert P2 to N2°6. In addition, however, we allow for lags in the
conversionof ideas into patent applications. We will estimate these lags, parameterized by
p from the innovation function itself. We take the actual productivity parameter, O, to
depend on the 8 estimated above and exogenous research productivity: 8, = 7)o + rii8t. The
parameters '/s and ,j, will also be estimated from the innovation function.
   Note that patents are not actually granted until some later date, usually within 2 to 3
years of application but occasionally much later. Because this second lag is variable and
results from the vagaries of the patent office, we estimate the innovation function using
patents by year'of application.43 This is in contrast to our construction of 8,, and the
knowledge diffusion analysis more generally, which used patents by grant year. This was
prcdicated on the assumption that knowledge does not begin to spread until the patent is
actually granted. This seems plausible, since patent applications are secret. Only when
the patent is granted is the technical knowledge contained in them published. We should
note, however, that we will look below at the response of firms' market value to (ultimately
successful)patent applications. We are implicitly assuming that, at the time of application,
the market knows that an idea has been generated, and responds to that knowledge, even
though its technical content is still secret.
   We estimate the innovation function using measures of U.S. research inputs, and a mea-
sure of U.S. patents. Again, this differs from the previous subsection where, though we
are using "patents in the U.S.," we include patents granted in the U.S. to foreigners in N.
This means that, in estimating the relationship between U.S. research and U.S. patents, we
include in the spillover function 8, all patents,not just U.S. patents. Thus we are assuming
that U.S. research produces U.S. inventions, but it draws upon (and is made obsolete by)
worldwide inventions.
    It is well known that the productivity of research, as measured by patent output, shows
a long-term decline from the 1950s until the mid-l9SOs (Griliches (1989); I'Cortum (1993)).

 43This is th€ standard practice in the patent literatnre. See e.g., Ilausman, flail and Griliches (1984)


                                                     32
This is shown in Figure 3.5. The top panel shows the ratio of patents to several measures
of research input; the bottom panel plots N', that is times patents. The patent series is
total "U.S. priority" patents,44by year of application. The research input measures include
real non- government R&D expenditures and total research scientists and engineers, as
well as each of these scaled by U.S. population,45 and nominal R&D scaled by nominal

expenditure. Explanations that have been put forward for the downward trend in patent
productivity include (1) an exogenous fall in "technological opportunity;" (2) aggregate
decreasing returns to research, producing a fall in average productivity because research
has risen significantly; and (3) a decline in the propensity to patent (Kortum (1993)).
   Our estimates from the previous section shed significantlight on these issues. First, as
can be seen from Figure 3.5 (as well as Figure 3.3), correcting for patent size using the
estimated   ,
            does mitigate the fall in productivity up until 1970. Thereafter, unfortunately,

the estimated eJ, begins to fall, aggravating the apparent fall in productivity. Our estimates
for 9, do, however, provide an explanation for much of the overall trend in patent produc-
tivity.This can he seen from Figure 3.5, in which the estimated 9, is plotted along with the
observed productivity. In both panels, it is clear that the overall downward movement in 9,
is quite consistent with the fall in research productivity, though it does not explain the high-
frequency movements,including the precipitous drop in the late 1970s and the rapid rise in
very recent years. In the terms of the previously offered explanations for the fall in patent
productivity, our estimates suggest that "technological opportunity" has indeed fallen. In
our model this takes the form of decreased usefulness of the stock of existing knowledge in
generating new ideas.46 The previous section shows that this fall can he observed in the
pattern of actual use of older knowledge, as evidenced by patent citations.

  44This means thst the patent was applied for in the U.S. before being applied for anywhere else in the world.
   iSCivilian population over the age of 16 (1991 Economir Report of the President)
                                                                                              i
  45Note that the fi shown in Figure 3.5 is the one that results when we treat the increase in as an artifact
of citation practices rather than a real phenomenon. On one hand, the close correspondence of the resulting 0,
                                                                                             ',
to measured productivityprovidesfurther support to our conjecture that the movements in are not "real."
On the other band, if this is wrong and the "abnormal" trend in citations corresponds to a trae increase in
spiliovers, our measure of 0 exacerbates rather than eliminates the patent/R&D ratio purrle, at least outil
1986.


                                                      33
   Figure 3.5 suggests that the estimated 8, explains much of the observed trend in patent
productivity. To push this a little further, we estimate the equation:47


                                        = ae + (1     —
                                                            p)U,R, + PA',_,,

with R, a measure of research input and

                                                 =   Tic,   + '7i8t.

    The parameter estimates are presented in Table 3.3. The columns correspond to different
measures of research input. In column 1, we use research scientists and engineers. The fit is
quite good, and the estimates are all reasonable and statistically significant. As suggested
above, 8 is highly significant. The next column uses research scientists and engineers as a
fraction of the population. The fit is approximately the same, and the role of 8, is smaller
but still positive and significant. In the next three columns we report results for research
input measured as real R&D expenditure, and R&D expenditure divided by consumption
and population, respectively. Except for unscaied R&D (where the signs are correct but the
coefficients are not significant), the results are similar to those obtained with scientists and

engineers.
   Thus the regression results confirm what can be seen in the pictures, that our estimated
decline in 8,, inferred from patent citations, "explains" much of the secular decline in mea-
sured patent productivity. In interpreting this, we must consider the factors determining
the almost monotonic decline in 8 through our sample period. First, there is the decline
in 5, indicating a reduction in the usefulness of successive cohorts of ideas in generating
spillovers to the creation of new ideas.48 In principle, there is a second force potentially

   4mWe also estimated versions allowing for decreasing returns with respect to research ioput. The standard
specification with decreasing returns hut q     = 0 was uniformly and very significantly outperformedby the
linear model with q' unrestricted. Adding decreasing returns to the model with 'h unrestricted yielded
 unrealistically low and very imprecise estimates of the returns to scale parameter.
   48The empirical regularity is that the citations to early patents are more frequent than would be expected
 based on the estimated rate of exponential obsolescence. We interpret this in terms oft, having heen larger in


                                                      34
 at work;    9
             is constructed using all patents, not just U.S. patents. The fraction of U.S.
 patents going to foreigners rose from about 11 percent in 1957 to about 44 percent in 1989.
 Fom the point of view of U.S. inventors, this increase in foreign patenting in the U.S. has
 the effect of speeding up the "N clock" without affecting the "time clock." New ideas are
coming faster in the aggregate, making it harder for any inventor to take a step, and much
of this new    knowledge is too recent to have diffused and thereby spilled over             to helping new
invention.
   The top panel of Figure 3.6 shows that it is actually only the decline in S. that mattered.
The solid line shows what 8 would have looked like if S. had been constant; it is itself quite
constant. The Figure also shows why the increase in N' due to foreign patenting did not
matter; the rate of knowledge diffusion is fast enough so that the spillovers from this influx
roughly halanced the increased obsolescence. This can be seen from the dashed line, which
shows what       9 would   have looked like     if y                           In that case, we
                                                       were much smaller, i.e. .001.
would havc had       a marked decline in           S  had
                                               O even if  been   constant.  The    bottom panel
reproduces these two cases for the actual (declining) path of 5,. It shows that, if y had
been smaller, there would have been an additional downward effect on productivity from
the influx of foreign patenting. But, given the actual y, this effect is small; diffusion is close
enough to instantaneous that we are, in effect, in the world described in Section 2.3 in which
S does not depend on N.

3.4      N   AND GROWTH

As shown in equation (21),the theoretical model predicts an extremely simple linear relation-

ship between the growth   rate of consumption and N. Casual inspection of the data makes
clear that such a relationship does not hold for annual data in the U.S. The high frequency
movements in these series are not likely to be well explained by a growth model. Therefore,

the early years. Alternatively, one could say that the true obsolescence functiou is "slower" than exposential,
i.e., the citation distributionshave fatter tails than predicted by exponential ohsolescence. Either way, the
effect is similar; we would predict a decline in the effective spillover base as knowledge accumulates.


                                                       35
 to explore whether we can find evidence of the predicted relationship, we smoothed both
 time series by using predicted values from a regression of the actual series on a filth- order
 polynomial in the log of time. The top panel of Figure 3.7 shows the resulting smoothed
 consumption growth rate and N, using the same U.S. priority patent series, corrected by
 the estimated from the citation data. The shapes are strikingly similar, especially con-
 sidering that it is not clear that one can expect consumption, as actually measured in the
 National Income Accounts, to move as predicted by the model.49
    Given the previous discussion,it is not clear how seriously one should take precise timing
 issues. For completeness, however, we mention             that the N    series appears to    be displaced
forward by 1 or 2 years up until the early 1980s. This suggests either that new ideas are
incorporated in new products even before the date of patent application, or, perhaps more
likely,   that both series are   moved by other shocks but exhibit different dynamic responses
to these.

    From equations (2) and (4) it is possible to write:


                                      _ir
                                      C          N,
                                                f{J'(q)e9}0dq
but since
                                           N,                   N
                                        fL'(q)dq = L —
and

                                       L,(q)    =

  45The essence of technological chsnge in this model is the introductionof new goods. As has been
                                                                                                   emphasired
by Griliches (1979) and others, the extent to which the statistics capture the increase in consumption that
occurs when new goods are introduced varies greatly across industries. The authorities measure
                                                                                                 revenues, not
output, and convert revenues to output using price deflatora that generally ignore the quality improvement
associated with new goods.




                                                      36
 we can express the rate of growth of consumption as:50


                                               +          -A
                                                   N:          (i-).
 We   estimated the following empirical version of this equation:



                                      a1=Ae+AsI_A2A(f).
The coefficient A2 was never significant so we omit   the lsst term in the regressions reported
belowin Table 3.4. Columns 1 and 2 present results for the growth rate of consumption, with
and without a serial correlation correction. Columns 3 and 4 present the same results using
the growth rate of lahor productivity instead of consumption as the dependent variable. All
versions tell a similar story. The coefficient on N' is about .5 to .6 and significant.51.
    The bottom panel of Figure 3.7 shows the (smoothed) growth rate of labor productivity
(CNP over employment), and thc "true" N that can he derived from N°5 using the estimated
parameters front the innovation equation. Again, the movements are very closely related.
Though we stress that the lag we have incorporated between the true and observed N is
something of a black box, the model does seem to do a good job at predicting the longer
term movements in the productivity series.


3.5      CREATIVE DESTRUCTION

All of the previous empirical subsections can be thought of as conditional on the path of
research. In the model, the allocation of labor to research is determined by the value of new
ideas, whose time path is given by equation (5), the "creative destruction" equation. In this
subsection, we present some empirical estimates of that equation.

  50For this we use the approximation In (1 — a) —x, fcr small. r
  stAll coefficients appear significant but our transformation introduces large hisses in the standard errors,
so these should not be taken too seriously. Agaio, we only emphusire the coincidence in the general shape of
the curves in Figure 3.7.


                                                     37
     Asnoted above, estimation of this equation requires confronting the notion of firms. It
also requires identifying the concept of sectors, which have not been explicitly described
in the models but whose dynamic properties can be easily understood by extension of the
results from the single sector model. We will treat firms as agglomerations of blueprints,
though we will not seek to explain why any particular firm holds the particular portfolio of
blueprints that Ft does.52 We will assign firms to sectors, which will be defined as groups
of firms whose research activities have historically focussed on similar areas. With these
assumptions, we can derive a version of the creative destruction equation that relates the
deviations from the sector mean in firms' value growth rates to the deviations from the
mean of the firms' N.

    Let   P123 .&,   and .2)',, represent the value of     a firm r in sector s, the value of the entire
sector, and the value of the firms in sector s that are includedin the sample; all of them at
time t and in terms of units of consumption. Letting A1(q) and wg,(q) be indicator functions,
we have:
                                             =
                                                 I-: A1(q)V2(q) dq,
                                            =        w,(q)172(q) dq,

                                                 =        Vi(q)dq.

Differentiating these expressions with respect to time, using equation (5), letting                   N12, as

A1(N24N23, and assuming w23(q) as w23, we obtain our basic estimating equation:53

  52Although this definition of firms is consistent with the non-excludability of knowledge implicit in the
model, it is unlikely to hold true in reality. In other words, research know-how, organizational capital and
other forms of private knowledge must add value to a firmbeyond the value of its patents.
  53An alternative derivation of the same equation can be obtained by letting A1(N,,) he a raodom variable
independent acrosn i, so the best predictor of its realization is the share of the firma value in the lodustry.
Also, assuming that each sector is comprised of a large number of firms, the total number of new patents in
the industry togetherwith its chaoge in value can be taken as known io advance (or at least uncertainty about
these can be assumed to be negligible relativeto the same concepts at the firmlevel).




                                                     38
                                         - Ii's = A1               -
                                                            [ic'
where
                                                         a       1
                                                      1 —    a
   We estimate equation (15) on an unbalanced panel of firms from the NBER R&D panel

(Hall, et al (1988)), which contains Compustat financial information and U.S. patent data.
The assignment of these firms to technological sectors is described in Jaffe (1986). Briefly,
the distribution of the finns' patents across patent classesfor the period 1965-1972 was used
in a multinomial clustering algorithm to identify groups of firms with "similar" patent class
distributions. The 567 firms are assigned to a total of 21 sectors. Simple statistics for the
sectors are presented in Table 3.5. In general level of aggregation the sectors are comparable
to 2 to 3 digit SIC industries. The assignment is made, however, on                    the basis of areas      of
inventive activity rather than sales.
   To estimate equation (15), we need to parameterize the variation in the parameter A31
over s and i. This parameter encompasses variations in the CES parameter a, in the shareof
the sector represented by the firms in the sample, and also variations in the proportionality
factor between patents and new ideas. We treat it as the product of a sector-specificconstant
and a cubic polynomial in t. We constrain              A    to be positive by using an exponential time
polynomial.54 Although equation (13) implies that the two terms in square brackets are
constrained to have the same coefficient A0, we allow a free parameter on the sector patent
total N. We also allow for year- and sector- specific intercepts, leading to the equation
actually estimated:


                                     —
                                         I   = a0 + A1A,
                                                             [i14c±-
                                                                       —



    The results of estimating this equation on 8457 observations                   are presented in Table

   541f we do not constraint these estimates to be positive we obtaia negative estimate at the end of the sample,
although these are insignificant. The overall fit wss statistically anaffected by our non-negativityconstraint.

                                                       39
3.6.   The
         coefficients A, are generally positive, though many are not significant.55 The

parameterp which should be unity if the proportionality (implied by the model) between
value and patents holds, is about 1.4. This says that firm patents scaled by the ratio of firm
to sector value averages less than sector patents. This is consistent with the general and
intuitive finding that large firms have proportionally fewer patents than small firms.56 The
parameters P5 P2 and P3 in the table are the coefficients of the cubic time polynomial for


   To interpret these results, we use the parameter estimates to calculate rates of creative
destruction. The most straightforward way to do this is to multiply the estimated A35 times
the estimated p times the number of patents in the sector in each year. Doing this yields
estimates of the rate of creative destruction by sector by year. The average over the sample
years of these numbers are presented in the last column ef Table 3.5. They range from
essentially zero for a number of sectors, including computers, to a high of 25 percent per
year for drugs. The (unweighted) average across all sectors is about 3.5 percent per year.
Some aspects of these results are quite consistent with previous findings. In particular,
the very high rate of creative destruction for drugs is consistent with the general view
that this is a very progressive sector and one in which patents are a very good measure of
technical advance (Mansfield (1986); Levin et al (1987)). We also find relatively fast creative
destruction as measured by patents in machinery, electrical equipment and communications
equipment. These are all sectors where patents are reasonably important. In contrast,
our inability to find creative destruction in computers is probably related to the relative
unimportance of patents in that sector (Bound, et al; Levin et al), rather than a low rate
of technological change.
    We can also look at variations over time. Again, the most straightforward way to do this
  to
is simply multiply the estimated A,5 and p times the yearly sectoral patent total. If we do
this, and average over sectors, we get the path shown in Figure 3.8. Beginning at a high of

 55The time and sector intercepts are not generally significant.
 55See, e.g., Bound, et al (1984).


                                                     40
about 7 percent in 1965, creative destruction falls quickly into the range of 3 to 4 percent,
and then falls close to zero at the end of the sample period in 1981. There is, however,
reason not to take the time variation in total patents in these data too seriously. First, it
is affected by the changing firm composition in the unbalanced panel. In addition, total
patents in this sample fall precipitously in 1980 and 1981, because of the way the dataset
was created.57 For these reasons, the very low         rates at the end of the sample period should
probably be ignored.


           4       GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM, CALIBRATION, AND

                   IMPLICATIONS OF THE EMPIRICAL RESULTS

    Inthe previous section we used the basic structure of the growth model presented in
Section 2 to guide our search for empirical manifestations of creative destruction and knowl-
edge spillovers. In this section we go back to the model itself and examine its properties,
using the estimates obtained in the empirical section for the parameter values. The primary
purpose of this section is simply to explore the static and dynamic behavior of the model
using reasonable parameter values. We will also, however, go a little further and examine
some strong positive and normative conjectures that arise from the behavior of the model
when calibrated with the empirical parameter values.
   In Section 2 we identified the following key parameters: p, cs 6, L, -y and            .
                                                                                       Section 3

provides estimatesof a, -y, and fi, as well as of changes in 8 (but not its level) and in a over
time. Initially, we focus our attentionon the average value of the parameters, and postpone
the discussion of the impact of changes in parameters until later in this section. We set
the discount rate, p, to o03,se and use average U.S. consumption growth togetherwith the

  '7Recall that the data is patents by year of application. Because the dataset was created in 1982, some
ultimately successful applications from 1980 and 1981 had not yet been granted, leading to a systematic
undercountin those years.
  Qualitative cooclusions are not affected by other "reasonable" assumptions about the discount rate, p.


                                                  41
steady state of the model to calibrate S and .t. In order to calibrate these parameters, we
first need to go back to the model itselfand characterize its equilibrium.

    The dynamical system that emerges from the model described in Section 2 has a range
of parameters for which innovation is unprofitable so growth does not occur. We focus our
analysis on cased where steady state growth is strictly positive.
   From the innovation function, labor market equilibrium and free entry conditions, we
obtain an expression for the rate of innovation as a function of the productivity of labor in
research and of the value of the leading idea in units of consumption:


                                                                                             (17)


Replacing this in the valuation equation (5), yields the dynamic equatioo for V as a function
of itself and B:
                                      (              -\      a
                                      \    1—a        /    1—a                               (18)

Finally, the dynamicequationfor labor productivity in researchis obtained by differentiating
(10) with respect to time:



which combined with (17) yields:


                                                                                            (19)


    Equations (18) and (19), together with initi conditions on 8 and a transversality condi-
tion, form a self-containeddynamical system. After solving for the paths of 8 aod l' from
this system, the rate of innovation can be recovered from equation (17).

      Since we found large values of — i.e. a high speed of diffusion of ideas — in the previous
section, it is convenient to first characterize the case where diffusion is infinitely fast; this
is   a good approximation and it has the advantage of ao extremely simple set of dynamic

                                                42
equations.
   If there are no lags in the diffusion of knowledge, the system has no transitional dynamics.59
As shown in Section 2, in this case        = S//3; which by (18) and the transversalitv condition
implies:
                                      V=x
                                       a
                                            1—a
                                                            1
                                                                 -.

while the rate of innovation is:


                                                                                                        (20)


and consumption growth is:

                                                                                                        (21)


   These expressionsprovide a simple setup to understand the main role of a.               .   /3   and p in

determining the equilibrium valuation of new ideas, knowledge spillovers and the economy's
rate of growth:6°


           DV pV2                ON   N                      3 / oN \ N
           —=———>0;              —=————-<0;                  —(————=—-—>0,                            (22a)
           Do  a2                Da  1—a                     Da\1—a) 1—a

               DV        fi DV       LV2              ON          ON      (1 — a)L
                                               '                                     >0                (92b
               D         /38/9        /3              08        /33/9         /9

                        DV        (1—a)V2                511
                                       a       <0;       —=--(1—a)<0.                                  (22c)
                        op                                 op
   When the degree of substitutability among goods (a) rises, the value (per unit of con-
sumption) of a new idea rises.- This may seem surprising since an increase in a lowers the

  59Obviously, anticipated changes will lead to non-steady state dynamics. The absence of transitional dy-
namics refers to the response of the system to a once and foe all unexpected change in a constant of the
model.                                    -
  600ne could also study the impact of L, but we take this as a nuisance parameter. It is at best unclear
which is the appropriate normalization.


                                                   43
 markup charged by firms. There are, however, three other effects that must be considered.
 First, as discussed in Section 2, the fall in the markup is outweighed by an increase in the
    of the market faced by new ideas (the "scope effect'), so that the initial profit of the
 size
 newest idea rises with a. Second, an increase in a raises creative destruction, which reduces
 expected future proflts and hence the initial value of ideas. Third, it can be shown that
 from these effects alone, the ratio of the value to the wage would fall.61 From the free
                                                                                           entry
 condition, this would be inconsistent with positive invention. Therefore, there must be an
 endogenous decline in creative destruction (fall in N) in order to offset the fall in the value
 to wage ratio.62
    The impact of an increase in the potency of spillovers (6) as well as that of a reduction
in the technological destructiveness of new ideas                ()
                                                        is shown in equation (22b). They
increase the pace of innovation, and through the impact of this on creative
                                                                                 destruction,
lower the equilibrium value of new ideas.52 Finally, equation (22c) shows that an increase
in consumers' impatience, p, lowers both the value of new ideas and the rate of invention
through standard discounting and savings mechanisms.

    Although the intuition as well as the sign of the relations described above survive the
introduction of a finite      7'
                           it is worth describing briefly the implications of frictions in the
diffusion of ideas.
    If 'p is finite, the system exhibits transitional dynamics since "the clocks have to                      syn-
chronize to the new pace." That is, if information diffuses slowly, "shocks" that lead to
changes in N disrupt the balance between technological obsolescence and increases in the

   51An important mechanism behind the monotonic relationbetweengrowth and markups is that labor
                                                                                                              sopply
is completely inelastic. If this assumption is relaxed, then as the wage falls
                                                                               (i.e. markopa rise) there seooid be
a reduction in resources available and, under the appropriate fonctional assumptions,       an eventoal decline in
equilibrium growth.
   521n the y finite case, the eadogenous decline in creative destruction would not
                                                                                      completely offset the initial
decline in the value to wage ratio.
   53Alternatively, the fall in equilibrium value can be explained in term of the increase in the productivityof
research. This and the creative destruction interpretationsof the decline in value are related in
                                                                                                        equilibrium
by the free entry condition.
   e4Thl5 is particularlytrue for large values of y, as is the one estimated in the            section.
                                                                                     empirical



                                                        44
base   of knowledge. Transitional dynamics occur                while   the new level of 9 that restores this
balance is reached. Before discussing dynamics, however, it is worth pausing to study the
steady state and to calibrate the remaining parameters using average U.S. growth data.
      The steady   sate can be found in closed form, although the equations are somewhat less
informative than before:


                          —   p(1_a)fi_7+(p(.l_a)fly)2+467L(1_a)                                       23
                                                   2fi(i—a)L


                                                          2/3

and

                                                                                                       (23c)

   It is apparent from these equations that using average growth data only (which we do
here), it is neither possible nor relevant to separate L from 6; thus we set L = 1. We can
now recover all the parameters of the model, which are summarized in Table 4.1. In words,
we obtained -y     = 0.7 directly from the citation function, and /3 = 1.67 is the inverse of the
          on the change in the number of ideas, as normalized in the citation function, in
coefficient
the growth equation. We recover cv from the average of our creative destruction estimates,
0.035, which corresponds to         aN/(l — a), and the averageof N, 0.042. The estimate                of n
so obtained is 0.463. The last parameter, 6, is obtained from the steady state equilibrium
equation fbr N (equation 23b) and is equal to 0.199.

   Figure 4.la plots the steady-state growth rate for an economy with the same base pa-
rameters of the U.S. and a range of values of cs the index of creative destruction, and 6,
the spillover potency index, that contain the U.S. values. Figure 4.lh does the same for the
equilibrium value/consumption ratio. U.S. "average" equilibrium is depicted by a black dot

 65For this we use that N     = N'°5//3, and N' = 0.07. Our sample for the estimate of creative destruction
is 1965-1981, while we   use the period 1960-1989 to compute the average change in ideas.


                                                     45
  in each figure.
     One of our main empirical findings is that productivity of labor in research has declined
 sharply over the sample, and this seems to be mostly due to a decline in 8. According to
 figure 4.1, this ought to lower the equilibrium rate of innovation, N, and raise the value of a
 new patent to consumption ratio, V. On the other hand, our
                                                                 empirical evidence on creative
 destruction suggests that a has decreased over time; this should raise N and V.
    Splitting the sample into two periods, 1960-74 and 1975-89, associating the 1965-74
 and  1975-81 averages of creative destruction to each of these periods,
                                                                         respectively,ee we
 can calculate the model's predicted steady-state
                                                  changes in N and V. We find that the
 effect of the decline in the power of spillovers dominates the effect of the decline in creative
 destruction on equilibrium growth, leading to a prediction that N should have fallen
                                                                                               by
 about 50 percent from the first to the second periods. With respect to value, both of these
 effects go in the same direction, leading to a predicted increase of about 25
                                                                                 percent in the
 value to consumption ratio.

                                                                          ')
     In reality, N (the patent series adjusted by our estimated fell about 15
                                                                              percent.      If we
proxy the value to consumption ratio by the ratio of stock prices to nominal consumption,
we find an actual rise in V of about 20 percent.67 Thus the
                                                              qualitative predictions of the
model are confirmed, though the actual magnitudes changed less than the model
                                                                                                      implies
they should have.

    We conclude this section by briefly addressing several issues that are
                                                                           tangential to our
main concerns: (i) a description of the transitional dynamics of the model;
                                                                            (ii) the long run
effect of changes in the speed of diffusion of ideas          ()
                                                        and in technological destructiveness
(fi); and (iii) optimal R&D subsidy rates.
    Figure 4.2 shows the phase diagram corresponding to a case with non-instantaneous dif-

   55Remember that the sample used to estimate the path of creative destruction
                                                                                  goes from 1965 to 1981 only.
   57Thsre ars several reasons to think that an index of
                                                           aggregate stock prices is not a great proxy for the
value of patents. In particular, ths number of patents a firm bus is likely to be an important               of
the value of its stock and, for the experiments we discuss hers, value and number of patents at. component
                                                                                                 the firm level
are likely to be negatively correlated.



                                                     46
fusion. Point A corresponds to a steady state equilibrium with the parameter configuration
of the 1960-74 period described above, while point B illustrates the steady state emerging

from the 1975-89 period. The thick line with srrows illustrates the saddle path of the new
equilibrium. Since in reality the shift in parameters may have been slow and the decline in
6 seems to have compromised only newer cohorts, it seems unreasonable to assume that the
actual dynamics can be characterized in terms of the new saddle path. Instead, a path like
the one depicted by the thin line with arrows seems more likely.

    Figure 4.3. illustrates the long run effect of changes in the speed of diffusion of ideas (-y)
and in technological destructiveness (fi), with the black dots representing the steady state
of an economy with the parameter values we found for the U.S. It shows that 'y is large,
in the sense that further increases in it do not increase equilibrium growth significantly.
An increase in the destructiveness parameter fl by lowering the equilibrium productivity of
labor in research, reduces equilibrium growth and raises the required value of a new idea.

    Finally, we address the optimal subsidy issue, focussing on the case where y — cc. We
also assume that the subsidy to labor used in research is financed with a tax on labor used
in production of consumption goods.
    Setting L = = 1, and letting s be the subsidy rate (in terms of units of consumption).
it can be shown that in equilibrium, N is:


                                                                                                              (24)


which is clearly maximized as a —* 1. As always, however, there is a tradeoff between long
run growth and current consumption. Indeed:

                                                   ___
                                                 6(1-s)         +))C      aS
                                                                                       .                      La)

  58Note   that the initial jump in ü   is possible only   if the initial change ia   involves the poteacy of older
patents.


                                                           47
which, for given N5, is decreasing with respect to s, and reaches zero when s = a. Since the
utility function is logarithmic, the optimal subsidy rate must he less than a.
    Since we have assumed that exogenous technologicalprogress is negligible, we have that
Cs = N, so we can write the present-value utility of the representative agent, U5, as:


                                         U5   =   ln
                                                  Pt.
                                                          Ca +
                                                                  P

Maximizing this equation with respect to s, subject to equations (24) and (25), yields the
optimal subsidy rate,     s:
                                                              —
                                           *—      cs2(6//3       p)
                                                p+a(8/—2p)
    Replacing the parameters calibrated in the previous subsection, yields an optimal subsidy
rate of 33% if p = 0.03. Turning back to equation (24), such subsidy rate almost doubles
the rate of growth of an unsubsidized economy characterized by the parameters calibrated
for the U.S..55


                                       5      CoNcLusioN
    We have constructed a model of economic growth through the creation of new goods, in
which the phenomena of creative destruction and knowledge spillovers play prominent roles.
The model has fairly simple and intuitive relationships between the existing public stock of
knowledge    and new ideas, between new ideas and growth, and between grotvth and the value
of ideas   or blueprints. The    model produces endogenous growth for appropriate parameter

values, and it highlights the importance of the speed of diffusion of existing knowledge and
the endogenous rate of knowledge obsolescence.

  ttThs optimal sohsidy rate experiment raises the issue os whether oor ralibratioa exercise should he cor-
rected to consider the fact that la the U.S. the subsidy rate is aos-sero. We do aot think that the precise
oumbers should be taken that literally.



                                                        48
   We implemented the model empirically using patents as proxies for new ideas. First, we
showed that it is possible to use patent citation information to put a fairly rich structure of
knowledge diffusion and knowledge obsolescence onto the notion of research spillovers. We
find that the rate of knowledge nbsolescence rose frnm about 2 or 3 percent per year early in
the century to about 10-12 percent per year at the end of the 1980s. Our results show that
the process of knowledge diffusion is quite rapid; indeed sufficiently rapid that the model
performs essentially as if diffusion were instantaneous. In this context it is important to
note that the lag we are measuring is between the grant date of the cited patent and the
grant date of the citing patent. It seems plausible to view diffusion as beginning with the
patent grant, since that is when the patent information is public. But the grant date of the
citing patent is, of course, several months to a few years after its application date, and we
take application date as being associated with invention. Thus, from the grant date of the
cited patent to the application date of the citing patent would be even a shorter lag. Our
results on the speed of diffusion seem to be broadly consistent with earlier work, particularly
that of Mansfield (1985), who found that 70 perccut of product iruiovationswere known and
understood by rivals within 12 months of the innovation, and only 17 percent took longer
than 18 months.
    This rapid diffusion rate prevented the large influx of foreign patenting in the U.S. in
recent decades from lowering U.S. R&D productivity even further: with diffusion this rapid.
the spillovers from the foreign knowledge creation approximately balance the increased rate
of knowledge obsolescencethat they also create.
    This "good news" is overshadowed, however, by a measured reduction in the usefulness
of existing public knowledge in generating new knowledge. as reflected in citation patterns.
The estimated spillover potency (6) fell by a factor of 5 over the century. with roost of this
occurring in the first few decades, and a fall of about 25 percent in the post-war period.
When we translatethis into the change in effective accumulated public knowledge, we predict
a fall in the private productivity of research inputs of about 30 percent between the late
1950s and 1990.


                                              49
    We then move to the estimation of the innovation production function, the relationship
 between aggregate U.S. private research inputs and aggregate U.S. idea generation, as
                                                                                       rep-
 resented by U.S. patents. We confront the well-known "puzzle" of the large fall in the ratio
 of U.S. patents to U.S. research inputs in the post-war period. The citation function esti-
mation could, potentially, explain this in 2 ways. If the size of patents was increasing fast
enough, then the idea/research-input ratio may not be falling even if the patent/research-
input ratio is. Second, if the effective stock of public knowledge is falling, then the reduced
spillovers would explain the fail in the productivity of private research inputs. We find
evidence   of both effects, although the increase in patent size peaks in the early 1970s. so
 that our ideas/research-input ratio actually falls faster than the patent/research-input ratio
 after that. For the entire 1958-1990 period, we can explain the overall patent-productivity
 trend quite well, but we do not explain the accelerated decline in research productivity that
occurred in the late 1970s, nor the apparent reversal of the trend in the mid l9SOs. One
difficulty with understanding the very recent movements is that these patents have not had
much time to be cited, so our estimates of both 8 and           are very imprecise for the late
 1980s. Given the large increases in the number of patentsin this period, it \vill be interesting
to see how these patents fare as time goes by.
    As noted, we also found evidence that the "size" of patents has grown over the
                                                                                         century,
increasing by a factor of 3 from 1900 until 1940, and then by an additional 20 percent
until it peaked in about 1970. This is consistent with previous conjectures about changes
in the propensity to patent. The early rise, in particular, is probably traceable to
                                                                                     changes
in the legal treatment of patents and the "corporatization" of research. (See Sehmookler
(1966).) It may also be that innovation has become more "systems" oriented as it has
become increasingly science-based, so that each "invention" is actually a larger and larger
package of component ideas. It is also interesting that we find the size of patents to he
falling in recent years. There are two major institutional changes in the 1980s that might
have been expected  to affect the propensity to patent, in opposite directions. First, patent
application fees were increased, and fees for patent renewal were instituted for the first

                                              50
time in the U.S. in 1981. These changes should have operated to increase the threshold for
inventors to decide to make a patent application, reducing the propensity to patent. At
approximately the same time, there has been a perceived increase in the strength of patent
enforcement in the U.S. This makes patents more valuable and should thereby increase the
propensity to patent. Our results suggest that the latter effect may he empirically more
important.7°
   Next we looked      at the relationship between the rate of idea creation and consumption
or productivity growth. We showed     that, after removing high-frequency movements, the
growth rates of either consumption or labor productivity display movements over the last
several decades that correlate quite closely with the rate of invention that we measured.
Thus in our model the productivity slowdown the long fall in the smoothed growth rate
                                                         —



of productivity from the mid 1960s — can be traced back to a fall in the rate of new product

creation, which itself can be traced to a fall in research productivity connected to a decrease
in the potency of old knowledge in generating new ideas.
   The coincidence in timing of the fall in patenting in the 1970s and the slowdown in
aggregate productivity has been noted by others. We have a story consistent with those
facts, but we cannot push it too hard because so many of our assumptions about lags
between observables and unobservables cannot be tested.
   Our final empirical innovation is the measurement of rates of creative destruction, using
data on patents and value at the firm and sectoral level. Unfortunately, these estimates can
only be made for a shorter time period in the 1960s and 1970s, because the construction
of patent totals for these firms in the 1980s has not been carried out. This exercise does

give reasonable estimates for many sectors, varying between 0 for Petroleum Refining and
25 percent per year for Drugs, with a mean of about 3.5 percent per year. The estimated
time path of the average rate of creative destruction is some\vhat surprising, falling from a
high of 7 percent in the mid-60s towards zero by 1981. A challenge for futurc work will be

  75As can be seen from Figure 3.5, there has been a large iscresse is the patest/research ratio is the late
1980s.This woald also suggest a possible rise in the propessityto palest (fall in the size of patests).


                                                    51
    to try to find alternative data series that
                                              would permit a richer analysis of rates of creative
    destruction by sector and over time.
       We then took the empirical parameter estimates back to the model, and showed that the
    observed declinein the productivity of research has implications for the innovation rate, the
    growth rate and the value of new ideas that are all roughly born out. The model simulation
    also emphasizes the importance of the apparently rapid diffusion rate ofknowledge. The fact
that knowledge diffuses rapidly prevented what could otherwise have been an even greater
productivity slowdown in the 1970s and early 1950s.
  Stepping hack from particular parameter estimates and the consistency of particular
-




model blocks withobserved trends, we have suggested an organizingframework for empirical
research on the contribution of industrial innovation to aggregate growth. We helieve that
this framework offers many avenues for fruitful future work. Having demonstrated that the
citation function works reasonably well, it would he interesting to go back to it and focus in
more detailon issues of stochastic structureand identification. Further, to really understand
the significance and interpretation of the observed decline in spillover potency, we need to
look    at the variations   across sectors and geographic space in the size of patents, and in
the diffusion and     obsolescence rates.
                                       In principle, one could categorize citing patents by
technologicalsector, and by the national origin or U.S. state of origination. This would allow
one to put a finer structureon our homogenous, public good called knowledge, examining,
for example, whether foreigners are slower to pick up knowledge in U.S. patents than are
Americans. One could also, to some extent, examine whether knowledge seems to have a
private component, by looking at whether the firm cites its own patents more often or more
rapidly than it does patents owned by other firms.7'
   Consideration of cross-country citation patterns suggests that more thought needs to
be given to how to think about the rate of invention, the rate of consumption growth and

  71There is evideace, for example that such 'sslf-citatioas" are more prevaleat for private firms thsa for
universities, and that they come aooaer io time than aon-self-citationa. See Trajtcnhcrg, Hcodcrsoo aad Jaffs
(1992).



                                                    52
the stock of public knowledge in an open economy. We have modelled U.S. consumption
                                                                                         the
growth as depending on U.S. invention, U.S. invention as depending on U.S. research, hut
"public" stock of knowledge availableto U.S. researchers as being the worldwide stock. With
respect to each of these, our assumption seems superior to the alternative polar extreme,
but reality is probably somewherebetween the extremes.
   An interpretation     of the declinein 8, is that research is steadily becoming "narrower" and

hence generates fewer spillovers because each new idea is relevant to a smaller and smaller
set of technological concerns. Empirical testing of this notion would necessitate incorporat-
ing multiple dimensions of product quality into the model, so that there would be a notion
of "technological distance" between different inventions.72 This could perhaps he imple-
mented empirically using the patent classification information,73 although the classification
information is not available in computerized form for patents before the late 1960s.
   Finally, it would be interesting to look at the connections among the private valoe of
particular inventions, the creative destruction they produce, and the knowledge spillovers
they generate. To some extent, one would expect that important patents would he high on
each of these scales, but ideas also probably vary in the magnitude of hoth the negative and
positive externalities they generate.




  72Ariel Pskes eniphssizes this point in his Discussion of this psper.
  73A version of this is presented in Trsjtenberg, Henderson and Jaffe (1992).


                                                     53
                                         REFERENCES
  1. Aghion, P. and P. Howitt (1992), "A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruction,"

    Econometrica 60-2, March, 323-351.

 2. Bound,   J.,   et   al (1984), "Who Does R&D and Who Patents," in Z. Griliches, ed.,
    R&D, Patents and Productivity, Chicago: University of Chicago Press

 3. Cockburn, lain,      and Z.   Griliches (1988), "Industry Effects   and Appropriahilitv Mea-
    sures in the Stock Market's Valuation of R&D and Patents," American Economic
    Review, 78(2), pp. 420-423

 4. Cohen, W.M. and S. Kiepper (1992), "A Reprise of Size and R&D," mimeo, November.

 5. Evenson, R. (1991), "Patent        Data by Industry: Evidence for Invention Potential   Ex-
    haustion?" in Technology and Productivity, the Challenge foT Economic Policy. OECD.
    Paris
 6. Gort, M. and S. Klepper (1982), "Time paths in the diffusion of product innovations,"
    The Economic Journal, 92, September, 630-653.

 7. Griliches, Zvi (1990), "Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey," Journal

    of Economic Literature, 28(4), pp.      291-330

 8. Griliches, Zvi (1989), "Patents: Recent Trends and Puzzles," Bros 1cing Papers on

    Economic Activity, Microeconornics, pp 291-330

 9. Griliches, Zvi, ed. (1984), R&D, Patents and Productivity, Chicago: University of
    Chicago Press

10. Griliches, Z. (1979), "Issues in Assessing the Contribution         of R&D to Productivity
    Growth," Bell Journal of Economics,

11. Grossman, Gene M.        and Elhanan Helpman (1991a), Innovation and Growth in the
    Global Economy, Cambridge: The MIT Press.

                                                54
12. Grossman, Gene M.    and ElhananHelpman (1991b). "Quality Ladders in the Theory
      of Growth," Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, 557-586.

13. Hall, B., ci   al (1988), "The R&D Master File," NBER Technical Working Paper No.
      72

14.   Hall, B., Z. Griliches and 3. Hausman (1986), "Patents and R&D: Is there a Lag?."
      International Economic Review, 27(2), pp. 265-283

15.   Hausman, J., B. Hall and Z. Griliches (1984), "Econometric Models for Count Data
      with sn Application to the Patents-R&D Relationship," Economctrica, 52(2). pp.
      909-938

16. Jaffe, A (1986), "Technological Opportunity and Spillover of R&D: Evidence from
      Firms' Patents, Profits and Market   Value," American Economic Review, (76)5. pp.
      984-1001

17. Jaffe, A, M. Trajtenberg and R. Henderson(1993), "Geographic Localizationof Knowl-

      edge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
      forthcoming (NBER Working Paper No. 3993)

18. Kortum, S. (1993), "Equilibrium RScD and the Decline in the Patent-R&D Ratio:
    U.S. Evidence," American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, forthcoming

19. Levin, H., ci    al (1987), "Appropriating the Returns from Industrial Research and
      Development," Broolcings Papers on Economic Activity, 1987:3, pp. 784-829

20. Mansfield, E. (1985), "How rapidly does new industrial technology leak   out?," The
      Journal of Industrial Economics 84-2,   December.

21. Mansfield, E., M. Schwartz and S. \Vagner (1981), "Imitation Costs aud Patents: An

      Empirical Study," The Economic Journal       91, 907-918.




                                              55
 22. Mansfield, E., etal (1977), "Social and Private Rates of Return from Industrial Inno-
     vation," Quarterly Journal of Economics,

 23. Merton, R.K. (1965), On the Shou1der of Giants, New York

 24. Pakes, A. (1986), "Patenting as Options: Some Estimates of       the Value   of Holding
    European Patent Stocks," Econometrica, 54(4), pp. 766-784

 25. Pakes, A. (1985), "On Patents, R&D and the Stock Market Rate of Return.' Journal
     of Political Economy, 95(2), pp. 390-409

 26. Fakes, A. and Z. Griliches (1984), "Patents and R&D       at the Firm   Level: A First
     Look," in Griliches, ed. (1984)

27. Pakes, A. and M. Simpson (1989), "Patent Renewal Data,"
                                                            Brookings Papers on Eco-
    nomic Activity, Microeconomzcs

28. Rorner, P. M. (1990), "Endogenous Technological Change," Journa.l     of Political Ecore-
    omy, 98, pp. S71—S102.

29. Segerstrom, Paul S. (1991), "Innovation, Imitation and Economic Growth." Journal
    of Political Economy.

30. Schankerman, M.      and A. Fakes (1986), "Estimates   of the Value of Patent Rights in
    European Countries during the Post-1950 Period," Economic Journal, 96, pp. 1077-
    1083

31. Schmookler, J. (1966), Invention and Economic Growth, Camhridge: Harvard Univer-

   sity Press

32. Schumpeter, J. (1942), Capitalism, Socialism   and Democracy.   New York: Harper

33. Stokey, N.L. (1992), "R&D and Economic Growth," mimeo, June.



                                           56
34. Trajtenberg, M., R. Henderson and A. Jaffe (1992), "Ivory Tower Versus Corporate
    Lab: An Empirical Study of Basic Research and Appropriahilitv," NBER Working
   Paper No. 4146, August 1992




                                        57
                  TABLE   3.1:   PATENT STATISTICS BY CITING COHORT
           number    average                               modal
             of       total  citations average median       lag     average    median
citing     sample sample made per lag in       lag in       in       lag in    lag in
year       patents citations patent     years   years      years    patents patents
1975         694     3493      5.03     15.30     9         2        838,442    631,512
1976         689     3352      4.87     14.67     8         2        820,938    569,471
1977         650     3322      5.11     15.21     8         2        857,036    580,613
1978         651     3385      5.20     14.93     8         3                   578,342
                                                                    846,948
1979        443      2391      5.40     15.65     9         3       891,220     644,482
1980        648      3690      5.69     15.67     9         4       883,639    624,897
1981        650      4044      6.22     16.12     9         3       908.679    611,175
1982        571       3716          6.51    16.22    10     4       927,214    677,083
1983        550       3520          6.40    15.99    10     5       914,550    658,850
1984        662       4058          6.13    15.39    10     3       887.513    641,609
1985        706       4733         6.70     16.10    10     3       924,547    632,644
1986        700       4801         6.86     16.31    11     2       952,094    704,355
1987        821       5665         6.90     16.39    11     2       970,055    703,255
1988        766       5487         7.16     15.77    10     3       958,933    650,782
1989        932       7130         7.65     16.43    11     2      1,003,940   728,840
1990        928       7458         8.04     15.35    10     3                  713,108
                                                                    986,169
1991        935       7017         7.50     16.39    10     3      1,056,534   737,182
1992        596       4515         7.58     16.46    10     3      1,082,150   761,274
All yrs.   12592     81777
              TABLE 3.2:       CITATION FUNCTION REGRESSION RESULTS
                     Parameter          1       2       3       4

                           y           .816   .703    0.707    0.705
                                      (.019) (.015) (0.012) (0.016)
                                       .074   .062
                                      (.001) (.001)
                        1973          1.000   1.000   1.000    1.000

                                      1.244   1.444   1.495    2.066
                                      (.028) (.027)   (0.012) (0.021)
                       MSE            0.184   0.130   0.124    0.122
                  2 (LLK-LLKpc)         —     537.6    70.6     15.0

Notes:
Dependent variable: Samplecitations from year t to year s/((Sample patents)(total patents)).
Sample: t from 1975-1992; s from 1900 to
* See Figure 3.2.
Estimates of j976 —      are omitted to conserve space.
(LLK-LLKpc): log-likelihoodminus the log-likelihood of the previous column.
                       TABLE     3.3: INNOvATIoN FUNcTIoN RESULTS
                          I    &       S-E/Pop. R&D R&PI
              Parameter          1                             4

                  c           -0.012    -0.013     0.002    -0.009    -0.013
                              (0.008)   (0.007)   (0.009)   (0.062)   (0.007)
                  p            0.953    0.934      0.887     0.912     0.934

                  i           (0.069)
                               -0.380
                              (0.134)
                                        (0.062)
                                        0.002
                                        (0.056)
                                                  (0.076) (0.074)
                                                  -0.133    -0.042
                                                  (0.133) (0.052)
                                                                      (0.062)
                                                                      0.028
                                                                      (0.056)
                              0.759     0.259     0.188     0.207     0.254
                              (0.223)   (0.071)   (0.189) (0.104)     (0.071)
                LLI<           180.0    182.4      176.6    177.9     178.6

        Dependent variable: t,b weighted aggregate US priority patents by year of applica-
tion.
Sample: 1958-1989.
              TABLE 3.4:    GROWTH EQUATION REGRESSION RESULTS

                Parameter       1
                             -0.0092 -0.0098     -0.0248 -0.0311
                             (0.0044) (0.0032)   (0.0132) (0.0083)
                    .\        0.6121   0.5999     0.5162   0.5440
                             (0.0629) (0.0434)   (0.1872) (0.1128)
                     p           —     0.9037        —     0.8993
                                 —                   —
                                       (0.042)            (0.0362)
                    R2          —        -          -        -
                   LLK        5.752    7.237      4.697    6.315


N:    Dependent variable: smoothed growth rate of US consumption expenditure
Sample: 1958-1989
             TABLE 3.5:    STATISTICS FOR CREATIVE DESTRUCTION SAMPLE FIRMS



                                                                     firm                   average
                                              average  patents    average       average    estimated
           number     average       patents    growth    times       total        total     rate of
             of         total        firm        per    rate of                  sector      sector
                                                                firm/sector                             creative
  sector
    1
    2
            firms
             30
             44
                    observations
                         441
                         684
                                     value
                                    542.23
                                   2351.03
                                              72 firm   value
                                                       0.04455
                                              67.0877 0.0743
                                                                    value
                                                                   352.45
                                                                  3768.71
                                                                                 value
                                                                               l4735.4fi
                                                                               96900.08
                                                                                            patents
                                                                                            167.02
                                                                                                       destruction
                                                                                                         0.0145
                                                                                           2889.46       0.0318
    3        16          226       4070.11    78.0487 0.03546     4622.25     57903.42      1141.43      0.0129
    4        21          318       2652.53    45.1792 0.05299     1123.76     49921.29      907.29       0.2511
    5        16          239        706.93     16.841 0.05748      337.34       9956.7      25.5.97      0.0304
    6        20          303       8224.99    79.8119 0.05127     5477.57     146432.80    l544.fi5      0.0018
    7        24           341       208.75     5.0469 0.07579       143.5      4158.79      112.46       0.0411
    8        21           326      4530.83    58.7791 0.14140      3378.6      88065.11    1209.72      -0.0012
    9        33           489      1286.94    54.1984 0.09234     2063.89      38265.89    1708.56      0.1313
    10       27           418      1607.58    57.2847 0.12077     2159.74      39483.43    1508.15      0.0693
    11       27           393      1147.94     34.916 0.02499     1349.37      27557.80    877.26       0.0246
    12       34           511      1071.48     6.3053 0.03260     226.17       32952.44    205.77       0.0115
   13        31           451       502.24    14.6386 0.08774     695.64       13135.86    418.41       5.0056
   14        13           200      1726.71      15.34 0.08214     475.53      20197.74     195.03       0.0065
   15        33           493      1333.17    16.7728 0.04794     872.42      39768.57     525.17       0.0105
   16        23           342       547.36     9.462 0.07767      518.28       11241.32    207.74       0.0205
   17        49           757      2145.09    41.749 0.06716      3995.33     99554.18     2018.69      0.0205
   18        24           339       587.77    9.6962 0.04060      285.85       11881.87    208.21       0.0084
   19        29           425       751.29    12.4965 0.05136     931.02      19417.10     346.84       0.0101
   20        27           393      300.32     3.4122 0.10359      318.63       6767.87      85.57       0.0152
   21        25           368      632.95     15.9484 0.05136     653.64      13540.95      375.9       0.0297
   All
 sectors    567         8457       1658.93    31.3948 0.06210     1712.52     43774.37     940.05       0.0355

Notes:

Sectors: 1. Adhesives and coatings; 2. Chemicals; 3. Electrochemistry; 4. Drugs; 5. Cleaning and
abrading; 6. Petroleum and refining; 7. Machinery (non-dec.); 8. Computers and data processing;
9. Electrical equipment; 10. Electronic communications; II. Stone, clay and glass; 12. Food; 13.
Instruments; 14. Medical; 15. Primary metals; 16. Misc, consumer goods; 17. Automotive; 18.
Paper and packaging; 19. Refrid. and heat exch.; 20. Static structures; 21. Farm and construction
equipment
            TABLE   3.6:   CREATIVE DESTRUCTION REGRESSION RESULTS


                       Parameter      Coefficient Standard Error
                                           1.383            .245
                            A1                .318          .185
                            A2                .037          .025
                            A3                .040          .019
                            A4             1.034            .297
                            A5                .425          .420
                            A6                 004          .009
                            A7              1.397           .767
                            A8              - .003          .030
                            A9                .283          .089
                            A10               .157          .046
                            A11               .098          .060
                            A12               .187          .238
                            A13               .045          .087
                            14                .135          .178
                            A15               .072          .071
                            A16               .376          .177
                            A17               .038          .018
                             18               .146          .271
                            A19               .108          .063
                            A                 .695          .249
                                                            .158
                            A21               .316

                            P1             -.808              .206
                            P2               .113             .034
                            P3            -.0048            .0016
                       R2   = .0366
                     MSE = .1612


Notes: Dependent variable: firm value growth rate minus sector value growth rate.

Sample: 8457 observations on 567 firms, 1966-1981.
                   Figure 2.1




                                                   F

                                              F
                                          F
                                      F
                                      F
                                     F
                                 F
                                F


z4)                  F
                    F




               F
              F
          F


      F                                           ——a-   A
                                                         B




                      time
       0
       0
0
0      0
0      *                   ()
*      O)
 (1)   I1)
.1-'
*                          0)
 (U                        (0
                           C
 (U    -a                  0
                          -4-)
                           (0
 a)    a)                 -4-,
       L                   0
 0)    0)
U-     U-
             OOOLCS'8Je
    Figure 3.2a:    bt
      Cc5s    consti




             time

Figure 3.2b:    l't and ó




             time
                       Figure 3.3: Technological Obsolescence
d
(\J
d
0
a
P
0
CD
P
0
0
d
(\J
C
0
0
0
a     1900   1910   1920    1930    1940          1950   1960   1970   1980   1990
                                           time
                                            time
1990   1986    1982           1978   1974          1970         1966      1962       1958    1954 ci
                   I           I      I             I
                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                  ('J
                                                                                                  0
                                                                                     — — —
                                                                         cnst.   ó                ci
                                                                          free   ö                0
                                                                                                  (\J
                                                                                                  (\J

                                                                                                  d
                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                  ('J

                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                  ('J
                                                        —                                         (0
         —                                                  — — —
                      —                                             %
              —   — —     —                                             — —
                                                                            — _. — — — — —        0
                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                  (\J
                                                                                                  w
                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                  In
                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                  In
                                                                                                  (\J

                                                                                                  D
                                                                                                  C


                                                                                                  D
                                                                                                   c




                                          3.4: Figure
                           Figure 3.5a: Patents/Research

 C'J




                                                                —
                                                                       PAT/RD
 p
c'J                                                                    PAT/ENG
                                                                       PAT/RDP
                                                                       P AT/EN G P
                                                                    —. PAT/ROD
                             \                                  •




0


54     1958        1962     1966   1970          1974   1978   1982       1986       1990
                                          time

                             Figure 3.5b: N/Research

d
                  -,   \                                        —
C%J


d        \/                                                     —


C
              /
                             \                                  -—
                                                                       J/ENG
                                                                       gJ/PDP
                                                                       J/ENGP
d                                                                      /RDC

0
CD

q
0

0

0_
c'j
54     1958        1962    1986    1970      1974       1978   1982       1986       1990
                                          time
                    Figure 3.Sa: 9      for different ys
                               6        cnst.


c'J


0




       ROCy=0.7]
         -
        —
             8[y=OOO1]

54    1958   1962     1966   1970         1974    1978     1982   1986   1990
                                    time

                    Figure 3.6b:        for different ys
                                   ös   free




        —[y=0.7]
        — -  eCy=o.001)
0
54    1958   1962     1966   1970          1974   1978     1982   1986   1990
                                    time
Figure 3.7a: Growth and Innovation




               time

Figure 3.7b: Growth and Innovation




              time
                      Figure 3.8: Creative Destruction
      N
      P
      0
      CD
      P
      0
      U)
  0
Cd
0


0U)   C,.)
>P
(0
U)
L
      0
      0
      d
      D
      P
      D 1964   1988         1972           1976          1990   1984
                                   time
      >
('3   0
0)    0)
C-
0)    JC-
      tJ,
U-    U-
                     Figure 4.2: Phase diagram
    Co




    0

>


    CD




    N



    C
     0.07   0.08   0.09   0.10   0.11   0.12   0.13   0.14   0.15
 '1   U)C-   0)   U-
(0    U)C-   0)   U-
