NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MONOPOLISTIC COMPiciruON AND
INTERNATIONAL TRADE:
RECONSIDERING THE EVIDENCE

David Hummcls
James Lcvinsohn,

Working Paper No. 4389

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1993

This paper is part of NBER's reseaxh program in International Trade and TnvestmcnL Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER Working paper #4389
June 1993

MONOPOLISTIC COMPEnTION AND
INTERNA1IONAL TRADE:
RECONSIDEffiNG THE EVIDENCE

ABSTRACT

In this paper, we test some propositions about international trade flows that are derived

from a model of monopolistic competition developed by Lihanan Helpman. We investigate
whether the volume of trade between OECD countries is consistent with the predictions of a
modal in which all trade is inira-industry trade in differentiated products. We then repeat the test

with non-OECD countries. We also investigate whether the share of inira-industry trade is
consistent with a more gencral theoretical model in which some, but not all, trade is thtraindusiry trade. Our itsults lead us to question the apparent empirical success of these models.
David Hummels
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Aim Arbor, MI 48109

James Levinsolin
Department of Economics
University of Michigan

AM Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER

Monopolistic Competition and International Trade:
Reconsidering the Evidence
David Hummels
University of Michigan
James Levinsoha
Universily of Michigan
National Biizrau of Economic Research

1. Introduction.
This paper is about testing a relatively new thcory of international trade. The life cycle of trade

theories seems to progress as follows. First, some brilliant theorists, say Eli Heckseher and Bethl
Ohlin (1991 translation), arrive at a new theory explaining international trade flows. After a while,

someone comes along, say Wassily Leontiet (1953). and tests the theory. finds that it doesn't do

exceptionally well, and leaves matters generally mucked up. Later, someone else, say Edward
Learner (1984, 1987). comes along and sets matters straight. Maybe the theory works, maybe it
does not, but by the time Learner was done, trade economists more or less knew why the theory
did or did not find support in the data

If those are the three steps in the life cycle of international trade theories, this paper is part
of the second stage. This time around the theory tested is that of monopolistic competition and
international trade. Instead of 1-leckseher and Ohiin, we have Ethanan Helpman and Paul Knigman.

In this paper, we point out some puzzles and paradoxes. We do not provide many answers. At best,

we pave the way for the third stage of the theory's life cycle. At worst, we icave matters confused

and unsettled.

There is a long and distinguished literature examining the theory of international trade and
monopolistic competition. The first papers were by Krugman (1919 and 1981) and Lancaster(1980).

This work was further developed and expanded in Helpman (1981). and it is iiicely summarized in

Helpman and Krugman (1985). This line of work was in part motivated by the observation that

much international trade appears to be in goods that are quite similar. While traditional factor
We are grateful to James Bnnder, Ron Cronovich, Alan Deardorff, Jonathan Eaton, Martin Feldstein, Gene Grossman,
Ethsnn Heiptuan, Anne Krueger, Paul Knigmzn, md Edward Lcain for helpful comments, suggestions, and skepticism.

I

endowments-based explanations of international trade did not explain this empirically relevant
component of international trade, }Ielpman and Krugman showed that a model of monopolistic
competition could.' There are many models of monopolistic competition and international trade.
each with different sets of assumptions. In general, though, these are models in which finns produce

differentiated products with an increasing-returns-to-scale technology, while on the consumption
side, consumers have utility functions that reward product diversity.

There is also a lengthy literature examining the empirical side of this topic. These studies
typically construct aft index of intraindustry trade and investigate what that index is conelated

with? While these studies are certainly interesting, their relationship to the theory of monopolistic
competition and international trade is often tenuous. This is no surprise, since in many cases the
empirical studies preceded Helpman and Krugman's theoretical work. Nonetheless, the theory is
almost old enough to apply for a driver's license, and empirical tests closely linked to the theory
remain scarce. An important cxccpdon to this is a paper by Helpinan (1987) in which he developed

some simple models of monopolistic competition and tested some hypotheses which were directly

motivated by the theory.
Of the many papers that empirically investigate intraThdustry trade, this one. titled "Imperfect
Competition and International Trade: Evidence from Fourteen Industrial Countries," is especially
noteworthy. It constructs hvo very straightforward theoretical models (drawing heavily on Helpman

and Krugman.) These models are designed to yield empirically testable hypotheses. Taking the
theory on its own terms, Helpman then asks whether the data are consistent with two predictions

that fall from the theory.3 Helpmaifs first hypothesis concerns the volume of trade in a model

in which all trade is trade in differentiated products. He next asks whether the share of trade
which is intraindustry is consistent with a model in which some trade is motivated by traditional

factors-based explanations, while the rest of trade is motivated by a model of monopolistic
1 ReCC*2WOtby Donald Davis (1992) shows that i(intralndusciy nde is defined as nile in goods embodying similar
faciors. ndhional (Ricaidlia) bade theay can indeed explain ininindustry bade.

2 See Loenschc and WoItc (1980) for an tidy example and (heeniway and Milner (1987) for a nice ovcrview of these
studies.
Nelpmsn actually itsts three predictions, but (or lessons discussed in section 3, only two are relevant to our data.

2

competition. Using graphical methods and some simple regressions, Helpman finds that the data
appear to be consistent with the models tested.

In this paper, we revisit llelpman's tests and reconsider the evidence. We do not amend
L-Eelpman's theoretical models. for we find no clear way in which to improve upon them. Rather,

we apply a combination of diffennt data and different econometric methods and ask whether

the data stifi support the theory's specific predictions. In the course of our investigation, we
successfully replicate Helpman's results, pose several new puzzles and, in the end, fmd less thaii
overwhelming empirical support for the theory.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2. a model in which &1 trade

is motivated by monopolistic competition is presented. This model generates predictions about

the volume of made. Using Helpman's data set comprised of OECD countries, we re-test the
model's predictions. We also test the model using an alternative data set! In section 3, a more

general model in which some trade is intraindustry while the rest is traditional inter-industry
(Heckscher-OhIin) trade is described. We then test the model's predictions concerning the share of

trade that is intraindusuy. Section 4 concludes by summarizing the puzzles generated by the two
tests of the theory. Two appendices arc. also included. In the first, we gather the derivations of the

estimating equations, while the second describes our data in detail.

2. Monopolistic Competition and the Volume of Trade

We begin with the simplest modeL5 Here. all trade between countries is assumed to be
intraindustry trade. Firms each produce a different variety of a differentiated product with an
increasing returns to scale technology and monopolistic competition prevails. An important and

testable result that falls from this theoretical set-up is that relative country size determines the
volume of trade between countries. This is in contrast to the traditional factor-endowments based

explanations for trade lo which "differences in relative country size. . . have no particular effect
(on the volume of trade)."°
A summary of some prelimirwy resulis using this sort of cat is found in David Hummels and James Ladnsohn (1993).
See Appendix I for a fUlL description of this mode!.
6

From Helpman, 1987, p. 64.

3

Helpman shows that if countries have identical and homothetic preferences and trade is
balanced, then:
VA

GDP'

= CA[i —

(1)

jEA

where:

V' is the volume of trade between countries in group A;

GDP" is the GDP of the group of counties comprising group A;
eA is the share of group A's GDP in relation to world GDP. and

is the share of country j's GDP in relation to group A's GDP.'
The RHS of (1) is a measure of size dispersion that increases as countries become more similar in

size. 'This particular measure of size dispersion falls directly from Helpman' s theoretical model.

Furthermore, theory dictates exactly how relative country size ought to matter. Pot another way,

(1) is a structural equation from a model of monopolistic competition and international tide; it
is not a reduced form equation. Helpman also amends (1) and shows how the equation is altered

in the presence of trade imbalances. Hclpman found that conecting for trade imbalances made.

virtually no difference to his empirical results. We also fmd this to be Irue. For expositional
simplicity, we present only the model and results for the balanced trade case.

Hclpman noted that as countries become more similar in size, the volume of nade as a
proportion of group GDP should increase. To investigate this hypothesis, he selected a subset of
the OECD countries. This seems a judicious choice, for if any group of countries can support the
predictions of a model in which all trade is intraindustry, the OECD countries are likely candidates.

Using this group of countries, he computed the left-hand-side of (1) (the volume of intra-OECD
trade relative to OECD GDP) and the right-hand-side index for every year from 1956 to 1981. This

yielded 26 points which he then graphed. The resulting graph showed a clear positive conelation

between the ratio of inn-group volume of trade to group GDP and the index of size dispersion.
That is, as counuy size became more similar, intra-group trade volume rose, hence confirming the
theory's prediction.
The daivation of (1) j, pmvided in Appendix

1.

4

We found this result surprising. The theory that generated the estimating equation seems quite
restrictive: every good is produced in only one country; all trade is intraindustry; ant] all countries

have identical hornothetic prcfercnces. Nonetheless, the theory appears consistent with the data
We revisit this test and apply more standard econometric methods. HcLpman's original graph

of 26 points, while a prudent methodology given the small sample sizer, did not allow him to
conduct standard hypothesis tests. The theory holds for country groups of any sire. Rather than

aggregating over the entire OECD sample, we opt to treat each country-pair in each year as an
observation. This yields 91 country-pair observations for each of the 22 years for which we have
OECD data (1962-1983). This gives a total of 2002 observations.

Them are. several masons why, even if the underlying theoretical model is correct, the model

might not tit the data exactly in every year for every country-pair. For example. border trade,
seasonal trade, trade restrictions that vary across country-pairs, language. and cultural ties may
encourage or discourage intcrnational trade. Each of these. is basically an explanation of trade that
is unique to pairs of countries, but orthogonal to GDP. (Of these. trade restrictions are the example

for which this assumption is most questionable. We will return to this issue below.) Because these

factors are country-pair specific, they can be accurately modeled as a country-pair fixed effect
There axe also idiosyncratic reasons why the model might not fit exactly even if the underlying

theory is correct Prominent among these is measurement error in the volume of trade. Indexing
country-pairs by I and years by t and taking logs of (1), rearranging yields:
En(V1) = a1 ln[GDPg(1 —

—

+ v+

(2)

where:

eg is the first country's share of country-pair i's GDP,

4 is tbe second country's share of country-pair i's GDP.
=

+ Irt(e) is tbe country-pair fixed effects

and cj is the idiosyncratic component of the disturbance term.
The term p is capturing the effect of the myriad influences on trade flows that arc orthogonal to

the included right- hand-side variable. For cxaznple. one might expect the p for the Japan-Austria
e Is Considered 10 be a constant because we assume, Like Helpmsn, that group ODP as a fraction of world GDP, is
constant over time.

pair to be quite small or negative whereas the p for the Austria-Germany country-pair might be
quite high. That is, for reasons that have nothing to do with country sire, Austria and Germany
trade a lot with one another while Austria and Japan do not.

Prior to estimating (2), we first plot the right-hand-side variable against the left-hand-side
variable.. This is our analog to Helpman's graphical test of the hypothesis. The plot is given in
Figure 1. This plot of over 2000 country_pairLycars shows a clear positive correlation between a
measure of trade volume and country size.

We next estimate (2). Our base-cam estimates are for the fixed effects estimator. The results

are given in the first column of Table 2 The results confirm the simple plot of the data as well
as Helpman's initial findings. The theory works. With a t-statistic of 183.7. there is little doubt
that the particular measure of country size dispersion dictated by the theory is quite important in
explaining trade volumes. Indeed, inclusive of the fixed effects, almost 95 percent of the variation

in trade volume is explained by the model.
There are, though, several reasons why the fixed effects estimate of (2) might be misspecified.

For example, we are treating the p;*s as fixed when in fact they may be random. Column 2 of
Table 1 gives the estimates of (2) when a random effects estimator is employed, and it makes
no difference to the results. Another possible problem is that economic theory suggests that the

disturbance term eg wifi be correlated with the included regressor. That is, if exports receive a
positive shock, trade volume rises, but by an accounting identity, so does GDP. Since a fwErjon of

GDP appears as a regressor, we have an endogeneity problem. The standard solution to this is to
employ an instrumental variables estimator. In this particular case, economic theory suggests some

appropriate instruments. Following the strategy used by James Harrigaii (1992), we use country's
factor endowments as instruments. These are likely to be correlated with GDP and are orthogonal

to idiosyncratic trade shoe k The results with the fixed effects instrumental variables estimator
are gwen in column 3 of Table 2 We fmd that factor endowments am excellent instruments, for
variation in factor endowments explains a very laige share of the variation in GDP. While the theory

suggests that the measure of size dispersion may be correlated with the idiosyncratic disturbance
term, correcting for this makes very little difference. We noted above that if country-pair specific

trade barriers are an important component of the fixcd effect, the fixed effect may be correlated
with GDP. (This would be the case if high trade barriers lead to low GDP.) In this case, the fixed
6

effects estimates remain consistent. but incfficient, while the random effects estimates are biased.

Hence1 the true standard enor may be smaller than the reported one, but since estimates are still
very precisely estimated, this is not a cause for much concern.
Another potential explanation for the remarkable fit of (2) is that the volume of agj and group
GDP may be trending upward over the period spanned by the sample. This might be the

for

example, as trade barriers fell in the European Community. It might also be the casc since we have
nominal dollars on the right-hand-side and left-hand-side of (2) and both arc trending upward. We

investigate how robust our estimates to this concern by estimating (2) using (deterministically)

detrended data. The results ate given in the fourth column of Table 1. Even after sweeping
out trends and all country-pair fixed effects, the results arc still strong, as the cocfficjent on the
measure of size dispersion is stifi quite precisely measured. In the final column of Table 1, we
rcport the estimates that result from simple OLS on the detrended data. The message of this table is

that Even controlling for trends and/or country-pair fixed effects. our regressions strongly support

Helpman's original fmdingY

This is surprising. We began with a simple model of monopolistic competition in which
all trade is trade in differentiated products, and everyone has identical and homothetic tastes.
This model implied a very specific estimating equation in which a very particular index of size
dispersion was predicted to explain trade volume. And it all worked! Is the world really so simple?

To address this question, the model is ie-esthnated using a data set which we believe, a ante,
ls grossly inappropriate for a model of monopolistic competition and internationa] trade. Instead of

using the OECD countries, we create a data set comprised of Brazil, Cameroon, Cohtmbii Congo,

Greece, Ivory Coast, South Korea. Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru. Phillipines, and
Thailand. This group of countries is referred to as the NOECD countries.

Equation (2) is -thiiad using slightly different data definitions. The sample stops in
1977 instead of 1983 because several countries stopped reporting trade data in 1978. Also, we

estimate the equation in levels instead of logs. This is because four of the 1456 observations of
the dependent variable are almost zero. and when one takes logs, they become very large outliers,

and our estimation methods are sensitive to these outliers. Column one reports the fixed effects
We also estimated (2) by adding each country's GDP Iineviy as regressors. Resulcs remain mbust.

estimates. Even for this sample of countries, the particular measure of size dispersion suggested by

the theory matters, and it matters in a precisely measured way. The t-statistic drops to 28. but by
any conventional standard, thu is remarkably significant. Furthermore, the result is robust When
(2) is estimated with NOECD data using random effects, fixed effects instrumental variables, and

detrended data (fixed effects and OLS), the results do not vary much. If the NOECD data set is
applied to (2) in logs rather than levels, the magnitudes of the coefficients are similar to those

reported for the OECD dam set. While using the NOECD data set does not explain as much of
the variation in the volume of trade as was the case with OECD data, the results of Table 2 still

provide strong support for the theory. Put another way, if Table 2 had been presented prior to
Table I, most would agree that the model fit the data welL

What is going on here? What is it about this particular index of country size such that it
so successfully explains trade volumes in such varied data sets? The thcory of monopolistic
competition and international trade predicts the importance of this index of country sire, but, when

we apply the same index to a data set for which the theory is quite inappropriate, it stifi works.
Perhaps what is driving tbc NOECD results also underlies tbe success of the OECD results. We do

not have any definifive answers. It is true that the estimating equation would be correctly specified

in any model in which countries have identical and homothetic tastes and each good is produced
in only one country. Monopolistic competition is only one model which gives rise to this peculiar
pattern of production. So perbaps them is another market structurc as yet unexplored, which gives

rise to the same pattern of production. Perhaps too our understanding of the indeterminate role of

country size in a traditional Hcckschcr-Ohlin model is inconect Even if theoreticians can derive
another credible model of internationally specialized production of every good, the consumption
side of the model is also puzzling. Equation (2) is quite dependent on the assumption of identical

and homothetic preferences across countries. Yet it is reasonable to qucsdon the validity of this
assumption, especially in our NOECD data set. So far, our results, while intriguing and puzzling,

are not especially enlightening. We conclude, though. that something other than a model of
monopolistic competition and international trade may be responsible for the empirical success of
tbe initial attempts to test tbc model.
Our results using the NOECD data set also pore a challenge to a body of literature concerning

the "gravity model of international trade." (For a summary, see Deardorif (1984).) This
8

literature started with the observation that a measure of combined GDP explained frae flows
between countries quite well. For years, this was an empirical regularity in search of a theoretical

foundation. The literature on monopolistic competition and international trade provided that
foundation, for researchers showed that the gravity model was consistent with some models of
international trade and monopolistic comoetition. The results nesented above. thotwh. sunest that

monopolistic competition may not be what is generating the empirical success of our estimating
equation.
3.

A More General Approach
In section 2, we used a model of monopolistic competition to show how the presence of

volume of trade.
intraindusty trade results in a specific and testable hypothesis about the bilateral

One of the underlying assumptions of the first section was that all trade was intraindustry. In
this section, we relax that assumption and assume that some trade is intraindustry and some

inter-industry. We then examine how the fraction of tie that is iniraindusti-y varies between
counties and over time.'°
Thwretical research into the causes of intraindustry trade can be divided into "small numbers"

and "large numbers" explanations, with the label refening to the number of firms, "Small
numbers" models involve intraindusiry tmde in oligopolistic industries. These models come in
many flavors as assumptions concerning homogeneity of product, the firms' strategic variable, and

entry conditions valy. It is well known that the results derived io these "small numbers" models

are often not robust to these varying assumptions. Thcsc models, therefore, are limited use in
constructing general country characteristic hypotheses about intraindustry trade.

'targe numbers" explanations model free entry by firms into increasing returns to scale
industries. We turn again to the model we fmd most convincing, llelpman (1987). He shows there

that the bilateral share of iniraindustry irade increases as two countries become more similar in
10 Our study will focus on county chnctexistlc explanations for inlnindustry flOe (ff1). that Is, 110w diffwences
aaoss couniries explain UT. That Is another, exteive litnar on how intrainduny wade vthes ross indusnies
within counties. The model of monopolistic competition In this paper assumes two types of briusthes, homogeneous rd
differentiated goods. Within each type, frvlustzies ut Identical so ft makes little sense to test Lntnindusty aide viiiation

aaoss them.

9

factor composition."
The intuition for this is as follows. In a model with homogeneous and differentiated goods,
some interindustry trade wifi be motivated by relativ1 factor abundance, and some intraindustry
trade will be motivated by the exchange of varieties of differentiated goods. A standard measure
of intraindustry trade is the Grubel-Lloyd index. The share of intraindustry trade between country

j and k in industry i is given by:

IITk =

(Xk +

where Xep arc exports of industry I from country jto country k. The share Of InITaInCIUSUy iracte

between country j and k. over all industries, is given by:

IITjk =

2 E1 min(X1Jk,X1k)
Ea(Xu* +X,kJ)

The numerator captures two-way trade within industries, and the denominator is the total volume

of trade. More transparently, we can thu of this index as:

=

INTRA

INTRA + INTER'

In a two country, two factor modeL with one homogeneous good sector and one differentiated
goods sector. allow both countries to have identical capital to labor ratios. Then no trade is
motivated by relative factor abundance. That is, INTER = 0, and tbc intraindustry trade index
(IITj*) equals one. Now, perturb the capital to labor ratios. holding relative size constant INTER

increases because there is now a reason for trade motivated by factor differences. INTRA may
decrease, or may stay constant" In either case. the above index will decTease.
We were careful to note that the reallocation of capital and labor must occur holding relative

size constant. We know from section 2 that relative size can have an important effect on the
volume of trade in differentiated products. A reallocation of capital and labor that widened factor
See AppendIx 1 foes fonnsl nainnent of the 2x2z2 case. The result also holds in a model with many countiics, many
goods, and unequal (actor jewanis.

12 See Appendix

1.

10

differences and also changed relative size (for example, making the two countries more equal)

may actually the- intraindustry trade.
Finally, note that this relationship between the similarity of capital-labor ratios and intraindustry

trade has as much, and perhaps more. to do with traditional explanations for trade as it does with

monopolistic competition models. Put another way, if we are to fmd empirical evidence of the
hypothesized relationship between intraindustry trade and factor differences, it must be that trading

patterns are sensitive to factor differences in a way suggested by the Heclcscher-Ohlin model.
To test the relationship between factor differences and the sham of intraindustry trade, Helpman

estimated the below equation on a cross section of 91 country-pairs. using separate regressions for

each year from 1970-1981.

1175k

+rlog

GDP1—GDPk
N1
1k +a2rnutQog GDP',log GDPk)

+ck37flaX(1O9 GDP', log GDP') +

where IITp is the Grubel-Uoyd index for the bilateral trade of a country-pair consisting of
countries j and k, N1 is the population of country j, and an industry is defined as a four-digit

srrc

group.

Per capita GDP is used to proxy factor composition. MINGDP and MAXGDP are

included to control for relative size effects. The model predicts a < 0, a2 > 0, and a3 < 0.
He!pman found that the data supported these predictions. In particular, he found a negative
and significant correlation between factor differences and the IIT,e index, although it weakened

toward the end of his sample.'3 There are. however, two potential problems with his approach.
One. Helprnan uses per capita income as a proxy for factor composition. Two, he does not exploit
the panel nature of his data.

Two problems are posed by the use of per capita income as a proxy for factor composition.
First, it is an appropriate pmxy if there are ooly two factors of production and all goods are traded.

As this is probably not the case, we would like to know to what degree a better measure of factor
composition might alter the results.

Second, this approach runs afoul of a long standing debate on whether per capita income is

proxying factor endowments or consumer tastes. Under (1961) hypothesized that manufactured
13 Specifically, the coefficient on his factor2 diffwvces variable is negative md significant in the first seven years. but
becomes insignificant thereafter. Also, ihefl in theftgression drops steadily from 0.266 in 19701o.039by 1981.

11

products must first be developed for home markets before they can be exported successfully.
Counwies with similar demand structures would develop similar goods for home use and later

export. If per capita income is a good gauge of demand, then two countries with similar per
capita income will have similar demand, and will produce and export similar goods. Krugman
(1980) and Bcrgstxand (1990) have subsequently demonstrated the importance of taste differences

in more rigorous models of monopolistic competition with non-homothetic demand. The empirical
literature has generally interpreted differences in per capita income as a demand side phenomenon,

and found good support for a negative relationship between per capita income and intraindustry
trade.'4 This leads to some confusion as to whether the difference in per capita income is proxying

differences in factor composition. as posit&I by Helpman, or demand structure, as posited by
Under. To address these potential problems with the proxy variable, we alternately employ per
capita income and actual factor data to measure differences in factor composition.
We begin by estimating equations quite similar to (3) for our OECD sample separately for each

year from 1962 to 1983." Instead of using per-capita GDP differences, though. we use per-worker

GD?'6 and actual capital-to-laborratios. The estimating equations. then. are given by:

11T,k =ao + ai1og GDP —

GLPF*
I

+ a2min(log ODE1, log ØQpk)

+a3TmGxQog GDP', log GDPk) +

IITJk =00 +

K-'—Kk

-yy1 cr2rain(1og CDP', log GDP')

(5)

+a3max(log GDP, log GDP') +
where V is the working population of country j and K1 is j's capital stock. For expositional
ease, we label loge GZP! —

L which give differences in income per worker, PWGDPDIF.

Analogously, KLDIF wifi refer to the differences in capital per worker (as in (5)).
14 See Bcrgsirind (19O) aM the liinamrc ciLed thaein.
Unlike the test In the section 2, we do not replicate this test using NOECD data. This is because the NOECD set.
by consirjcdon, contains virtually no inusindustry btde and would therefore be of lithe USC in studying cross-cmmwy
variadon in an 1ff bdn.

We use per workc GD? Instead of pa capila (DP, sbxe the fonna seems more consistent 'Mth the undeilying

theoq.

12

GDP, K (constructed capital stock), and L (labor force) come dircctly from, or are constructed

from, Penn World Tables, Mark V data GDP and K are measured in constant 1985 frtmaflon
prices. Sec Appendix 2 for details.

Equations (4) and (5) are estimated with oixlinary least squares (OLS.) ilTik is an index
varying between zero and one. We apply a logistic transformation to UT so that OLS using the
transformed variable is appropriate. The results are reported in Tables 3 and 4.
Table 3 reports the results of estimating (4). The results arc quite similar to Helpman's.'7 The
cocfflcicnt on PWGDPDIF is negative in each sample year, but is only significant through roughly

half of the sample. The coefficients on MJNGDP and MAKGDP arc consistent with theory, but
only MJNGDP is significant Finally, like Hclpmazi, the explanatory power of the regression drops

steadily over time.

Just as in Hclpman's study, the relationship betwccn the sham of intxaindustxy trade and
differences in factor composition is strongly negative in early years of the sample, but breaks
down in later years. Having replicated Helpman' s results, we turn to the estimation of equation
(5), where per worker income as a proxy for factor composition is replaced with actual factor data

In Table 4. we

that using actual factor data changes the results considerably. The sign on

the factor differences variable, KLDIF, is initially negative, but becomes positive by the end of the

sample. However, in only one year (1963) is this coefficient significantly different from zero. Put
another way, for 21 out of the 22 years in our sample, we cannot reject that there is no rclañonship

between factor differences and the sham of intraindustiy Irade. The coefficients on MJNGDP and

MAKGDP are again consistent with theory, while only MJNGDP is significant for most years.
Finally, the explanatory power of the regression again drops steadily over time.
We noted above that we saw two ways in which one might improve upon Helpman's approach.

The first was to use actual factor data, rather than a proxy. Ibis change in specification changed
the rcsnjts in important ways. The second potential improvement is to take advantage of the panel

nature of the data

—

bat differ in three ways from He1nan's. PhiL, we use pa water income it than pa
The vthables
capita income. Second, PWODPDIF Is measured in constant 1983 dollan. Helpman'z study employed per capita thcome
measured in cwrent dollars. Wben we use * cwrent dour measwe we obtain regression results vay slmlIr to Helpmsn's.
but which 4111cr sllghdy from constant dollar measwts. Third, we apply the logit inesform to UT.

13

By estimating equations (4) and (5) year by year, we ignore the possibility that the reason
the model doesn't fit exactly may be conelated over time for a given country pair. That is, for
reasons outside of the model and resulting specification, intraindustry trade between Japan and the

UK might always be quite low relative to the sample as a whole. Here, the theory provides some

guidance. The comparative statics exercise in question takes two countries, and, holding other
things constant, perturbs their relative capital to labor ratios. The natural experiment this suggests

is to examine the relationship between intraindustiy trade and factor differences as they change
over time for a given country-pair. By looking only at cross-sectional variation, the "holding other

things constant" assumption is far less tenable. This approach may be especially important if
much of observed intraindustry trade is due to idiosyncratic differences between country-pairs that

do not

change

much over time. Examples of such time-stationary idiosyncratic differences might

include geography, seasonal trade, culture and language ties, and trade barriers. ' For example,
in the cross-section, we tiy to ascribe the variability in liT between Germany-Austria and irr
between

Japan-UK to differences in their relative factor endowments. If Germany and Austria are

more similarly endowed than are Japan and the UK, we expect them to have more intraindustry

trade. However, it may be that the "similar factor" effect is swamped by the fact that Germany
and Austria are next door to one another while Japan and the UK ate thousands of miles away, or

that Germany and Austria belong to a customs union
To examine the relationship between intraindustry trade and factor differences over time, we

want to pool our 22 years into a single panel. This estimation approach requires a constant dollar

measure for the factor differences variable, if nominal values are employed, currency inflation
will cause this variable to trend up over time.

We first estimate a panel data version of (5) in order to pick up both cross-sectional and time
series variation in lITiki. The estimating equation becomes:

IITjk,t ao + al log I

— + a2mznQog GDP/, log GDPt)

(6)

+cx3maxQog (3DPI, log GDP) +
where

j

k indexes a country-pair as before and t now indexes time.

IS

Previous CtSS-eCtIOnAI studies (sec Locrcschcr and WoItc, 1980) have tried to capture these cffccts with dummy
vaiablcs, and consisteniiy found them to be significant

14

We also estimate a variant of (6) which includes a vector of country-pair specificfixed effects,
I'jk. thereby sweeping out all of the cross-sectional variation.19 Hence we have:

K'K + crntin(log GDP/, log GDP)

LT7jk1t =cxilogl- - —

(7)

+a3rnaz(log GDPf, log GL)Pt) + i/IL + fp,
The OLS results using either income per worker or capital per worker as a regressor are
reported in the firn two columns of Table 5. The results differ considerably depending on which

regressor is included. The income per worker variable is negative and higffly significant, while
the capital per worker variable is not significantly diierent from zero. These results are consistent
with those reported in Tables 3 and 4. Treating the data as a panel does not appear to change the
basic message of Tables 3 and 4; namely, that using actual factor data instead of a proxy matters.
For both OLS regressions. the. coefficients on MINGDP and MAXGDP are consistent with theory

and precisely estimated.

Fixed effects estimators arc presented in the third and fourth columns of Table 5. Recall
that these estimates sweep out all country-pair specific effects. The coefficient on the factor
differences variable, PWGDPDIP. is now positive and quite significant, whereas before it was
negative and very significant. The regression using capital per worker is slightly diierent than the
OLS case but now the factor differences variable, KLDJF, is both positive and significant For both

regressions, MTNGDP and MAXGDP are as before, and the explanatory power of the regressions

increases substantially. It is lisa interesting to note that when country dummies are employed in
the regressions, rather than simply mean differencing the data. the ft2 jumps to around 0.95.

Figures 2 and 3 ifiustrate the effects of controlling for country-pair specific effects. Figure
2 presents a plot of the intraindustry trade index against PWGDPDIF. The negative relationship
is clear. Figure 3 again shows intraindustry trade plotted against PWGDPDIF but this time after
mean differencing the data While some outliers remain, most of the observations lie on a line with

a slope close to zero.

We speculated above that there may be reasons why the model does not fit exactly that are

conelated over time for a given country-pair. Further, we noted that this could be especially
19

ThIs can be accomplished either by cxptichly %nctudlng couniry-pak dummies, or by differencing out country-pair

means from each vviable.

15

importantifmuchof the variability th iniraindusiry trade was explained by idiosyncratic differences

between country-pairs. The fixed effect regression results appear to bear this out.. Country-pair

dummies seem to explain a tremendous proportion of the variation in our intraindustry trade
index. Further, when country pair effects are swept out, the coefficient on one measure of factor

differences goes from beiig insignificantly different from zero to being significantly positive.
while the coefficient on the other measure goes from being a precisely measured negative estimate

to a quite significant positive estimate.

Fixed effects estimation treats the jk' as fixed constants over time. If instead they are random
variables, a random effects estimator is appropriate. The results for the random effects estimates
are reported in the final columns of Table 5. Note that the random effects estimator can be thought

of as lying between the within and between estimators, and hence makes use of variation both
between country-pairs and within country-pairs over time. The random effects regression results

are similar to the fixed effects results. Coefficients on the factor differences variables ate (stifi)
positive and significant in both regressions. MINGDP is as before, but MAXGDP is insignificant

and the explanatory power of the regressions drop a small amount The basic message of the
fixed effects estimates — that country-pair effects drastically change the empirical role of factor

differences, comes through as clearly with random effects as with fixed effects.

Prior to putting too much faith into these results, it is important to investigate how robust
they are to reasonable alternative specifications. \Vheeai the test described in Section 2 revolved

around a structural equation, this test employed a reduced form regression. That is, the theory

does not dictate the appropriate specitication. It offly informs one of the variables that ought
to enter the spccthcation.. While we have followed Helpman in estimating Tables 3-5 using a
semi-log specification, there is no theoretical justification for this particular specification, hence

we experiment. We begin by estimating (6) and (7) in levels, and these results are reported in
the first two columns of Table 6. Estimating in levels does not appear to change the punch-line,
except that the coefficient on MAXGDP becomes positive in the fixed effects estimation, and the

explanatory power drops somewhat2°

MINGDP and MAXGDP are included largely as size effect controls. Since we do not know

how they co-vary with the factor differences variable, we want to sce how the coefficients on
20

That is. KLD1P MINGDP and MAXGDP axe measured in levels rather than logs. 1ff Ic measured hi leveLs throughout

16

KLDIF and PWGDPDIF change when MIN/MAXGDP are omitted. Dropping MINOD? and
MAXGDP does not change the sign pattern on the factor differences variable, but the R2 drops to

about zero. This indicates that the factor differences variable alone explains none of the variation
in intraindusiry trade. Hence, while MINODP and MAXGDP may be of secondary importance in
the underlying theory, they take front stage in the empirical work.

It may be the case that cross-sectional estimates which impose a linear relationship between
KLDIF and IIT tit less well in later years because the relationship is, in fact, nonlinear. To begin

to investigate this, we include a quadratic term for KLDIF and for PWGDPDIF in equations (6)

and (7). For KLDIF, we find that the linear term is negative and the quadratic term is positive.
Both are precisely estimated. For PWGDPDIF, the linear term is positive and the quadratic term
is about zero. Evaluating the net effect of factor differences or GDP per worker differences on IT
in the neighborhood of the data indicates that ET co-varies positively with the factor and GDP per

worker differences.
It appears tbat the results presented in Table 5 are robust to some other reasonable specifications.

In the year by year cross-sectional regressions, and in the OLS regressions with pooled years. our

measures were either negative and insignificant (PWGDPDIF), or insignificant (KLDIF). When
we estimate country-pair dummies and remove all the cross-sectional variation, the coefficient for

both measures becomes positive and significant Why is this?
One explanation might be that we have very little time series variation in the right hand side
variables, KLDIF and PWGDPDJF. That is, relative capital-labor ratios for a given country-pair
don't change much over rime, so that when we sweep out cross-sectional variation, there is nothing

left for IIT to vary against. However, an analysis of variance shows that 58 percent of the total
variation in KLDJF is between country-pairs (cross-sectional variation), and 42 percent is within
country-pairs (time series variation). The ANOVA for PWGDPDIF shows that 65 percent of the

variation is between, and 35 percent within. In both cases, it would appear that there remains
sufficient variation after mean-dilferencing to give interesting rcsults.

The second explanation is that the industry classifications in the trade data are far noisier
than are supposed in the simple theoretical model. Thus far, we have uncritically accepted the
Sfl'C categories as appropriate definitions for industries. There is some danger that, by measuring

intraindustry trade with S1TC classifications, our results are subject to an aggregation problem.
17

(Sec Finger, 1975) For example, SITC categories sometimes group goods with similar consumption

uses, but different factor inputs. Trade within this "industry" would be measured as intraindustry,
when in fact it is motivated by relative factor abundance. The reverse is true when S1TC categories

fail to group goods that ought properly be considered an industry-- i.e. S1TC 7361 (metal cutting

machine tools) and SflC 7362 (metal forming machine tools). When S1TC classifications fail
to capture appropriate industry defmidons, the sign on the factor differences variable becomes
ambiguous. The difficulty with this explanation is that there is no necessary reason why factor
differences and intraindustry trade should be negatively correlated in cross-section, and positively

correlated in time series. Put another way, were the classification problem to bias our estimates,

the bias should not vary depending on whether our variation is cross-sectional or time series.

Indeed, this offers another plausible reason for prefening a fixed effects estimator. If the bii
in the data due to inappropriate aggregation is constant over time. it wifi be swept out when we
mean-difference the data

A third possible explanation cmphasizes the role of geography. There are several ways in

which geography might play a signifiit role in intraindustry trade. First, countries sharing a
border may see

two-way

trade in homogeneous goods, and such trade will appear in the data as

intraindustry trade. This is more likely to be important for country-pairs that share a long border
like the US and Canada. Second, distance may have a larger negative effect on intraindustry trade

than on interindustiy trade, hence closer counties may exhibit more incraindustry trade. This
situation would arise if transport costs increase with distance and the elasticity of substitution
between varieties of a differentiated product is greater than the elasticity of substitution between

homogeneous goods. In such a case, a decline in distance has a larger (positive) effect on the
volume of intraindustry trade than it does on the volume of intarindustry trade.

If proximate countries have similar per capita (or per worker) income, we may see a spurious

conelation between factor differences and the liTfi, index in cross-&on. That is. nearby
countries may have similar incomes for some unspecified reason, and they may have much
intraindustry trade because of low flnsport costs. By estimating country pair dummies in equation

(7), we sweep out the constant effect of geography on intraindustry trade. Only the conelation
between intraindustry trade and factor differences, independent of geography, remains, and it is no
longer negative as predicted by theory.
18

One can begin to evaluate the relevance of some of these explanations by examining the

magnitude of the estimated fixed effects from (7). In Table 7 we report some nonnaliwj
country-pair intercepts. The left panels of the table show country-pairs with large intercepts (at
least one standard deviation above the mean) implying large amounts of ininindustry trade. Two
things are remarkable. One. Ireland appears as one of the countries in seven of the fourteen pairs.
These intercepts come from a regression which included variables for relative sire (MINODP and

MAXGDP). When we re-estimate equation (7) without the size variables, freland is no longer
among the country-pairs with large intercepts, and in fact, can be seen as a low end outlier in some

cases. This seems to indicate that size adjusts these estimates in important ways, and that ireland1
given its small size. has an especially large amount of intraindusfry trade. This may be because of

Ireland's tax policies with respect to multinational corporations. Another interesting thing about
the first half of this table is that, of those country-pairs that do not include Ireland, nearly all share
a border.

The right panels of this table contains country-pairs with very small intercepts (at least one
standard deviation below the mean) and hence imply very little intraindustry trade. Fourteen of
the sixteen country-pairs include either Canada, Japan, or the United States. Of the countries in

our OECD sample, these are the only three outside of Europe, suggesting that perhaps oceans
matter. The difficulty with intcipreting these intercepts, though, is that they contain more than
geographical information Anything affecting intraindustry trade that is specific to country-pairs

and does not change much over time wifi be captured in them. This might include geography,

culture and language, trade barriers, or natural resources. For example, in the results reported

above, one cannot ascertain whether Canada, Japan and the US have low intraindustry trade
because they are geographically distant. or because they are outside the European customs union.
To further unravel these effects and decompose exactly which factors peculiar to country-pairs

might be corrclatcd with intraindustry trade, we could construct a series of dummies for distance,

and borders, and language, and customs unions, or any number of other things. However, we
choose not to do so. The purpose of this paper is not to suggest and test for plausible intraindusiry

trade correlates. There is an already large literature investigating such correlates. Rather, we scek

here only to reconsider the evidence regarding hypotheses which come directly from a rigorous
model of monopolistic competition and international trade.
19

In this section, we tested the relationship between tbe share of intraindustry trade and factor
differences. Existing studies employ per capita income as a factor proxy, utilize cross-sectional
analysis. and find a negative correlation between intraindustxy trade and factor differences. We

fmd that either using actual factor data or sweeping out country-pair specific effects causes this

conelation to disappear. This result appears to be robust to several specifications. We present
multiple plausible explanations for this result and conclude that the effects of geography may be

important. Finally, we note that country-pair effects explain a very large fraction of the variation
in intraindustry trade.

4. Inconclusions
From the outset, our goal has been to test some hypotheses generated from a formal model of

monopolistic competition and international nde. Previous tests had been encouraging. Studies
which were not especially informed by the theory of monopolistic competition and international
trade still found reasonable correlates of indexes of intaindusuy trade. A study which was directly

guided by the theory also found encouraging support for the theory. After reconsidering the
evidence, we am not so sure. The first test presented in this paper seems based on very wrealistic

assumptions, but the theory passes with flying colors. When confronted with data for which
the theory is probably quite inappropriate, it still passes with high marks. The second test we
conducted allows a more reasonable underlying theoretical structure, but we find little empirical

support for the theory. Instead of factor differences explaining the share of intmindustry trade,
much intraindustry trade appears to be specific to country pain.
The results of the first test leave us genuinely puzzled. The results of the second rcst leave us
pessimistic. for if much intraindustry trade is specific to country-pain, we can offly be skeptical

about the prospects for developing any gcnaJ theory to explain it. The theory of monopolistic
competition and international trade is elegant and seems to address important aspects of reality.
We hope our results motivate others to also investigate the empirical relevance of the theory, for,
as promised in the introduction, we provide few answers.

20

Appendix I

Note: Most of this appendix is taken from work by Elhanan I-Ielpman. It is reported here for
reference purposes only.

Theoretical background for section 2.

Consider an economy with two countries, two factors (K and L) and two sectors (X and Y.)

Suppose that X and Y are differentiated products produced with an increasing returns to 3j
technology. Monopolistic competition prevails so that with free entry, equilibriurn is characterized
by a large number of firms, each producing a unique variety of X and making zero profits.

Let X and X denote total production of good X in the home and foreign country, respectively.
The number of firms.
it

= X/x.

where z is the number of home varieties and similarly for the foreign country.
Assume identical homothctic preferences and a utility function that rewards variety. Then, with
costless transport, every variety of every good will be demanded in both countries. Further, each
country will consume an amount of each variety proportional to its share in world GDP, GDP..
Let s be the home country's share in world GDP. That is,

GDP

3=GDPa11d

s* =(1-s)

where GDP + GDP' = GDP. Then the home country consumes spifz ( ipX') of the foreign
X good and the foreign country consumes a'pnz (= 3t p1) of the home X good. Since y is also
differentiated, the volume of trade is given by:

VT= 8(pX*+y)+

s(pX+ Y).

The bracketed tenns ate just foreign and home GDP so

VT = sGDP' + sGDP.
Assuming

balanced trade,

VT = 28QDF =

2•GDP GDP' GDP =
GDP
GDP 2s'GDP.

(Al)

bilateral volume, of trade achieves a maximum when . =
Note that the same relationship between trade volume and relative size holds any time there
is complete specialization in production. For example, let X and Y be homogeneous goods and
The

21

assume the home country produces only X and the foreign country produces only Y. Then,
x = X + XS = X and Y = Y + Y' = Y'. Identical homothetic preferences imply

VT = sY' + s'X = sGDP + ?GDP = 2ssGDP.
It is possible to generalize (Al) so that it holds for groups of cowuries of any size. For a group
of countries, A, we have,
CDPA E GDP1,
JElL

where GDPA is tbe GDP of group A. The share of country j in group A is given by

,_GDP1

6A GDPA
Similarly, the share of group A in world GDP is

GDPA

e'-GDP.
The within group volume of trade is given by:

VA -E

E 3JGDFA

lEA LEA

L E SJ4GDPA
GDPA E s'(l e)

-

(A2)

With balanced trade, one obtains:

-

124.GDPA
GDP

A

and substitution yields (1) from section 2 of tbc text
VA
—c
Jei — eAI
GDP4 —
A V'
eAL
I

(-43)

eA[l —

This is the equation Helpman graphs to study the relationship between trade volume and relative
country size in the OECD.
In the text we do not report tbc. results obtained from amending this equation to account for
trade imbalances. We do report, though, that such amendments did not effect the results. To amend
22

the estimating equation for trade imbalances, we employed the following correction (folloMng
Helpman exactly.) With a trade imbalance,
= CJ4GDP

—

P

GDP

where 2' =

— M, and one just substitutes for s) into (Al). The order of the correction is the

ratio of the trade imbalance to group GDP, and this is empirically negligible.

Theoretical background for section 3.
Now allow X to be differentiated (as before) and Y to be a homogeneous good produced with
constant returns to scale. Assume that X is capital intensive and that the home country is relatively
capital abundant. Then there wifi be two-way trade in the X good. Also, the home country will
be a net exporter of X and an importer of Y. In figure. Al, we see the direction of trade for this
example. The total volume of trade is given by:

VT=i'pX+ spX+sY—Y.
The volume of trade that is inna-indusiryis 2 min(spX1 atpX), and the share of intra4ndustry
trade is

IIT,k =

2 min(spl, spX)
s'pX+ spX+ (sY—Y)

(A4)

Helpznan and Krugman (1985) show that constant hunt-industry trade share-curves for
endowments in the factor price equalization set are given by figure A2, Along the 00' diagonal,

the inn-industry trade share equals one. Factor reallocations which widen capital to labor
differences without changing itladve size decrease the share of inira-induscry trade.
To see this. consider a factor reallocation from endowment point El to E2 in Figure AZ We

are above the diagonal at El, so the home country is relatively capital abundant. The move to
E2 further widens the gap between the home country's and the foreign country's cqi to labor
ratios. Also, since the move takes place along the wage-rental line, relative size is unchanged. We
now ask, what happens to our inn-industry trade index?
Since incomes and preferences are unchanged, each country consumes exactly what it did
before (the value of which is given by point C). The only thing that has changed is the location
of production. The home country produces more X and the foreign country produces more Y.
Since total endowments in the world economy haven't changed, dx = dX + LIX" = 0. Hence,
dX = —dX, and similarly dY = —dY. Since we remain in the factor price equalization set.
= 0.
prices air unchanged, dp = 0. Finally, by construction, relative size has not changed, ds =
We wish to sign the change in (A4) that occurs as a result of this irallocation. In the numerator,
s*pX is larger, but aspiC is smaller, so the numerator decreases. For the denominator, take the
total derivative to yield CpdX + spdX — dY. Since 8* = (1 — s) and dX = _dX*, we have
(1- s)pdX - spdX dY or (1- 2s)pdX - dY. The factor reallocation causesthe home county
to produce more X and less 1', so cIX >0 and dY c 0. Since s lies between C) and f, the term in
brackets is always non-negative. The denominator in-s, so our In'index decitases as a result
of a factor reallocation which widens factor differences without changing relative size.

-

23

Appendix 2

Trade Data:
Trade data used in the first and second tests come from the United Nations Trade Database, years
1962-1983. The data are reported in four digit SITC (revision 1). The volume of trade variable
used in the first test is:
VTJk =

+ X2k3).

It comprises exports from country j to country k, plus exports from country k to country j,
summed over industries 1.

The sham of intraindustry trade was calculated using the Gmbel-Lloyd index as described in
the text. An industry is defined as a four digit SITC group. All S1TC categories were included in
the calculation of both VTJk and IITp.
The UN trade database contains both country j's report of its exports to country k and country
k's report of its imports from j. On the assumption that the importing country keeps better track of
trade flows crossing its borders, we use the importing country's reported data However, we have
repeated tests in sections 2 and 3 using importer and exporter data without a change in the reported
results.

Gross Domestic Product (GDP) Data:

In the first test we use GDP as reported in the World Bank World Tables. The data are converted
from current year, foreign currency to current year. U.S. dollars using the exchange rate reported
in the World Tables (a yearly average rate).

In the second test, we require constant dollar measures of per capita or per worker GDP to
use as a factor composition proxy. Current dollar measures are inappropriate as currency inflation
will cause an upward trend in the factor differences variable. As an example, at time 0, country 1
has per capita GDP of 200, countiy 2 has per capita GDP of 300, so that pcGDPdif= 100 where
pcGDPdif is the difference in per capita GDP. Allow 10 percent inflation and pcGDPdif=l 10. We
use two series from the Penn World Tables, Mark V.

RGDPCH is per capita GDP, measured in constant 1985 international prices (chain index).
This variable is used to construct pcGDPdif. It doesn't appear in any of the regressions we report,
because it gives results which are extremely similar to PWGDPDTF (pcr worker GDP differences.)
RGDPW is per worker GDP in constant 1985 international prices (chain index). It is used to
construct PWGDPDIF.
Using RGDPCH and POPULATION. we arrive at GDP, measured in 1985 international prices.
This is used to construct MINOOP and MAXGDP.

24

Factor Data:

Factor data are used in the first test in the instrumentai variables specification. Population data
from the World Bank World Tables are used to proxy labor force. Our capital stock series has been
constructed using the third method described in Appendix B of Learner (1984). Gross Domestic
Investment, exchange rates (yearly average), and the GDP deflator, are taken from World Tables.
Investment flows are converted year by year into dollars. deflated using the US GDP deflator, then
summed over years and depreciated appropriately.

This gives a capital stock for each year from 1962 to 1983, with accumutated irivestmen flows
denominated in the relevant year. That is. the 1970 capital stock is an accumulation of investment
flows valued at 1970 prices. The World Tables Gross Domestic Investment series begins in 1960,
so we assumed an initial capital stock for each country equal to 250 percent of its GDP in 1960. We
assume a constantdepreciation rate of 13.3 percent. This gives an asset life of 15 years. We have
constructed different series using diffcrcnt initial assumptions. and the first test results reported
here are insensitive to these assumptions.
For the second test, we require capital stock data valued in constant dollars. Learner (1984)notes
in his data appendix that the Penn World Tables provide a useful data set for constructing a capital

stock series because GDP and investment flows are comparable over time and across counties.
We use the Penn World Tables, Mark V1 series RGDPCH. POPULATION, RGDPW, and C Using
RGDPCH, WGDPCH, and POPULATION, we get labor force. That is, RGDPCH/WGDPCH 2
labor force particpation rate. C is the year by year fraction of GDP that goes to investment.

Since the initial variables are already in 1985 internaflonal prices, we need only sum over
investment flows and depreciate at 13.3 percent. That is.
=

—

depreciation) +

irnut

Using Penn World Tables data, we can construct an investment series going back to 1950. We
assume a 1950 capital stock equal to 250 percent of GDP.

25

References

Bergstrand. Jeff (1990) "The Hecksher-Ohlin-Samuelson Model, the Under hypothesis, and the
Determinants of Bilateral Intra-industry Trade," Economic Journal. 100, 1216-1229.
Bowen, Hany, Edward Learner, and Leo Sveikauskas (1987) "Miilticountry, Multifactor Tests of

the Factor Abundance Theory." American Economic Review, 77.791-809.

Davis, Donald (1992) "Intraindusuy Trade: A Heckscher-Ohlin-Ricardo Approach," mimeo,
Harvard University.

Finger, Michael (1975) "TradeOverlap andlntra-industrylrade," Economiclnquiry, 13, 581-589.

Greenaway. David and Chris Milner (1987) "Inn-industry Trade: Cunent Perspectives and
Unresolved Issues," Weltwirtschaftiiches Archly, 123, 39.
Grubcl H.. and P. Lloyd (1975) IntTa-inditstsy Thick: The Theoiy and Measurement ofinternational
Tmck $n Dfferenfiaxed Products. London: MacMillan.

Hanigan. James (1992) "Openness to Trade in Manufactures in the OECDI?' mhneo, University
of Pittsburgh,

Heckscher. Eli and Beth! Ohlin (1991) Heckscher - 0/din Track Theory: edited by Hany Ham
and June Flanders. Cambridge: MIT.

Hclpman, Lihanan and Paul Krugman (1985) Marker Sfructure and Foreign Trade: increasing
Returns. Imperfect Competition and the International Economy. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Helpman, Elhanan (1981)" International nate in the presence of product dii ferentiation, economies
of scale and monopolistic competition: a Chamberlin-Hecksher-Ohlin approach," Journal of
International Economics, 11 305-340.

Helpman, Elhanan (1987) "Imperfect Competition and International Trade: Evidence from
Fourteen Industrial Countries." Journal of the Jipanese and International Economies. 1,
62-81.
Hummels, David and James Levinsohn (1993) "Product Differentiation as a Source of Comparative
Advantage?," Amen can Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, forthcoming.

Krugman, Paul (1979) "Increasing Returns to Scale, Monopolistic Competition and International
Trade." Journal of International Economics. 9,469-479.

Krugman, Paul (1981) "hun-industry Specialization and the Gains from Trade," Journal of
Political Economy, 89, 959-973.

Lancaster, Kelvin (1980) "Intra-Industry Trade under Perfect Monopolistic Competition.,"
burnal of iMernational Economics, 10.

151-175.

Learner, Edwaitl (1984) Sources oflnternafional Comparative Advantage. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Under, Stefan (1961) An Essay on Track and Tran.sfonnation. New York: Wiley.
26

Loertscher, R and Wolter, F. (1980) "Determinants of lntra-industry Trade: Among Countries
and Across Industries," Wejp,vjq Archly, 8, 280-293.

27

TABLE I
Eqn. (2) Estimates
OECD Data (19621983)
Fixed

Random

Effects

Effects

Fixed
Effects

(Instrumental

Fixed
Effects
(Detrended

OLS

(Detrended
Data)

1.236

1.236

Variables)
1.255

Data)

a,

1.092

1.18

I-stat.

183.7

183.9

159.3

31.9

44.7

Ft2

.946
2002

.944

2002

.347
2002

2002

if Obs.

2002

.499

Note: Reported R for the fixed effects regressions are from regressions with dummy variables, not with
mean-differenced data.

TABLE 2

Eqn. (2) (in levels, not logs) Estimates
NOECD Data (1962-1977)
Fixed
Eftects

Random
Effects

Fixed

Fixed

Effects

Effects

(Instrumental

0
t-Mat.
IV
# Cbs.

(Detrended

OLS
(Detrended
Data]

Data)

Variables)
.00192

.00167

29.01
.366

17.48

24.33

—

.302

.00139
25.29
.305

1456

1456

1456

1458

.00147

.00146

28.33
.37
1456

TABLE 3
Eqn. (3) OLS Estimates with GDP per Worker instead of GDP per Capita
(1962- 1963)

Year

a1

1962

-.051'

.064

-.022

.207

1963

-.067'

1964

-'J52

-.022
-.026

.251
.227

19R5

.fl68

.064'
.013'
0M

—.079

.086

1967

-.060

.09?

1968

-067

1969

-.063

.096
.106

-.011
-.017
-.021
-.022
-.030

i74

1966

1970

-.04r

-.045

.207

1971

-064

.117

-.046

.221

1972

-.070

.11P

-.033

.207

1973

-.084

.100

-.023

.199

1974

-.035

.103

-.040

.130

1975

.102

.094'

-.029
-.030

.145

1976

-.073
-.048

1977

-.085

.089

-.027

.083

1978

-.09V

.073

-.009

.111

1979

-.064

.088

-.034

.096

1980

-.041

.088

-.051

.073

1981

-.043

.079

-.053

.069

1982

-.033

.073

-.051

.067

.048

-.031

.050

11?

1983

.266
.237
.239

.231

.079

The estimated regression is:

ik + cr2min(!og GDP(J log GDPk)

IITJk,l &o + cr1 091GDFY - GDPk
I

1

+cxrnax(Iog GDFj,Iog GDP,') + jk,t
An asterix indicates statistical significance at the 95% level.

TABLE 4
Eqn. (3) OLS Estimates with

Capital to Labor Ratio instead of per capita GDP
(1962-1963)

Year

01

1962

-0.042

0.073

-0.37

0.156

1963

-0.042'

0.078'

-0.044'

0.179

1964

-0.031

0.062'

-0.042'

0.156

1965

-0.017

0.094'

-0.037

0.156

0.158

fl.lRfi
0.158
0.163
0.170

a3

1966

-0.029

0.096'

-0.042

1967

-0.029

0.102'

-0.040

1968
1969

-0.018
-0.008
-0.004
0.007
0.012

O.106

-0.047

1970

O.11&

-0.048

0.1230

D.D55

0122'
0.119'

1973
1974

0.00?

our

-0.056
-0.045
-0.040

0.016

O.108

-0M42

1975
1976

-0.003
0.041

O.110

0.105'

-0.042
-0.036

0.119
0.108
0.081

1977

0.042

o.ior

-0.041

0.065

1978
1979

0.013

0.090'

-0.029

0.05-4

0.020

0.103'

0.070

1QRO

01116

DflIfl•

-0.047
-nn.c7

1981

0.022

0.092'

0.061

1982

0.040

0.089

1983

0.04 1

0.066

-0.056
-0.055
-0.036

1971
1972

0.163
0.148
0.133

(I ARS

0.069

0.1348

The estimated regression 1:

=°o + ailosF J — 45-i + a,vnin(log GDPj, log GDP)
+a3max(log GDP(, log GDPt) +
An aster ix indicate statistical significance at the 95% level.

TABLE 5
Eqn. (7) Estimated
(1962-1983)

Fixed effects

no fixed effects

Vat lable

PWGDPDIF

.0221

-.0618

- (-9.85)
KLDIF

Random effects
.0187

(&23)
.0127

.0047

(.778)

J1!)

.012
(3.21)

(3.47)

MINCOP

.0986

J09

.473

.481

.298

.314

(16.39)
-.0218

(15.24)
-.034

(16.37)
-.085

(16.60)

(16.39)
.015

(16.36)

MAXGDP

(-3.30)

(-5.15)
.106

(-3.28)
.372
.949

(-3.53)

(0.92)
.299

(.643)
.306

-.091

•

—

.147

R2

(w/ dummies)

.365

.011

- .948

The estimated regression is:

+ oilo,jJ — CDI?

a,min(log CDfl, log GDPt)

+asmax(log CDP/,log GDPIb) + 1& + p.t
or

HT5&i =ao + crttool-jf —

+ cr2min(log GDT'(, log CDPr)

-t-c3maxQog GDP:, log ODP) + p

+ jfr,t

T-statistics are in parentheses. The reported R2 in the ftxed effects mode's is that for the regression

using mean-differenced data.

TABLE 6
Sensitivity Analysis of Equation 7 Estimates
(1962-1963)

Same epecification M Equation 7 Except:
Variable

In LeveIs Not Loge

Drop MIN/MAXGDP
OLS
F.E.

Add DIF2
F.E.

OLS

Fl.

KLDIF

3.06E-06

7.47E-06

-0.0019

0.00047

-O189

-0.081

(7.03)
5.84E-1O

(-0.31)

(0.11)

(-3.63)
0.11

(-3.07)

MINGDP

(2.88)
4.92E-1O

MAXGDP

(11.44)
-4.1SE-11

1.7OE-1O

(15.4)
-0.033

(6.43)
4.085

(-5.18)

(10.257)

(-4$1)

(-3.28)
0.008

(8.15)

LKDIF2

oils

0.0123

(3.75)

0.475

0.084

.196

0

0

0112

(3.58)
.372

PWGDPDIF

-2.52E-O5

1.40E-05

-0.071

0.015

0.347

-0.03

(-14.22)
4.22E-iO

(6.54)

(-10.97)

(2.88)

MINGDP

5.83E-1O

(7.09)
0.092

(-1.10)
0.473

MAXGDP

(10.25)
5.20E-12

1.98E-1O

(16.39)
-0.081

(0.62)

(11.38)

(13.22)
-0.0097
(-1.47)

ft2

I

(8.13)
I___________

PWCDPDIF'
0.147

T-statistics are in parenthes.

0.194

0.056

0.004

(-3.I3

-0.027

£04

(-6.42)

(1.95)

0.176

0.374

TABLE 7
Country-Pair Outliers from Fiied Effects
EsLimat of Equation (7)

Large Interce
Country-Pair
Ireland UK
Ireland US

Small InLeFCCL

ntercept Country-Pair
1.08
Japan us

Belgium Gennany
Germany Ireland
Germany Switzerland
Belgium Netherlands
Austria Switzerland
Denmark

Sweden

Ireland Japan
flanceTreIand
Ireland Italy

0.81

Japan UK

0.74

France Japan
Canada Italy

0.70

0.84
0.80
0.58
0.56
0.54
0.53

Canada Japan
Cennany Japan
Italy Japan
Canada Germany
Canada France

________

ntercept
-1.09
-0.91
-0.89

-0.86
0.85

-0.85
-0.83
-0.79
-0.78
-0.75
-0.72
-0.72

0.52

GermanyUS
Italy us

Belgium Fr&nce
Canada Ireland

0.48

Canada UK

0.47

France

Austria Germany

0.46

Italy UK
UKUS

-0.65
-0.54
-0.54

Germany Italy

-0.47

____________________ —

us

Large intercepts are defined as one standard deviation .ibove the mean1 while small intercepts are one
standard deviation below the mean. Intercepts were normalized around zero for purposes of this table.

FIGURE 1

2.12559

6'

0

03

C
Co

C.

oo

I.-

0

0

10
>

0
0

00
0

0
0
0

-2.15991 —

-1. 52

99
1.25079

HelpmarYs Size Oispersion Index

FIGURE 2

2.69127

0

0
4.4

0

80
8
0
a-)

e

0
C.,

0

C
Co

L
4-,

ooo

00 0(0°0
00
0 Ooo q)

U,

000

0
0

0
0

.009092 -

0

0

0

-

4.4
-'.4

coO

00 0oo

—,

'Sc09

0

00004

00c1o0
o40tJ
9.92i38

2.19722
Per Worker GOP differerioes

StaTaw,

FIGURE 3

1.88035 -

0

0
0

-i-I

00

V
C)

19 B00

E

00 01
0

C-

0
0

0

(I,
C

00

L

11

00 0000 o09 00 O%

0 0000

0

00 0rQ0ur
00

0
—.681289 -

-Ai73

S

0

QD

00

°
0

00

Per Worker GDP differences

1.56787

ST2T

HOME COUNTRY

sY-Y
stpX

FOREIGN COUNTRY

Figure Al

L*

0*

KI

-

0

L

Figure A2

K*

