NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRADE AND iNDUSTRIAL POLICY REFORM
IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES:
A REVIEW OF RECENT THEORY AND EVIDENCE

Dani Rodrick

Working Paper No. 4417

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1993

Chapter to be included in J. Behrrnan and T.N. Srinivasan (eds.), Handbook of Dc-velo_pment
Economics, vol. III, North-Holland, Amsterdam forthcoming. I am grateful to Ink Atiyas, Ann
Harrison, and James Tybout for helpful conversations, and to Alice Amsden, Gene Grossman.
Gerry Helleiner, Augustine Tan, Larry Westphal, and the editors for comments on an earlier
draft. This paper is part of NBER's research program in International Trade and Investment,

Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #44 17
August 1993

TRADE AND INDUSTRIAL POLiCY REFORM
IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES:
A REVIEW OP RECENT THEORY AND EVIDENCE

ABSTRACT

This paper reviews recent theory and evidence on trade and industrial policy reform in
developing counn-ies. First, the theoretical and empirical basis of the rationales for policy reform

are discussed. Next, two sources of heterodoxy are identified and evaluated: (a) the East Asian
experience with interventionist indosrrial policies; (b) recent models of imperfect competition.
The survey then turns on strategic issoes in reform, and discusses the theory of piecemeal reform,

tax or tariff uniformity, credibility, political economy, and interactions with stabilization policy.

The penultimate section reviews the available evidence on the consequences of recent policy
-

reform.

Dani Rodrick

Columbia University
420 West 118th Street
Room 1312
New York, NY 10027
and NBER

TRADE AND INDUSTRIAL POLICY REFORM IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES:
A REVIEW OF RECENT THEORY AND EVIDENCE

I. Inlmduction
A decade or two from now, the 1980s will probably be remembered as the time when two
significant, and not unrelated, set of events ocurred. First, much of the developing world, including a
majority of countries in Latin America and Africa, became engulfed in a debt and macroeconomic cnsis
of major proportions. Per capita income scarcely grew, and, in many countries, declined over the

course of the decade. it became commonplace to call this the lost decade" for development.
But maybe not all was lost. For the second major feature of the decade was that in scores of
countries, the inward-oriented, import-substituting policies of the past came under cn!ical scrutiny from
policy makers—often from the same government leaders who had enthusiastically espoused and

implemented the older poricies. By the end of the decade, the anti-eeporl and anti-private enterprise
bias of the prevailing policy regimes was largely discredited. Public enterprise, industrial promotion. and
trade protection were out; privatization, industrial de-regulation, and free trade were in.

This paper is an attempt to review what we know about the consequences of theae policy reforms.
I try to cover in equal measure both theory and evidence, as it is only the interplay of the Iwo that
allows us to comprehend and interpret the world around us. Just as theory without facts is vacuous, a
search for evidence in the absence of a sound conceptual framework yields unintelligible resutts.

Research on policy reform has not been short on either theory or evidence, even though, as we shall
aee, there is stilt a need for systematic empirical studies on the consequences of the recent round of
reforms. My focus is strictly on trade and industrial policies; macroeconomic stabilization issues are
touched upon only to the extent that they impinge on microeconomic reforms. Further, I will emphasize
the more recent literature.

Since the World Bank has been intimately involved in the policy reforms of the igitos thrcugb Its
Structural Adjustment Loans, I begin the survey by considering the role of the World Bank and the
concept of "structural adjustment". In the following section (section 3), I briefly discuss the nature of the

policies to be reformed. Section 4 is devoted to the rationale for trade end industrial policy reform. I
identify four basic arguments; fi) improvements in static resource allocation; (ii) dynamic benefits in the

form of learning end growth; (it) improved flexibility in face of esternal shocks; end (iv) reduced rentseeking. I discuss critically the theory end evidence that underlie each one o! these arguments.
Sections 5 and 6 turn to two sources of "heterodoxy". First, I discuss recent revisionist accounts of

the East Asian experience lsection 5). These accounts have stressed the positive role cf government
intervention in trade and tndustry, and sit uncomfortably with the orthodox emphasis on restricting the

government's role. Section 6 covers recent modela with imperfect competition. These models!
developed in part in response to the challenge posed by East Asia to received theory, provide increased

latitude for government intervention on account ot both static and dynamic effects. Section 7 is
devoted to the literature on the strategy of reform and covers recent contributions including those in the
theories of piecemeal reform, timing end sequencing of reform credibitty, and political economy.
Section 8 reviews the available evidence on the consequences of the reforms of the

1980s, paying

particular attention to the supply response, and to static and dynamic efficiency. In section 9, I offer
some briar concluding remarks.

2. Policy reform, afructunt adjuafrnent and the Woald Bank
tJonng the 1980s, the term atructural adjuatment" became virtually another name for policy reform.
Almost all major episodes of policy reform during [his period in the developing world were instigated

and/or supported by Structural Adjuatment Loans (SALa) from the World Bank. The reforms usually
took place in the context of Intense policy dialogues with the World Bank—as well as with the
International Monetary Fund, which began to disburse medium-term assistance under its own Extended,

Structural Adjustment, and Enhanced Structural Adjustment facilities. The policy dialogue with the
Bretfon Woods inatitutiona, along with the conditionality that goes with the latler'a lending, helps account

for the remarkable uniformity that has characterized the reformiata' agenda. Wherever reforms were
attempted, the words "atructural adjuatmenr became the code used to describe and legitimize them,
and liberalization and outward orientation the main strategies employed. Williamson (1990) has termed

3

this agenda the Washington consensus"' Perhaps the only important exception was Chins; where
policy developments were insulated from World Bank and IMF conditionality. But even here, the
ongoing reforms since 1978 have unmistakably moved the economy in the direction of greater use of
the market mechanism and private incentives, and of greater export orientation.
The role ptayed by the World Bank in the reforms of the 1 980a has been chronicled and analyzed in

a number of different sources, notably by World Bank staff themaalves. Thomas 8L8L (4991) and
Corbo, Fischer, and Webb (1992) present useful compilations of Bank studies, focusing on the

effectiveness of adjustment lending. A comparable independent study including case studies is that by

Mosley, l-larrtgan, and bye (1991).
According to Ernest Stern, a vice president of the World Bank who was closely invotved in the
development of SAL5, interest in such lending arose from the frustration felt in the Bank in the aftermath
of the second oil shook regarding the lack of real invotvement in country policies, despite substantial

commitment of resources in the form of project assistance:
Initially our thinking focused on the ways to help countries develop greater export capacity,
When we started, however, we were quits naive about just how pro foundly distorted the

development strategies of many of the developing countries were.... (These countries] must
begin to move from highty distorted price incentives and investment frameworks to something

more stable, more oriented to the market system of prices, and more open and less protected.
(E. Stern, 1991, 1-2)

Hence, even though the origin of SALs lay in the esternal payments crisis brought on by the two rounds
of oil shocks in the 1 970s, the Bank's attention soon turned to correcting microeconornic distortions.

Indeed, it became common to view the subsequent debt crisis of 1982 as "one of the symptoms of

these distortions," as Stern htmselt put it (1991 2).

However, he later came to regret the implication that the
choices made by reformists all over the developing world were in

fnct derived from a consensua reached in Washington, D.c.
(Williamson, 1992)

4
The goals set forth for SALs, therefore, covered both macroeconomic stabilization and

microec000mic reforms. As Thomas etal, put It:
Two types of poticy response, both labeled adjustment, were called for [to deal with the
external shocks of the later 1970a and the earty lQBQs]. The first was stabilization, or managed
reductions in expenditures to bring about an orderly adjustment of domestic demand to the

reduced level of external resources available to the country, The second was structural
adjustment, or changes in relative prices and institutions designed to make the economy more

efficient, more flexible, and better able to use resources and so to engineer sustainable longterm growth. It was envisioned that effective structural adjustment measures would reduce the
necessary extent of stabilization. (1991, 11)

Contrast this definition of structural adjustment with the following one by Streeton'
The essence of deveropment is structural adjustment: from country to town, from agriculture to
industry, tram production for household consumption to production for markets, from largely
domestic trade to a higher ratio of foreign trade.,.. In this very general sense, development is
synonymous with structural adjustment and a paper on structural adjustment would he a paper

on developmeni (1989, 3)
While one cannot help but agree with Streeten, I witi use the term structural adjustment in the narrower
sense used by Thomas &Lfij.2 In particular, I will focus on structural adjustment pp(jçies, i.e., policies
aimed at improving an economy's efficiency and its tong-term growth. Macroeconomic stabilizaton
policies, aimed at price stability end overall balance between an economy's resources and its

expenditures, are covered in the companion chapter by Corbo and Fischer. However, as wilt become

An even narrower definition is given by Edwards and van Wijnbergen (1989, p. 1482): "A structural
adjustment program can be detined as a set of policy measures that attempts to permanently change
relative prices of fl8fible to nontradabte goods in the economy, in order to reallocate, or help along
reallocation of, production factors in accordance with the new set of external and domestic economic
conditions" (emphasis added). By focussing only on one key relative price, and the one that is most directly
influenced by the exchange rate at that, this definition presents a somewhat incomplete picture or the
microeconomic changes typically called for in the Bank's structural adjustment programs

5
clear, it is not always easy to draw clear distinctions between slsbilizalion end structural measures.

3 What is to be reformed?
An exhaustive list of the policies that came under atteck by the reformers would till volumes, as
does indeed any official catalogue describing the industrial incentive regime in a typical import-

substituting country. In trade policy, Ihe reforms were directed at licensing and other quantitative
restrictions, high and extremely dilterentiated tariff rates, export taxes, end burdensome bureaucratic

requirements end paperwork. In industrial policy, the targets were inetflcent end loss-making public
enterprises, entry and exit restrictions on private enterprise, price controls, discretionary tax and subsidy
policies, and soft-budget constraints.

The best quantitative picture of the state of trade protection in developing countries is provided in

Erzan etal. (1989), These authors provide a snapshot of tariff and non-tariff barriers in some 50
developing countries as of the mid-1980s. They list sectoral average tariff rates, as well as coverage
ratios for non-tariff measures such as licenses, quotas and advanced import deposits. See also
Kostecki end TymowskL (1985) for a review of import chsrges (other than customs duties) and a

calculation of their ad-valorem equivalents in a smaller group of developing countries. Prevaiing
industrial potcies are discussed, more qualitatively, in Dervis and Page (1984) Frischtak (1989), and

Meier and Steel (1989). De Soto (1969) provides an influential account of the burdens imposed on
private-sector actvity by bureaucratic regulations and paperwork in Latin America, particularly where
small business is concerned.
Policy discussions on trade policy were much influenced by the early work directed by Little.

Scitovaky, and Scott (1970) Balessa (1971), and Bhagweti (1978) and Krueger (1978). These studies
undertook quantitative descriptions and evaluations of trade regimes, notably by messunng effective

rates of protection in developing countries. They demonstrated that the existing policies had resulted in
haphazard and often inordinstety high levels of protection: hard to reconcile with policyrrokers stated
objectives.

6
More recently, Krueger, Schtff and Valdes (1991) have completed a multi-volume study on

agricultural pricing policy that promises to do for agriculture what this earlier work has done for trade
policy in industry. These authors quantify the effects of policy interventions on agriculture, taking into
account both direct effects (i.e, sector-speciflc interventions) and indirect effects (i.e., those arising from
trade restrictions on manufactures and induced changes in the equilibrium exchange rate). They
document the existence of a large disincentive for agricultural production, with the explicit and implicit

taxation of agriculture ranging from 25 percent in the case of Asian and Mediterranean countries to
more than 50 percent in sub-Saharan African countries. lnteresttngty, Krueger et.al find that meat of
this tax originates not from direct interventions, but from the general-equilibrium implications of industrial
protection and overvalued exchange rates (for a summary of their findings, see Krueger, Schiff, and

Valdes, 1986). In a sense, then what these authors have documented is the flip aide of the earlier
industrial protection studies referred to above.

4. Why reform? The rationales for policy refonn
By the late 1970s, the studies mentioned above on trade and industrialization policies had gradualty
erected a formidable case for policy reform in developing countries. The indisputable success of South
Korea, Taiwan, Singapore and Hong Kong with what appeared to be market-oriented potcies
strengthened the argument (see below, however). Perhaps the clincher was that the external-payments
crisis originating from the debt debacle made policy change unavoidable. However, it was by no means
clear that change would take the form of liberalization; the first impulse of policy makers confronting a
balance-of-payments crisis a typicalfy to tighten quotas and impose foreign exchange rationing. That
the 1980s eventually turned out differently was partly due to the fact that policy makers esrned from
their pasi mistakes, But there were other reasons as well; ('r) World Bank and IMP conditionality ruled
out access to external financing in the absence of at least some lip—service to reform; (ii) the depth and
persistence of the macroeconomic crisis relegated to second-place distributional considerations that

would have blocked rnicroeconomic reforms in more normal times (Rodrik, l992a).

7

There are four basic arguments in favor of market-oriented policy reform: (i) economic liberahzation
reduces static inefficiencies arising from resource misaflocation and waste; (ii) economic liberalization
enhances learning, technological change, and economic growth; (iii) outward-oriented economies are

beftter able to cope with sdverse external shocks; (iv) market-based economic syslems are less prone
to wasteFul rent-seeking activities, While all four of these arguments are used widely, it is the last three
that have dominated the discussion on structural adjustment policies. This is understandable since the
benefits on account of the first, basically some Harberger triangles, are quantitatively minor compared to

the benefits arising from the others, which usually are sizable rectangles. However, by and large, only
the first oF these arguments is solidly grounded in accepted economic theory.
4.1. Static effects: Resource mis-allocation

The efficiency costs of Import-substitution policies, encompassing most notably high levels ot trade
protection snd industrial regulation, were documented extensively in the studies cited above (Little

Scitovsky, and Scott 1970, Balassa, 1971, Bhagwali, 1978, and Krueger, 1978). These potcies had
encoursged the development of industries that were high-cost, and did little to ensure that productivity
would increase over time. The resutiag pattern of specialization became divorced from comparative
advantage. From the perspective of resource allocation, the effects were anti-esport anti-agriculture.
anti-labor, and anti-newcomers in industry.

The literature on these issues is broad, and it is impossibie to provide a complete list of references.
On the employment consequences of trade regimes, see in particular Krueger (1983). The dismal
export performance of sub-Ssharafl African countries is reviewed by Svedberg (1991), who traces its
roots largely to domestic economic policies. The consequences of industrial regulations are discussed
in Frischtak (1989), and Meier and Steel (1989). Two recent sources on India's infamous industrial
regime are Fursell (1990) and Bhagwati (1993). For additional references on the earlier literature, see

My Four-fold classification is not meant to be entirely exhaustive. An additional rationale for trade and
industrial policy reform is improved capacity utilization in the face of bottlenecks and macroeconomic policy
faitures. However, as the quafflers in the previous sentence indicate, I do not consider this to be as "basic"
an argument as Ihe others I have included.

the surveys by Pack (1988) and Eruton (1989).
While the theoretical and emp1ricel arguments for the resource misallocation costs of the import-

substitution syndrome are strong, it is much harder to make a compelling case regarding the

gt4de

of these costs. Reasonable estimates of the welfare cost of relative-price distortions under usual
neoclassical assumptions rarely produce numbers in excess of a couple of percentage points of GNP

(see, for example, Srinivasan and Whalley, t986). Moreover, when distortions get too large, the
emergence of parallel and black markets tend to arleviate Ihe welfare coats (aee Roemer and Jones,

1991). How, then, can such small numbers be reconciled with the large and growing

performance gap

between import-substituing countries and the outward-oriented countries of East Asia? To provide an

answer, it is common to turn to explanations that go beyond static allocative-efficiency.
4.2. Dynamic affects: Technical change1 learning, and growth

Import-substituting industrialization policy was supposed to enhance technological capabilities and

economic growth. That it failed to do so, while outward-oriented East Asian countries

continued to grow

at phenomenal rates, suggested to many economists not only that the infant-industry position was

untenable, but that it had it exactly backwards. The anti-export and anti-competition bias

of prevailing

pnltcies, the argument now went, discouraged innovation, cost-cutting, the acquisition of technological

capabilities, end therefore eventual growth. Correcting these biases would remove the

technological

disincentives. A representative statement is from Balaesa (1988, 45)
It has often been observed that Imonopolies and oligopolies

prefer a 'quiet life" to innovative

activity, which entails risk and uncertainty. In turn, the carrot and stick of competition gives
inducement for technological change. For one thing, in creating competition for donestio
products in home markets, imports provide incentives for firms to improve their operations. For
another thing, in response to competition in foreign markets, exporting trms

try to keep up with

modern technology In order to maintain or improve their market position.

This view became conventional wisdom as a retrospective explanation of the East Asian success, as
well as a prospective argument tor removal of distortions in other developing countries.

9
The analytical foundations of such arguments regarding the dynamic benefits of liberalization have

never been too cloar. Too often, the preferred method of proof is a casual appeal to common sense.
tn particular, no distinctions are typically made between policies for which received theory is silent as
regards learning (or hss ambiguous implications), and those for which a definite theoretical presumption

exists.
Relative-price distoftions, such as trade taxes and investment subsidies, are of the first kind. Such

distortions affect iv profitabif ties across industries and sectors, tf some sectors are adversely
affected by intervention, others must be left in better shape. Consequently, even if changes in a
sectors profitability could be presumed to have unambiguous consequencas for innovative actrvity

(which they do not), the çj change in economy-wide innovation would still be unpredictable. Innovative
activity would be reduced in some sector, but enhanced in others.

This argument spptes equally well to X-efflciency: if tariffs encourage entrepreneurial slack in
import-competing sectors because they increase such sectors' relative prices, by the same logic they

must reduce slack in export-oriented sectors (Rodrik, I 992b). Moreover, Balassa's statement above
notwithstanding, the LpüQ_ri relationship between the degree of product-market competition and

innovative activity is by no means clear; for the state of the debate In the advanced-country context, see

Nalebuff and Stiglitz (1983), Hart (1983), and Scharfstein(t 988). Neither is it clear whether the
inadequacy of incentives to upgrade quality due to informational externalities call for policy intervention

(as in Bagwell and Staiger. 1989) or are aggravated by it (as in Grossman and Horn, 1988).
To rescue the conventional wisdom, one needs to resort in each case to liner arguments and
special assumptions that are rarely made clear. An early esception is Corden (1974, 224-31). who
dissected many of the arguments linking trade policy to cost-cutting incentives and showed their

fragility. Developments in the theories of industrial organization and growth have now made learning
and technical change more amenable to analysis, and some recent contributions will be reviewed in

section &3.
In the second group are trade and industrial policies that have unambiguously deleterious

10
consequences for learning and technological capability. Some prominent examples are as follows
Domestic price controls on Industrial commodities like steel discourage innovation and quality upgrading

because they lead to excess demand: in the presence of excess demand, firms have no need to
increase demand for their product by improving it (see Perez and Peniche, 1987, for the case of
Mexican steel4). Soft-bud9et constraint policies similarly discourage innovation in a number of ways:
when profits are taxed on the basis of ex post profitability, the benefits of any innovation are shared

with the government when the government stands ready to bait out a loss-making enterprise it
discourages the adoption of technologies that may otherwise render the firm viable (Atiyas, Dutz, and

rrischtak, 1992, 16-17). Entry and exit restrictions, through capacity licensing or prohibition of layofl,
prevent more efficient newcomers from replacing less efficient ones. More directly pernicious are
restrictions on imports of technology and capital goods, and local-purchase requirements forcing firms to
use inferior inputs end equipment (as is common in many countries that prohibit imports when domestic

substitutes exist). See Lall (1987) for relevant evidence from India.
There is a wide array of empirical evidence that has been brought to bear on these issues and to
test, in particular, the hypothesized cause-end-effect relationship between protection and poor
technological performance. 1-lowever, since the conceptual issues are rarely sorted nut as a prelude to

empirical analysis, the results of these esercises are difficult to interpret. There are three types of
empirical evidence that deserve menlion: ci) firm-level case sludies; (ii) crosa-industry studies nI

technical efficiency and productivity change, and (Hi) cross-country studies of economic growth. I will
briefly discuss each in turn.

4.Zi. Firm-level case sludies of technological change
Several in-depth case studies of technological change and learning have been carried out at the firm
level and the results are described in a number of sources, including Katz (1987), Lalt (1987), and Pack

The authors quote the owner of the company they studied as saying that if the sun were not visible
through the steel sheets, they could be sold.

11
(1987). See Levy (1991) for case studies of learning related to export markets among Taiwanese and
Korean footwear producers. Pack (1992) provides an overview and survey of the firm-level literature on
technical change. These studies show that there is a considerable amount of tech nological tinkering

that goes on even when firms are cut off from foreign markets. They do not, however, lead to any easy
generalizations regarding the exlent to which trade regimes affect the pace of learning. In fact, it is easy
to read the case evidence in very different ways: Katz (1987) concludes from his and his collaborators'
studiee that reducing costs has not been a high-priority for Latin American firms because of high levels
of trade protection and little internal competition; the author of one of those stuthes, however, provides
evidence that it was firms which could rely on steady growth in captive domestic markets that undertook
the highest levels of technical effort (Pearson, 1987, p, 421).
4.2.2. Crosa-industiy studies of technical efficiency and productivity change

There exist a number of studies that correlate aspects of policy regimes with measured changes in total

factor productivity (TFP)et the industry level. Among the most notable of these are Krueger and
Tuncer (1982a), Ntshimizu and Robinson (1984), Nishimizu and Page (1991).
Krueger and Tuncer (1982a) find that, on average, periods of slower TFP growth in Turkish industry

coincided with period in which the trade regime was more restrictive. Drawing on data from Korea,
Turkey, Japan, and Yugoslavia, Nishimizu and Robinson (1984) relate the increase in sectoral TFP to

sources of demand growth, including export expansion and import substitution. They find a
preponderance of oases where export expansion is positively associated, and import substitution

negatively associated, with TFP growth. They caution specifically, however, that no causality can be
attributed to these results, Nishimizu and Page (1991) analyze a panel of industries from several
countries and regress TFP growth on country characteristics. They find that export growth is positively
correlated with TFP growth, but only in economies that follow market-oriented policies". However, they
also find that import penetration was negatively corretated with TFP performance in the same

economies in the post-1973 period. Naturally, the same comment about causatty applies to this study
as well.

12
There have not been meny studies thet have attempted to test the infant-industry hypothesis
directly. A well-known peper by Krueger and Tuncer (1 982b) corriperes sectorat TFP growth ratea in
croas-section of Turkish industries, and reporta that there was no systematic tendency for more

protected industries to have had higher TFP growth than less protected industries,5 Strictly speaking,
the authors' method doea not conatitute an appropriate test of the Intant-induatry argument. Such a test
would require e counterfactuat regarding the TFP path that the protected industries would have followed

in the absence of protection; the implicit assumption that the less protected industries provide the
appropriate counterfactust ie not compelting. Along similar lines, Dollar and Sokoloff (1990) analyze
TFP growth in South Korean manufacturing industries (over the period 1963-79), and find productivity

increase to play a smaller role in the growth of heavy industries than in the growth of light and medium
industries. They speculate that the reason may have to do with the prevalence of credit subsidies for
heavy industries, which would have encouraged capitat deepening. On the other hand, Waverman and
Murphy's (1992) study of TFP growth in the automobile sectors of four countries—Argentina, Mesico,

Korea, and Canada—provides a more mixed picture. Judged by the yardstick of TFP growth] the
second most successful country during the 1970s was Argentina (after Korea), the most closed of the
four econonlies. Waverman and Murphy find TFP growth to have been high in Argentina both during its
trade-liberalization period (1978-81) and earlier. Other, more informal evidence on infant industries are
sun,eyed in Bell, Ross-Larson, and Westphat (1984), who suggest that the evidence is rather damaging

Actually, a closer look at their data leads to a conclusion more favorable to protection. Krueger and
Tuncer report data on three measures of protection end two measures of productivity growth. The only
correlations that are statistically significant at a 10 percent confidence level between these types of
indicators are two positive correlations between a measure of protection and a measure of productivity
growth. Moreover, one of these is statistically significant at the 1 percent level. I am grateful to Ann
Harrison for this information.
Krueger and Tuncer claim (1982b): "... in order for infant industry considerations to have warranted
intervention in favor of industry i, costs per unit of output must have fallen more in i than in k (1145). This
is not quite right. One can imagine a situation where dynamic leaming externalities in industry i call for
intervention, but once these externalities are appropriately internalized vie policy, productivity still grows
slower than in other industries.

13
to the case for infant-industry protection.
The above studies can be criticized for not being able to control for induatry or country effects that
exert an independent Influence on productivity. An Interesting study that avoids some of these
problems is Chen and Tang (1987) on Taiwan's electronics industry. These authors compare the level
of technical efficiency (as measured by distance from an estimated productton frontier) in two groups of
firms, one (hat comprises firms that are constrained to export all their output, and one that includes

firms that are allowed to service the protected domestic market, They find that the former group
exhibits a higher level of technical efficiency than the latter. However, the interpretation of this rssut is
open to question also. in parttcutar, there is reason to suspect that the two samples of firms would be
subject to selection bias: since firms know which policy regime thay are going to be operating under, it
would seem obvious that only firms (hat had reasonably high estimates of their efficiency would submit
themselves to the exports-only regime.
A recent paper by J.-W. Lee (1992) is significant because it focuses on the productivity
consequences of Korea's industrial policy, which has been the subject of great debate (see sectirm 5).
Lee constructs sectoral estimates of tariff and non-tariff barriers, tax incentives, and credit subsidies.
His econometric analysis covers a panel of 38 Korean msnufscturing sectors over four 5-year periods
(during 1963-83). He finds sectoral TFF growth rates to be negstivs)y and statistically significantly

correlated with non-tariff barriers, but positively and significantly correlated with tax incentives these
findings are interesting as well ss puzzling. it is difficult to reconcile the two sets of results
theoretically, suggesting perhaps thaI differences in the implementation of these interventions may have
had something to do with the findings.
Other empirical studies of how contacts with the outside world influence domestic technological

performance include Katrak (1989), Aitken and Harrison (1992), and Prasnikar, Svejnsr, and Klinedinst
(1992). Katrsk finds a positive reislionship between the amount of imported technology and domestic

in-house R&D in Indian enterprises. Aitken and Harrison look for evidence of spillovsrs at the plant
level from foreign subsidfsries to local firms in a panel drawn from Venezuela. They find no indication

14
that foreign presence helps domestically-owned plants' productivity. Prasnikar

is a plant-level

econometric study of the determinants of technical efficiency in the former Yugoslavia. This study finds
no evidence that export orientation or the presence of joint ventures with foreigners had benetcial
effecta on technical efficiency. See the chapter by Evenson and Weatphal in this volume for a more
complete discussion of the related literature.

Finally, a recent group of papers has been devoted specifically to the experiences of countries
undergoing structural adjustment programs, and has paid close attention to econometric and conceptual

issues. These papers will be discussed when we turn to the results of recent policy reforms.

4.2.3. Cross-country studies or economic growth
A large number of crosa-crountry studies have looked at the relationship between eccnornc growth and
aome measure of trade policy and/or price distortions, using various controls on the right-hand aide of
the regression. These studies generally conclude that openness has been conducive to higher growth.
The immediate problem in such regressions is corning up with an appropriate indicator of trade
parley that would rank countries consistently among each other trom least open to most open. Many
candidate indicators exist, including trade shares, tariff and non-tariff measures, and residuals from

factor-endowments models of trade patterns. Pritchett (1991) reviews and discusses some of the
better-known measures.7 His disturbing conclusion is that there is virtually no statistically significant
positive correlation among them. Secondly, there is the usual problem of attributing causality: if
governments routinely tighten restrictions when economic performance becomes wcrse statistical
analysis will pick up a spurious relationship between distortions and growth. This may happen even in
the absence of conscious government policy. Under a fixed exchange rate, for example, the blackmarket premium will endogenously increase in response to a foreign-exchange crisis, If such crises are

Pritchett limits his sttsntion to objective' measures of outward orientation, these include: the share

of trade in GDP, adjusted for country characteristics and factor endowments; the average tariff and
coverage ratio of non-tariff barriers; measures of deviation of actual trade patterns from the pattern
predicted from a model of resource based comparative advantage; measures of real price distortions.

15
associated with lower growth, the analyst will uncover a negative relationship between the black-market
premium (the trade distortion variable) and economic growth.

Hence, most of the indicators that have been used can be criticized on conceptual or empirical
grounds. Balassa (1978), Feder (1983), Michaety (1977), Syrquin and Chenery (1989), and Easterly
(1992) use exports (either their growth rate or their share in income) as the Indicator of openness. This
raises problems of endogeneity and reverse causality (Jung and Marshall, 1955, Esfahani, 1991). Alan
(1987) and Easterly (1992) use the trade orientation index presented in World Bank (1987), which haa

been criticized as being misleading and biased (Taylor 1991, p. 107). Edwards (1992) uses a measure
of openness computed by Leamer (1988), which attributes all of the residual from a cross-country
factor-endowments model to government intervention and has serious shortcomings in the way it ranks
certain countries.6 De Long and Summers (1991) use a range of measures, among which a dummy !or
high levels of efective rates protection (s 40%) and the World Bank (1987) trade orientation index are
found to exert an independent negative effect on growth. Barro (1991) and Dolfar (1992) use some
measure of the deviation in the local price level from purchasing power parity (n the case of Barro, only
with respect to investment goods), derived from Hexton and Summers (1988)!
The last method deserves separate comment, as it appears at first sight to yield an intuitive and
objective measure of openness and price distortions, and has received considerable attention. What
Dollar (1992) does specifically is to take a len-year average for each country of the deviation in its price
level from that of the U.S. The systematic component of cross-country differences in non-tradablex

6 For example, one of Leamer's measures (the scaled regression-based openness measure) ranks
countries like Morocco, Indonesia and Ivory Coast ax more open than countries like Canada and the U.S.
White Edwards (1992) limits his sample to developing countries, such anomalies reflect the inadequacy of
the basic method. Leamer himself remains doubtful about his results: Aa I examine these results, I am
left with a feeling of skepticism regarding the usefulness of the adjusted trade inlenxity ratios as indicators
of trade barriers. I see taxIes (Japan's coffee), omitted resources (Iceland's fish), and historical accidents
(switzerland'x watches), I am not sure that I see trade barriers (1958, pp. 19899),

This is by no means a complete list of such studies, For additional references, see for exareple
Esfahani (1991) and Helleiner (1990).

16
prices is purged, to the extent pnssibte, by regressing price levels en national income. Dollar claims
that Th country maintaining a high price level over many years woctd clearly have to be a country with a

relatively large amount of protection (inward orientation)' (525-26). However, it is not uncommon for
countries to maintain overvalued eschange rates (as measured by PPP) for a prolonged period of time,
even in the absence of trade restrictions--think of Chile in 1979-82 and the U.S. in 1981-85, for
example. Moreover, the converse of the statement is certainly not true: a large amount of protection
need not imply a high price level for tradables as a group. Trada protection raises the prices of import
competing goods relative to exportables; it has no definite implication for the aggregate price index for
tradables, A country can slap on extremely high levels of import barriers, and yet have its price index
for tradabtes scarcely move against the U.S. level (or indeed have it actually fall below the U.S. level).
In practice, what will bring this re-equiibration about is a compensating appreciation of the national
currency which will reduce the dollar pricea of local exporleblea while ii dampens the increase in the
dollar price of imporlablea.

Judged from this perspective, some of the anomalies in Dollar'e rankings can be better understood.
For example, India and Indonesia are listed among the second least distorted group ol countries (there
are four groups in all), which should come as a surprise to anyone with some knowledge of these

countries' trade regimes daring 1976-85. What explains this, in al likelihood, is that these two countries
managed their exchange rates and macroeconomic policies rather well over the period in question,

avoiding sustained ovarvaluations of their currencies. It is even more surprising to find Chile listed
among the more closed economies, even though this economy was certainly one of the least protected
ones in the world during much of this period. Since Chile also experienced a pronounced exchange
rate overvatatlon during part of this period, this result is however understandable in light of the
methodology. In short, purchasing-power-parity-based indicators of price distortions are likely to capture
the exchange-rate (and therefore macroeconomic) stance of countries, and miss out on micro price

IQ In his growth regressions, this price level index is actually combined with an index of real exchange
rate variability to produce what Dollar cafls an outward orientation index. The inclusion of the variability
index is itself problematic in this context.

11
distortions when exchenge rates ere managed well.
An additional problem with growth regressions of the type discussed here is that they Lend to be

very sensitive to the precise configuration of explanatory variables included in the regression. Levine
end Renelt (1992) have shown that very Few explanatory variables are 'robusr to the inclusion of
additional variables on the right-hand side ot cross-country growth regressions. The share of

investment in GDP tends to be robust in this sense. Trade and price-distortion indicators sre not. But
they also report that the ratio of trade to GDP does appear to have a robust correlation with the
investment share. Partly In response to this criticism, Harrison (1991) has analyzed a large set of trade
end price distortions, and included them individually in a panel regression with country fised-effects and

additional controls of the type Levine and Renelt have used. Within this fixed-effect framework, she
recovers a systematically negative and statistically significant correlation between trade distortions and

growth.
4.2.4. Summary on empirical studies on dynamic costs at price distortions

A number of problems have plagued the empirical studies surveyed here. We summarize the more
important here: (I) the trade-regime indicator used is typically measured very badly, and is often an

andogenous variable itself (ii) the direction of causality is not awiays clear, even when a policy variable
is used as the trade indicator: govemments may choose to relax Lrade restrictions when economic

performance Is good: (iii) openness in the sense of lack of trade restrictions is often confused with
macroeconomic aspects of the policy regime, notably the exchange-rate stance:11 (iv) the causal
mechanisms that link openness to beneficial dynamic effects are rarely laid out carefutty and subjected

to test themselves; this makes it very difficult for poicy conclusions to be drawn.
Measurement and conceptual issues aside, it is perhaps reassuring that so many studies using so
many different indicators tend to confirm that countries with fewer price distortions, particularly on the

' When foreign currency is rationed, an overvslued exchange rate ix equivalent to an import tariff.
However, in all other cases the consequences of exchange-rate overvaluation (or undervaluation) differ frcm
those of trade barriers. This distinction is rarely drawn in the studies discussed above.

18
trade side tend to grow faster. Even if we are not convinced by any single study, should we not be
swayed by all of them taken together? Perhaps so. But the virtual impossibility of accurate crosscountry measurement of distortions, as wett as the prevalence of distortions in Taiwan and Korea in the
1960s and 1970s (see below), should make us cautious with regard to the presumption of improved
performance in any specific country contemplating liberatzation.1

4.3. Response to external shocks
The case for policy reform was much strengthened by the argument, originating most forcefully in
Bela Bslassa's work, that export-oriented countries are better positioned to deal with negative external
shocks than inward-oriented countries. The argument was advanced by analyzing the comparative
experience of countries during the second half of the 1970s. Focussing on the period following the first
oil shock (1974-18), Batassa (I 961a) first calculated the foreign-exchange impact of terms-of-trade and

export demand shncks for several countries. Then, he decomposed the aggregate shock into four types

of what he called potcy responses; (1) additional net external nencing; (ii) increase in export market
share; Qti) import substitution; end (iv) import effects of lower ChIP growth. He argued that exportpromoting countries, unlike inward-oriented countries, were able to increase their world market shares,

which in turn favorably affected their economic growth. Balassa (1981b) later confirmed these findings
with a larger sample of developing countries.13

Focussing on the early 1980a, Sacha'a (1985) comparative analysis of East Asian and Latin

American experiences reinforced Balasse's conclusion. Sacha argued that the primary reason most
East Asian countries were successful in avoiding protracted debt crises was the higher share ot exports

12Alao, the weight of published evidence should be tempered by a selection bias at work. Such is the
appeal of conventional wisdom on this iaetre that it is possible that many atudiea which find an insignificant
or positive relationehip between price distortions end growth do not make it beyond firat-dreft atage.

See Srinivaaan (1955) for a review of theae and related studies by Mitra (1986). Salassa's
procedures have been criticized by Hughes and Singh (1991) for not taking into account the negative
interest rate shock to Latin American countries and the positive remittance shock to certain Asian countries,
thus making the comparison less favorable to the former.

19in their GNPs, He also went one step further in linking the Latin American outcome to the political
pressure originating from powerful urban groups with a stake in inward-orientation.

At first sight it is paradoxical that more Open economies should perform better in the face of

negative external shocks. Here it is useful to distinguish between the impact effect of a shock and the
transition out of it. With regard to the former, it is clear that a given terms of trade shock is more
harmful to a country with a high export-to--GNP ratio than one with a low ratio. Similarly, a reduction in
external capital flows affects a country that has actively participated in international capital markets

more than one that has not. Indeed, the impact effects of external negative shocks were gravest on the
moat open economies auth as Korea in 1980 and Chile in 1982-83, but were barely fett in a closed

economy tke india.
The appropnate way to think of Balassa's and Sacha'a arguments, therefore, is as follows: it ix not
that outward oriented countries are immune to shocks, but that they have an easier time getting out of

crisis. But even here there are conceptual problems. if what one understands by outward orientation is
the absence of microeconomic distortions that bias incentives away from exports, it is difficult to see
how such distortions could be causally related to the balance-of-payments crises that have typically

followed external shocks. None of the case studies in Thomas etal. (1991), for example, makes a
convincing case that microeconomic distortions were at the root of the crisis of tho early 1980s. As a
matter of aimple economics, trade restrictions lower exports and imports, and have no implications for
the balance between the two. The trade balance is determined by macroeconomic policies—expenditure

policies arid exchange-rate potcy in particuiar. The correct response to an adverse balance-ofpayments shock is a combinaton of expenditure-reducing and expenditure-switching (i.e., exchangerate) policies. The evidence ix that countries that recovered relatively quickly from their respective
shocks were those that applied this simple recipe (see for example Dailami, 1991, on Korea, and
Moran, 1991, on Chile).14

14 Weatphars criticism of Dailami's account is noteworthy: "[the chapter] does not develop with s uttcient
clarity the point that Korea'a rapid recovery from the macroeconomic crisis owed far more to stabilization
policies than to concurrent structural adjustment policies" (1991, 406).

20
These objections notwithstanding, it is still possible that outward oriented countries have greater
flexibility in responding to shocks, or that their political economy more easily allows (and acommodatea)

a change in macro policies. The informal evidence is consistent with these views, but the studies cited
above—with the exception of Sachs (1965). which explicitly links policy choices to the underlying pottical

economy—have only scratched the surface. Consequently, we lack a good understanding of how and
why certain configurations of economic policy render the economy more resilient to external shocks than
others.
4.4. Institutional effects: Reducing rent seeking

The final set of arguments in favor of policy reform has to do with governance issues. The
institutional setting under which import-substitution policies have typically operated has given rise to a
wide variety of incentive distortions and resource misatocations that collectively go under the name of
"rent-seeking". Starting with Krueger's (1974) classic article, it has become commonplace to argue that
the resource costs of the prevaitng distortions are multiplied several-fold by the existence of such
actvities. Examples of the waste generated include: employment of lobbyists and other intermediaries
in pursuit of licenses and incentives to be obtained from government officials; generation of excess
capacity when import licenses era allocated in proportion to installed capacity; competition for scarcity
rents in black markets when commodities and foreign exchange are ratoned: smuggling, under-

invoicing, and over-invoicing. See Krueger 0990) for a recent re-statement, Bhagwati (1982) for s
theoretical generalization, Gallagher (1991) for an empirical application to African countries, Tarr (1992)
for an application to autos and TVs in pre-trsnsition Poland. and Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny (1991) for
an extension in the context of economic growth.

While the costs of rentseeking may be genuinely immense, it does not fellow that a correction of
price distortions and a move to outward orientation necessarily eliminates them. As long as
governments exist and they implement policy, individuals and groups will exercise poticsl power to
obtain particulsristic benefits for themselves. Por example, Onis (1991) shows how a new type of rent-

21
seeking took over once Turkish policy moved towards Korean-style outward orientation: rent-seekers

started to run after export subsidies instead of import tcenses.
it is a plausible hypothesis, nonetheless, that certain types of policies are more conducive to rent-

seeking than others. Compare tariffs and quotas. As Bhagwab and Srinivasan (1980) have noted, tariff
revenue can be sought by rent-seekers just as quote premia are. Yet, it is reasonable to suppose that
the anonymity of revenues that accrue to the general budget somehow shields them from the gaze of
rent-seekers, something that cannot be said for quota licenses that carry hefty premia (Krueger, 1990).

Similarly, a uniform tax system may be more impervious to lobbying than one with a highly differentiated
structure (see Panagariya and Rodrik, 1992, for an analyis). But the lack of overt rent-seeking in East

Asia must be attributed primarily to the hardnesC of the slate in thai setting (see the next section), and
not to outward oriented policies per se.

5. Heterodoxy I: Reinterpreting the East Asian experience
The East Asian success story--i.e., the stupendous growth rates achieved by Japan, South Korea,
Taiwan, Singapore, and Hong Kong--raises the challenge of how this experience can be emulated in
othet settings. Economists who prescribe openness and price liberalization to developing countnes
typically present a picture of the East Asian experience that differs rather sharply from that presented by
East Asian specialists themselves. A usual caricature is that these countries schieved their miracles by
minimizing price distortions, giving marketa free rein, and emphasizing exports. ln the case of Korea
and Taiwan, in particular, emphasis is placed on reforms during the 1960s that greatly reduced the
restrictiveness of the trade regime, eliminated financial repression, and established a hee-trade regime

for esporters. Analysts who have studied these countries closely describe a much more nuanced
situation, and stress that government intervention has been pervasive (except for in Hong Kong). The
latter credit East Asian governments for making the miracles happen, not by getting out of the way of
private entrepreneurs, but by actively nurturing and protecting infant industries.

With regard to liberalizing trade restrictions, for example, it is clear that East Asian countries did not

22
go nearty as far some Latin American countries have done recently and that whatever was
accomplished took place a lot more gradually. Here is how Hong (1991) describes the progress of
liberalization in Japan, Korea, and Taiwan:

It was not until the I 960s that Japan eliminated the bulk of its formal quantllstive restrictions:
the nominal import liberalization ratio (by items) expanded from less than 70 percent in 1 960 to

about 93 percent in 1964, and to 97 percent by 1976. Similarly, Taiwan did not eliminate the
bulk of Its formal quantitative restrictions until the early 1970s: the nominal import-liberalization
ratio increased From 61.5 percent in 1970 to 96,5 percent in 1973.... Korea is scheduled to
eliminate the bulk of its quantitative restrictions during the period 1984-88. (p.

245)

According to a Korean Development Institute (KDI) study (cited in Hong, 1991), the average effective
rate of protection in Korea (for domestic sales only) actually rose from 30 percent in 1963 to 38 percent

in 1978, after a dip to 24 percent in 1970.15 The conlrast with the rapid and no-holds-barred
liberalization that has taken place in Chile in the second half of the 1970s, and in Bolivia, Mexico and
Argenlina in the 1980s is staggering.
With regard to industrial policy, the following evaluation of Tsnzi and Shome (1992) of Taiwan's tax
incentives is ncteworlhy:
Taiwanese policymakers believed that they could pursue an investment strategy that would

second-guess the market and pick winners, As a consequence, Taiwan kept its tax rates much
higher than Hong Kong but pushed the investors in the desired direction through Ihe

widespread

use of tax incentives. These incentives were fine-tuned to a degree rarely seen in other
countries. (p. 57)
The same objectives ware pursued in Korea via selective and discretionary credit subsidies (see C.H

Lee, 1992). On industrial activism in Singapore, see Young (1992).

This reflects an increase in protection of the agricultural sector, however. For
manufacturing proper,
the effective rate has declined from 28 percent in 1963 to 13 percent in 1978.

23
The extensive involvement of the state in industrialization has long been familiar to close
observers of East Asia (see to' example Jones and Sakong, 1980, Westphal, 1982, and Pack and
Westphal. 1986). Two recent books have led the way in popularizing the reinterpretation of the East
Asian experience, Amsden (1989) on Korea and Wade (1990) on Taiwan. While many of Amsden's
and Wades arguments have been made before, what is new in these books is an smbitious re-

conceptualization of this experience, as well as their extensive documentalion of the governments role
in allocating resources and guiding ndustriatzation in both instances.
Amsden (1989) describes in detail the Korean government's use of trade protection, selective credit
subsidies, export targets (for individual firms!), public ownership of banking sector, export subsidies, and
price controls—all deployed single-mindedly in the service of acquisition of technological capabilities and

of building industries that wtll eventually compete in world markets. She argues that government policy
was successful not because it got prices right, but indeed because it got them purposefully wrong.
However, a key element of the strategy, Amsden argues, wss thst in exchange for government
subsidies and trade protection the government also set stringent performance stsndsrds. Firms were
penalized when they performed poorly, as when they became subject to "rationalization" (government-

mandated mergers and capacity reduction) in the wake of over-extension. They were rewarded when
they fulfilled government objectives, as when they were awarded subsidized credit for fulfilling export
targets. Such discipline kept the system free of the rent-seeking that has contaminated incentive
regimes in other settings: "in other countries—like Turkey and India, for example.—subsidies have been

dispensed primsrity as giveaways. In Korea the 'wrong' prices have been right because government
discipline over business has enabled subsidies and protection to be less than elsewhere and more

affective" (Amsden, 1989, vi).
Wade (1990) does not deny that there were elements of the free-msrket (ie., Hong Kong) recipe in

e But see Johnson (1982) for an antecedent in Japan's case, as well as Jones and Sakong (1960) on
Kores.

24
the Taiwanese strategy, but he quelittes the picture significantly. He cells Taiwan a governed market
economy, characterized by; (1) high levels of investment: Oi) more investment in certain key industries

than would have resulted in the absence of government intervention: end O) exposure of many
industries to international competition (p. 26). He documents the pervasiveness of incentives and
controls on private firms through import restrictions, entry requirements, domestic content requirements,

fiscal investment incentives, and concessionel credit. I-fe argues that the Taiwanese state has
consistently acted in anticipation of comparalive advantage in such sectors as cotton textiles, ptastics,
basic metals, shipbuilding, automobiles, and industrial electronics; "Taiwan manages its trade differently

from many other developing countries, but not less' (p. 113). Ute Amsden, he stresses the 'hard'
nature of the East Asian state, but also argues that the emphasis on exports helped reveal policy
mistakes and made reversal possible when some ventures got too costly.

These works do not make easy reading for economists, both because they so boldly contradict
conventional wisdom on what constitutes good economic policy, and because their authors' anatyses

ocassionally remain incomplete or confusing. The latter is true particularly on the question of whether
the verious policy interventions more or less offset each other, resueing in broad policy neutrality on

balance, as liberalizers are prone to argue (e.g., Snaps, g91). On this important issue, Amsden
openly contradicts the Lemer symmetry theorem (and Wairas' Law) withoul attempting a reconciliation.'7

Wade does the same, and also contradicts tiimselfi* Nonetheless, these books cannot easily be
dismissed: they present a serious challenge to those who would deny the usefulness of an activist

17 "The argument that relative prices in Korea were distorted but in the right direction, that is, toward

exports, is therefore itself distorted: Prices were distorted in all directions in Korea—both for import
substitutes and for exports—and often for one and the same product in the two categories' (Amsden, 1989,
p. 155).
78

"The government was trying to promote both exports and, in different industries, import
substitution,.,,' (1990, p. 117, my anphasis) Later on, Wade writes: '[export promotion and import
substitution] are mutually asciusive only If daitned to refer to the overall balance of incentives between
domestic and foreign sale. But at the individual industry level, import-substituting incentives and exportpromoting inventivas can be complementary' (p. 363). His second statement is, of course correct, but
greatly limits the force of his argument since it is a partial-equilibrium one which cannot have applied to
more than a narrow segment of industry.

25
industrial poticy. Similar analyses of the East Asian experience, with varying emphases, are presented
in Banuri (1991), Bardhan (1990), Diddle and Milor (1992), Biggs and Levy (1990), Geretfi and Wyman
(1990), Johnson (1967), and Westphal (1990).

It bears repeating what is perhaps the most striking aspect of the revisionist accounts of the East
Asian experience: the policy instruments used to such benefit in that context are no different from those

that have spparentty tailed so miserabty in Latin America, Africa, and the rest of Asia. The polides in
question are import quotas and licenses, credit subsidies, tax exemptions, public ownership, and so on.
For example, export subsidies that have worked so well in Korea in the 1 960s have been ineffective

and a source of rent-saaking in Kenya in the 1970s, and in Bolivia, Cote d'lvoire and Senegal during the

1980s. A reasonable hypothesis is that the reason has to do with differences n the way that the
government interacts with the private sector. One way of conceptualizing this difference is to think of
the government as a Stacketberg follower vis-a-vis the private sector in much of the developing world,

whereas it is the Stackelberg leader in East Asia. A modal of this sort can be used to explain how
identical poticies can have diametrically opposite consequences in different institutional settings (see
Rodrik, 1992d).

tf there is a set of conclusions regarding the East Asian experience on which the revisionists and
the liberalizers can agree on, it probably goes as follows: (I) there has been a lot of government
intervention and sn active trade and industrial poticy; (U) but intervention has taken place above all in
the context of stable macroeconomic policies in the Form of small budget deficits and realistic exchangerate management; (iii) equally important, the governments' emphasis on and unmitigated commitment to

exports has helped minimize the resource costs and incentive problems that would have otherwise
arisen From heavy intervention; (iv) also, intervention has taken place in an institutional setting

characterized by a "hard state and strong government disciptne over the private sector; (v)

This point was also stressed by Pack and Westphal (1 986): The differences between Japan, Korea,
and Taiwan, on one side, and most less successfut industrializing countries, on the other, are not to be
found in the use of different policy instruments. The differences are to be Found instead in different ways
of using the same poticy instruments—for example, in the scope of of their spptication, in whether they are
used promotionalty or restrictively (pp. 102-103).

26
furthermore, such a setting is lacking in most other developing countries. What one then does with
these conclusions dopends on one's predilections, Some would argue that it is possible to engineer
local versions ot the institutions that have made Korea's or Taiwan's policies so successful (e.g., Wade,
1990, chap. 11; Fishlow, 1991). Others would conclude that weaker governments should economize on
their scarcest resource, administrative competence, and restrict their involvement in the micromanagement of the economy (Krueger, 1990). Yet others would call for an entirety hands-off approach
(Lsl, 1990).

6. Heterodoxy II: Recent models of inperfect competition
One of the common arguments against East Asian type industrial policies is that governments could
not possible make informed decisions about which industries will eventually become successful and

hence deserve support. Wade (1990) argues that this objection misses the point: "The governments of

Taiwan, Korea, and Japan have not so much pjd winners as made them." (p. 334, emphasis in the
odginsi). In other words, Wade implies that under the right set of government poficies, industries can
be nurtured into competitiveness even if these industries are es ante undistinguished with respect to
potential comparative advantage. Now, while this statement may be true as a matter of objective
description, its normative implications are not as salutary as Wade assumes. Indeed, in an economy
approsimating perfectly-competitive condttions, the policy just described would have to reduce the

economy's real income. Making "successfur esporters out of industries that do not possess an
underlying comparative advantage is a resource-subtracting potcy. So is this another display of poor
economics?
The answer is not so clear in light of recent trade models with increasing returns to scale and
imperfect comperition. Assume for a moment that much of manufacturing operates under increasing

returns to scale, at least up to a point. Assume also that industrial production eshtbits demand or
technological spillovers; that is, the expansion of a firm leads to an increase in demand faced by other,

27
neighboring firms or a reduction in their cosls.7° Under these circumstances, the pettern ot comparative
advantage can be largely arbitrary. A policy that subsidized a sub—grouping of firms or industries
eshibrting such demand complementarities or technological spillovers would permanently alter the

economy's "comparative adventage in raise Its rear income (Pack and Westphal, 1986; Murphy
1989; Krugman 1991, 1992). Moreover, the informstionat requirements of a policy of this sort need not
be heavy: en input-oulpul lable and some knowledge ot the industrisi structure of more advanced
countries are basically all that the policy makers would need.21

There are strong echoes of Rosenstein-Rodan (1943), Nurkse (1953) and Hirschman (1958) in this.

Indeed, one consequence of the emergence of this new literature has been the partial rehabilitation! at
least at the level of theory, of concepts such as "big push," "balanced growth" and "linkages".
This is just one example of how conventional wisdom can be upset by explicitly considering

Increasing returns to scale. However, the new fitereture is far from having yielded robust conclusions.

See Stewart and Ghani (t992) for a survey of evidence on this and other type of spitlovers. Note
that a demand spillover, lelcen on its own (i.e., in the absence of increasing returns), would not constitute
grounds for policy intervention. A technological spitlover normally would.

21 This is how Wade (1990, p. 335), citing the Economist, describes the way MITI picked industries to
support: "First, MITI officials studied income elasticities of demand for various items in the main markets
of the world, especially the United States, Second, they examined trends in technological change in various
industries, Third they checked industries with high income elasticities and high potential for technological
change against Japan's specialization Index, or the share of each industry in Japan's industrial exports over
the share of that industry In world trade.... If world demand was growing especially fast for some particular
item, the planners would get worried If Japan's specialization indes for that item was not going up too, On
the other hand, if Japan's specialization index was already high for sn item whose world demand was not
rising, they would not worry if its exports did not keep up. Fourth, they checked the trends against another
index called the 'export and industrial estrangemenl coefficient.' This measured the relationship between
an ilem's importance in Japan's total industriat output against its importance in exports.... With these
measures, the government could identify sectors where measures for encouraging greater output and
exports should be slapped up." None of this of course makes sense in the context of the compehtive model
of economy. 8ut with increasing returns, demand spillovers, and imparted competition, a justification can
be constructed, Of course, it is also easy to credit East Asian planner with too much: even Arnsden (1989)
recognizes that Korean potcy makers may have gone too far with their promotion of heavy and chemical
industries in the late 1970s. See Yoon (1992) for a model of how a Korean producer of computer memory
chips became successful without direct government support, and Young (1992) for an interesting critique
of Singapore's industrial policy.

28
As we shall see, more often than not it has led to a bewildering array of special cases and an
embarrassingly rich set of possible outcomes from policy intervention. Consequently, it may be a

mistake to think of it as having signitcantly enhanced the case for intervention. Some have noted that
returns to scale and imperfect competition are rampant in developing countries, which makes the new
ideas particularly relevant to developing countries (Krugman, 1969; Rodrik, 1988; t-lelleiner. 1992a).
Others have dismissed them as largely irrelevant to developing-country circumstarrces and concerns

(Srinivaaan, 1989; Corden, 1990). See Grossman (1990) for a cautious survey of recent arguments for
promoting new industrial activities, and an avaluatton of their policy reievance,

f-low important is imperfect competition in developing countries? Casual evidence would auggesi

that it is very important indeed. See Lee (1992) for a recent survey of studies on market structure in
developing countries. However, imperfect competition is often the consequence of oovernment policy
itself: entry and exit reatrictiona, capacity licensing and quantitative trade barriers are among the policies

that come to mind. The evidence on returns to scale is much more limited. Wtrat we have are mostly
engineering studies undertaken for advanced countries (as summarized in Scherer and Ross, 1990, for
example). Sertous recent econometric evidence comes in a paper by Tybeut and Westbrook (1 992a)

who analyze a panel of plant-level data from Chile. They find nc trace of significant returns to scale:
none of their estimates for three-digit induetriea suggests departures from constant returns, and only two
(out of 12) of their four-digit estimates indicate increasing returns. They caution, however, thet their
method is unable to pick up any set-up costa that might be present, Broadly supportive evidence
comes from Little (t 937), who reports that small enterprises do not face a substantial comparative
disadvantage via-a-via larger firma.

Perhaps the recent literature's main contribution resides in providing new tools for analysia of some

age-old questions. The new tools relate to the modeling of three sets of issues in particular: strategic
interactions among firms; market-size externalities; and equilibrium when returns to scale and learning-

by-doing are h etny) to firma. These in turn have raised three typea of policy questions: (i) strategic
trade pcfcy O.e.. profit-shifting policy): (ii) policies to promote industries with scale economies; and (iii)

29
policies to promote leerning end growth. I take up each in turn.

6.1 Strategic trade policy
Much of the recent interest in modeling potcy in imperfectly-competitive settings arose from the
work ot Brander and Spencer (1985) on strategic trade policy. The basic Brander-Spencer model
consists of Iwo otgopolists based in different countries, competing in third markets and operating under
constant costs. Their cornpelition is modeled in a static, Nash-Cournol fashion; that is, esch firm
selects its output taking the other firm's oulput as given, and the equilibrium is defined as the pair nt
outputs from which neither firm wishes to deviate. In this setting, Brander and Spencer showed that if
one of the governments moved firsl and offered an esport subsidy to the domestic firm, the policy would
unambiguously increase home welfare (producer profits net of subsidy costs). What brings this result
about is the first-mover advantage arising from the assumed ability of the government to credibly

commit itself to a subsidy fie firms select their output levels. In effect, this transtorms the domestic
firm into a Stackelberg leader vis-a-vis the foreign firm, increases the market share of the domestic firm,
and enhances home weitare by shilling profits towards the latter,

What makes support or home firms a polentally worthwhile objective in imperfectly-competitive

markets is the existence of excess profits, at least when there is limited entry. This makes a peso of
additional activity inherently more valuable in these industries than in other, perfectly competitive
sectors.
However, the practical relevance of the profit-shifting argument ia quite limited. As Krugman (1992)
has put it, while an admirable piece of modeling craftsmanship, [the Brander-Spencer modefl has
generated intellectual and political heat out of all proportion to its long-run importance. The laundry list
of objections against the result is indeed formidable, The export-subsidy prescription is reversed (into
an export tax) when firms compete in prices (in Bertrand fashion) rather than in quantities (Eaton and
Grossman, 1986)22 With free entry into the industry, the rents from policy intervention are competed

22 The logic, somewhat crudely, goes as follows. When firms play Bertrand] they each assume that
the other firms price remains unchanged in responae to an increase in own price. In actual fact, the
optimal response is to raise prices when the competitor does the same, This means that under Bertrand

30
away and the home economy left worse ott? If the home government lacks perfect information about
coats end demand, the intervention may be set at the wrong level. When the foreign government plays
the same game, a prisoners' dilemma situation results. Last but not least, the available empirical
studies (which are mostly of the catbratiori-simulation type) yield only small gains from strategic policy
even when policies are set optimally and with perfect information, See the essays in Krugman (1 986)
for a good discussion of the potcy issues raised by the Brander-Spencer model, and the real-world
limitations to its usefulness.
Because they are rarely significanl players in oligopofistic global markets, the direct implications of
the Brander-Spencer model to developing-country exporters are even more limited. Baldwin (1992)
conducts a calibration-style empiricel analysis of one of the few exceptions; Brazilian exports of
commuter aircraft (the EMB-120) to U.S. and European markets. He finds that, on profit-shifting
grounds alone, even an optimally-selected Brazilian subsidy would have reduced home welfare. (But he
also shows that this result would be reversed once labor rents in the Brazilian aircraft industry are
allowed for.)

Perhaps a more promising area for profit-shifting policy is domestic markets in which home firma
compete with local subsidiaries of multinational corporations or with direct sales from aligopoliats

abroad. In such markets, there is a parallel case for discriminating against the foreign firma. Such
discrimination can be accomplished by impori tariffs when foreign firms do not produce locally (Levy and
Nolan, 1992), or by discriminatory performance requirements when they do (Rodrik, 1987a). But in

conjectures the home firm is too restrained in setting its price, relative to the true (out-of—equitbrium)
response by its competitor. An export lax raises Ihe home firm's price, thereby correcting the "distoriion
due to the difference between the conjectured response and the actual response.

It is possible to confuse the presence of excess profits with the lack of free entry. Suppose entering
an industry is risky, with a positive probabitty that an incumbent will make losses (and have to exit). In
order for there to be any entry at all, there must also be a positive probability of excess profits. Excess
profits, under free entry, will be zero
but positive
Subsidizing incumbents will simply lead
to additional entry, and the dissipation of additional rents created.

31
either case many of the limitations of the original protlt-shifting argument carry over to this setting as
well.
Levy and Nolan (1992) systematIcally analyze policies In the area of trade and direct foreign

investment in the presence of excess profits, and present a useful summary of the implications br
developing countries. The "lessons" they list are as follows: (1) Competition from foreign firms need not

always be beneficial. (2) Imports can be excessive under laissez-faire. (3) Foreign investment can be
harmful, even under free trade. (4) Policies that discriminate in favor of domestically-owned firms can
be beneficial. (5) Given the available empirical evidence, imperfect competition in the Industrial sector
of developing countries does not justify nominal tariff rates in excess of 15 percent. (6) Imperfect
compátition in the industrial sectors of developing countries is not an argument against trade
liberalization measures of the type typically under consideration.

L2 Policies to promote induslries with scale economies
The "new" trade theory has investigated a second area of potential policy intervention when

domestic firms operate at sub-optimal levels of capacity. In the presence of increasing returns to scale!
average costs of production exceed marginal costs; and since prices cannot fall below average costs for
firma to remain financiatly viable, there must exist a gap between price and marginal coat (even when
eacess profits are zero). In principle, this gap could be cloaed via policiea of subsidization and trade
protection which encourage increased scale of production.

When economies of scale are large enough, and there exist demand spillovers from one sector to
another, it is even possible that otherwise profitable industries will never get established in the firat
place. This is the basis for Murphy, Shleifer, and Vtshny's (1989a. 1989b) justification for coordinated
industrialization poicies:
When domestic markets are small and world trade is not free and costless, firms nay not be
able to generate enough sales to make adoption of increasing returns technologies profitable.
and heace industriafization is stalled.... (W]e focus [in this paper] on the contribution to

industrialization of one sector to enlarging the size of the market in other sectors. Such

32
spillovers give rise to the possibility that coordination of investment across sectors—which the

government can promote—is essential for industriatration. (189a, pp. 1003-4)
Note, however, the important caveat with regard to trade. If firms are able to take advantage of world
markets, they are treed from dependence on demand spillovers from other sectors in the same
economy; they can instead rely on a much larger world market. While it is possible to think of marketsize externalities that are local rather than globake.g., when geographical proximity matters or there are
non-tradable inputs—the possibilty of foreign trade greatty reduces the applicability of Murphy

a

argument? Indeed, since government policy is often the greatest impediment to trade, the argument
can even be read as one in favor of free trade rathar than government interventon.
This objection is a general problem with the idea of promoting increasing-returns industries, It
exporting is an option and transport costs low, firma can be expected to take advantage of it to reduce
their costs and become competitive. Consider, for esampte, the case of an import-competing firm with
strong scale economies (and assume the country in question is small in world markets). Trade

protection would allow the firm to increase its output and reduce its unit costs, Is thrs a good idea? If
the alternative is to close down the firm at no cost, the condition for such a policy to be make sense is

that the firm be able to reduce its average cost below the world price. Otherwise, we can save
resources by shutting down the firm and importing what was locally produced hefore. But if the firm can
reduce its average cost below its competitors' by expanding its scale of output sufficiently, ii needs no
inducement from the government to undertake what ts a profitable strategy in any case.25 The

(necessary but not sufficient) condition for local welfare improvement due to a small increase in

24 Pack and Westphal (1956) make a similar argument in the presence of trade, but they critically
assume that the import price of the relevant final good esceeds its export price (i.e., there exists transport
costs),
For a large-country the situafion may be different. Trade protection may raise the marginal oust of
the foreign firms, because it reduces their sales. This in turn makes the domestic firm achieve a larger
market share even in foreign markets. This is Xrugman's (1984) idea of import protection as export
promotion.

33
protection is less stringent, namely that the domestic marginal cost lie below the world price (Roddk,
1986). But of course the latter may still be an inferior strategy to letting the firm go bust,
Allowance for free entry generally weakens the case for trade protection even further. Entry in the
presence of scale economies tends to crowd firms and lead to duplicstion of fixed costs; protection
leads to further entry, end aggravates the duplication. Harris (1984) has shown, in the context of a
computable general equilibrium model for Canada, how the reversal of this process can lead to an
'industry rationalization' effect that significantly enhances the welfare gains from trade liberatization.
The basic mechsniem can be underslood by considering the equality belween price and average cost in
a model with free entry. In the aftermath of trade liberalizalion, the domestic price in import-competing
industries has to be lower, which implies s lower level of average dosls in the new equilibrium. What
allows this new equilibrium to exist is the exit of some of the incumbent firms, which provides room for
the remaining firms to expand their production lines and reduce their unit costs. The quantitative
importance of this rationalization effect has been cnnfirmed in simulaton exercises carried out in partial
equiibrium for several Turkish industries (Rodrik, 1968) and in a general equilibrium exercise for Korea

(Gunasekers and Tyers, 1991). The latter study estimates welfare gains of the order of? percent of
GDP arising from lengthened production runs and increased labor productivity, a number that greatly
exceeds anything that comes out of models with constant returns. However, a rather similar model
calibrated to Cameroonian data yields negligible effects from industry rationalization (Devarsjan and

Rodrik, 1992).
Note that the potential For excessive entry creates a role for entry restrictions, especially when entry

has been artiflcafly spurred by trade restrictions. This point is rarely recognized in industrial-policy
discussions, which too often assume the worst about the effects of such restrictions (eg., Fnschtaic.
1939). Whatever deleterious consequences entry barriers in countries like India and Argentina may
have had, they may have at least prevented even greater departures from minimum effcient scale.

-

34
6.3 Policies to promote learning and growth.
Recent modets of endogenous growth have stressed how learning and purposive R&D activity drive

economic growth through the creation of new products snd the improvement in the quality of esisting
ones. Unlike in the neo-claasical models of the Solow-type, long-run growth rates in these models are
not pinned down by a forever-diminishing marginal productivity of capital, and can be affected by
government policy (Lucas, 1988; Romer 1986). Endogenous growth is obtained by allowing nondecreasing returns to reproducible assets, such as knowledge and human capital. A question of
particular interest has been how international trade and trade policy influence growth in models of this

kind. The answer is: it depends.
To aee the different channels at work, consider a simple endogcnoua growth model of the type
considered by Grossman and Heipman (1991) and Rivera-Batiz and Romer (1991). We distinguish
between three sectors, which we call agriculture, manufacturing, and R&D. The agriculture sector is
intensive in unskilled labor, while manufacturing is intensive in akiilled tabor. We suppose they trade at

esogenoualy given world prices. The R&D sector also uses skilled labor and specializes in inventing
intermediate goods, which are produced under monopohsticaily competitive conditions. The wider the
range of intermediate gooda, the lower are the coats in the manufacturing sector (as in Ethier, 1982).

(Atternativety, this cost efect could arise from knowledge apillovera produced in the R&D sector.) The
profitability ot producing these intermediate goods determines the rate at which new goods are

produced, and therefore the rate at which manufacturing coats decline. The R&D sector is therefore the
economy's growth sector: activity in this sector directly determines the economy's growth rate.

International trade has three main conaequencea in a model of this type? Following Grossman and
Helpman (1991, chap. 9) and Rivera-Batiz and Romer (1991), we can list them as follows:
(1) The comparative-advantage or allocation effect Static comparative advantage determines the

instantaneous resource-pulls in an economy opening up to trade. If the effect of these is to direct

2A fourth, more direct, consequence arises from the enhanced contact with toreiunera and with foreign
technologies that trade often atmulatea.

35
resources towards the "growth sectoC of the economy, the effect of trade is to speed up economic
growth; otherwise, opening up to trade may lead to reduced growth. In the context of the model
sketched out above, s country that is poorly endowed in human capital would experience a reduction in
the relative wages of skilled labor, and therefore a decrease in the cost of doing R&D. The
consequence would be an increase in that country's growth rate. The opposite is true for an economy
that Is well endowed with skilled labor (Grossman and Helpman, 1991, chap. 6). More broadly, trade is
likely to enhance growth to the extent that innovative activity is more closely linked to the exporting
sector than the import-competing sector, and diminish it otherwise.

(2) The market size or integration effect. International trade expands the size of the market which

the R&D sector services; but it also increases the competition faced by the home R&D sector. The first
of these effects generally increases growth, as long as there is some increasing returns built into the

R&D sector. For example, when intermediate goods are traded and used in the R&D sector, the
enlarged market size allows a wider range of inputs, tower costs, and therefore a boost in R&D activity
and growth. Alternatively, when there is learning-by-doing, the larger market size speed up the rate or

learning (Davis 1991). The second effect is generally detrimental to growth because the smaller
market share implied by each of the innovating domestic firms reduces the incentive to innovate.
Feenstra (1990) provides a model of two countries with unequal sizes in which intermediate goods are

not traded. The latter property implies that the smaller country has a cost disadvantage in producing

these goods, and its trms lose market share when trade is opened up, Consequently, trade
unambiguously reduces the smaller country's growth rate.

(3) The redundancy effect. In the absence of trade, some innovative activity is necessarily

duptcatod in different countries. That is, resources are devoted to developing identical products. With
trade, such duplication can be avoided.

Hence, only the last of these effects is unambiguously favorable to trade in vew of this, it is
possible to come up with models of trade and growth to satisfy any type of priors or to rationalize any

36
conventional wisdom,27 Gomptcating the analysis turther, growth and welfare do not atways go hand in
hand in these models: it is possible for growth-enhancing poficies to reduce welfare, and for welfareenhancing opening up to reduce growth.

Are there any generalizations that can be drawn for developing countries in particular? There is one
robust feature in the type of models considered here, and that is the following: the more asymmetric the
trading countries are—in terms of size, extent of a head start, or static comparative advantage--the more

likely that growth effects will be asymmetric also. This raises the danger that developing countries may
end up with the short end of the stick, as could happen when comparative-advantage and/or markot-

size effects lead to a crowding out of their innovative sectors. For countries that are similar, the danger
is less reaL2° Somewhat paradoxically, this resuscitates the theoretical case for regional integration

schemes ggg developing countries, even though such schemes have long gone out of academic
fashion.
A particularly noteworthy paper in Ihie research tradition that has served to clarify the links among
agricultural productivity, openness, and growth is Matsuyarna (1991). This paper shows how the effect
of agricultural productivity on growth is mediated through the openness of an economy. Matsuyama
considers a model with the following key features: (I) there are two sectors, agriculture arid
manufacturing: (ii) there is learning-by-doing in the manufacturing sector, which drives growth; and (Hi)

the income elasticity of demand for agricultural output is less than unity. tn a closed economy, the

Krugman (1957) and Young (1991) provide additional examples where trade is detrimental to growth.

IJe Melo and Robinson (1990) present an imaginative CGE application to esplain" Korea's growth
performance in terms of externalities ariatng from exports and from the acquisition of technology via
imported goods, Buffle (1992) and Taylor (1992) explore models with yet additional channels of ambiguity.
In Taylor's model, growth is driven by profitability, and the effect of commercial policy depends on how

much it depresses the profitability of the export sector relative to the increase in the import-competing
sector's profitability.

2S As Rivera-Eattz and Romer (1991, p. 974) put it, "there is a strong presumption that trade restrictions
between similar regions like North America and Europe wit reriuce world wide rates of growth."

37
model predicts that agricultural productivity is positively related to growth: the more productive is
agriculture, the higher the resources that can be devoted to manufacturing, and the Faster the rate of

learning and growth. In an open economy, by contrast this result is reversed: a more productive
agriculture leads the economy to specialize in agriculture and therefore to withdraw resources from
manufacturing, which is the engine of growth. Turning Malsuyama's results on their head, one can then
argue that the optimal trade strategy for a developing country depends on its level of agricultural
productivity. Countries that are poorly endowed in arabia land have little to Fear from openness: indeed
they should encourage it. But countries that have a comparative advantage in agricdlture should worry
about the consequences of crowding out manufactures iF they rely on trade too much?
The focus on ideas and on learning in many of these papers is a useful counterweight to the
traditional focus on the accumulation ot physical and human capital (i.e., investment and schootng) as

the engine of growth. It requires attention to be devoted to the microeconomics of how ideas are
generated and transferred. As Romer has emphasized, the focus on ideas places openness to the
outside world at the center of Ihe analysis, but in a different way than nne usually thinks of openness in
trade models:

-

When one considers the economic opportunities afforded by ideas, openness is central to the

analysis, but not necessarily in the sense articulated by the classical theory of trade In terms
of the effect on the rate oF growth (and even on the overall effects on consumer welfare), it
probably matters little whether the consumers of a deveIopng country have access to cigarettes
and citrus products made in the US.
What does matter is whether investors from the rest of the world have an incentive to put

ideas to use in that nation. By creating the right incentives, any country in the world can follow
the first oF the two strategies mentioned in the title Jof Romer's paper]: using ideas. But it also

Ii

For esample, Lucas (1990) simulates a macro-econometric model of the Indian economy to find that

real value added in manufacturing (at world prices) would fall in the aftermath of complete trade
liberalization.

38
matters whether producers in a rratton receive the rtght signals about the ideas that can be sold

on world markets, whether they have eccess to the right inputs, and whether they receive the
right rewards (or generating such ideas. This is what is required for the second strategy,

producing ideas. (p. 5)
Rorner goes on to discuss the cases of Mauritius and Taiwan as archetypal examples of these two
respective strategies. See also Amsden and t'fikino (1991) for historical examples on the two strategies,
and Young (1992) for a parallel account on the divergent industrial strategies in I-tong Kong and

Singapore. These case studies illustrate that a government's commitment to provide the right incentives
for the transfer and generation of new technologies (i.e., adequate property rights and policy stability) is
cf significantly greater importance than the extent of policy intervention per se.
Informal case studies like these aside, there are as yet practical!y no direct emprrical tests of the
specific trade-growth linkages identitied above. We need such tests to close the large gap that
presently exists between the empirical work described in section 4.2.3 and the theoretical models
discussed here. The former is informative but largely devoid of policy content, while the latter are
stimulating, but remain empirically untested.

7. How to refonn? Issues in the stntegy of reform
The recognition that trade and industrial regimes in developing countries are sorely in need of
reform, as well as the growing experience with reform, has led to an expanding literature on appropriate
strategies for reform, Some of the issues involved—such as piecemeal reform—have a relatively long

tradition of analysis within economics. Others—such as the analysis of policy credibility and of
interaction with stabilization--are of more recent origin, and owe their genesis to the special

circumstances ol the 1980s. My review will stress the more recent analytical contributions. For broad
discussions of reform strategy on various aspects of trade and industry, see Takacs (1959), Nnllis and
Kikeri (1989), Thomas, Nash and associates (199), Michaely, Papageorgiou and Choksi (1991),

Johnson (1991), Krause and Kihwan (1991) and Atlyas, Dutz, and Frischtsk (1992). Evans (1991,

39
1992) provides a mora heterodox perspective on reform strategy. On cost-benefit analysis of
privatization in second-best environments, see Jones, Vogelsang, and Tandon (19O),

7.1 The theory of piecemeal reform
The theory of piecemeal reform is a natural estension of the theory of the second best. The question it
poses is the following: Suppose all policy distortions cannot be removed at once; what partial reforms
can we undertake and be certain that we have increased (rather than reduced) aggregate real income?

See Oixit (1985, sec. 4) for a review of the literature and references. Two results stand out in this
literature: (i) an equal percentage red uction in all distortions increases aggregate income (the 'radial
method): and (it) reducing the distortion on the most highly-taxed good increases aggregate income
provided thst good is s substitute to all others (the "concertina" method).
Two notable recent extensions of this literature are Fstvey (1 988) and Lopez and Panagariya

(1992). Fatvey shows that the presence of quantitative trade barriers does npt affect these conclusions,
provided 'distortions" in the above is read as applying to tariff-ridden goods only: that is, the radial and
concertina methods slill work as long as they are applied to tsrtfUridden goods only. Further, since the
presence of quantitative restrictions cuts off spillovers, a loosening or removal of any quota distortion is

beneficial if quotas are the only distortion. Lopez and Psnagsriya show that in the presence of a "pure"
intermediate input (i.e., one that is not produced at home), the substitutability assumption of the

concertina method will normally fail; in reasonable models such an input has to be complement to at
least one final good. Therefore, when pure intermediate goods have high tariffs, the concertina method
cannot be relied on to reduce the overall tariff structure in a gradual manner.

7.2 Is tax or tariff uniformity a good idea?
Provided the substitutability condition holds at every step along the way, the logic of the concertina
approach to reducing distortions leads us at the end of the road to a uniform tax or tariff system.
Indeed, ruling out complementarities like those discussed by Lopez and Panagariya (1992), any move
towards uniformity from above—that is, the reduction of the most extreme distortions—will necessariiy be
an improvement over the status quo ante,

40
This is occasionally interpreted as a justifcation for recommending uniform tariffs or, at least

reduced dispersion in ates. However, the theorems just stated sre derived under the assumption that
the tariffs in existence do not serve an economic or non-economic purpose in the first place. Once the
stated goal of having taxes end/or tariffs is made explicit, we can almost always find a non-uniform tariff
structure that will do better than any uniform one?C For revenue-raising purposes, for example, a
differentiated tariff structure along Ramsey principles would be called for. For providing importcompeting goods with a given amount of protection a differentiated structure would be called for also,
unleaa we do not care about consumption distortions. With pre-existing market distortions, the optimal
lariff atructuré will be similarly non-uniform in general. A uniform tariff is optimal only when the objective
of poTicy is to reduce aggregate imports to a certain level. For a transparent discussion of these issues,
see Panagariya (1990). For a realTwortd application that shows how second—best tariff can signitcanily

diverge from uniformity, see Devarajan and Lewia (1990). On the design of optimal tariffs for
distributional or revenue reasons, aee Heady and Mitra (1957). On hew export taxes can be justifled in
the preaence of revenue constraints and market diatortiora, aee Roumasset and Setboonsarng (1988).
Tariff uniformity ia aometimea recommended on the basis of administrative simplicity and political

econcmy, rather than economic efficieny. However such arguments are not always subjected to
careful scrutiny. When they are, they turn out to have a number of limitations (see Pansgsriya and
Rodrik, 1 992). -

7.3 Tuning and sequencing of reform
A different set of second-best issues arises when we consider the time path of liberalization,
possibly in connection with liberalization in other areas. Two questions in particular have dominated the
analysis in thia area: (i) how quickly should reform be introduced? and (U) how should reform ir different

° It goes without saying that tariff are rarely trst-beat policies. The only exceptions are the presence
of market power in world trade, and a non-economic objecttve that targets the volume of imports directly
(see Dixit, 1985). So conaideratona in the present paragraph apply to instances where tha tirsi-beat
policies are not available for acme reason.

41
areas be sequenced?

On the speed of reform, the classic, but too-often neglected contribution is Mussa {1B6). Mussa
considers the optimal timing of trade reform in a model where domestic factors of production face

adjustment costs when they relocate from one sector to another. Contrary to the widely-held belief that
adjustment costs call for gradualism in policy reform, he shows that the optimal policy consists of an
immediafe jump to free trade unless there exists specific market distortions; adjustment costs by
themselves are not an argument for gradual introduction of reform. To understand this conclusion, we
have to draw a distinction between the rate at which the reform itself is introduced and the rate at which

the private sector nds it optimal to adjust to the reform, In the presence of adjustment costs, it is true
that agents may find it optimal to spread out over time their sectoral reallocation. However, it does not
follow that reform itsetf shoutd be spread out over time also. Mussa shows that, as long as individuals
have rational expecfations regarding the ruture path of factor rewards and there are no market
distortions, they witl in fact adjust al a socially optimal rate when the reform is introduced all at once.
Departures from these assumptions may call for gradualism (or indeed overshoofincU, If for example,
individuals have static expectations regarding fufure factor prices, they may adjust 100 quickly, and then

it may be beneficial to stow down the reform. Other complicatinns arise when there are distortions in
the adjustment process, or when the govetnment wishes to moderate (for distributional reasons) the
losses incurred by individuals in the previously-protected secfors.

On the issue of sequencing, most of the analytical work has focussed on the question of whether
trade liberafzation should precede or follow capital-account liberalization. Studies by Edwards (1934),
Edwards and van Wijnbergen (1966), and Rodrlk (1937b) generally come out in favor of a trade-first

strategy. The transition to markets in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union has given rise to
broad-ranging discussions of alternative sequencing options with regards to reforms in the areas of
prices, trade, finance, and privatizatton; see, for example. Genberg (1990). Hinds (1990), Kornai (1990),
Lipton and Sacha (1990), Portea (1990), and Williamson (1991).

42

7.4 Credibility in poticy reform
Policy reforms in the Southern Cone of Latin America during the I 970s and throughout the world
during the 1980s were frequently met with skepticism on the part of the private sector, who had been

deceived in the past by promises of reform and by aborted efforts. Calvo (1969) has shown how the
lack of credibility that a reform will last introduces a distortion that could easily render the (incredible)
reform harmful rather than beneficial. See Rodrik (1991) for an application of this idea to structural
adjustment programs.

To see the basic idea, consider a trade reform that is put in place today, but is widely expected tc
be temporary. This temporariness introduces a distortion in the intertemporal structure of prices, the
effect of which may outweigh the temporary elimination of the static distortion. In Calvo's (1989) model,
the distortion exhibits itself in the form of over-borrowing while the reform lasts: since imporied goods
ere perceived to be cheap only temporarily, the private sector goes into debt for usual reasons of
intertemporal susbtitution. In a model where foreign borrowing is ruled out, the same intertempcrsl
distortion would exhibit itself in the form of s sub-optimally low level of investment, thanks to a reduced
saving rate (Rodrik, I 989a).
In view of the adverse incentves created for private-sector behavior, credibility problems can be
self-fulfilling: the reversal of reform may come about for no other apparent reason than the belief trial it
will be aborted (Rodrik, 1991). In addition, credibility problems can arise because of dynamic

inconsistenoies in government policy. In an interesting paper, Matsuysma (1990) analyzes the extort to
which a government can credibly threaten to liberalize so as to induce domestc trms to undertake

appropriate investments. He shows that such threats are unlikely to be credible. As long as firms
realize that the government's best option is not to liberalize in the absence of such investments, the

firms' best strategy in turn is not to yield. Sinoe liberafzation "thrests are incredible, they are never
carried nut, Similarly, Hardy (1992) models the soft-budget constraint that is inherent in government
policy, notably but not exclusively in Eastern European countries, as a form of dynamic inconsistency.
As long as the government ceree about unemployment, its commitment not to bail failing enterprises is

43
not entirety credible. Hardy suggests that the creation of a "social satety net" may render such a
commitment more credible, by reducing the income loss to unemployed workers.
As these examples show, depending on the precise source of the credibility prcblem and how it is
modeled, the policy prescriptions vary. Froot (1988) suggests going slow on liberalization, while Rodnk
(1989a) argues for going over-board to signal the government's true intentions, Engel and Kletzer
(1991) show how credibility can be enhanced over time by optimal potcy choice when individuals are
Bayesian learners. For a broad, informal discussion of government strategies, including external

commitments (e.g., accession to GAll), reputation-building, signalling, increasing the costs of potcy
reversal, and institutional design, see Rodrik (1989b).

7.5 The fallacy of composition
The simultaneous implementation of outward-oriented poTicies in countries pioducing the same

commodity exports (e.g. coffee or cocoa) has raised the worry that a fallacy of composition may be the
end result. Even if the terms-of-trade consequences can be judged minor for exporters taken one at a
time, the same need not be the case for the group as a whole. Such considerations have been given
increased salience by the exceptionally low level of real commodity prices in the 1 980s. Over the
longer horizon, there is evidence that the terms of trade for primary commodities have experienced a
small, but statistically significant negative trend during the present century (Gnu and Yang, 1988;
Qiakosavvas and Scandizzo, 1991). These considerations give rise to the possibility that export taxes
(whether administered singly or jointly) remain part of the optimal potcy package for certain commodity
exporters (Panagariya and Schiff, 1990. 1992; Evans

1992). However, in view of the extremely

restrictive import policies already in place in these countries, it is hkety that such considerations would

not come into play short of dreslic liberalizations. In other words, the existing restrictions are much too
high to justify on the basis of terms-of-trade arguments.
Ever since Bhagwati (1968), it is known that a country with market power in trade cannot esperience
immiaeriztng growth as tong as it has in place optimal export taxes. Bandyopadhyay (1992) has shown
that this logic need not hold when there are more than a single exporter of the same commodity, unless

44
exporters select their export tax cooperatively. As the quatlier in the previous sentence indicates, the
reason is that export taxes that are selected, say, In a Nash tashion cannot adequately cope with the
externality genersted by each country's growth. Even when countries impose their individually optimal
export taxes, they can still be immiserized when they grow.

7.6 Political economy issues
One ef the most important puzzles in understanding economic reform is the following: if reform is

such a great idea, why are governments typically so reluctant to undertake it? There has been
increased attention paid by economists to lhis question recently, for the simple reason that it is
impossible to design sensible reform packages without understanding what keeps governments frcrn

embracing reform in the first place. Attempts to resolve the puzzle usually revolve around disttibutionel
issues: losers from reform, it is assumed, tend to be politcalty-powerfut groups, such as urban
industrialists and organized labor, while the gainers, such as agricultural workers and small
induslrialists, are disenfranchised and powerless.

Two recent papers have gone beyond this simple, almost tautological explanation. Alesina and
Drazen (1 991) focus on the question of why reforms are delayed, even though all groups lose as a

consequence. While their reference point is a stabitzation (i.e., macro) crisis, their basic argument is
relevant to all distortions whose costs increase over time. Their answer relies on asymmetric
informahon: when groups are uncertain about the costs incurred by their rivals, they may choose to
enter a war cf attrition in the hope that somebody else will give in First and agree to pay a
disproportionately large share of the costs (or, more to the point, receive a disproportionstaly small

share of the reform's benefits). What this argument shows is that reforms may be delayed even when
all groups stand to benefit from it.

In Fernandez and Rodrik (1991), a different form ci uncertainty is introduced. It is assumed thst
individuals do not know precisely how they will fare under reform, even though the aggregate
consequences may be well known. This is motivated by the evidence that large trade reforms bring into
existence new activities that could not have been predicted ex ante. The paper shows thst under these

45
circumstances, reforms thst would have been accepted ea post (I.e., once the uncertainty is resolved)
may rail to be adopted ax ante, even if Individuals are risk neutral and completely rational. Political
systems have a status-quo bias in the sense that many beneficial reforms are passed up, even though
they would have been popular if introduced by a dictator.
The concern with distributional and other political-economy issues has lad to their introduction into
analyses that are otherwise quite conventional. For example, in their analysis of the Marshall Plan
(which they call "history's most successful structural adjustment plan"), de Long and Eichengreen (1991)
identify the Plan's ma)or contribution as follows: it facilitated the negotiation of a pro-growth 'social
contract that provided the political stabifity and climate necessary to support the postwar boom" (p. 6).
Levy and van Wijnbargan (1992) pay spedal attention to distributional issues in their CGE analysis of
agricultural liberalization in Mexico1 focusing on poor farmers in particular, and reccmmand measures

that would alleviate adverse consequences. De Janvry etat. (1992) construct art index of political
feasibility of policy outcomes, based on a number of arguments drawn from the pcttical-acononiy

tterature, and introduce it in a CGE model.
7.7 Interaction with stabilization policy
Perhaps the hallmark of the reforms of the 1 980s has been their implementation in the contest

macroeconomic instabitly. Indeed, the most aigniticant trade and price reforms often have been in
reality mere appendages to stabIlization programs (as in Bolivia in 1965, Mexico at end-i 987, Brazil and

Peru in 1990, Argentina in 1991). This despite the broad professional consensus, emerging largely from
the failures in the Southern Cone of Latin Amreica during the late i970s, that a stable macroeconomic
environment is a kay prerequisite to the success of microeconomic reform (Corbo and da Meto, 1987:
Cavallo, 1991: Hachatte, 1991), This consensus has received dramatic confirmation in research
undertaken by Kaufmann (1991) at the World Bank. Kautmann re-estimated rates of return from 1200
World bank projects in 58 countries. He found that the overall Quality cI macroeconomic management—

as measured by the extent of fiscal deficits, exchange-rate ovarvaluation, and negative real interest
rates—made a significant difference to the productivity of investment prcjects. It is selt-evident that

46
triple-digit inflation can negate the benefits of structural reform; entrepreneurs are unlikely to take full
advantage of relative-price changes when there is a high degree of uncertainty about the overall price
level.

I-lance, there can be tttla dissent from the view that macroeconomic stability is essential to the
success of structural reform. Much of the debate on the wisdom of undertaking structural reform in the
context of stabilization policies has focussed instead on whether the former can assist in the disinflation
process. Three channels in particular have been addressed;
(1) Exchange-rate management. Trade tberalization typically calls for a compensating exchange
rate depreciation, in view of the likely downward nominar rigidity of wages and other non-tradables

prices. Stabilization of the price level, by contrast, requires avoiding such jumps in the exchange rate.
Hence liberalization in the midst of stabilization exerts conflicting pressures on exchange rate policy

(Sacha, 1987). Usually, the conflict is resolved in favor of stabilization, leading to a prolonged
overvaluation and large trade deficits (as in Mexico after 1987 and Poland in 1991).

(2) Importing price discipline from abroad. Trade liberalization, and the removal of quantitative
restrictions, in particular, may help disinflation by forcing convergence between domestic inflation in

tradables prices and external tnflation. This strategy was tried in Chile during the 1970s, but has been
judged a failure thanks to the backward-looking nature of wage contracting (Corbo and de Melo, 1987).
In the context of Eastern European atabifizations of the early I 990s, the strongest advocate of this
strategy has been Jeffrey Saohs—somewhat paradoxically in light of his earlier predilections in favor of

delaying liberalization (Sacha, 1 987). Sacha has argued that precious effort neeed not be wasted on
breaking up monopolistic enterprises, as long as the trade regime is treed up in the initial stages ct the
program (Berg and Sacha, 1991),

(3) Fiscal revenues. Shoring up fiscal revenues is a primary goal of stabifzation programs. Certain
types of trade fberalization may go in the opposite direction, when they involve substanlial outs in
export and import taxes. In practice, however, the typical trade liberalization package is as likely tc
increase fiscal revenues as to reduce them. Transforming quotas into tariffs is an unambiguously

47
revenue-enhancing rrleesure. So is reducing the scope of tariff exemptions, or reducing prohibitively
high tariffs that encourage ernuggling and squeeze out otfical trade. A preliminary review of the
evidence from countries undertaking SALs indicates the absence of any clear patterns with respect to
fiscal consequences of trade reform (Oreeneway and Mimer, 1991).

In addttion structural reform can interact with stabilization in more subtle ways. One reason that so
many Latin American governments have jumped on the free trade bandwagon is their desire to enhance
the credibifity of their stabifization efforts. What better way to signal that these governments now really
mean business than to disavow their entire comples of impofl-substitution policies (Rodrik. 1 992c)? A
paper by Diwan (1990) makes this notion more precise in the context of bargaining with external
creditors. He argues that a shift towards export-promoting policies increases the cost to a debtor
government of repudiating its debt, because the trade penalties that would be incurred—such as the loss

of trade credits—are proportional to the volume of trade. This renders the government's promise to
honor its debt more credible, and thereby relaxes its credit ceiling,1

8. What has been achieved? Evidence on consequences of policy reform
Since the reforms of the 1 980s are recent and still largely under way, a section evaluating the

results of these reforms has to be necessarily briefer than one would wish. In addition, the results of
structural reforms are likely to have been delayed by the environment of macroeconomic instability in
which they have been typically carried out. For the same reason, the consequences of microeconomic

reforms are hard to disentangle from the effects or stabitzation policies. Available studies are too often
sloppy in identifying precise cause-and-effect relationships.

For obvious reasons, the World Bank itself is the primary source for information on the extent of

' As Diwan (1990) points out, however, a government may also choose to turn inward precisely
because this reduces the cost of a future debt repudiation: the choice between export prornotior (EP) and
import substitution (IS) depends on whether it is more profitable to increase the credit ceiling above
inherited debt in order to borrow more, orfo reduce it below inherited debt in order to repay less" (p. 306).

48
policy reform that haa taken place—aee, for example, Thomas gj...J. (1991) and Corbo elal, (1992) for
detailed overviews (ae well es evaluations). Webb and Shariff (1992) is a particularly useful source.

describing the policy content of SALs and the evidence on their implementation. Table I summarizes
some of their findings, and shows flow wide-ranging the reforms have been, with sectoral and

Table 1: Summary Information on SALe and SECALs, FY 1979-59

conditinnalitvjM
diet'n of

ahare of

all actiona bane w/action
A.

Structural

84

n.a.

trade

16

79

aectora].

28
5
5

n.a.

reforms

industry

energy
agriculture
financial sector
govt. adininiet.

SOE reform
eooial policy
others
B.

t4aaro

policies

fiscal
monetary
exchange rate
wage

811

17

10
9
14
2
5
16
8
3
3
2

100

44
27
62
51
72
65
24
49

n.e.

implementation

full
n.a.
56
n.a.
53
72
49
79
54
67
65
n.a.

na.

f%l

leaat

at
substantial

n.a
82

n.e.
68
SC
74
92
66
77
82

n.a-

n-a.

67

72

42
45
22

61
71

50

89
89
81
50

n.a.

60

79

Source: Adapted from Webb and Sheriff f1992).

49
trade reforms dominating the agenda. Sixty-one countries have submitted themselves tc the
conditionality of at least one SAL (or SECAL—sector adjustment loan) over the period 1979-89, and on

average more than three-quarters of alt conditions have been substantially implemented. For other, less
comprehensive accounts, see Whalley (1989), Ftodrik (1992c), and Helleiner (1992b) on lrade reforms

and Vvilliarrtson (1990) for a progress report which focuses on Latin America. See Lardy (1992) on the
important case of China, and Pryor (1991) for an account of agricultural and other reforms in Marxist
developing countries. Trade and industrial policy reforms in Eastern Europe are reviewed in Blanchard

etal. (forthcoming). On privalizatton, World Bank (1992) is a comprehensive survey of developments
over the last decade; It reports that more than 80 countries have launched ambitious efforts to private
their public enterprises and that more than 2,000 enterprises (including 805 in Eastern

Europe

however) have been privatized in developing countries since 1980.

8.1 The supply response and restructuring
World Bank staff has ao been at the forefront of evaluating the consequences of policy reform
One strand of analysis has focused on whether countries that have received SALs have

outperformed

others, once other circumstances are controlled for to the extent that they can. Faini etal. (1991) and
Corbo and Rojas (1992) have undertaken large-scale econometric studies

50
addressing this question. The answer seems to be that, once external shocks are controlled for SAL
recipients tend to do better than comparator countries in exports and economic growth but worse in

investment. These findings are broadly confirmed by the work of Mosley etal. (1991). The reduction in
investment is puzzling, and suggests that the increase in growth may be largely due to the impact ci
additional imports made possible by external financing. However, there are Important interpretational
problems that attach to these studies, In particular, the links between specific policies and outcomes
are not examined. And policy retorm is measured simply by a dummy vanable that takes the value of
unity when a country has received a SAL.
The argument for getting prices right is predicated on the existence of a non-negligible supply
response to price changes. With respect to exports, the evidence would appear to be clear: a credftile,
and lasting effort to increase the supply-price of exportables is rewarded by a large, often very quick
export response. The export pertormance of Korea and Taiwan during the 19605 had already turned
elasticity pessimiam on its head. More recent experience has given additional reason to be confident
about the presence of e strong supply response in exports. In countries where export profitability has
been increased in a sustained fashion, export miracles have soon followed: aen, for exanple, Hachetta

(1991) on Chile, Krueger and Aktan 0992) on Turkey, and Lardy (1992) on China Even in Eastern
Europe, wtere low-quality manufactures were long judged unmarketable in Western markets, a turn tc
undervalued exchange rates in 1990-91 (alongside the collapse of domestic demand) has yielded a

large increase in exports to the West (see Rodrik, forthcoming).
However, as this last example indicates, export booms have generally been associated with sharp
currency devaluations and, ocaaaionally, export subsidies. Export processing zones have also played a
critical role in some other more narrowly-based casesl electronic components in Malaysia, garments in
Bangladesh and Sri Lanka, and the maquiladora in Mexico (Hellainer, 1992b). It is more difficult to
identify cases where import liberalization itself was causally implicated: Chile may be the cnly significant
exception, but even here the effects were delayed well unfl the exchange rate began to play a

supportive role in the mid-1960s The Lamer symmetry theorem is a poor guide tor the short-run,

51
especially when the economy is mired i macroeconomic instability,
One of the striking regularities in the export performance of these countries has been that, once a
decisive increase in exports is achieved, the process tends to be setf-perpetuating even when the
originally advantageous circumstances reverse themsetves somewhat, In Korea and Turkey, exports
have been affected during periods of prolonged real appreciation, but have not come crashing down
This suggests that export performance is subject to strong hysteresis effects: it may take a big push
(i.e.. sizable change in incentives) to get exports out, but by the same token, once the transition is

made, not much may be required to keep then going. A rare gtimpse into the microeconomics of the
exporting decision is provided in a paper by Roberts and Tybout (1992). The authors carry out a
statistical analysis of plant-level data from Colombia, and look for evidence of sunk costs and hysteresis

in the decision of plants to export. They find strong persistence, in the sense that the exporting status
of a firm exerts an inordinate influence on the future decision to export
In poorer, agricultural countries such as those in Africa, the supply response may be considerably
more limited than in Latin American or Asian countries. For one thing, agricultural supply elasticities are
necessarily tow in the short run. A survey of the aggregate supply response in agriculture suggests that
long-run pnce etasticites of supply may be In the range of 0.3-0.9, with poorer countries at the tower

end of this range (Chhibber, 1990). Infrastructure constraints appear to be a key bottleneck The sharp
increse in cocoa outpul in Ghana following the price reforms of 1983 would sem to belie this conclusion
However, a significant (perhaps a third) of the increase in output can be attributed to previously
smuggled exports now showing in offcial statistics (Green, 1989). This example suggests that the true
supply elasticity can be overstated when the presence of unoftical markets prior to reform are not taken
into account. Also in Ghana, Steel and Webster (1991) have found some limited evidence of industrial
restructuring at the firm level (msinly in product mix), but further adjustment has apparently beeeri
blocked by inadequate demand and lack of credil.
A healthy export response can be entirely consistent with sluggish industrial restructuring, if firms
simply choose (and have the incentive) to substitute foreign markets for domestic markets. In Eastern

52
Europe, where structural change is badly needed to get away from Soviet-style industriaizatiorr, the

early evidence is that reform policies have not been able to foster much restructuring. There is some
evidence that the much-repressed services sector has revived somewhat (Berg and Sachs, 1991). But,
as of the middle of 1992, there was scant evidence of restructuring within manufacturing industry
(Estdn, Schaffer, and Singh, 1992; commander and Codoelli, 1992; Bcrensztein, Demokas, and Ostry,
1992). The reasons appear to be labor-hoarding by enterprises and the governments' reluctance to let

large firms go bankrupt. in addition, the increase in exports to the West has ameliorated, but not
entirety offset, the huge fall in industrial output that followed reform efforts. Hughes and Hare (1992)
report, moreover, that the shift towards exports in the Eastern European countries has not noticably
pulled resources into the more competitive industries (as measured by domestic resource costs).

8.2 Consequences for static and dynamic efficiency
Evaluating the efficiency consequences of policy reforms is s difficult task, and ore that differs
considerably from model-based analyses of prospective reform. One needs s countertactual regarding
what would have happened in the absence of reform, and to disentangle the effects of the reform under
consideration from the effects of other ohenges in the environment. To render a welfare judgement,
one needs in addition a set of shadow prices to value the change in the quantities of outputs and

inputs. Even if all these obstacles are surmounted, there is the difficulty or figuring out exactly what has
happened. Here is Leroy Jones (1991) on evaluating divestiture:
An sti too typical story of divestiture runs as foitows: visit country X and be told that enterprise V
is a divestiture success story with vastly enhanced profitability; visit company Y and be shown
how costs have been reduced and demsnd increased by a vsdety of impressive management
reforms; visit the political opposition and be told that profits were turned around primarily
because of a side-condition of divestiture that competing imports be banned for five years. (p.
129)

Such difficulties have not stopped Jones and his colleagues from evaluating the welfare consequences

recent pdvatizstion efforts (Calal etsl., 1992). Their study is a rare and exemplary effort to apply a

53
common methodology to reforms in diferent countries. Their analysis of twelve cases from Chile,
Malaysia, Mexcio, and the U.K. reveals that 10 of them improved national welfare and 11 improved
world welfare. Moreover, the welfare gains appear quantitatively significant.
The productivity consequences of Chins's reforms since the late 1970s have been the subject of a
series of papers by Dollar (1990), Jefferson (1990), and Jefferson, Rawsk', and Zheng (1992). Dollar
(1990) hnds that Chins's incentive reforms have led to rapid TFP growth and a reduction in TFP

differentials across firms. Moreover, he finds that TFP growth was positively correlated with the shsre
of profits that firms were allowed to retain. Jefferson (1990) draws attention to the pronounced increase
in 1FF in the iron and steel Industry during the reForm years, while Jefferson etsl. (1992) argue that
factor accumulation—mainly in material inputs—was still the principal contr4bulor to aggregate growth in

the state and collective sector.
The most systematic evidence to date on the efficiency consequences of trade reform comes from a

research project ted by James Tybout at the World Bank Tybout and his collaborators have
assembled panel data sets From several developing countries, and have subjected them to statistical

analysis, paying close attention to conceptual and econometric issues. Tybout (1992) provides a

progress report, and links this research to antecedents. Three questions have been addressed in
particular: (I) has trade liberalization led to reduced price-cost margins in import-competing sectors? (ii)
has it resulted in firms taking better advantage of scale economies through industry rationalization? (iii)
has it led to improvements in technical efficiency?
On the first question, Foroutsn (1992), Levinsohn (1992), Harrison (1990), and Grether (1992)

provide an affirmative answer. The first two authors analyze the Turkish case, where a substantial
trade reform took place during the 1980s. In a three-digit industry-level analysis with panel data,

On the more recent evidence, see also Helleiner (1992b, p. 44) who summanzes the results of
seventeen country studies he directed in the following terms: "The case studies in this volume otter very
weak, if any, support For the proposition that either import liberatzstion or esport espansion are particularly
associated with overall productivity growth."

54
Foroutan finds that higher import penetration is correlated with lower price-cost markups (controlling for

capital-output ratios and fixed effects). Levinsoho undertakes a plant-level version of Foroutan's

exercise. Also instead of using import penetration as the independent variable, he looks at the
after 1984, the year that major trade retorm was implemented. His finding is that price-cost

charge

gaps

decreased irt imperfectly competitive induatriea which experienced a decrease in protection, while they

increased or stayed the same in others. Harrison undertakes an anatyala very much like Levinaohn'x
for Cole D'lvoiro, and reachea broadly similar concluaions. Finally, Grether looks at both plant- and
industry-level panel data from Mexico, and concludes that price-cost margins were reduced by the trade
reforms of the 1980a; the relaxation of quarbitative reatrictiona was apparently particularly

effective, as

trade theory would predict.
With regard to industry rationalization, the reautts are leaa encouraging. tybout (19e9) carries out
ftn analysis of plant level data from Chile for the 1979-85 period, and finds no relationship between
import competition and exit ralea. Roberts and Tybout (1991) examine annual plant-level data from
Chile and Colombia, and find that, controlling for industry and country effects, higher trade exposure is

positively correlated with smaller plant sizes over the long run. Further, the mix of high and low
productivity plants is not strongly axaociated with trade exposure. As Roberta and Tyboul indicate,
'both of thexe findings cast doubt on the mechanisms linking trade, plant size, and productivily in a

number of recent analytical and simulation atudies (1991, p 2). Similar results are obtained in Tybout
and Weatbrook's (1992b) study on the Mexican liberalization: "We find that scale effects were only
significant for a minority of industries during the sample period [1984-89], and that improvements in

scale effloency were jp associated with heightened foreign competition" (p. 1). A possibly dissenting
conclusion is reached in Dutz'a (1991) study on Morocco. Dutz finds that the probability of exit in
response to an increase in imports ix significantly higher among small firms than among large firms;
together with his evidence that large firms are more efficient, this may suggest an improvement in
average technical efficiency following liberalization. This concission needs to be tentative, however,

since the focus should be on net rather than mss exit rates.

55
Finally, the available studies are generally favorable to the hypothesis that trade reform is conducive
to gains in technical efficiency. Foroutan (1992) reports that growth in import penetration is correlated

with growth in TFP in Turkey. Tybout

(1q91) find in Chile that performance in TEP was better in

industries that experienced the largest declines in protection. Similarly, industries undergoing the most
dramatic reductions in protection in Mexico improved their efficiency the most (Tybout and Westbrook,
1992b; but see also the mixed results obtained by Grether, 1992). On the other hand, Harrison's (1990)
results on Cote d'lvoire fail to uncover a similar link once imperfect competition is explicitly allowed for:
"our data suggest that when we incorporate imperfect competition into the productivity estimates [which
are biased if perfect competition is assumedi, there is no apparent relationship between productivity and
trade reform" (p. 25).

9, Conclusions: What ve know and what

don't

Few would disagree with the proposition that getting prices systematically and significantly wrong in

the way that import-substituting countries have done in the past has been a costly mistake, But few
would also disagree that getting prices right, in and ol itself, will be insuffticient to make Bolivia or
Ghana grow at Korean rates. A cautious conclusion From the literature surveyed here would be as
follows: the benefits of price reform remain small in relation to developmental objectives, and tend to be
linked to economic growth through uncertain and unreliable channels. Furthermore, the East Asian
experience indicates that relative-price distortions, and the analysis thereof, are vastly over-emphasized
relative to the institutional dimensions of reform. It bears repeating that the South Korean and
Taiwanese economies have prospered in policy environments characterized by quantitative trade
restrictions, selective subsidies, and discretionary incentives bearing more than a passing superficial

resemblance to those in other developing countries. What has differed, of course, is the discipline

eserted by the East Asian state over private-sector groups. It also bears repealing that countries like
Mexico, Argentina, Chile, and Bolivia have travelled recently much faster and further on the road to
price reform and trade liberalization than South Korea, Taiwan, and Japan before them ever did.

56
Genuine reform requires the creation of a new set of interactions between government and the
private sector, one that provides for an environment of policy stability and predictability, that
discourages rent-seeking activities, and that improves on the governments' ability to discipline the

private sector. In other words, the change that ia needed is not only in policy, but also in policy rnujn.
The East Asian experience Is full of clues as to what the end-product should look like, But we know
much less about how to get there. Economists' comparative advsntage may lie in analyzing price
distortions; but it is research on Issues of governance and institutional design that promises to yield the
larger marginal social product.

§7
Refetences
Aitken, 6.. and A. Harrison (1992) 'Does proximity to foreign firms induce technology spillovers?
Evidence from panel data," mimeo.
Alam, M. S. (1987) "Trade orientation and macroeconomic performance in LDCs: An empirical study,'
Economic Development and Cultural Change 39, 839-848.

Alesina, A., and A. Drazen (1991) 'Why are stabilizations delayed?'

can Economic Review 81,

Amsden, A. (1989) Asia's next giant: South Korea and late industrialization, New York and Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Amaden, A., and 1. 1-likino (1991) 'Borrowing technology orinnovating: An exploration of two palhs to
industrial development,' New School for Social Research mimeo,
Atiyas, I., M. Dutz, and C. Frisohfak (1992) Fundamental issues and policy approaches in industrial
restructuring, Industry end Energy Department Working Paper. World Bank, April.
Bagwell, K. and R. Staiger (1989) "The role of export subsidies when product quality is unknown,'
Journal of international Economics 27, 69-89.
Bslsssa, B., and associates (1971) The structure of protection in developing countries. Baltimore: John
Hopkins University Press.
Balassa, B. (1978) "Exports and economic growth: Further evidence,"
Economics 5, 181-190.

ignal of deveiogj

Balassa, 6. (1961) The newty indusfriahzing countries in the world economy. New York: Pergamon
Press.
Balsssa, 6. (1981) 'Adjustment to external shocks in developing economies," World Bank Staff Working
Paper No. 472. Balaeea, B. (1986) 'Interest of developing countries in the Uruguay Round,' The World Economy 11,
39-54.
Baldwin, R. (1992) "High technology exports and strategic trade policy in developing countries: The
case of Brazitan a,rcraft,' in: G.K. Heiteiner, ed., Trade policy, industrialization and development,
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Bandyopedhyay, S. (1992) 'lmrniserizing growth in a multicountry framework in the presence of optimal
export taxes,' University of Maryland, mimeo.
Eanuri, T., ed. (1991) Economic liberalization: No panacea: The experiences of Latin America and Asia.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Berdhan, P. (1990) "Symposium on the state and economic development," Journal of Economic

rspectivea 4, 3-7,
Barro, R. (1991) 'Economic growth in a cross section of countries" Quarterly Journal of Economics,
407-443.

58
Bell, M., B. Ross-Larson, and L. Wealptral (1984) "Asaesssing the performance of infant industries'
Journal of Development Economics 16, 101-12.
Berg, A., and J. Sacha (1991) "Structural adjustment and international trade in Eastern Europe: The
case of Poland," mimeo.
Bhagwati, J. (1968) "Diatortions and immiserizing growth: A generalization," Review of Economic
Studies 35, 481-485.
Bhagwati, J. (1978) Foreign trade regimes and economic development: Anatomy and consequences of
exchange control regimes. Lexington, MA: Ballinger.
Bhagwati, J. (1982) "Directly unproductive, profit-seeking (DUP) activitiea," Journal of Political Economy
90, 988-1002.
Bhagwati, .J. (1993) India's economy: The shackled giant. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Bhagweti, J. and TN. Srinivaaan (1980) "Revenue seeking: A generalization of the theory of tariffs
Journal of Political Economy 88, 1069-I 087.
Biddle, W.J. and V. Milor (1992) "The quality of stale intervention: A cornparartive analysis of Korea,
Turkey and Brazil," research proposal, Brown University, mirneo,
Biggs, 1., and B. Levy (1990) "Strategic interventions and the political economy of industrial poicy in
developing countries," in: OH. Perkins and M. Roemer, eda., Reforming econoniic yy5)ems in
developing countries. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Blanchard, O.J., K. Froot, and J. Sacha, eds. (forthcoming) The transition in Eastern Europe. Chicago
sod London: University of Chicago Press.

Borenaztein, ER., DO. Demekaa, and J.D. Ostry (1992) "The output decfne in the aftermath of reform:
The caaea of Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, and Romania," mimeo.
Brander, J., and B. Spencer (1965) "Export subsidies and market-share rivalry," .lornal of International
Economics 18, 83-1 00.
Eruton, H. (1969) "Import substitution," in: H. Chenery and T.N. Srinlvasan, eds., Handbook of
development economics, vol. 2. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Bufile, E.F. (1992) "Commercial policy, growth and the distribution of income in a dynamic trade model,'
Journal of Development Economics 37, 1-30.
Calvo, 0. (1989) "Incredible reforms," in: 0. Calve et al., eds., PSPL..stabilizatinn.. and development:
Essays in honor of Carlca-Diaz-Aleiandro. New york: Basil Blackwell.

Cavatic, D. (1991) "Argenfina: Trade reform, 1976-82," in: 0. Shepherd and CC. Langoni, eds., Trade
reform: Lessons from eighteen countries. San Francisco: ICS Press fcr International Center for
Economic Growth.
Chen, T.-J, and D. Tang (1987) "Comparing technical efficiency between import-substituting and exporloriented foreign firma in a developing country," Journal of Development Economics 26, 277-89.

59
Chhibber, A. (1989) "The aggregate supply response: a survey," in: S. Commander, ed., Structural
adjustment in agriculture: Theory and practice. London: Overseas Development Institute.
Commander, S., ed. (1989) Structural adjustment in anriculture: Theory and practice. London: Overseas
Development Institute.
Commander. S., and F. Codcelli (1992) "Output decline in Hungary and Poland in 1990/91: Structural
change and aggregate shocks, mimeo.
Corbo, V., S. Fischer, and S. Webb, eds. (1992) Adjustment lending revisited: Policies to restore

grgh. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Corbo, V., and J. de Melo (1987) "Lessons from the Southern Cone policy reforms," The World Bank
Research Observer 2, 111-142.
Corbo, V., and P. Rojas (1992) "World Bank-supported adjustment programs: Country performance and
effectIveness," in: V. Corbo, S. Fischer and 3.6. Webb, eds., Adjustment lending revisited: Fotdes to
restore growth. Washington DC: World Bank.
Corbo, V., M. Goldstein, and M, Khan, eds. (1989) Growth-oriented adjustment programs. Washington.
DC: IMF and World Bank.
Corden, W.M. (1974) Trade oolicv and economjc wetfare. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Corden, W. M. (1990) "Strategic trade potcy: How new? How sensible?" World Bank PPR Working
Paper 396, April.
Dailami, M. (1991) 'Korea: Successful adjustment," in V. Thomas et al., ads., Restructuring economies
in distress: Policy reform and the World Bank. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
Davis, Donald Ray (1991) 'Mutual dynamic gains from trade due to specialization in learning," mimeo.
de Janvry, A., A. Fargeix, and E. Sadoulet (1992) "The political feasibility of rural poverty reduction,"
Journal of Development Economics 37, 351-67.
de Long, J.B., and B. Eichengreen (1991) "The Marshall Plan: History's most successful structural
adjustment plan," NBER Working Paper No. 3899, November.
de Long, J.B., and L. Summers (1991) "Equipment investment and economic growth," Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 445-502.
de Melo, J., and S. Robinson (1990) "Productivity and externalities: Models of export-led growth, CEPR
Discussion Paper No. 400, April.
de Soto, H. (1989) The Other Path. New York: Harper & Row.
Dervis, K., and J.M. Page, Jr. (1984) "Industrial policy in developing countries,' Journal of Comparative
Economics 8, 435-451.
Devarajan, S., and J.D. Lewis (1990) "Structural adjustment and economic reform in Indonesia: Modelbased policies vs. rules of thumb," in: OH, Perkins and M. Roemer, eds., Reforming economic systems
in developing countries. Cambridge. MA: Harvard University Press.

60
Devarejart, S., and D. Rodrik, (1992) "Pro-competitive effects of trade reform: A CGE model of
Cameroon," Eurooeen Economic Review.
Diakosavvas, 0., end FL. Scandizzo (1991) 'Trends in the terms of trade of primary commodities,
1900-1 982: The controversy end its origins." Economic Development and Cultural Change 39, 231-264.
Diwan, I. (1990) "Linking trade and external debt strategies," Journal of International Economics 29,
293-310.
Dlxii, A.K. (1985) "Tax policy in open economies1" in: A.J. Auerbach and M. Feldstein, eds., Handbook
of public economics, vol. I. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Dollar! 0. (1990) "Economic reform and allocative efficiency in China's atate-owned industry," Economic
Development and Cultural Chanoe 39, 89-1 05.
Dollar, D. (1992) "Outward-oriented developing economies really do grow more rapidly: Evidence from
95 LDCs, 1976-1985," Economic Development and Cultural Change 40, 523-644.

Dolfar, 0., and K. Sokoloff (1990) "Patlerns of productivity growth in South Korean manufacturing
industries, 1983-1 979,' Journal of Development Economics 33, 309-327.
Dulz, M.A. (1991) "Firm output adjustment to trade tberalizaton: Theory with application to the
Moroccan experience!" World Bank WPS 602, February.
East arty, VI!. (1992) "Endogenoiss growth in developing countdea with government-induced distortions,"
in: V. Corbo etel., eds., Adiustment lending revisited. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Eaton, J., and C. Grossman (1986) "Optimal trade and industrial policy under cligcpcly," OJarterjy
Journal of Economics 101, 383-406.
Edwards, 5. (1984) The order of liberatzation of the external sector in developing countries. Frincolon,
NJ: Princeton Essays in international Finance No. 156._
Edwards, S. (1992) "Trade orientation, distortions snd growth in developing countries," Journal of
Development Economics 39(1), 31-57.
Edwards, S., end S. van Wijnbergen (1986) "The welfare effects of trade and capital-market
liberalization," International Economic Review 27, 1 41-148.
Edwards, S., and S. van thtjnbergen (1989) "Disequilibrium and structural adjustment," in: I-I. Chenary
and TN. Srinivassn, eds., Handbook of development economics, vol Ii, Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Engel, C.. and KM. Kletzer (1991) Trade policy under endogenous credibility," Journal of Develnoment
Economics 36, 21 3-228.
Erzen, R., K, Kuwahsra, S. Marchese, and P. Vcssenaar (1959) "The profile of protection in developing
countries," UNCTAD Review 1(1), 29-49.
Esfahani, H.S. (1991) "Exports, imports, and economic growth in semi-industrialized countrios," Journal
of Development Econprn(cs 35(1), 93-116.

Eetrln, S., ME! Schaffer, and I. Singh (1992) " Enterprise adjustment in transition economies:
Czechoslovskf a, Hungary, and Poland," mimeo.

Si
Elhier, W. (1982) "National and international returns to scale in the modern theory of international
trade," American Economic Review 12, 389-405+

Evans, 0. (1991) 'Visible and invisible hands in trade policy reform," in: C. Colciough and J. Manor,
eda., States or markets: Neo-liberalism and the development policy debate. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Evens, 0+ (1992) institutions, sequencing and trade policy reform," University of Sussex, mimeo.

Evans, 0+, I. Goldin, and 0. van der Mensbrugghe (1992) "trade reform and the smell country
assumption," in:l. Goldin end L.A. Winters, eds., ODen economies: Structural adiustment and
agriculture. New York and London: Cambridge University Press.
raini, R., J. de Melo, A. Senhadji-Semlali, and J. Stanton (1991) 'Macro performance under adjustment
lending." in: V. Thomas etel., eds., Restructuring economies in distress. Washington, DC: The World
bank.
Feder, 0. (1963) "On exports and economic growth," Journal of Development Econcmics 12+ 59-74.
Feenatra, R. (1990) "Trade snd uneven growth," NOER Working Paper No. 3276. March.
Fernandez, R., and D. Rodrik (1991) "Resistance to reform: Status-quo bias in the presence of
individual-specific uncertainty," American Economic Review 81, 1146-1155.
tFishlow, A. (1991) "Some reflections on comparative Latin American economic performance and policy,'
in: 1. Benurl, ed., Economic liberalization: No oanaces: The esoeriences of Latin America end Asia.
Oxford: Clarendon Press,
Foroutan, F. (1992) 'Foreign Trede end its relation to competition and productivity in Turkish industry,"
World Bank, June.
Frischtak, C. (1989) Competition potcies for industrializing countries, Washington, DC: World Bank.
Froot, K. (1988) "Credibility, reel interest rates, and the optimal speed of trade liberalization," Journal of
International Economics 25, 71-93.
Gelal, A., L. Jones, P. Tandon, and I. Vogelsang (1992) Welfare Conseouences of Selling Public
Enterprises: Case Studtea from Chile, Malaysia, Mexico. and the U.K. Washington, DC: The World
Benk, forthcoming.
Gallagher, M. (1991) Rent-seeking and economic growth in Africa. Boulder end Ostord: Westview
Press.

Genherg, H. (1990) 'On the sequencing of reforms in Eastern Europe.' Geneva, Graduate Institute of
International Studies, mimso.
Qerefli, G., and DL. Wyman, eds. (1990) Manufacturing miracles: Peths ot industrialization in Latin
America end East Asia. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Pceaa, Princeton.
Green, RH. (1989) 'Articulating stsbiliaation programmes and structural adjustment,' in Commander
(1969).
Greenaway, 0,, and C. Mimer (1991) "Fiscal dependence on trade teses and trade policy reform,'

62
Journal of Development Studies 27, 96-I 32.
Grether, .J.-M. (1992) "Trade liberalization market structure and performance in Mexican manufacturing:
1954-1989," mimeo.

Grilli, E.. and MC. Yang (1958) "Primary commodity prices, manufactured goods prices and the terms
of trade of developing countries: What the long run shows," The World Bank Economic Review 2. 1-47.
Grossman, G. (1990) "Promoting new industrial activities: A survey of recent arguments and evidence,'
QECD Economic Studies 14 (Spring), 87-125.

Grossman, G., and E. Helpman (1991) Innovation and growth in the global econgy. Cambridge, MA:

MIT PrOse.

Grossman, G., and l-t. Hom (1988) "Infant industry protectiOn reconsidered: the case of informational
barriers to entry,' Quarlerly Journal of Economics CIII, 767-787,

Gunaaekera, H.D.B.H., and P. Tyars (t991) 'Imperfect competition and restorns to scale in anewlyindustniarizing economy: A general equitbrium analysis of Korean trade policy," Journal of Develonment
Economics 34, 223-247.
Hachette, D. (1991) "Chile: Trade liberafizatlon since 1974," In: G. Shepherd and CO. Langoni, erie.,
Trade reform: Lessons from eighteen countries. San Francisco: ICS Press for International Center for
Economic Growth.
Hardy, D.C. (1992) "Soft budget constraints, firm commitments, and the social safety net," IMF Staff
F!Qrn 39, 31 0-32g.
Harris, P. (1984) "Applied general equilibrium analysis of small open economies with scale economies
and imperfect oompetition," Amrioan Economic Review 74, 1016-1033.
Harrison, A. (1990) "Productivity, imperfect competition, and trade liberatzation in Cote d'lvoire,' World
Bank Working Paper WPS 451, July.
Harrison, A. (1991) "Openness and growth: A time-series, cross-country analysis for developing
countries," World bank, mimeo.

Hart, 0. (1953) "The market mechanism as an locative scheme,' Bell Journal of Economics 14, 366382,

Heady, C., and P.R. Mitre (1957) "Distributional and revenue raising arguments for tariffs," Journal of
Development Economics 26, 77-1 01.

Hel?einer, G.K. (1990) "Trade strategy in medium-term adjustment," )gjj,gyelo ment 19(6), 879-597
Helleiner, G.K., ed. (1992a) Trade Policy, industrialization and development. Oxford: Clerendon Press,

Helleiner, G.K. (1992b) "Trade policy and industrialization in turbulent times,' mimeo
Hinds, M. (1990) 'Issues in the introduction of market forces in Eastern European socialist economies,"
World Bank, Washington, DC.

63
Hirschman, A.O, (1958) The strategy of economic develo

ant. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Hong, W. (1991) "Import restriction and liberalization," in: L. Krause and K. Kihwan, ads., Liberalization
in the process or economic devatopment. Berkeley and Oxford: University of California Press.
Hughes, A., and A. Slngh (1991) "The world economic slowdown and the Asian and Latin American
economies: A comperative analysis of economic structure, policy, and performance," in: T. Banuri, ed.,
Economic liberalization: No panacea: The experiences of Latin America and Asia. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
Hughes, C., and P. I-tare (1992) "Industrial policy and restructuring in Eastern Europe." London: CEPR
Discussion Paper No. 653.
Jefferson, C. (1990) "China's iron and steel industry: Sources of enterprise efficiency and the impact of
reform," Journal of Development. Economics 33, 329-355.

Jefferson, C., T. Rawaki, and V. Zheng (1992) "Growth, efficiency, and convergence in Chins slate
and collective industry," Economic Davalooment and Cultural Change 40, 239-266.
Johnson, C. (1982) MITI and the Jaoanese miracle. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Johnson, C. (1987) "Political Institutions and economic performance: a comparative analysis of the
business-government relationship in Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan," in: F. Deyo, ed,, flttpolitical
economy of the new Asian industrialism. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

Johnson, D. G. (1991) "Agriculture in the liberalization process," in: 1. Krause and K; Kihwan, eds.,
Liberalization in the process of economic development. Berkeley and Oxford: Unversity of Cetfornia
Press.
Jones, L. (1991) "Comment on reform of public enterprises," in: V. Thomas etal,, eds., Restructuring
economies in distress. Washington, DC: The World Bank.

Jones, L., and I. Sakong (1980) 0yefnment, business, and entrepreneurship in economic development:
The Korean case. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Jones, L., P. Tandon, and I. Vogelsang (1990) $lljrin public enterprises: A cost-benefit methodology.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
Jung, W.S., and P.J. Marshat (1985) "Exports, growth, and causality in developing countries," Journal
of development Economics 18, 1-12.
Katrak, H. (1989) "Imported technologies and R&D in a newly-industrializing country: The experience of
Indian enterprises," Joumal of Development Economics 31, 123-139.
Katz, J.M., ed., (1987) technology generation in Latin American manufacturing industries. London:
Macmillan.
Kaufmann, D. (1991) "The forgotten rationale for policy reform: the productivity of investment projects."
World Bank, mimeo, April.
Kornai, J. (1990) The road to a free economy—Shittino from a socialist system: The example of

hlungarv. New york: w.w. Norton.

64
Kostecki, MM., and M.J. Tymowskl (1985) "Customs duties versus other import charges in the
developing countries," Journal of World Trade Law 19, 269-286.
Krause, LB., and K, Kihwan, ads. (1991) Liberalization in the process of economic development.
Berkeley and Oxford: Unversity of California Press.
Krueger, AG. (1974) "The political economy of the rent-seeking society? American Economic Review
64, 291-303.
Krueger, AC. (1976) Poreian trade regimes and economic develoDment: Liberalization attempts and
consequences. Lexington, MA: Ballinger.
Krueger, A.O. (1983) Trade and employment in developing countries: Synthesis and conclusions.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Krueger, AC. (1990) "Government failures in development? HOER Working Paper No. 3340, April.
Krueger. A.O., and OH. Aktan (1992) Swimming against the tide: Turkish trade reform in the 19BPs.
San Prancisco: ICS Press.
Krueger, A.O., M. Schiff, and A. f/aides, eds. (1991) The political economy of agricultural pricing policy.
Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Krueger, AC., M. Schiff, and A. Vatdes (1988) "MeasurIng the impact of sector-specific and economywide policies on agricultural incentives in LDCs? World Bank Economic Review, September.

Krueger, AC., and B. Tuncer (1982a) "Growth of factor productivity in Turkish manufacturing
industries," Journal of development Economics tI, 307-326.
Krueger, AC., and 6. Tuncer (1982b) "An empiricxl lest of the infant-industry argument," Amrican
Economic Review 72, 1142-1152.
Krugman, P. (1984) "Import protection as export promotion," in: H. Kierzkowaki, ed., Monopolistic
competItion and international trade. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Krugman, p. (1986) Strateoic trade policy and the new international economics. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Krugman, P. (1987) "The narrow moving band, the Dutch disease, and the competitive consequences of
MRs. Thatcher: Notes on trade in the presence of dynamic scale economies," Journsl of Development
Economics 27, 41-55.
Krugman, P. (1989) "New trade theories and the less-developed countries,' in: G. Calve at aI., eds.,
Debt, stabilization, and development:. Essays in honor of Carios-Diaz-Alel8ndro. New York: Basil
Blackwell.
Krugman, P. (1991) "History vs. expectations," Ousrtarlv Journal of Economics 106, 651-667.
Krugman, P. (1992) "Does the new trade theory require a new trade policy?" mimeo.

Lat, 0. (1990) "Political economy and public potcy," International Center for Economic GroMt,
Occasional Paper No. 19.

65
Lall, S. (1937) Learning to industrialize: The acquisition of technolooical capability in India. Basingstoke
and London: Macmillan.

Lardy, N.R. (1992) fpgn trade and economic reform in China. New York: Cambridge University
Press.

Learner, E. (1988) "Measures of openness," in: R. Baldwin, ed., Trade policy issues and empirical
analysis, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lee, Cl-I. (1992) "The government, financial system, and large private enterprise in the economic
development of South Korea,' World Development 20, 187-1 92.
Lee, J.-W. (1992) "Government intervention and productivity growth in Korean manufacturing industries,"
International Monetary Fund, mimeo.

Lee, N. (1992) "Market structure and trade in developing countries," in: O.K. Helleiner, ed , Trade oolicy,
industrialization and development. Osford: Clarendon Press.
Levine, R., end D. Renelt (1992) "A sensitivity analysis of cross-country growth regressions," American
Economic Review 82(4), 942-963.
Levinsohn, J. (1992) "Testing the imports-as-market-discipline hypothesis," mimeo (Joprgal ot
International Economics, forthcoming).
Levy, 8. (1991) 'Transactions costs, the size of firms and industrial policy: Lessons from a comparative
case study or the Footwear Industry in Korean and Taiwan" Journal of Development Economics 34, 151178.

Levy, S., and S. van Wijnbergen (1992) "Mesican agriculture in the Free Trade Agreement: Transition
problems in economic reform,' OECD Development Centre Technical Papers No, 63, May.
Levy, S., and S. Nolan (1992) "Trade and foreign investment policies under imperfect competition:
Lessons For developing countries,' Journal or Develooment Economics 37, 31-62
Lipton, D,, and J. Sachs (1990) "Creating a market economy in Eastern Europe: The case of Polsnd,"
Brookinos Papers on Economic ActIvify 1, 75-133.

Little, M.D. (1987) 'Small manufacturing enterprise in developing countries," The World Bank
Economic Review 1, 203-235.

Little, I,, T, Scitovsky, and M. Scott (1970) inttry and trade in some developing countries. London
Oxford University Press.
Lopez, R., and A. Panaganye (1992) "On the theory of piecemeal tariff reform: The case of pure
imported intermediate inputs," American Economic Review 82, 615-625
Lucas. R. (1983) "On the mechanics of economic development,' Journal of Monetary Economics 22, 342.
Lucas, R.E.B. (1989) "Liberalization of Indian frsde and industrial licensing: A disaggregated
econometric model with simulations," Journal of Development Economicy 31, 141-175.

66
Matsuyama, K. (1990) 'Perfect equilibria in a trade liberalization game,' American Economic Review 60,
460-492.
Matsuyama, K. (1991) Agricultural productivity, comparative advantage and economic growth,' NBER
Worldng Paper No. 3605.
Michaely, M. (1977) "Exports and economic growth: An empirical investigation' Journal of developrnsn(
Economics 4, 49-54.
Michaely, M., D. Papageorgiou, and A.M. Choksi (1991) Liberalizing forean trade—Lessons of
experience in the developing world. Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell.
Mitra, P. (1956) "A description of adjustment to external shocks: Country groups," in: 0. Lal and M.
Wolf, - eds., Stagflation. Savings and the state: Perspectives on the olobal economy. New York: Oxford
University Prose.
Meter, G.M., and W.F. Steel, ads. (1989) Industrial adjuatment in Sub-Saharan Africa, Washington, DC:
The Worid Bank.

Moran, C. (1991) 'Chile: Economic crisis and recovery,' in: V. Thomas etal., eda., Restructuring
economies in distress. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mosley, P., J. Harrigan, and J. Toye (1991) Aid and Dower: The World Bank and policy-based lending.
London and New York: Routledge.
Murphy; KM., A. Shleifer, and R. Viahny (1989) 'Income diatribution, market size, and industrialization,'
Quarterly Journal of Economics 104, 537-54.

Murphy, KM., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1989) "lndustrializaticn and the big push," Journal of Political
Eccnorny 97, 1003-1025.
Murphy, K.M., A. Shleiter, and R. Viahny (1991) 'Allocation of telent and economic growth,' Quarterin
Journal of Economics (May).
Muasa, M. (1986) "The adjustment process and the tining of trade liberalization," in: AM. Choksi and 0.
Papageorgiou, eds., Economic liberalization in developirto.countries. Osford and New York: Basil
Blackwell.
Nalebuff, B., and J. Stigttz (1983) 'Information, compettion, and markets," American Economic Review
73, 278-283.
Nellie, JR., and S. Kikeri (1989) 'Public enterprise reform: Privatization and the World Bank," World
Oevelopment 17, 659-72.
Niahimizu, M., and 5, Robinson (1984) "Trade policies and productivity change in semi-industrialized
countries,' Journ& of Oevelopment Economics 16, 177-206.

Nishimizu, M., and J. Page (1991) "Trade policy, market orientation and productivity change in industry,
in: J. do Melo and A. Sapir, eds., Tradethaory and eccnomic reform: Essays in honor of Bela Balasaa.
Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell.
Nurkse, R. (1953) Problems of capital formation in underdeveloped countries. New York: Oxford

67
University Press._

Onis, Z. (1991) trganization of export-Oriented lndustriatzation: The Turkish foreign trade companies
in camps relive perspective," in: T. Was and M. Odekon, eds., Politics and Economics gf Turkish
Liberalization. London and Toronto: Associated Universities Press.
Pack, H. (1987) Productivity, technology, and industrial development. New York: Oxford University
Press.

Pack, H. 0988) "Industrialization and trade," in: H.B. Chenery and T.N. Srinivasan, eds., Handbook of
development economics, vol. I. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Pack, H. (1992) "Learning snd productivity change in developing countries," in: O.K. Helleiner, ed.
Trade policy, industrialization and development. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Pack, H., and L. Westphal (1986) "Industrial strategy and technological change: Theory versus reality,"
Journal of Development Economics 22, 87-I 28.
Penagariya, A. (1990) "How should tariffs be structured," Country Economics Department WPS 353,
World Bank, Washington, DC, February,

Panagariya, A., and 0. Rodrik (1992) "Political economy arguments tor a uniform tariff," friinationat
Economic Review, forthcoming.
Panagariya, A., and M. Schiff (1990) "Commodity exports and real incomes in Africa: A preliminary
anatysis," mimeo.
Panaganya, A., end M. Schiff (1992) "Taxes versus quotas: The case of cocoa exports," in: I. Goldin
and L.A. Winters, eds., Qp6ps000omies: Structural adiustment and agriculture. New York and London:
Cambridge Univrsity Press.
Pearson, R. (1987) "Transfer of technology and domestic innoveion in the cement industry," in: J.M.
Katz, ed., Technolooy oenerption in Latin American manufacturino industries. London: Macmillan.
Perez, L.A.P., and J.J.P. y Peniche (1987) "A sumary of the principal findings of the case study on
technological behavior of the Mexican steel firm, Altos Homos de Mesico, in: J.M, Katz, ed.,
IchpoIoay generation in Latin Americart manufacturing industries. London: Macmillan Press.
Portes, R. (1990) "The transition to converlibibty for Eastern Europe and the USSR," CEPR Discussion
Paper No. 500. London: Centre for Economic Policy Reseerch.
Prasnikar, J., J. Svejnsr, and M. Klinedinet (1992) "Structural adjustment policies and productive
efficiency of socialist enterprises," Eurooean Economic Review 36, 179.1 99.
Pntchett, L. (1991) Measuring outward orientation in developing countries: Can it be done?" World
Bank, mimeo.
Pryor, F.L. (1991) "Economic reform in Third-World Marxist nations," Hoover Institution, Stanford
University.
Pursell, 0. (1990) "Industrial sickness, primary and secondary: The effects of exit constraints on
industrial performance," The World Bank Economic Review 4, 103-114.

68
Rivera-Satiz, LA, and PSI. Romer (1991) "International trade with endogenous technological change
European Economic Review 35, 911-1004,

Roberts, M.J., and J.R. Tybout (1991) "Size rationalization and trade exposure in developing countries,"
World Bank WPS 594, February.
Roberts, M.J., and JR. Tybout (1992) "Sunk costs and the decision to export in Colombia," unpublished
paper, January.

Rodrik, D. (1957a) "The eccnomics of export-performance requirements' Ouarlerlv Journal of
Economics 102, 633-650.
Rodrik, b. (198Th) 'Trade and capital-account liberalization in a Keynesian economy,' Journal of
International Economics 23.
Rodrik, D. (1988) "Imperfect competition, scale economies, and trade potcy in developing countries," in:
R. Baldwin, ed. Trade policy issues and empirical analysis, Chicago and London: University of Chicago
Press.
Rodrik, D. (1989a) "Promises, promises: Credible policy reform via signalling," The Economic Journal
99, 756-772]
Rodrik, D. (1989b) "Credibility of trade reform:

policy maker's guide]" The World Economy.

Rodnik, 0. (1991) "Policy uncertainty and private investment in developing countries," jyal of
Development Economics 36, 229-242.

Rodrik, D. (1992a) "The rush to free trade in the developing world: Why so late? Why now? Wit ii
last?" NBER Working Paper No. 3947, January.
Rodnik, D. (1992b) "Closing the productivity gap: Does trade liberalization really help?" in: G 1-lelleiner,
ed., Trade policy, industrialization, and development. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Roddk, 0. (1992c) "The limits of trade policy reform in developing countries," Journal of Economic
Perspectives 5, 87-105.
Rodrik, 0. (1992d) "Political economy and development policy," European Economic Review 35, 329336.
Rodrik, 0. (forthcoming) "Eoreign trade in Eastern Europe's transition: Early results," in: O.J. Blanchard
etal., eds., The transition in Eastern Eurep. Chicago and New york: Univeraity of Chicago Press.
Roemer, M. and C. Jones, eds, (1991) Markets in developing countries: Parallel, fragmenled.,...nd
San Ersncisco: ICS Press.
Romer, P. (1985) "Increasing returns and long-run growth,' Journal of Politcal Economy 94, 1 002-1 037.

Romer. P. (1992) 'Two strategies for economic development: Using ideas and producing ideas,' mimeo.

Rosenstein-Rodan, P.N. (1943) "Problems of industniaization of Eastnrn sod South-eastern Europe."
Economic Journal 53, 202-211.

69
Roumasset, J., and S. Setboonsarng (1988) "Second-best agricultural policy: Getting the price of Thai
rice nght," Journal of Development Economics 28, 323-340.
Sachs, J. (1985) "External debt and macroeconomic performance in Latin America and East Asia,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1985:2, 565-73.
Sachs, J. (1987) "Trade and exchange rate policies in growth-oriented adjustment programs," in: V.
Corbo, M. Goldstein. and M, Khan, eds., Orowth-oriented adiustment programs. Washington DC: IMF
and World Bank.
Scharfstein, 0. (1988) "Product-market competition and managerial slack," Rand Journal of Economics
19, 147-55.

Scherer, F.M., and 0. Ross (1990) Industrial market structure and economic performance 3rd. ed.
Boston: Houghton Mitflin,_
Snape, P. (1991) "East Asia: Trade reform in Korea and Singapore," in G. Shepherd and C.G, Langoni,
cdx., Trade reform: LessonE from eiohteen countries, San Francisco: ICE Press for International Center
for Economic Growth.
Srinivasan, TN. (1988) "International trade and factor movements in development theory. policy, and
experience," in: G. Ranis and TN. Srinivasan, cdx, The state of development econcmics. Cambridge,

MA: Basil Blacell.

Snnivasan, TN. (1989) "Recent theories of imperfect competition and international trade: Any
implications for development sirategy?" ftidin Economic Review 24, 1-23.
Srinivasan, T.N., and J. Whalley, cdx. (1986) General equilibrium trade policy modeling. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Steel, W.F., and L.M. Webaler (1991) Small enterorisea under adjustment in Ghana, World Bank
Technical Paper Number 138, Washington, DC.
Stern, E, (1991) "Evolution and lessons of adjustment lending," in: V. Thomas et xl., cdx., Restructuring
economies in distress: Policy reform and the World Bank. Oxford and New York: Oxford University
Press.

Stewart, F., and E, Ghani (1992) "Extematties, development, and trade, in: 5K. Helleiner, ed,, fl
policy, industrialization and development. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Streeten, P. (1969) "A survey of ihe issues and options," in: S. Commander, ed., Structural adjustment
in agriculture. London: Overseas Development Institute.
Summers, R., and A. Heston (1988) "A new set of international comparisons of real product and price
levels: Estimates for 130 countries," Review of Income and Wealth 34, 1-25.
Svedberg, P. (1991) "The export performance of Sub-Saharan Africa," Economic Development and
Cultural Change 39, 549-566.
Syrquin, M., and H, Chenery (1989) "Three decades of industrialization," The World Bank Economic

yjew3, 145-181.

70
Takacs, W. (1989) 'Options for dismantling trade restrictions in developing countries,' The Workl Bank
Research Observer 5, 25-48.

Tanzi, V. and P. Shome 0992) 'Tho role of taxation in the development of East Asian economies,' in:
1. Ito and A.O. Krueger, ads., The political economy or tax reform. Chicago and London; The University
of Chicago Press.
Tarr, D. (1992) 'Rent-seeking and the benefits of price and trade reform in Poland: The automobile and
color television cases,' The World Bank, mimeo,
Taylor, L. (1991) "Economic openness: Problems to the century's end," in; 1. Banuri, ed., Ecnnomic
liberalization; No panacea: The experiences or Latin America and Asia, Oxford; Clarendon Press.
Thomas, V., J. Nash, and associates (1991) Best practices in trade policy reform. Washington, DC;
World Bank.
Thomas, V. at al., ada, (1991) Restructuring economies in distress; Policy reform and the World Bank.
Oxford and New York; Oxford University Prasa.

Tybout, J., J. de Melo, and V. Corbo (1991) 'The Effects of trade reforms on scala and technical
efficiency; New evidence from Chile," Journal of International Economics 31, 231-250.

Tybout, JR. (1992) 'Linking trade and productivity,' The World Bank Economic Review 6, 189-2tt
Tybout, JR., with appendix by L. Ltu (1989) 'Entry. exit, coropatition and productivity in the Chilean
industrial sector," World Bank, unpublished paper, May.

Tyhoul J.R., and M.D. Wostbrook (1992a) tstimaling returns to scale with large imperfect panels; An
application to Chilean manufacturing industries,' Georgetown University, unpublished paper, May.
Tybout JR., and M.D. Wastbrook (I 992b) Trada liberalizafion and the dimensions of afficiancy change
in Mexican manufacturing industries," Gaorgatown University, unpublished paper, July.
Wade, R. 0990) Governing the market; Economic theory and the role of qovernmenl in East Asian
industrialization. Princeton, NJ; Princeton University Press.
Wayerman, L., and S. Murphy (1992) "Total factor productivity in automobile production in Argentina,
Mexico, Korea, and Canada: The impacts of protection," in; G.K. Helleiner, ad., Trade Pclicy,
induatrialization and davelooment. Oxford; Clarendon Press,
Webb, S., and K. Shadif (1992) 'Designing and implementing adjustment programs," in; V. Corbo, S.
Fischer, and SB. Webb, eds., Adjustment lending revisited; Policies to restore qrowth. Washington DC;
World Bank.
Weatphal, LE. (1982) 'Fostering technological mastery by means of selective infant-industry protection.'
in; M. Syrquin and S. Teitel, erie,, Trade, stabitty, lochnolocv, and equity in LAtin America. New York;
Academic Press.
Weatphal, L.E. (1990) 'Industrial potcy in an export-propelled econcmy; Lessons from South Korea's
experience,' Journal cf Economic Perspectives 4, 41-59.

Westphal, L.E. (1991) "Comments on Korea; Structural adjustment,' in; V. Thomas atal., ada.,

71
Restructuring economies in distress. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Whatley, J. (1989) Recent trade Uberalization in the developing world: What is behind it, and where is it
headed?" Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no. 3057.

Wsltamson, J, (1990) the prowess ot policy reform in Latin America. Washington, DC: Institute for
International Economics, Policy Analyses In International Economics, 28.
Williamson, J. (1991) The economic ooening Qf Eastern Europe. WashIngton, DC: institute for
International Economics.
Williamson, J. (1992) Comments on "Adjustment programs and Bank support", in: V. Corbo et al,. eds..
Adiustment lending revisited (World Bank, Washington, DC).
World Bank (1987) Wortd development report. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank (1992) Prtvatization: The lessons of experience, Country Economics Department,
Washington, DC.

Voon, C-Ft (1992) "International competitiuon and market penetration: A model of the growth strategy of
the Korean semiconductor industry, in: O.K. Helleiner, ed., Trade Dolicy. industrializstion and
development, Oxford: Clarendon Press,

Young, A. (1991) 'Learning-by-doing and the dynamic effects of internaticnal trade.' Quarterly Journal of
Economics 106, 369-405.

