NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ASSESSING CLINTON'S PROGRAM ON
JOB TRAINING, WORKFARE, AND EDUCATION
IN THE WORKPLACE

James Heekman

Working Paper No. 4428

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1993

This paper is part of NBER's research program in Labor Studies, Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4428

August 1993
ASSESSING CLINTON'S PROGRAM ON
JOB TRAINING, WORICFARE, AND EDUCATION
IN TIlE WORKPLACE

ABSTRACT

The Clinton administration has made job training and skill upgrading a major priority.
Secretary of Labor Robert Reich has already presented a bold program for skill enhancement
drawing on a new coosensus in certain circles of the social science and policy communities about

the need to opgrade the nation's skills. An apparently new approach to training and education
has been proposed and Secretary Reich is now busy selling it to the Congress and the Nation.

This paper provides background on the problems in the labor market that niotivate the

new Clinton-Reich initiatives on training and schooling.

It briefly summarizes the proposed

strategies and the background philosophy for the ClintonReich agenda. It then considers the
evidence that supports or contradicts assumptions of their plan. There is a lot of evidence abottt
many of the 'new' proposals becaose some are reworked versioos of old programs that have been

carefully cvalttated. Other proposals borrow ideas from Germany. I compare the rhetoric that
accompanies these proposals io the comesi of the U.S. labor market. Still other proposals have

been evaluated in demonstration projects but the lessons from these evaloations have oot yet
infl neared admiti i srat ion thinking. Tb is is unforlttnate becaose many current plans are based on

assumptions that have been discredited in earefttl empirical studies, Tbts research has not yet
caught the attetttion of the policy makers in Washington.
James I-Ieckman

Department of Economics

University of Chicago
129 E. 59th Street
CUnago, 1L 611637

and NBER

L Some Unpleasant Arithmetic About The Iron Law

of Skill Ijivestments

A central fact dominating the Clinton administrations' concerns about the labor market

is the declining real income of male high school graduates and high school dropouts. In
purchasing power constant or deflated dollars, male high school graduates earn 4% less per week

in 1989 than in 1979. Male high school dropouts earn 13% less per week than in 1979, Male

college graduates earn 11% more per week. These comparisons widen further if we consider
annual earnings. By any measure, labor incomes have become more unequally distributed.
For women, the story is somewhat different. Real wages of female high school graduates

have risen but the rise has been even greater for female college graduates. Thus for both men

and women, inequality of labor incomes has risen. The returns to schooling and skill have
increased, The real earnings of workers at the bottom of the skill distribution (less than high

school graduate) have definitely declined for persons of either gender. Youth have been hit
hardest in this shifting market for skills, Indeed, it is the youth labor market that is a central
focus of concern for the Clinton policies.

A corollary phenomenon is the decline in labor market activity especially among the
unskilled. Using a variety of labor force measures, we find that among the unskilled there is
much greater joblessness, nonernployment and longer unemployment spells than among workers

with more skills. This gives rise to the "Youth Labor Market Problems -

a

central focus of

current policy concern. Particularly problematic are the less skilled (high school degree or less)

youth who appear to flounder in the market for years before they settle down. These youth are
a source of major social problems. Teenage pregnancy, participation in crime, incarceration, and

idleness arc important phenomena that are on the Increase in most areas.
2

The problem of a deteriorating market for unskilled or semiskilled workers is not solely

a problem of youth. Displaced adults - primarily factory workers-are a major concern. Efforts

to retrain the so called 'dislocated workers' are central to the Clinton agenda. Middle-age
workers displaced from high-wage manufacturing jobs are at a major disadvantage in the new
market for labor that has emerged since many of these workers took their first jobs. The decline

of manufacturing has displaced many workers with substantial investments in unwanted skills.
This new inequality with declining real incomes for the unskilled is a central fact of our

rime and is a major concern of the Clinton administration. The employment and training
component of Clinton's stimulus package was designed to address these problems. Roughly
$16.5 billion dollars was set aside to upgrade American skills. Even though the stimulus package

was defeated, its major components are still very much under consideration in administration
circles.

Before considering specific features of Clinton's program, I first describe the size of the
task confronting his administration. My analysis wlil confirm the impression that economics is

a dismal science because my calculations convey very dismal information indeed.
In his budget speech, President Clinton frequently used the term 'investment" to describe

his plans for job training. He was referring to investment in human capital - the skills of persons

- in describing the job investment program. An investment generally yields returns over many
years, after initial costs are incurred. For human capital, a round - and roughly correct - average

number is 10%. Thus, for each $10 invested in a person, the expected avenge return is $1.
Some claim that this number is lower and some claim that it is higher but most economists
would accept a 10% return as a good starting point for the kind of analysis I want to present.

3

Table 1
Estimated Investment Outlays Required To Restore
1979 Parities and Levels in The Labor Market
(1989$)

Assumed Rate of Return: 10%

A. To Restore Male High School Dropouts to 1979 Real Wage Levels
= $ 284 Billion
($25,000 per high school dropout adjusted for labor force
participation)
B. To Restore Male High School Graduates to 1979 Real Wage Levels

=

$501.5 Billion

Total: A + B = $785.5 Billion
If all investment ($16.5 Billion Per Year) were spent on Males alone it would take 47 Years at the
current rate of investment.

C. To restore Male Real Differentials to 1979 Levels,
High School Dropouts vs. High School Graduate = $171 Billion
($15,000 per Dropout)
D. Male High School Graduates vs. College
Graduate = $840 Billion
($43,500 per High School Graduate)
E. Male High School Dropouts vs. College Graduate
$664.6 Billion
($58,500 per Dropout)

Total: D + E = 51.304 Trillion
(Need 78 Years of Investment at Proposed Rate)
Women

To Restore Differentials to (1979 Levels)
Female High School Dropout with College Graduate:
= $290 Billion
($29,050 per Dropout)

To Restore Female High School Graduate
To Some College Differentials (1979 Levels)
= $466 Billion
($22,800 per high school Graduate)
Total Need For Men and Women to Restore 1919 Differentials:
$2.06 Trillion
(Need 124 years of Investment at Proposed Rate)
ource: Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1990. The figures adjust for differential rates of labos
force participation. The figures for wage differentials come fromRebecca Blank, Employment Strategies:
Public Policy To Increase The Work Force and Earnings!, Harvard University Press, forthcoming in
1994, edited by She'don Danaiger, Gary Sandefur, and Daniel Weinberg, working title, 'Tuverty ansi
Public Policy: What Do We Know? What Should We Du?

To add $1000 in earnings per year to the average person, it is necessary to make a one

time investment of $10,000 in that person. This is a large sum but many college students are
making even greater investments each year. Using a 10% rate, I can take any annual earnings
gap and determine how much investment must be done to close it simply by multiplying the gap
by ten.

What do such calculations reveal? Consider two interesting eounterfactual questions:

(I).

How much would we have to invest in our workforee in $1989 to restore
male high school dropouts to their 1979 real incomes?

This questiun is meaningful only for men because real weekly wages for women have risen or
remained roughly constant over the period 1979-1989,
A second question is:
(II).

How much would we have to invest in our workforee in $1989 to restore
1979 differentials without reducing the real income of anyone (those for
dropouts y.. high school graduates; high school graduates

persons with

college; dropouts yj persons with college)?
Answers to these and other related questions are given in Table 1. The answer to question

1 is a staggering $284 Biffion. Thus, if all of the $16.5 billion of the Clinton stimulus package

had been devoted to upgrading the skills of the workforce to restore male 1979 real earnings,

it would have gone less than 6% of the way toward restoring high school dropouts to their
previous positions in the labor market.

The answer to question II is more dismal yet. To restore skill differentials to their real

1979 jgygj would take more than two trillion 1989 dollars. This would require an enormous

4

effort. At the proposed rate of expenditure it would take 124 years to achieve this objective. The
other calculations in Table 1 indicate the magnitude of the investment required to restore real

wages to their 1979 positions.
One could qualify these calculations in many ways. One might want to adjust down the
rate of return as more difficult-to-train persons receive training. Or, one might wish to account

for the fact that as persons are upgraded from high school graduate status, the real incomes of
the remaining high school graduates are likely to increase. Under most plausihte scenarios the

costs of restoring skill parities to their 1979 levels are huge.
From these calculations, we learn two lessons: (a) the problem addressed by the Clinton
administration is an enormous one and (b) expenditures at the level of 16 - or 6(1 - billion dollars

a year cannot possibly solve these problems in the next four years. These sobering conclusions
also suggest that it will be essential to make wise investments. With resources as limited as they

are, it is necessary to make the most effective use of them.

2. The General Principles Guiding The Clinton-Reich Initiatives

In the past four years, a consensus of sorts has emerged in certain circles about the
functioning of the U.S. labor market and the institutions that produce skills for that labor market

and in that labor market. It is negative in tone about current institutions and looks abroad especially to Northern Europe - and in particular Germany - for advice on how to structure

American labor market policies. Nathan Glazer has recently summarized the intellectual sources

for the new view and so a detailed review of the origins of these ideas is not needed.1
The following core ideas underlie the new consensus.

5

(1) The growing inequality in wages and incomes is a serious social problem. Especially

troublesome is the decline in real earnings among young and unskilled workers.
(2) The quality of the labor force is in decline. Included in the notion of "quality" is the

work ethnic, atitude, glg of employees. The U.S. is perceived to be facing a skills shortage
exacerbated by immigration from countries with less skilled workers. Our productivity growth

has declined and this is linked to the decline in the quality of our labor. The recent growth in
output during the Reagan-Bush years had more to do with expansion of inputs (primarily the
surge of workers produced by the Baby Boom) rather than with workforce quality improvements.
(3) The productivity of the werlcforce cannot be improved by investing in physical capital

and machinery because "low wage countries can now use the same machines and still sell their

products more cheaply than we can". (This view is not held universally even within the group
of scholars advocating the new view).
(4) The key to enhanced productivity lies in a "Third Industrial Revolution now taking

place in the world1': Henry Ford-style mass production and specialization (also known as
"Taylorism' after its synthesizer and formalizer the industrial engineer Frederick Taylor) is
becoming obsolete, although it is still widely utilized in the United States. The ability to produce

quality goods, sensitive to changing consumer tastes - "flexible technology" - is what is valued

now and this requires more highly trained - not necessarily more highly specialized - workers.

Participation in the "global economy" requires that we move toward high productivity work
organizations built around highly trained workers.
(5) American schools have failed to produce high-quality students. They fall to motivate
students and leave students inadequately trained for academic or nonacademic alternatives. Most

6

American education is only poorly connected in content or practicaiity with the demands of jobs.

The tow academic performance of Americans is manifest in poor test scores compared with those

of other countries.
(6) As a consequence of the point just made, the "school to work" transitioo in America

is chaotic" compared to the "orderly", "smoothly functioning" transitions experienced by
German youth. Youth apprenticeships, especially designed for non-academically-oriented youth

motivate learning by making it tangible. They wilt make learning relevant to market needs and

wilt foster an environment of achievement among the non-academically-oriented youth. By

certifying youth through nationally recognized credentials based on tests, we will do for

vocational training what we currently do for academic training by granting nationally
recognizable and accepted degrees. We will enhance incentives for acquisition of skills in the

workplace "by guaranteeing" an economic return to quality in a national market through
establishment of nationally-recognized skill credentials programs operated by finns, unions and
govemments. In this way, we will create the skill base for Americans to participate in the "Third

Industrial Revolution'.
The new consensus is a happy marriage of two recent lines of thought: (a) The view that
the craft economy - the "flexible technology" economy - more adaptable to taste and technology

change is coming back after a century and a half of the thu mph of the mass production
economy. This view was expounded by Michael Piore and Charles Sabel2 and has fired the

imaginations of many planners and policy makers. It has proved hard to document as a
widespread phenomenon but "flex-tech" is widely trumpeted as the "leading edge" technology;

and (b) The view that a return to the apprenticeship system that supported the old craft system

7

will provide the incentives to acquire the right skills. This view is most avidly espoused by
Stephen Hamilton3, To this line of thought has recently been adjoined a third argument that
"flex-tech" is best implemented in job environments in which firms and unions cooperate, and
in which workers with general skills perform a multiplicity of tasks itt is claimed that by defying

the law of comparative advantage and by foregoing the benefits of specialization in tasks in the

workplace, worker and firm productivity wilt be enhanced. Coupled with the remarkable and

unsupported claim that investment in physical capital cannot restore or boost American
productivity in regard to other countries the new consensus virtually dictates a strategy of
workplace - based investment in human capital.

Tu these views are added the more prosaic, and ongoing, concern that most Americans

share about the welfare population. President Clinton made a bold promise during the last
presidential campaign to train workers for two years and then induce them to work by reducing

their welfare benefits. In addition to this promise, the Clinton team proposed that dislocated
adult workers - who have lost their jobs by plant and firm closings - should be retrained to learn

new jobs.
I now turn to the specific features of these proposals.

3. Clinton's Specific Agenda For Training
The Clinton Program has the following features and approximate price tags. Here, I use

the old proposals withdrawn in April as a henchmark for likely new proposals.

'

The Summer Youth Employment and Training Program under the Job Training

Partnership Act (JTPA) to doubled in size from 700,000 slots to 1.4 million slots at an

S

increased cost of $1 billion for the first year of operation.

•

President Clinton's National Service Program would be started as a pilot program at a

cost of $15 million.
•

The 5cnior community Service Employment Prognm, which provides part-time work
for older Americans, would be increased by $33 mitlion to serve an additional 5,000
older workers.

•

A Worker Profiling project woutd he undertaken to assist states in developing automated
systems to identify laid-off workers tikety to experience difficulty in obtaining a newjob.

Development costs are estimated to be $14 million.

•

A One-Stop Career Shoppioglrogram would be established to provide adults interested

in upgrading their skills or changing careers with a single location where they could
apply for services needed. The program would cost $900 million over four years.
•

A Welfare Reform initiative will be developed to help families in poverty gain the skills

and education needed to increase their incomes. Details have not been developed, but

the program will provide enhanced education and training for up to two years, after
which welfare recipients will be required to work.
•

The Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) Program and Economic Dislocation and Worker
Adjustment Assistance (EDWAA or Title Ill of JTPA) would be combined and expanded

to serve more dislocated workers who lose their jobs due to foreign competition, industry
restructuring, and defense downsizing. The program would likely cost $2 billion in 1997

and approximately $4.6 billion over 4 years.

•

The Job Corps would be expanded by 50 percent by 2001 to increase slots from 70,000

9

to 104,000. The cost would be $202 million in 1997 and $341 million for 1994-97. An

additional $50 million in 1997 and $105 million over four years would be used to
renovate existing Job Corps centers.

The Summer Youth Employment and Trainint Pro.grgrn would be expanded on

a

permanent basis to provide more employment, education, and training opportunities for
disadvantaged youth. Over four years, the expansion would cost $2 billion and provide
an additional 2 million summer opportunities.
•

A nationwide system of Youth Apprendceshp programs would be established to provide

school - arid work-based learning for youth who dci not plan to attend college. The
proposal calls for $500 million in 1991 and $1.2 billion over four years.

4. flow Effective Are The-se Programs Likely To Be?
A. The Sumner Youth and Employment Training Program

The investment content of the Summer Youth Employment and Training program is likely

to be low. Predecessor programs like the Kennedy-Johnson Neighborhood Youth Corps program

were well known to be palliatives, designed to keep inner city youth out of the streets. No firm
evidence of any lasting effects of these programs on the employment, wages, criminal or sexual

behavior has ever been demonstrated. The new twist on this program is that an hinvestments
argument has been given to it. Barbara Heynes and her associates have argued that knowledge

acquired in schools deteriorates through disuse during the summer.4 The new proposals
recognize this possibility and suggest that summer youth programs should be enhanced by
learning enrichment activities. "Make work" has become an 1nvestment".

10

What are the prospects for success

of this program? Fortunately, a recent evaluation of

the Summer Training and Education Program (STEP) has been presented by Public/Private
Ventures, a Philadelphia-based non-profit corporation that evaluates and manages social policy
initiatives aimed at helping disadvantaged youth.

STEP offered two summers of employment, academic remediat.ion and a life skills
program to tow-achieving 14 - and 15 - years old from poor families. The objective was to reach

youth at the crucial age at which they are deciding whether or not to drop out of school or
become pregnant.

Part-time summer work at the minimum wage was supplemented with

remedial reading and math classes and courses on the long term consequences of drug use,
unprotected sex, and dropping out behavior.

Using randomized trials, 4,800 14 - and 15 - year olds in five cities were enrolled into
or randomized out of the program. Both treatments and controls were followed for eight years.

A high quality evaluation was conducted using state of the art "Demonstration Methods" fur
three cohorts of participants.
The outcomes of this program are disappointing. STEP participants experienced measured

short run gains and boosted their math and reading scores by half a grade as measured by
competency tests. Even after 15 months, these gains held up, but gains in the second summer

were less than those in the first. Especially large was short-run growth in knowledge of
contraceptive methods.

This short-term promise did not translate into longer-term gains. Three and a half years

after their STEP experience at the ages of 17 and 18 -

15%

of participants were neither at

work nor at school. The proportions were virtually identical for treatments and controls. Some

11

22% of young women had children and 64% of these were receiving public assistance in some

form. Work rates and school completion rates were identical and low for treatments and
controls!
Since STEP is, if anything, more intensive than the proposed summer youth programs,

this evidence suggests that summer youth programs are n investments. There is no evidence
that they have lasting effects on participants. They may, however, protect the peace, prevent
riots and lower the summer crime rate but there is no evidence of such effects,

B. Youth Apprenticeship Programs
I now turn to the most novel - and controversial - part of the Clinton-Reich agenda - the

proposal for Youth Apprenticeship programs. Apprenticeship - once a vital part of the craft
system - has now withered away. It is now largely confined to a few crafts in the construction
trades.

Participants in these programs tend to be in their mid-to-late twenties. The term

"apprenticeship is used more broadly in the new proposals advanced by the administration to
encompass a variety of work-place-based training programs for youth in their late teens.
The premise of the Youth Apprenticeship Program is that in the American labor market

the transition from school to work is "chaotic with many youth who do not continue on to
college becoming engaged in "deadendTM jobs that lead nowhere. A recurrent theme in the policy

discussions on this topic is that high youth turnover is a symptom of "floundering" in which
aimless job search produces no long run benefit for youth labor market participants. In contrast,

the German system is held up as paradigm of order" in which youth in their late teens progress

smoothly from school to work and engage in learning on the job. Much lower youth

12

unemployment and nonemployment-nonschooling rates in Germany are contrasted favorably with

high rates in the United States.6

The central features of the German scheme that are advocated for adaptation to an
American setting are:

(I) Workplace-based training and schooling which will motivate learning for the less
academically inclined. By putting theoretical constructs developed in the classroom to immediate

use on the shop floor, students who are not academically oriented will be more likely to learn
new ideas of perceived immediate value. This is the "motivation to learn" argument.
(2) Workplace-based training reduces job shopping by linking trainees to firms at an early

age. It increases knowledge of the world of work and facilitates acquisition of knowledge about

the world of work. Instead of wasting time searching for a job, apprentices are busy learning
how to do a job. This eliminates a lot of unnecessary search, This is the "cuts wasteful search"
argument.
(3) Workplace-based training places young people in contact with nonfamily adults earlier

than traditional schooling and teaches the work ethnic. It takes students out of formal schools
where peer pressure often works to undermine learning and achievement. This is th "eliminates

peer pressure and promotes exposure to adults" argument.
(4) Workplace-based training improves on ordinary vocational training provided in public

schools which is often out of touch with market realities and new ideas. Firms providing

training are more likely to be in touch with market demands than are public school
bureaucracies. This is the "benefit to privatization of learning" argument although it is rarely
described in these terms by advocates of Youth Apprenticeship programs.

13

(5) Workplace-based training coupled with national certification for achievement of skills

by governmental industry and union groups will bring to vocational training the benefits of
credentialling now conferred by academic degrees and cerlificates. Certification of generally-

recognized skills will create a national market for skills that are currently hard to verify.
Workers will have a greater incentive to invest in skills if they can transport them to a wide
variety of firms. This is the "credentialling" argument.

(6) Workplace-based training will be the first step in a lifetime of career learning in

which workers return to the classroom on a regular basis to enhance skills. Learning will
become a permanent part of the workplace eliminating the sharp dichotomy between learning and

earning that characterizes the current labor market. This is the "career of learning" argument.

What are the merits of these arguments? Before answering this question, it will be
helpful to summarize existing knowledge about the youth labor market in the United States and
to examine the functioning of the German apprenticeship program.

(i) The Youth Labor Market in America
Comparing the United States and German labor markets, there can be no doubt that the

latter is more "orderly" in the sense that a much smaller proportion of youth is not at work or
not at school in Germany at age 17 than in the United States. This fact does not prove that the

German system is the more efficient one. This is especially true in light of the fact that the
compulsory schooling age is 18 in Germany while it is 16 in most states in the United States.
Most German youth are recuired to be "off the street" at the ages when young Americans are
making their transitions to full-time jobs.
The technocratic view put forth by advocates of youth apprenticeship programs deny the

14

-

value of job shopping and job search that characterizes the United States labor market,
Joblessness and turnover are viewed as wasteful activities that are usefully curtailed. Yet a
recent study documents the important role of job shopping as an element of career mobility for

young male workers (over age 18) in the American labor market. During the first ten years of
labor force attachment, a typical male worker holds seven jobs and achieves about one third of

his realized wage growth by changing jobs. (Career paths for young women have not been
studied in similar detail). Matching of workers to firms - characterized by the consensus view

as a time-intensive process that involves 'wasteful" search and 'wasteful' turnover - is in fact

a major source of productivity enhancement with important long term economic and social
consequences.7

Such matching activity is productive because the worker skills utilized by firms are
idiosyncratic. A bright person with a corrosive personality may not be suited for one firm but

may be ideal for another. Diversity is an integral feature of the skills embodied in persons.

Diversity of opportunities in firms is an essential feature of the American economy. Job
shopping is a productive activity that reveals the suitability of worker-firm matches.
Moreover, finding a successful match is only the beginning of the investment process that

characterizes most worker-firm relationships. There are match-or finn- specific investments that

enhance productivity and are not portable elsewhere. No uniform national skill test can certify

or predict the value of these investments in advance. It takes trial and error to learn about,
create and expand upon good matches. Programs that wceffyN general skills do not recognize

the enormous economic value of nontransfcrable match-specific skills. The credentialling
argument biases government policy toward general skills because they are easier to measure.

15

Much research demonstrates that standardized tests are only crude proxies for the skills

that are valued by firms. The goal of using uniform national tests to eliminate wasteful' job
shopping by certifying skills is likely to be an illusory one. More information is preferred to
less informatiorr and skill tests probably convey some information. They cannot convey all of
the characteristics of personality, motivation, and drive that make for a successful worker and
a successful match nor can they capture important ftrmspeeific skills.
The case for certifying skills diminishes under close scrutiny. The technocratic point of

view that youth job turnover is a "wasteful" activity is not supported by the evidence. Job
shopping promotes wage growth. Turnover is another form of investment not demonstrably less

efficient than youth apprenticeships.

The concern about 'inefficient' joblessness that is characteristic of recent proposals for

youth apprenticeships also ignores some important features of the youth labor market
summarized by Richard Freeman, David Wise, Martin Feldstein, David Ellwood and Harry
Holzer.8 First, most (83%) teenagers (men and women age 16-19) are either in school, working

or both. Most unemployed teenagers are either in school or seeking only part-time work. Only
6% of all teenagers are unemployed, out of school and looking for full-time work. Most teenage

unemployment spells are short. The bulk of teenage unemployment is experienced by a small

group of teenagers with long spells of unemployment. These teenagers are concentrated in
disadvantaged (minority, poor family background) groups with low levels of education. The
unemployment and nonemployment problems are very acute for high school dropouts. This is,

however, only a small portion of the total teenage population. Deadend joblessness is not a
!nodal phenomenon for teenagers - rather, it is a phenomenon for only a minority of them. The

16

recent (1980') growth in joblessness and length of unemployment spells documented has been

neutrat across age groups. The 1970' view that unemployment risk declines with age remains.
essentially correct today.

Some employment problems are concentrated among a .

proportion of youth with

disadvantaged backgrounds. Black youth are less likely to be employed than are white youth.
Early employment experience has little effect on later employment chances controlling for ageinvariant person-specific characteristics. Loss of work experience reduces wage growth but such

effects are transient in the life cycle. Even when teenagers hold deadend jobs, most transit out

of them by the early twenties. There appear to be few "permanent scars" (in the language of
David Ellwood) from early "floundering" or job shopping during the teenage years and in the
longer view, there is considerable evidence of wage growth that resutis from job shopping.
None of this denies that there are disadvantaged groups that are not readily assimilated

in labor markets. Special remedies may be appropriate for these groups. Apprenticeship and
special job training programs may be appropriate for them. But in devising national strategies
for revising education and training, it is also important to keep in mind the broader picture of
the youth labor market. "Churning" is a form of learning and most youth who are in deadend

jobs work and search their way out of them.

(ii) How The German Apprenticeship System Works
German youth move through three academic tracks. By grade 4 or 6 students are sorted
into three schools: HauptschOle where they continue until grades 9 or 10; ReatschOte where they

continue until grade 10; and Gymnasium where they continue until grade 13. HauptschOte leads

17

to apprenticeships usually of a three year duration. Typically, one day a week of an
apprenticeship is spent in academic schooling suitable to the occupation being trained for. The

rest of the apprentice's time is spent learning and working on the job. Realschiite qualifies
students for further vocational schooling that eventually culminates in work and learning ("dual

system") activities. Gymnasium leads to university preparation and is technically considered

outside of the apprenticeship system although in certain sectors, such as banking, students
certified to go to the university instead take a form of professional apprenticeship. Hauptschaler

become carpenters, auto mechanics and office assistants. ReatschOler become laboratory
technicians, precision mechanics and personnel managers. They are placed in higher level

apprenticeships. Not all graduates of these schools become apprentices (Only 38% of
RealschUler become apprentices and about 50% of the HauptschOler become apprentices.) Many

youth, especially those from Realschüler, cuntinue on in post-secondary vocational schools.

Government pays for the schooling. Apprentices pay the costs of training by taking lower
wages.

Apprenticeship wages range from 22-33% of full-time professional wages. The training

wage varies by sector with larger firms paying more than smaller firms and in the hand crafts

sector (retail trade and services) wages are quite low. Many apprentices live at home and are
unable to support themselves with the apprenticeship wage. Only .IU.Ti of the firms in industry

and commerce participate in these training programs, while 4Q.%. of the smaller crafts firms

participate at the lower wages they face.9 These training wages thus operate like youth
subrninimum wages. Since the German economy is virtually 100% unionized, the variance from

high level onion wages granted apprentices greatly facilitates their employment. The

18

apprenticeship system thus provides an escape route for firms from high union wages.

Apprentices are tested for minimal knowledge of basic skills. The pass rate on
certification exams is 90%. Candidates may take the exam twice more if they fail the exam on
the first attempt. Success rates in the exams thus tend to be quite high. Most apprentices move

on to take full-time positions at other firms. This is especially true for trainees in the crafts
sector where firms are rather small. Apprentices often take jobs in different occupations than

they are trained for. The leading trainer of bakers in Munich is the Ford Motor Company.
Participation in apprenticeship programs postpones but does not eliminate job shopping.
Completion of an apprenticeship, like graduation from a school, often conveys more information

about the tenacity of the trainee and his/her ability to finish a task than it does about the quality

of the skill learned. Credentialling conveys information about the stamina and degree of
socialization of the apprentice that is valued in the market. A recent study of the economic
returns to the German apprenticeship program suggests that they are low.'5
The apprenticeship and schooling system in Germany has come under attack as rigid and

unresponsive, Students are tracked at an early age. There are many fewer second and third
chance features in this system than are characteristic of schooling choices in the United States a feature unlikely to be attractive in an American setting. Although some RealschUler become

students at the universities, this occurs infrequently.

It is often charged that minorities

(especially Turks) are excluded from participation because the informal nature of the workplace

places a premium on personal ties as a basis for participating in work groups. Turkish
participation rates among eligibles are only a third of German rates.
The very narrow technical training and rigid curriculum of the apprenticeship program

19

may contribute to diminished options in later life. This observation goes part way toward
explaining the current anomaly of tow youth unemptoyment rates and much higher adult
unemployment rates found even in the former West German part of Germany.
The German apprenticeship system is a mechanism for evading union-mandated minimum

wage laws. It is no accident that those firms permitted to pay the lowest wages (in the crafts

sector) are more likely to train apprentices than higher wage - firms in the industrial and
commercial sector where the permitted reduction from the standard wage is not as great.
The German apprenticeship system is also a device for permitting choice in schools. By

selecting an occupation, a trainee also selects a school. He/she is thus able to shop around for
better schools and better training, thus breaking the monopoty of public schools in Germany at
the secondary level.

The exam certification system acts as a credentialling device for young workers. What
is not clear is whether the signal sent by the credential represents achievement of real skills or

a demonstration of persistence and tenacity. Exams do not certify specific skills or match
specific characteristics, aithoogh both matching and firm specific investment are important
components of modem economies. Indeed, it seems likely that if we were to return to a craft
economy, match-specific and firm-specific skills would be even more important than thcy are
today and testing would be even less effective in such an environment.

(iii) Youth Apprenticeship As A Way To Introduce Choice In Schools and A
Youth Subminlinum Wage
A central premise of the argument in support of the Youth Apprenticeship Program is

that American public schools have failed to provide adequate basic skills and job-oriented

20

training for non-college-bound youth. Current governmental educational subsidy policies favor

college education over other forms of education and training. The vocational training provided
by public school bureaucracies is often not tailored to market demands.
Proposals for apprenticeships redress the current imbalance in public expenditure between

academic and job-oriented training. In this regard they correct a potentially important distortion

in the provision of education although they run the risk of favoring general skills over specific
sldlls. To the extent that proposals for apprenticeships undermine the monopoly of local school
bureaucracies in shaping the content of schooling and adapting the curriculum to market needs,

the youth apprenticeship movement can be seen as supporting choice in schools by permitting

students to opt out of conventional school systems that discourage creativity, achievement or
productivity. To the extent that apprenticeships subvert the minimum wage, they expand youth

employment, and the opportunities for youth to take training wages from private finns.
Of course, these objectives could be achieved by other means. The minimum wage could

be lowered or abolished. Choice could be instituted in schools. Vouchers could open up options

for improved training and schooling. Since these policy options do not appear to be acceptable

to the new administration, art apprenticeship policy that goes part way toward accomplishing
these goals may be a successful partial substitute.

The argument for the Youth Apprenticeship Program is not couched in these terms.
Instead, a romanticized description of an "orderly transition from school to work through work-

based training is presented that understates the value of job shopping, and the iniportance of
firm-specific human capital and likely overstates the value of continuous progression through
schooling, training, and work.

21

It is significant that there is little hard evidence on the efficacy of any work-based
learning plan. It is also significant that popular discussions fail to note that the compulsory
schooling age is higher in Germany than in the U.S. (18 vs 16) and this necessarily reduces

unemployment in Germany at young ages. The fact that most youth trained as apprentices work

for firms other than the ones that train them means that job shopping is postponed, not
eliminated. The standards of evidence required to justify most government training programs
have been suspended for this one.
Once it is recognized that the Youth Unemployment Problem H is one experienced by

a small minority of disadvantaged youth, it seems rather drastic to restructure the training
environment for all teenagers to benefit just a few. TargetS programs like Job Corps that are
costly but that have proven to be effective may accomplish more than the sweeping reforms of
the sort envisaged by some advocates of Youth Apprenticeship programs.

C. Evidence About Conventional Workiare and Mandatory Welfare Work Programs
One major campaign promise made by President Clinton was that most persons currently

on welfare would be given extensive training and be required to move off welfare within the

next two years. It is fair to say that no one believes that this will happen. How effective are
current programs in moving people from work to welfare? In this section, I draw heavily no the

work of my University of Chicago colleague, Robert LaLonde,"

(i) Welfare Women
Employment and training programs increase the earnings of female AFDC recipients.

22

Earnings gains are (a) modest (b) persistent over severaj years (c) arise from several different
treatments and (d) are sometimes quite cost effective. Participation in art Arkansas job search
program was required for AFDC recipients with children over age three. Participants attended

a group job search club for two weeks and then were asked to search as individuals for an
additional two months. A program in San Diego required all AFDC participants to talke job
search assistance and mandated work experience. The gains were high for participants in both
programs. The Nationaj Supported Work program provided intensive training and job search
assistance, Roughly ¶16,550 were spent per recipient. However, the estimated rate of return to

this program was onty 3.5%.
Results from the recent experiment evaluating the lob Training Partnership Act confirm

these findings: the largest effects are for women but none of these programs is sufficientiy
sizeable to move more than a tiny fraction of women out of welfare. These programs are often
cost effective (especially if the opportunity cost of trainee time is ignored or is sufficientty tow)

but do not produce dramatic changes in participant earnings.'2

(ii) Adult Males
The evidence for this group is consistent. Returns are low but usually positive, lob search

is an effective strategy but produces only modest increases in the level of earnings.

(iii) fl
Evidence from the ITPA experiment produces only low or negative earnings. For male

youth, the estimated negative effect is unbelievably low. If taken seriously, participation in
JTPA has a more negative impact on youth earnings than participation in the Army, loss of work

experience or the cost of incarceration as measured by many studies.'3

23

Only the Job Corps has a demonstrated positive impact on earnings but it is an expensive

program - costing $20,000 or so per participant with an estimated return of roughly 8-9%.
There is some support for expanding this program. It is a tried and true successful vehicle for

job

advancement among disadvantaged youth.

(iv) Workfare and Leg rnFarv
How effective are the recent learnfaxe and workfare programs? A receot evaluation of

two programs conducted in Wisconsin is of interest. One program - Work Experience and Job
Training - provided AFDC clients with assessment, job search activities, subsidized employment,

job training and community work experience. The second program - Community Work
Experience - requires mandatory participation in unpaid community service jobs for non-exempt
AFDC participants. Participants who failed Eu find employment after completing their education

arid training were also required to participate in CWEP jobs.

Using randomized trials for one county and nonexperimental methods for the rest,
researchers show niieffectis of these programs compared to existing program alternatives)4 The

reduction in AFDC participation that is widely cited as a consequence of these programs is
essentially due to the improvement in the Wisconsin economy over the past few years. These
results are disappointing but consistent with previous studies of the efficacy of such programs
by the Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation)5 Mandatory work experience programs

produce little tong term gains. It is just as welt that President Clinton has quietly dropped his
campaign pledge to end welfare. No cheap training solution has yet been found that can end the
welfare problem. To raise a welfare woman out of poverty by increasing her earnings by $5,000

per year ($100 per week) wilt cost at 1it $50,000. This is the scale of required investment and

24

no "quick fix' low cost solution is in sighL

E. Displaced Workers

Displaced workers suffer major wage losses.

This evidence is consistent with an

important role for matching-specificity and firm-specific human capital. Programs that
successfully placed displaced workers are expensive. The "iron law" of investment applies here

as well. For each dollar of wage gain, at least ten dollars of investment cost must be incurred.

5. Faith in Tests To Measure Job Skills
A central tenet in the new consensus is that tests measure job-relevant skilis. The case
for national testing and credentialling is based on this premise. So is the notion that incentives

within education can be restored by linking performance on tests to the quality of job training
placements in order to tighten the link between academic and nonacaderrtic learning.

One test of skill has recently been studied; the (lED. It is of interest in its own right
because a major goal of many government job training programs is certification of participants
at high school-GED levels.

The (lED has become a major source of high school degrees in this country. One out
of every seven new high school certificate holders achieve that status by a (lED. In New York
State and Florida the proportion is one out of four. High school completion levels measured by

the proportion of persons age 20-24 who have high school credentials or more - have not
deteriorated in the last twenty years only because GED certification has been rising. Advocacy
groups - in particular the American Council on Education - claim that it is easy to test for high

25

school job relevant skills and to certify them.

What is the market value of this certification? Except for a tiny upper tail, (lED certified high school graduates earn roughly the same as high school dropouts. Controlling for

their years of schooling completed, mate (lED certificate holders in their tate 20' and early 30'

earn the jg as high school dropouts. For other groups of workers over the age range 20 -

60

there is little evidence that (lED certified workers earn the same wages or work the same hours

as ordinary high school graduates.'6

These findings challenge both the wisdom of our current training emphasis en (lED
certification, and the folly of relying on tests to measure market-relevant skills. National tests

that credential "skill' cannot capture the imagination, drive or motivation of the person being

tested nor can they develop a score that will successfully rank its bearer in all firms in the
economy. Markets value and humans possess richer and more diverse skills than can be captured

by standardized exams.
Summary

This paper assesses recent proposals for job training, workplace education and workfare.
The challenges confronting the new administration are daunting. Even a very successful human

capital investment strategy - one with a rate of return as high as 10 percent - would require

trillions of dollars of investment to restore parities in wage differentials by education to their
1979 levels. Small sums like those proposed in the recently defeated stimulus package can go
only a little way toward reducing inequality and uplifting the wages of unskilled workers.

26

Footnotes

Revision of The Aloysius Dunaway Memorial Lecture presented at Michigan State
University April 15, 1993. Heckman is Henry Schultz Professor of Economics, The University
of Chicago and Director, Center For Social Program Evaluation, The Harris School, University

of Chicago. Support for this research was provided by a grant from the Lynde and F3arrv
Bradley Foundation of Milwaukee, Wisconsin. The Bradley Foundation does not, necessarity,

endorse the views expressed in this paper. I have received useful comments from Robert
L.aLonde, Derek Neal, Jeffrey Smith and Rainer Winketmann,

See Nathan Glazer, "A Human Capital Poticy For The Cities", The Public Interest,
Number I t2, Summer, 1993, p. 27-49. The main references are America's Choice: Rich Skills
or Low Wages issued by the National Center on Education and The Economy; Robert Reich's
The Work of Nations and Growth With Equity by Martin Neit Bailey, Gary Burtless and Robert
Lit.an.

2Michaei Piore and Charles Sabel, The Second Industrial Divide, Basic Books, New
York, 1984.
3Stephen Hamilton, Apprenticeship for Adulthood, The Free Press, New York, 1990.
4See Barbara Heynes, "Schooling and Cognitive Development: Is There A Season For

Learning?", Child Devetopnsent, 1987, Vol. 58, pp. 1151-1160.
5See Malomy of A Demonstration by Gary Walker and Frances Viella-Vetea, Public and

Private Ventures, Philadelphia, PA, 1992.

6For one statement of this view, see Robert I. Lerman and Hilliard Pouney, "The

29

Compelling Case For Youth Apprenticeship", The Public Interest, #101, Fall, 1990, pp. 62-77.

7Rnbert Topel and Michael Ward, 'Job Mobility and The Careers of Young Men"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 107, May, 1992, pp. 439-480.
ArticIcs on this topic by these authors appear in Richard Freeman and David Wise, eds.,

The Youth Labor Market: Its Nature. Causes and Consequences; University of Chicago Press,

Chicago, 1982; Richard B. Freeman and Harry Holier, The Black Youth Employment Crisis,
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1986.

9Rainer Winkelmann points out to me that these figures may overstate the lack of
participation of German firms in the apprenticeship programs because solo entrepreneurs are

required to register as firms but are unlikely to use apprenticeships and there are many such
entrepreneurs.
'°Kenneth Couch, "High School Vocational Education, Apprenticeship, and Earnings; A
Comparison of Germany and United States", forthcoming, Applied Economics Ouarterlys, 1993.

"Robert LaLonde, "The Earnings Impact of U.S. Employment and Training Programs',

University of Chicago, January 29, 1992.
2Howard Bloom, Larry On, George Cave, Stephen Bell, Fred Doolittle, 'The National
JTPA Study: Title lI-A Impacts on Earnings and Employment at 18 Months", Abt Associates,
Bethesda Maryland, January, 1993.

13The National J'TPA study has been fraught with controversey. See the critique of the

study by Fred Romero, "The National JTPA Study: Lessons Not Learned', onpublished
manuscript, April 21, 1993, Washington, D.C.

4John Pawasarat and Lois M. Quinn, "Evaluation of The Wisconsin WEJT(CWEP

30

Welfare Employment ProgramC, Employment and Training InstituEe, University of Wisconsin,

Milwaukee, April, 1993.
15fudith Gueron and Edward Pauly,

fojjWelfar to Work, Russell Sage Foundalion,

New York, 1991.
nSee

Stephen Cameron and James Heckman, "The Nonequivalence of High School

Equivalents", J'oumal of Labor Economics, Vol. ii, No, 1, Part I, January 1993, pp.l-4'7, and
their unpublished manuscript, The GED.

31

