                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         LAWYERS AS AGENTS OF THE DEVIL
                          IN A PRISONER'S DILEMMA GAME




                                     Orley Ashenfelter

                                       David Bloom




                                 Working Paper No. 4447




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 September 1993




This paper is part of NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors arid not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                  NBER Working Paper #4447
                                                                  September 1993


                               LAWYERS AS AGENTS OF THE DEVIL
                                IN A PRiSONER'S DILEMMA GAME


                                                ABSTRACT


           The goal of this paper is to explore the possibility that the costs and benefits of legal

    representation are structured so that each individual party seeks legal representation in the hope

    of exploiting the other party, while knowing full well that failing to do so will open up the

    possibility .of being exploited. The first part of the paper shows how the structure of the

    incentives faced by the parties may be estimated, and the second describes the results of

    empirical tests in several different settings. The empirical results strongly suggest that the parties

    do face "prisoner's dilemma" incentives, although no attempt is made to determine whether the

    parties respond to these interviews.


    Orley Ashenfelter                                      David Bloom
•   Industrial Relations Section                           Department of Economics
    Princeton University                                   Columbia University
    Princeton, NJ 08544                                    New York, NY 10027
    and NBER                                               and NEER
Lawyers as Agents of the Devil in a Prisoner's Dilemma Game




                      Orley Ashenfelter'
                     Princeton University

                        David Bloom
                     Columbia University




      The nickname Prisoner's Dilemma, attributed to A.W.
      Tucker, derives from the original anecdote used to
      illustrate the game. Two prisoners, held incommunicado,
      are charged with the same crime. They can be convicted
      only if either confesses. Further, if only one confesses,
      he is set free for having turned state's evidence and is
      given a reward to boot. The prisoner who has held out is
      convicted on the strength of the other's testimony and is
      given a more severe sentence than if he had also
      confessed, It is in the interest of each to confess whatever
      the other does. But it is in their collective interest to hold
      out. Rapoport and Chammah (1965)
       It is often asserted that a substantial fraction of the U.S.
economy's output is devoted to unproductive legal services.
Accompanying these claims are chilling stories (and jokes!) told
about highly compensated lawyers who are the only beneficiaries
of some economic, political, or social dispute.2 How, in a well
defined competitive market for lawyer services, could any such
inefficiency arise?
       The purpose of this paper is to explore the possibility that
the parties to a typical dispute face incentives very similar to
those faced by the prisoners in the classic dilemma described
above, In short, the goal is to explore the possibility that the
costs and benefits of legal representation are structured so that
each individual party seeks representation in the hope of
exploiting the other party, while knowing full well that failing to
do so will open up the possibility of being exploited.
       Jn the prisoner's dilemma the players are faced with
incentives that lead to behavior that is not in the best interests of
either party. The incentive structures embedded in such
institutions provide a payoff to each party for engaging in
noncooperative behavior. The mere existence of such incentives
is not enough to produce the prisoner's dilemma, however. In
order to produce inefficiency the payoffs to noncooperative
behavior must be larger than the costs. Determining whether a
particular institution embodies the incentives associated with the


                                 1
prisoner's dilemma thus requires determining whether the
individual benefits to engaging in noncooperative behavior are
likely to exceed the costs.
       The first part of this paper shows how it is possible to test
for the presence of an incentive structure like the one in a
prisoner's dilemma game in a typical dispute resolution system.
The goal is to measure the payoff matrix faced by the parties, but
no attempt is made to determine how the parties respond to the
incentives they face. Although the analysis is framed in the
context of an arbitration system it could equally as well be
applied to any dispute resolution system, including the court
system. The second part of the paper reports estimates of the
incentives for the parties to obtain legal representation in wage
disputes that were settled by final-offer arbitration in New Jersey.
The third part of the paper reports briefly on similar studies of
data from (1) the arbitration of discharge grievances, (2) the
arbitration of court-annexed disputes in Pittsburgh, and (3) the
settlement of child custody disputes in California. All of these
data provide evidence that the parties face strong individual
incentives to obtain legal representation.         Whether these
incentives lead to excessive legal representation that has no social
benefit is discussed in the final section of the paper.




                                 2
               I. The Incentives for Noncooperation
       In the analysis set out here the employer seeks the highest
net value added (the value of the workers output less their costs)
consistent with recruiting enough workers, and the union seeks to
receive the highest labor costs consistent with the continued
viability of the employer. In the typical case where arbitration is
used to settle such labor disputes, workers and employers have
long term relationships that they would like to see continue
indefinitely. However, it is necessary to change the terms of the
employment agreement as the external labor market changes, and
this causes disputes over just how much the compensation of these
workers should increase.
       To avoid costly strikes, arbitration is sometimes used as
the procedure to resolve these compensation disputes. It is now
widely agreed that if the parties submit their disputes to
arbitration, they will be facing some uncertainty over just what
wage increase the arbitrator will select.3 Suppose, therefore, that
we may characterize the distribution from which the arbitral
awards will come as normal, having mean u and standard
deviation s.
       If the old wage rate is w and employment is e, then the
increase in the wage bill that the parties may expect if they go to
arbitration without employing agents is weu. Now let us consider
the payoff to the union if the union employs an agent, but the


                                3
employer does not. Suppose that by employing an agent the
union may expect to improve the mean of the distribution from
which the arbitratorst awards are drawn by the quantity a. It
follows that if the union proceeds to arbitration and employs an
agent it will expect to receive the wage bill we(u+a). Assuming
the agentt s fee is x', the net wage bill expected if an agent is
retained is we(u+a)-x'. The increase in the wage bill that the
union may expect from employing an agent is thus wea-x', and
the proportionate increase is a-x (where x =1/we, the proportion
that legal costs are of the wage bill.)
       The employers net value added if the union engages an
agent, but the employer does not, is z-we(u +a), where z
represents   the value of the union's work. The employer's net
value added if neither party engages an agent is z-weu. The
increase in the net value added to the employer as a proportion of
the wage bill is thus -a for the case where the union employs an
agent and the employer does not.
       The upper right hand corner of the matrix in Table 1
contains the payoffs to the employer (the first entry) and the
union (the second entry) as calculated above for the case where
the union retains an agent and the employer does not. (The
payoffs are expressed relative to the case where neither party
retains an agent and the payoffs in this latter case are normalized
to zero.) The remaining parts of the payoff matrix are easily


                                4
filled in by the same type of analysis. For simplicity it is
assumed that if an employer retains an agent it has the same
effect on the distribution of arbitral awards as when the union
retains an agent. This makes the payoff matrix symmetric, but
it is by no means necessary.
         The payoff matrix in Table 1 represents a prisoner's
dilemma if (a-x) >0. For in this case it pays for the union to
retain an agent regardless of what the employer does. If the
employer does not retain an agent, the union receives a wage bill
increase of a-x, which is greater than 0. (The payoff a-x is called
"the temptation" in the extensive literature on the prisoner's
dilemma.) Likewise, if the employer does retain an agent, the
union is certainly better off doing so also (because -x> -a.) (The
quantity -a is called the "sucker's payoff 1) In sum, the union is
better off employing an agent regardless of what the employer
does *

         It is easy to see that when a-x> 0, precisely the same
reasoning applies to the employer's choices. In this case the
employer is also better off employing an agent regardless of what
the union does. The end result: If the union and the employer
do what is in their individual best interests they both retain agents
and expend the resources 2x, but the arbitration results are
precisely the same as what would have occurred if neither union
nor employer had retained agents. The private demand for legal


                                 5
services generated in this way is clearly socially inefficient. The
goal in this paper is to estimate the parameter a so as to test the
hypothesis a-x=O.
        It is well known that the existence of a payoff matrix like
the one in Table I creates incentives for the parties to arrive at
cooperative contracts. It is also clear, however, that making such
contracts may well be impossible if the parties do not have
repeated disputes.      There is an enormous literature in
experimental psychology that attempts to clarify the conditions
under which cooperation may be expected. (See Rapoport (1965)
and Axelrod (1984), for example.) Suffice it to say here that in
the experimental literature the parties do often manage to arrive
at the cooperative result.     Moreover, cooperation tends to
increase with experience and with the extent to which the parties
appreciate the social dilemma in which they are trapped, while it
tends to decrease with the magnitude of "the temptation" to cheat.
       It is easy to generalize the payoff matrix and still keep the
basic structure of a prisoner's dilemma game. For example, there
is no reason why the payoff to retaining an agent must be the
same for each party. Suppose that the mean arbitral award is
increased by a" when the union alone retains an agent, and that
the mean arbitral award is decreased by a' when the employer
alone retains an agent. The upper right hand corner of the payoff
matrix then contains the elements (-a", a"-x), while the lower left


                                6
hand corner of the payoff matrix contains the elements (a' -x, -a').
These payoffs represent a prisoner's dilemma if a'-x >0 and a"-
x >0, since in this case "the temptation" to behave
noncooperatively exists for both parties. Moreover, the dominant
strategies, where both parties retain agents, is strictly inefficient
only if a'-a"-x<O and a"-a'-x<O.
       Another modification of the payoff matrix may be
appropriate if the amount of the parties expenditure on legal
resources influences the amount by which the mean of the
distribution of arbitral awards is shifted when an agent is
retained. For example, suppose that the payoff to the union, in
the case where the employer does not retain an agent, increases
with additional expenditure on the agent. that is, suppose that
a=a(x), with dafdx >0. The union will calculate that the optimal
amount to spend on their agent requires that a(x)-x be maximized,
which occurs when daldx =1. As a first approximation, this
implies that da=dx, or that the incremental payoff to retaining an
agent be equal to the costs of doing so. In this scenario, the
improvement in the outcome that the parties obtain by retaining
an agent is, at the margin, appropriated by the agent. This
suggests that an indirect way to measure the fee an agent receives
may be available from an analysis of the empirical payoff matrix.
Jn short, a (or a' and a") may well be indirect measures of the
magnitude of the agents' fees.


                                 7
       II. Lawyers and the Arbitration of Wage Disputes
A. The Estimation Procedure
        In some cases it may be possible to quantify explicitly the
payoffs a and a-x by contrasting the numerical outcomes of a
dispute resolution system in each of the four cases indicated by
the matrix. In other cases it is only possible to observe who is
adjudged the victor in some dispute. This is the situation in final-
offer arbitration.
       In particular, under final-offer arbitration each party
submits a proposed wage increase. The arbitrator must select one
or the other of these offers without compromise. A simple model
that has been remarkably successful in several applications
assumes that the arbitrator first decides what would be a
reasonable award, and then selects whichever offer is closest to
it.4 If we denote the arbitrator's numerical award by y, and the
employer and union offers by m and n (m < n), the employer's
offer is selected if y-m <n-y, which is true if y < (m+n)/2. Since
y has a normal distribution with mean u and standard deviation
s, it follows that the probability that the employers offer is
selected is Pe=F{[(m+n)12s]-uls} , where F{.} is the value of the
cumulative unit normal distribution function. Pe=F{. } is a probit
function, with argument (m+n)/2, the mean of the employer and
union offers. The constant in this probit function, -uls, is the
negative of the (standardized) mean of the distribution of


                                8
arbitrator awards, while the slope, us, is the reciprocal of the
standard deviation of this distribution.
       With this setup it is a relatively easy matter to determine
what the payoff matrix must look like in terms of the underlying
probability of an employer victory. In particular, suppose that p
represents the value of Pe that results when neither union nor
employer retain an agent, Then, to first order, the probability
that the employer will be victorious (holding constant both the
employer and union offers) when only the union retains an agent
is p-fals, where f is the unit normal density function (evaluated
at the same point as p.) Tn effect the mean of the distribution of
arbitrator awards is increased by a when the union retains an
agent, and this decreases the probability of an employer victory
by (f/s)a (since -f/s is the derivative of Pe with respect to u.) By
the same reasoning, when the employer retains an agent, but the
union does not, the probability of an employer victory increases
by Ia/s. Finally, when both parties retain agents the probability
of an employer victory is identical to the case when both parties
refrain from engaging agents.
       Table 2 contains the payoff matrix translated into the
implied probabilities of an employer victory as a function of each
of the strategies available to the parties. The symmetry of the
payoff matrix translates into symmetry in the probabilities of an
employer victory. The most important difference between the


                                 9
payoff matrix and the table of implied probabilities of an
employer victory is the absence of any role for the agent's fees
in the latter. This is an important point, because in some
applications it is not possible to measure the payoff matrix
directly. A necessary condition for the presence of a prisoner's
dilemma payoff structure is that fals> 0, which occurs if a> 0.
This condition will be satisfied if the probability of a union
victory, given that the employer does not retain an agent, is
greater when the union employs an agent than when it does not.
However, finding this to be the case is not sufficient to guarantee
that the prisoner's dilemma incentive structure exists. It is also
necessary that the union's increased payoff be greater than the
cost of obtaining it. That is, we require that a-x >0, not just that
a> 0. Unfortunately, it is not possible to determine whether this
is the case from an examination of the probability structure alone.
In the case of final-offer arbitration there is a fairly natural
method for translating from the observed probabilities to the
underlying payoff structure, but this need not always be the case.
     Asymmetry in the payoff matrix will translate into
asymmetry in the probability of an employer victory. If the
decrease in the mean of the distribution of arbitral awards is a'
when the employer retains an agent, the probability of an
employer victory when the employer retains an agent and the
union does not becomes p+fa'fs. Similarly, if the increase in the


                                10
mean of the distribution of arbitral awards is a" when the union
retains an agent, the probability of an employer victory when the
union retains an agent but the employer does not becomes p-faa/s.
The probability of an employer victory when both parties retain
an agent is thus p-1-f(a'-a")Is.        Although    the matrix of
probabilities no longer retains the symmetric simplicity of Table
2, it is still the case that the probability in the lower right hand
cell of the matrix is a simple linear combination of the
probabilities in the remaining three cells of the matrix. This is,
of course, a restriction that may be tested.


B. The Empirical Results
       Table 3 contains some simple summary statistics on the
cases resolved by final-offer arbitration in New Jersey in 1981-
1984. This procedure is available for the settlement of contract
disputes by all public safety workers (mainly police officers) in
New Jersey.5 The table reveals two interesting facts. First, the
arbitrators have typically been more likely to select the union's
offer than the employer's offer. Employers have won about 40%
of the cases submitted to arbitration in every year since 1978.6
This result is inconsistent with the notion that the equilibrium
outcome in this dispute resolution system is a simple 50% victory
rate for the employer. Moreover, the probability of obtaining
these results if p = .5 is extremely small. This suggests that either


                                 11
the parties are not behaving symmetrically when they submit their
final offers, or that the arbitrators are not treating the parties
offers symmetrically. Ashenfelter and Bloom (1984) show that,
in fact, there is evidence that the partIes are not behaving
symmetrically and that the unions are systematically submitting
offers that are conservative.
       The data in Table 3 suggest an alternative explanation for
these unbalanced win/loss records. These data indicate that union
bargainers are far more likely to enlist the assistance of a
professional agent in selecting an arbitrator, preparing the
arbitration case, and in presenting this case to the arbitrator. If
the parties obtain an advantage from retaining an agent, then the
fact that the unions are much more likely to retain an agent than
are the employers may account for the greater probability that
their offer is selected by the arbitrator.
       Table 4 provides the empirical analogue to the matrix of
predicted probabilities contained in Table 2. This matrix is
remarkably similar to the predicted one. The probabilities along
the diagonal are nearly equal, and the matrix is fairly close to
symmetric. In fact, the advantage to the employer of retaining an
agent (an increased win rate of 29 percentage points), is slightly
greater than the advantage to the union of retaining an agent (an
increased win rate of 21 percentage points.) In an additive model
this implies that the employer win rate when both parties retain


                                 12
an agent should be 52%, while it is actually only 46%. Despite
these small discrepancies, a formal statistical test does not reject
the symmetry hypothesis.
       Although the results in Table 4 are suggestive, they suffer
from two deficiencies. Firsts they do not control for the offers
that the parties have made. If these offers are correlated with the
probability that the parties retain an agent, then the results in
Table 4 may simply reflect the possibility that the parties who
retain agents make less aggressive offers than those who don't.
Second, the probability matrix in Table 4 does not allow
comparison of the financial payoffs associated with retaining an
agent against the costs.
       Table 5 remedies these problems. It contains the results
of fitting probit functions to the actual arbitrator selections. The
probit function contains the mean of the parties' final offers,
(m+n)/2, and dummy variables indicating whether the union or
employer retained an agent. The coefficients of these dummy
variables are estimates of the shifts in the distribution of arbitral
awards that result from retaining an agent, and they control for
the offers made by the parties. The results indicate that when the
union retains an agent the distribution of awards is shifted upward
by between .5% and 2.0%. Likewise, the results indicate that
when the employer retains an agent the distribution of awards is




                                 13
shifted downward by between .3% and 1.9%. Five of these eight
shifts are statistically significant (at the .05 significance level.)
        These empirical results provide strOng evidence that a >0,
and that each party increases the chance their offer will be
accepted when they retain agents. There still remains the
question of whether the benefits are worth the cost, however. It
seems very likely that they are. A permanent increase in the
compensation of a police officer by 1 % would have a discounted
present value of perhaps $2,000 to $3,000. Legal fees are
typically said to be about $5,000 per case for the union, and up
to $15,000 per case for the employer.7            It would take a
bargaining unit of only 5 to 10 employees to make it well worth
the cost for each party individually to retain an agent. In short,
their is little doubt that the incentive structure in the New Jersey
final-offer arbitration system creates a prisoner's dilemma.


     Jil. The Incentives to Retain Agents in Other Systems
A. Discharge Grievances
       Union contracts commonly specify that if an employee is
unfairly treated, he or she may formally object to the treatment.
The employce does this by filing a grievance. If the grievance
cannot be settled through negotiation, then it is usually presented
to an arbitrator for decision.




                                 14
       Grievances may be filed for many different reasons, but
a common case is one where an employee has been discharged
for some behavior that is unacceptable to the employer. Block
and Stieber (1987) have reported a very thorough study of a
sample of discharge grievances, which includes arbitrator
decisions that are both published and unpublished. In their study
Block and Stieber estimated the probability that a discharge
grievance would be denied (the union loses) as a function of
whether the parties did or did not retain attorneys to assist in the
selection of the arbitrator, and in the preparation and presentation
of their case to the arbitrator. The results of their study are
contained in the probability matrix in Table 6.
       The results in Table 6 are similar to those in Table 4, and
they are consistent with the prisoner's dilemma incentive structure
of Table 2. As before, arbitrator decisions favor unions in more
than 50% of disputes, even when both parties retain lawyers.
Like the New Jersey final-offer arbitration cases, the probability
matrix here is somewhat asymmetric, but here the asymmetry
indicates that the probability of a union victory is changed by
more when the union retains a lawyer than when the employer
retains a lawyer.
        One unusual feature of the Block and Stieber study is the
presence in the data of many disputes decided by the same
arbitrator.   The results in Table 6 control (through the


                                15
introduction of arbitrator dummy variabjes) for the arbitrator in
the case. As a result, the results in Table 6 imply that the
effectiveness of the lawyers in changing outcomes is not due
primarily to their ability in helping the parties to select arbitrators
that will be more favorably disposed toward their cases.
       It is not possible to convert the probabilities in Table 6
into a payoff matrix of the form in Table 1 because it is difficult
to attach a valuation to a union or employer victory. Presumably,
the union worker's loss is the discounted present value of the
difference between his or her wage in the unionized job and his
or her wage elsewhere. Union wage premiums are generally
estimated to be around 10%, so a job that would otherwise pay
$25,000 may generate a premium of $2,500 per year, or a
discounted present value of perhaps $25,000. Since the union
increases its victory rate by .18 by hiring a lawyer, the legal fee
for a discharge case could approach $5,000 before the payoff
would no longer make it worthwhile for the union to retain a
lawyer. Precisely how to value the employer's victory in such a
case is an open question.
       In sum, the data from the grievance arbitration cases
suggests that the effect of retaining legal representation on the
probability of each party being victorious is substantial.
Reasonable calculations suggest that it is quite possible that the




                                 16
incentive structure in the grievance arbitration system represents
a prisoner's dilemma.


B. Arbitration of Court Claims
        For a variety of reasons several courts have adopted a
procedure whereby the parties in a civil lawsuit submit their
claims to arbitration. Adler, Hensler, and Nelson (1983) have
reported the results of a study of the outcomes of such an
arbitration system that has been operating in Pittsburgh for over
thirty years. In their study, Adler, Hensler, and Nelson estimate
the percentage of a plaintiff' s claim that is awarded to the plaintiff
as a function of whether the parties have retained a lawyer. The
results of this study are contained in the estimated payoff matrix
in Table 7. These data have very similar implications to those
contained in Tables 4 and 6. Again1 the payoff matrix is only
approximately symmetric. Here the advantage to the use of a
lawyer is greater for the defendant than for the plaintiff.
       An especially useful feature of the data in Table 7 is that
they are a very natural representation for the payoff matrix.
Suppose, for example, that the plaintiff's attorney is paid on the
traditional contingent fee basis. In this form of payment the
plaintiff's fee is established as one-third of the award, if any.
According to Table 7, a plaintiff who retains a lawyer may expect
to obtain 82% of his or her claim if the defendant does not use a


                                 17
lawyer. Such a plaintiff must expect to pay about 27% of the
claim to the lawyer, however. On the other hand, the expected
advantage to the plaintiff of retaining a lawyer is 22% (82%-
60%) of the claim. The result: The advantage to the plaintiff is
just about equal to the cost.
        The payoff matrix in Table 7 also demonstrates the real
costs of legal representation. Suppose that the plaintiff pays his
or her attorney in accord with the contingent fee system. If the
plaintiff retains an attorney and the defendant does not, then the
• plaintiff expects to have a net payoff of 55% (81% -27%) of the
claim. This is slightly below the 60% of the claim that the
plaintiff may expect if the defendant does not retain a lawyer. On
the other hand, if the plaintiff and the defendant both retain
attorneys, then the plaintiff may expect to receive only 43%
(65%-22%) of the claim. Nevertheless, if the plaintiff does not
retain an attorney, he or she may well be stuck with the "sucker's
payoff' of only 24% of the claim. After a careful study of
lawyer's costs, Adler, Hensler, and Nelson conclude that,
   • taking into account the amount they spend on legal fees,
represented litigants can expect to obtain better net outcomes, on
average, than litigants who appear pro se" (that is, unrepresented
by lawyers.)8




                                18
  This, of course, is precisely what we should expect if the
incentive structure in the Pittsburgh arbitration system represents
a prisoner's dilemma.


C. Child Custody Disputes
       Among the most difficult disputes to study are those that
arise from the breakup of the family. Among other problems,
monetary valuations of the various outcomes of the dispute are
difficult, if not impossible, to establish by an outside observer.
One of the most contentious issues in such disputes is the question
of who will retain physical custody of the child of two divorced
parents.   In a recent empirical study, Mnookin, Maccoby,
Depner, and Albiston (1989) have presented some data on the
outcomes of such disputes as a function of whether the mother
and father retain lawyers.       These data are arrayed in the
probability matrix in Table 8.
       The results in Table 8 have very similar implications to
those in the previous tables. The likelihood that a mother or
father prevails in retaining the physical custody of the child is
clearly related to whether they retain a lawyer. Although the
probability matrix is asymmetric it is consistent with an additive
structure for the payoff matrix. For example, under an additive
structure the predicted percentage of cases where the mother
retains custody of the child when both parents retain lawyers is


                                 19
60%. This may be contrasted against the 65% of cases where the
mother actually retained custody in these circumstances.
        There are many potential problems in using the results of
Table 8 to make inferences. For example, Mnookin, et. a!.
report that in virtually every case the mother wished to have
physical custody of the child. However, it is not clear that
fathers are so interested in this matter. Thus, it is possible that
whether the father retains a lawyer is simply a signal that the
father wishes to obtain custody of the child. If this is the case,
then Table 8 may overstate the impact on the outcomes when the
father retains a lawyer as compared to the case when the father
does not retain a lawyer. A more complete statistical analysis is
required before these results should be accepted at face value.
Despite these reservations, it is seems possible that the court
system for dealing with marital disputes over child custody may
also contain the incentive structure of a prisoner's dilemma.


                        IV. Conclusion
       The analysis in this paper spells out how the demand for
legal services may arise from a set of incentives like those
contained in the classical prisoner's dilemma game. When
incentives are so structured it is in the individual's interests to
behave in a way that makes the parties jointly worse off.
Although there are obvious incentives for the parties to reach


                               20
enforceable contracts when the incentives are like those in a
prisoner's dilemma, it is far from clear that it is possible to
implement such contracts.
        All of the data available on differential outcomes in the
dispute resolution systems studied here are consistent with the
incentives present in a prisoner's dilemma. In short, the data all
imply that it is individually rational for the parties to retain costly
agents so as to increase the likelihood that they will prevail, even
though there is little evidence that the result will be any different
from what would occur if both parties did not retain agents. The
primary potential problem with these data is the possibility that
some omitted variable is influencing the outcomes, and that it is
correlated with whether the parties retain an agent. In this case
the estimated differential payoffs to retaining an agent may be
systematically biased.       Apart from implementing a field
experiment with randomized trials, however, this is a potential
problem for all empirical studies. At a minimum, it appears that
the tests of the prisoner's dilemma incentive structures set out
here should be used to investigate other dispute resolution
systems, including the court system.
        If these empirical results do accurately portray the
incentive structures the parties face in most dispute resolution
systems, they raise three important questions.          First, do the
parties respond to these incentives and employ an excess amount


                                 21
    of legal services? None of the empirical material in this paper
    addresses this issue. The experimental psychology literature
    indicates that the mere presence of a prisonert s dilemma incentive
    structure does not automatically lead to noncooperative behavior,
    even in situations where it would be most expected. (Indeed, this
    is often considered a major deficiency in the usefulness of game
    theoretic solutions as positive predictions about behavior. Game
    theoretic solutions strongly predict that noncooperative behavior
    should be the result in a prisoner's dilemma game. See Luce and
•   Raiffa (1957).) It is likely that behavior in ongoing dispute
    resolution systems parallels the experimental behavior to some
    extent. For example, some union—employer contracts specify
    "expedited arbitration" for certain grievances.          Expedited
•


    arbitration usually prohibits the use of lawyers by the parties, and
    specifies that the arbitrator's decision in such cases will have no
    value in setting "a precedent." Apparently some bargaining pairs
    are able to cooperate in the presence of a prisoner's dilemma
    payoff structure, while others are not. It would be interesting to
    know just how common such cooperation actually is. It seems
    likely that cooperative behavior will be easier to encourage when
    the parties have the experience of repeated disputes, when it is
•

    possible to alter the temptation to cheat, and when the parties are
    aware of the social dilemma they face.




                                   22
       Second, it is natural to ask just what mechanism it is that
produces the prisoner's dilemma incentive structures in dispute
resolution systems. There are many possibilities. For example,
the lawyer's expertise may be used to select the third-party
decision-maker in a dispute resolution system. In the courts the
lawyer will help the client to "shop for the most favorable judge"
or to "select the favorable jury." In arbitration the lawyer will
assist in the selection of the most favorable arbitrator. In both
cases the lawyer must expend resources to obtain the information
to engage in helpful judge shopping or jury or arbitrator
selection. Of course, if the other party engages in the same
behavior then the mean result will be unchanged, and both parties
will have paid a lawyer's fee without any corresponding gain in
the mean result. On the other hand, it is likely that the variance
in the outcomes of the dispute resolution process will be reduced
if both the parties engage in this behavior, and this may be an
unintended benefit to the process. Of course, this leaves open the
question of whether such judge, jury, and arbitrator shopping has
benefits great enough to justify the social costs.
       Finally, the empirical results in this paper raise questions
about the efficiency of Anglo-American legal procedures that are
provocative and apparently very controversial. Gordon Tullock
(1980) has argued for the superiority of continental (or
"inquisitorial") trials over Anglo-American (or "adversarial")


                                23
trials primarily on the grounds that the adversarial system sets up
prisoner s dilemma incentives that lead to over-investment in legal
resources.   Despite some arguments to the contrary9, most of
the empirical issues raised by Tullock are rarely addressed by
legal scholars. As Tullock observes, lawyers are not generally
encouraged to acknowledge this problem or to study it, perhaps
because it is not in the best financial interests of the legal
profession.'° The fact that the legal profession has a vested
interest in the legal system, however, raises questions about the
role of institutional structures in the law and the motivation for
their existence. It would be interesting to consider whether some
of the existing rules of legal procedure act to enforce the
prisoner's dilemma incentive structure and thereby increase the
demand for legal services.




                               24
                       REFERENCES


Adler, Jane, Hensler, Deborah and Nelson, Charles, "Simple
       Justice: How Litigants Fare in the Pittsburgh Court
       Arbitration Program," Institute for Civil Justice, Rand
       Corporation, 1983.

Ashenfelter, Orley, "Arbitrator Behavior," American Economic
      Review, May 1987, 77, 342-346.

Ashenfelter, Orley, and Bloom, David, "Models of Arbitrator
      Behavior: Theory and Evidence," American Economic
      Review, March 1984, 74, 111-125.

Ashenfelter, Orley, Dow, James and Gallagher, David,
       "Arbitrator and Negotiator Behavior Under an Appellate
       System, mimeo., Industrial Relations Section, Princeton
       University, 1986.

Axelrod, Robert, The Evolution of Cooperation, Basic Books,
      New York, 1984.

Block, Richard, and Stieber, Jack, "The Impact of Attorneys and
       Arbitrators on Arbitration Awards," Industrial and Labor
       Relations Review, July 1987, 40, 543-555.

Bloom, David, "Empirical Models of Arbitrator Behavior under
      Conventional Arbitration", Review of Economics and
      Statistics, Nov. 1986, 68, 578-585.

Farber, Henry, "An Analysis of Final-Offer Arbitration," Journal
       of Conflict Resolution, Dcc. 1980, 5, 683-705.




                              25
Farber, Henry, and Bazerman, Max, "The General Basis of
      Arbitrator Behavior:   An Empirical Analysis of
       Conventional and Final-Offer Arbitration," Econometrica,
       Nov. 1986, 54, 1503-1528.

Hirshleifer, Jack, "The Economic Approach to Conflict,?! in
       Gerard Radnitzky and Peter Bernholz, eds., Economic
       Imperialism: The Economic Approach Applied Outside
       the Field of Economics, Paragon House Publishers, 1987.

L.andes, William, and Richard Posner, "Adjudication as a Private
       Good," Journal of Legal Studies, March 1979, 8, 235-
       284.

Lester, Richard, "Analysis of Experience Under New Jersey's
       Flexible Arbitration System," The Arbitration Journal,
       June 1989, 44, 14-21.

Luce, R. Duncan, and Raiffa, Howard, Games and Decisions,
      John Wiley & Sons, 1957.

Magee, Stephen, William Brock, and Leslie Young, Black Hole
       Tariffs and the Endogenous Tariff Policy, Cambridge
       University Press, 1989.

Mnookin, Robert, Maccoby, Eleanor, Depner, Charlene and
     Albiston, Catherine, "Private Ordering Revisited: What
       Custodial Arrangements are Parents Negotiating,"
       mimeo., Stanford University, August 1989.

Murphy, Kevin, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, "The
       Allocation of Talent: Implications for Growth," Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, May 1991, CVI, 501-530.




                              26
Olson, Craig, Dell' Omo, Gregory and Jarley, Paul," A
      Comparison of Arbitrator Decision-Making in
       Experimental and Field Settings," mimeo., University of
       Wisconsin, June 1989.

Rapoport, Anatol, and Chammah, Albert, Prisoneris Dilemma:
      A Study in Conflict and Cooperation, The University of
      Michigan Press, 1965.

Tullock, Gordon, Trials on Trial, Columbia University Press,
       1980.




                             27
                    Endnotes


L An early draft of this paper was written while
Ashenfelter was a Fellow at the Center for
Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences. The
authors are grateful to the Russell Sage and Alfred
P. Sloan Foundations for financial support.

2. The famous Texaco-Pennzoil dispute is one of the
most widely discussed. Cutler and Summers (1988)
estimate, from the decline in the stock market's
valuation of the pair of companies, that this pair of
firms declined in value by several hundred million
dollars as a result of their dispute. A more
systematic study of the wealth effect of lawsuits by
Bhagat, Brickley, and Coles (1992) finds about a
1 % decline in the combined stock market valuation
of two firms that engage in a lawsuit. Finally,
Magee, Brock and Young (1978) and Murphy,
Shleifer, and Vishny (1991) both report evidence
that the proportion of law graduates in a country's
population is inversely related to the country's
growth rate of gross domestic output.

3. See Ashenfelter and Bloom(1986), Farber and
Bazerman(1986), Bloom (1986), Olson, Dell'Omo,
and Jarley (1989), and Ashenfelter (1987) for a
brief survey.

4. See Ashenfelter and Bloom (1986), Farber and
Bazerman (1986), Ashenfelter, Dow, and Gallagher
(1986), and Olson, Dell'Omo and Jarley (1989).
5. My colleague Richard Lester participated in the
design of this arbitration system, and he has


                       28
followed its development continuously since its
founding in 1978. For details see Lester (1989).

6. For the data for 1978-1980 see Ashenfelter and
Bloom (1986).

7. See Lester (1989).

8. Adler, ilensler, and Nelson do not consider the
possibility that this may lead to a prisoner's
dilemma incentive structure, and their analysis of
net costs takes into account the actual empirical
frequency of the other parties use of legal
representation. As a result, instead of a study of the
payoff matrix, they are reporting estimates of the
net payoffs actually received by the parties. The
question that Adler, Hensler, and Nelson's findings
raise is, why don't the unrepresented parties retain
lawyers? This, of course, is precisely the puzzle
that is raised in all the extensive empirical literature
about the prisoner's dilemma. Adler, Hensler, and
Nelson do not discuss this question.

9.See especially Landes and Posner(1979), A more
general theoretical discussion of some related issues
is contained in Jack Hirshleifer (1987).

 10.Tullock (1980, p. 97), despite acknowledging
that he is a lawyer, is more blunt: "A change from
our system to the Continental system would
eliminate a sizable part of the demand for
lawyers.... A sharp fall in the demand for lawyers
would, of course, impoverish the present profession.
Many lawyers would become vacuum-cleaner
salesmen, law schools would be compelled to
close... Under the circumstances, the opposition of


                         29
the lawyers to the type of legal system used on the
Continent is understandable."




                      30
                                    Table I
       Proportionate Effects on the Net Wage Bill end Net Value Added
        of Union and Employer Strategies Using a Lawyer (or Agent)




                                           Union Uses:

                             No Lawyer                   Lawyer




         No Lawyer              010                      —aa—x




             Lawyer           a—x,—a                     —x.—x




 tbe fint entry represents the employers payoff and the second entry
represents the u.nion's payoff.
a = the shift in the mean of the distribution of arbitrator awards resulting
     from the use of a lawyer (or agent)
x= the cost(as a percentage of the wage bill) of using a lawyer (or agent)
                                       TabLe 2
Predicted Effects on the Percentage of Employer Victories in Final-Offer Arbitration
           of Union and Employer Strategies Using a Lawyer (or Agent)




                                           Union Uses:

                              No Lawyer                  Lawyer




           No Lawyer               p                     p—fats




              Lawyer           p+fais                       P




 f = normal density
 a = the shift in the mean of the distribution of arbitrator awards resulting
       from the use ofa Lawyer (or agent)
 $ = standard deviation of arbitrator awards
                                    TabLe 3

        Unions and Employen Represented by Law FL.s (or Agents)
            in New Jrney Final—Offer Arbitration Cases, 1981—1984




Number of Final—Offer
Arbitration Awards             49             64       45           59
Percent of Employer
Victories                     38%             41%     30%           38%
Percent of Cases in
Which Union Uses              64%             64%     50%           59%
Lawyer
Percent of Cases in
Which Employer Uses           21%             29%      25%          36%
Lawyer
                       TabLe 4
     Employer Victories in Final—Offer Arbitration




                             Union Uses:

                 No Lawyer                 Lawyer




No Lawyer           44%                     23%




  Lawyer            73%                     46%
                                        TabLe 5
  Estimates of   the   Parameter, of   the   DLstribution otArbCtrator. I 'referred)
                         Wage Change Award.,, 198 1—1984
                  (Estimated Standard         Errors in Parentheses)


                                 1981              1982         1983           1934
                                                                           —
Mean(u)                          6.4%              8.0%         7.4%           7.9%
                                  (.65)             (.27)        (.29)          (.35)

Standard Deviation(s)            1.5%               .76%         1.02%          1.00%
                                  (.37)             (.14)        (.24)          (.23)

Effectof Employer               —1.9%             —1.6%          —.34%         -1.0%
HavingtawyeronMean                (.65)             (.29)        (.35)          (.31)
Award
Effect of Union Having           2.3%               .54%         1..4%           .46%
t.awyeronMeanAward                (.72)             (.31)        (.45)          (.25)
                                             Table 6

                        Percentage of Discharge Clrievvances Sustained
                      (for the Union) in 755 Arbitrations, 1979 and 1982




                                          Union Uses:




                              No Lawyer                  Lawyer


         No Lawyer
                                   57%                     75%




                                   46%                     65%
           Lawyer




'This award rate is significantly different from the rates where neither party uses a lawyer (using
the .05 level).

*This award rate is not significantly different from the award rate where neither party uses a
lawyer (at the .05 level).

Source: Adler, Hensler, and Nelson (1983), Table 5.
                                   Table 7
   The Percentage ofPlaintiffClaims (Debt Collection. Persona I rii jury,
Breach of Contract', Property Damage) Awarded by A.rhitrators iii I'ittsbwgh




                                    Plaintiff Uses:

                            No Lawyer                  Lawyer




                                                              U
         No Lawyer              60%                     82%
4;
fri



4,
V
C
 4,
4.4
 4)
                                      U                      +
             Lawyer             24%                     65%




      'This award rate is significantly different fro the rates where neither
      party uses a lawyer (using the .05 level),
      tTMs award rate is not signi ficantly different from the award rate where
      neither party uses a lawyer (at the .05 level).
      Source: Adler, Hensler, and Nelson (1983), TabLe 5.
                             Table S

       Percentage of Mothen Awarded Child Physical Custody
     in San Matio and Santa Clara Counties, CaIifbrnia 198445




                                  Mother Uses

                      No Lawyer                 Lawyer




     No Lawyer           .75%                   86%
U


I-
U
-I
I
a


       Lawyer            49%                    65%




       Source: Mnookin,Maccoby, Depha, and Albiston (1989).
