NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COMPETITIVE DIFFUSION

Boyan Jovanovic
Glenn MacDonald

Working Paper No. 4463

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1993

This re-h was supported by the National Science Foundation, the Lynde and Hany Bradley
Foundation, the John M. Olin Foundation, and the CV. Stan Center for Applied Economics.
Phil Reny, Sherwin Rosen, and Yaw Nyarko provided helpful comments on an earlier draft. This
paper is part of NBER's research program in Productivity. Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4463
September

1593

COMPETITIVE DIFFUSION

ABSTRACT
The usual explanation for why the producers of a given product use different technologies

involves "vintage-capital": A firm understands the frontier technology, but can stifi prefer an

older, less efficient technology in which it has made specific physical and human capital
investments. This paper develops an alternative. "information-ban-ief' hypothesis: Fiis differ
in the technologies they use because it is costly for them to overcome the informational barriers

that separate them. The paper endogenizes both innovative and imitative effort. The industry
life-cycle implications -- declining price and increasing output .. broadly agree with the GonKlepper data.

Empirically, the paper focuses on the slow slow spread of Diesel locomotives, which can

not be explained by the vintage-capital hypothesis alone. For instance, contrary 10 that
hypothesis, railroads were buying new steam locomotives long after the Diesel first came into

use -- exactly as the information-barrier hypothesis would imply.

Boyan Jovanevic
Department of Economics
New York Uiiiverstiy
New York. NY 10003
and NBER

Glenn MacDonald
Simon School of Business
University of Rochester

Rochester, NY 14627

Solow (1957) observed that most growth in economic activity cannot be exp1aned by
increasing quantities of inputs producing output with a fixed technology. This paper models the
unexplained component and proposes a theory of the development and spread of new technology

at the industry level. The theory is motivated by evidence like Figure 1. Panel a) displays the
fraction of shipments of bits of dynamic random access memory by chip density and over time.

Low density (1 kilobyte) chips are displaced by those with higher density (4 k), which are then

taken over by those with yet higher density (16, then 64 and then 256 k). Meantime, the
quantity of bits delivered explodes and price declines dramatically. The bit industry displays the

waves of change and improvement stressed by Schumpeter (1934). Such data call for a theory
in which new developments occur periodically and do not spread instantaneously.

In the setup studied here, the growth and diffusion of technology are both endogenous.

Fii improve their know-how both by producing new knowledge- innovation-- and by learning
from others-- imitation. Both activities are costly and thus respond to the incentives provided
by the economic environment.'
Informational baniers appear to play an important role in explaining lags in the adoption

of technology: Nabseth and Ray (1974) and Rogers (1983) report that some firms learn of a

relevant new technology more than a decade before others. Moreover, being aware of a
technology is not the same as mastering it- According to Mansfield, Schwartz and Wagner
(1981) and Pakes and Shankerman (1984). imitation and product-development lags are long.
Thus, the spread of information seems to be gradual and costly. The hypotheses developed in
this paper flow from a learning process embodying infoimational bathers and implying costly
and gradual learning in equilibrium along with a non-degenerate distribution of technological

knowledge among flims in an industiy.'

The list of attempts to endogenize technological progress is long. At the macro level, see
Arrow (1962). Shell (1967). Lucas (988) and Romer (1990); at the micro level, Flaherty (1980)
and Spence (1984).
2

Jovanovic and Rob (1989) also use informational barriers to generate a persistent non—
degeneracy in the distribution of technological knowledge, but they do not allow agents to

Jovaovic and MaCDOn1d

2

C,j)ive DIffiL7IVn

The vintage capital model is the primaiy alternative explanation for why firms use

different technologies; see, for example, Chari and Hopenhayn (1991). Tn that model, firms
have complete technological know-how, but use less than state-of-the-art technology when doing

so is profitable given the existing stock of assets specific to older technology. Here, firms use
different technologies because it is costly to overcome the informational barriers that define firm

boundaries, Innovation and imitation are alternative ways to make progress, and the relative
desirability of each depends on the firm's current know-how and the know-how of others.

The paper contains three types of results. The first three propositions deal with the
evolution of industry aggregates, and describe the precise sense in which technology improves,
output increases, and price declines as the industry matures. The technological diversity of firms

may or may ro persist forever, depending on the learning technology.
The second set of results focuses on innovative behavior in a cross section of firms at a
point in time. Under some conditions, small firms wifi, on average, grow faster than big firms.

There are two reasons why laggards may grow faster than leaders. The tirst is the diffusion of
technology from leaders to followers via imitation. The second is a cross-sectional "fishing out

effecf': if all firms are sampling new technologies from the same pool, leaders, who have
already acquired better technology, have less incentive to look for even better ones. As a result,
laggards look harder, and this causes at least partial convergence of output and technology over

firms as the industry matures.

The third set of results deals with the optiinality of equilibrium.

Imitation creates

technological spifiovers which are akin to an externality, so equilibrium is not generally
"efficienf'. While a global optimum is not analyzed fully, there is a sense in which a social
planner would prefer mo i of all learning activities, both innovative and imitative.
These results are first presented in a general form. Then, a series of examples serve to

ifiustrate various aspects of the general results, and to point to some conclusions that do not

substitute between innovation and imitation.

Jovanovjc nd MDonJd

Cthiw D4ffu-'i

3

emerge at the general level. One of these results is that innovation and imitation tend to be

substitutes -- a firm relies mainly on one Or the other form of cost-reduction -- and given the

way R&D spending is measured, this substitution possibility is likely to bias downward the
estimated rate of return to R&D. Another result is that diffusion-- an "equalizer"-- is triggered

by technological inequality which spawns the imitative effort needed to drive the diffusion.
All these results hold in a partial equilibrium environment without entry or exit.
Jovanovic and MacDonald (1993) simplify this model, but also allow for entry and exit and
estimate the resulting model on data from the U.S. automobile tire industry. Andolfatto and

MacDonald (1993) simplify too. but then embed the model in a general equilibrium framework.
Endogenous growth and cycles emerge; the model is estimated on aggregate U.S. post-war data.

I. Model
The model describes the evolution of a competitive market for a homogeneous product.

Demand is subject to exogenous random shocks as a result of income growth, variation in the

prices of related goods, etc. Supply is affected by random shocks too, but its development is
also governed by firms' introducing cost reducing technological improvements. Firms may get

better techniques either directly, through R & D, or indirectly by adopting methods already in
use by others. Both of these activities are costly and do not have fully predictable consequences.

A.csumptions

Assume discrete time and an infinite hoiizon. During each period a homogeneous
product is sold in a competitive market. Demand for the product is given by an inverse industry

demand function D(Qx), where Q, is the quantity produced at date t and x1 is a vector of
demand shocks. D is downward sloping and continuous in Q, and x, is a realization of a Markov
process X, which has transition law F(x11 Ix,); x0 is given.

In addition to the homogeneous product interpretation emphasized here, Q can also be
thought of as a flow of services, and technologies as alternative ways to provide consumers with

4

Jovanovic and MaDonaJd

CtnpSthv Dtaio,i

the services they ultimately desire. Thus, the model can accommodate product innovation as

well as process innovation.

The supply side of the model comprises a fixed continuum of price taking firms who

maximize expected discounted profits. To do so they choose a rate of output along with cost

reduction effort. There is no entry or exit
Let a finn's state of technological knowledge be denoted by 0, where 0

0 1, and

let the cross-firm distribution of know-how at t be v,, with given.' Thus, v,(9') is the fraction

of firms in the industry at date jhaving 0 8'.
The firm's actions will be represented by a vector (q, /), where q is its rate of output and

1 is its learning efforts, including the level of R & D in the usual sense, efforts to evaluate
others' products, as well as less obvious endeavors such as experimentation with alternative ways

to compensate employees or structure financial arrangements with suppliers or distributors. At

date t. the firms' net revenue is
p,q1—c(q,J1,O,x).

Here x

represents

(1)

input prices, patent laws, the cost of researchers and of other products to be

analyzed, etc. There are no fed costs (i.e. c(010,O,x)=O, where 0=(O,.. ,O)), and costs are
strictly increasing and convex in (q. 1) and strictly decreasing in U when q

0. A larger 0

At the outset, each firm's knowledge o, and hence the distribution of knowledge over
ru-ms, v0(8), is given exogenously. The nature of the distribution p0 wifi depend on how new
the technology is. By assumption, the product is new, but the technology used to produce it
need not be entirely new.

If the technology is entirely new, then the initial distribution of knowledge may be
concentrated at one value of U -- "the primitive technology", If, on the other hand, the
technology is related to other technologies used to produce older products, then there may be
dispersion in i0. But even if firms are technologically all alike at date zero, they wifi soon
become different because the outcomes of firms' iimovation efforts are random and imperfectly
correlated.

Javanovi md MKDCnJJd

5

Giyithth4r tLThSW1T

therefore denotes a better production technique. Further, ôcIôq is declining in 0; in this case,

given p, better production techniques imply greater Output, and firms can be described as
"largef' or "more technologically advanced" interchangeably.'
To specify the evolution of 0, let 'F(O' I q, 1,O,x,v) be the probability that the firm's know-

how next period is less than or equal to O, Thus, learning depends on the firm's state and
actions, and on the state of the industry, including the distribution of know-how rn use.
The learning technology 4' satisfies four conditions: (I) the firm cannot guarantee that it

will learn (t(Oq,l,O,x,v) > 0); (ii, there is no "free" learning (t(OO,O,O,x,p)= 1); (ui) the
firm's know-how does not deteriorate (t(O' q,1,O,x,v)=O ifO0 < 0); and (iv) increases in the
firm's efforts or know-how, as well as improvements in the know-how of others, add to learning

possibilities (if 4q 1

1, &

0. and jt

dominates

v

then

4'(O iJ&xit dominates

t(O' q.l,O,x,v).5
Maximization

Suppose that the state of the industry can be summarized by the pair (x,, i), and that
there exist the following equilibrium relationships at each f: p, = P(x,,p1) and v,.,1 =
Then, given equation (1) and the evolution of the state vector, the firm's optimal actions solve

the dynamic programming problem summarized by

That technology can be ranked by a scalar is a nontrivial restriction. Some technologies
cannot be ordered this way: A labor-saving technique may be superior when wages are high, but
need not be better when wages are low. Allowing for this in the present setup would entail that
the ranking of technology depend on x as well as 0.

5Whenever distribution functions are being compared, "dominance" wifi mean first order
stochastic dominance, and "improving" will refer to increasing in the sense of first order
stochastic dominance.

Jovanovk and MxDoraid

6

Canpeàiw Dküoi

V(O,x,v) =

naj {P(xv)'-c(q17O7x)÷PJ V [o',x','x,v4it(o' qj,O,x,v)dF(x' x)}

(2)

where $ is the discount factor and V(O,x, v) the value of the firm. The first two terms on the
right-hand side are the firm's cut-rent profit, while the integral is the expected present value one

period later, noting that next period's U and x are not known at present, and that they may
change. Let (q(O,x,),1(O,x, v)) be the (unique) action that achieves the maximum in the right

hand side of (2); (qj) is the firm's "policy ftinction".

Equilibrium

Equilibrium demands that firms select optimal policies, that supply equal demand, and

that expectations about the evolution of know-how are confirmed: A stationary equilibrium is
a set of functions { V,q.

this

I,P, $}

such that (1) V solves (2); (ii)

solution; (iii) P(x,.v) =

D[

(q, A)

is the policy associated with

J q(O,x,v)dv(O),x}; a n d flx,v) =

'FE I q(O,.x,v)J(O,x,v),O,x,]dv(O).6

Implications
The

analysis

of

implications is

greatly simplified by ignoring learning-by-doing.

Learning-bydoing complicates because, as the industry evolves, price tendsto

fall, giving firms

an incentive to shrink. With learning-by-doing, the tendency to contract output implies a
tendency to slow the learning process; the analysis becomes more complex and less intuitive.

Thus, assume c(q,l,O,x) = c(q,O,x)+c'(l,x) and that t is independent of q.

6

Jovanovic and MacDonald (1991) prove existence and uniqueness of the policy function
and of equilibrium in this environment, and provides a collection of results on the long mn
behavior of the industry. The technical assumptions made to facilitate that analysis-- for

example, regularity conditions used to prove continuity of optimal policies- are suppressed here.

7

Javiwvic sat MacDoaaid

Catht DØuion

The following general result underlies the time-series implications set out below .7

It

states that aggregate knowledge advances gradually, and never stops entirely:

PROPOSITION 1: Assume learning begins at some point; i.e.,
sequence {x,}, (i)

+

p0 for

some t. Then for any

dominates v,; (ii) the distribution of know-how eventually settles at a long

mn distribution i; and (iii) this long mn distribution is never actually reached (v, p at any

The intuition behind Proposition 1 is this: For part (i), the distribution of technology can
never become worse, since a firm knowing technology 0 would never implement a technology
inferior to 0. For part (ii), since the best technology is indexed by 0 = I, the distribution of

technology can never advance beyond the one in which all firms know 0 =I.

Thus, since the

distribution of technology can never fall back, it must either approach the distribution
conesponding to all knowing 0 =

1,

or one inferior to it, For part (iii), why must the

distribution of technology always increase? Suppose, to the contrary, that its advance halts at

some date t. In comparison to r-l. the main difference is that the distribution of technology in
use is more advanced at t, Since this makes learning new techniques easier --recall the final
restriction on 'P — any firm that tried to Learn at t-1 but failed, would wish to keep trying, in

which case learning could not halt as assumecL8
Proposition 1 states that if the distribution of know-how ever begins to improve-- as can

safely be assumed-- it wifi always improve. In this case the qualitative implications for industry

This result suimnarizes Propositions 2-S in Jovanovic and MacDonald (1991). Since a
formal statement and proof require significant additional notation, the full details are omitted
here.

This argument applies to a firm having some given information state in both periods.
Since the learning technology is such that learning something new cannot be assured, there is
always a positive fraction of firms that fail to learn, and so occupy the same information slate
during both periods.

3

Jovanovk and MacDonaid
CosryauAvDØlaSon

output and price that stem from the evolution of the distribution of know-ho-w and that are

derived in the next 3 propositions. are predicted to hold at all stages of the industiy 'S
development.

The distribution of know-how improves over time, and under competition the implied cost

reductions show up in a decline of the product price:

PROPOSITION 2: Ceteris paribus, the product price is lower at 1+1 than at t; i.e. for any x and

, P[x,t(x,)]
PROOF:

P(x,v).

Using the definition of equilibrium, the monotonicity in 0 of q(O,x,v), and part (I) of

Proposition 1, P(x,v) =

5

q(Oa,v)dv,(O),x]

D[ J

q(9,x,v)dzç÷1(O),x]

= P[x,4(x,v)].

H

Proposition 2 states that, given x, the price of output declines over time as supply shifts

to the right and demand remains stationary. More generally. however, price can temporarily
rise as a result of demand and supply shocks (X). The next result shows, however, that when

the shocks are i.i.d., p, declines in distribution. Let x be Li.d., with distribution F().
Denote the distribution ftinction of p, conditional only on i', by P'(p j v)
A(p,v)

S

Ac4dF(x), where

{xP(x,v) p}. Then p, is stochastically decreasing:

PROPOSITION 3: P('j ) dominates P(- I
PROOF: Since v, is stochastically increasing with i, and q(O,x,) is increasing in 0, P(x,v,) is

declining in I for fixed x. It follows that A(p,r,1)

A(p,jç), and the claim follows.

Propositions 2 and 3 carry over to the evolution of industry output; for example, average

output stochastically increases over time. But not every firm wifi experience continual output
growth, even holding x constant: Firms whose technological growth falls far enough below the

Jovanovk and MacDonald

9

Canpaizive DWuson

industry average will produce less at t+ 1 than at t if the anticipated price decline occurs.

Therefore, the cross-firm distribution of output may not always improve over time, since some

finns wifi experience a fall in output.

Nevertheless, a positive result can be obtained by

"normalizing" the distribution of output: let normalized output be 7(O,x,v)

q(O,x,v)Iq(,x.y),

where 0 is the smallest value of 0 in the support of v0. Since q(O,x,v) is increasing in O

normalized output is distributed over [1,0)). Let be the price elasticity of the firm's supply
curve.

PROPOSITION 4: If

is not increasing in 0, then for fixed x, the distribution of Q(O,x,v)

stochastically improves over time.

PROOF: For any q', let (n,x,q') be the solution for U to 4(O,x,p) = q'. If r is not increasing
in 0, then O is increasing in p. The fraction of firms at having normalized output at most

equal to q' is 1[9(p1,x,q')]. But, since v,1 dominates i's, v1[O(p,,x,q')]

v,+i[(pir.t,q')]. ThiS

exceeds v,÷1[O,+1,x,q')] because of proposition 2, and because is increasing in p.

The intuition behind Proposition 4 is this: As i'd. evolves to Pff1 two things happen.

First, the output of finns that learned at t rises relative to that of the smallest finns, because
some small firms wifi not have learned at t, and thus will not raise output This output growth
is tempered by the downward pressure on the product price needed to clear the product market.

However, given the elasticity condition, the response of larger firms is proportionally no greater

than that of smaller firms, so their normalized output in fact rises as price falls. With size
measured by normalized output, this generates a declining proportion of small firms; that is, an
improved distribution of normalized output?

The elasticity condition is easily met For example c4(q,O,x) = q"E(O,x), for a> 1, yields
a price elasticity that is independent of 0. Further, the result's simplicity stems from the absence
of fixed costs, so that the smallest firms are always those who fail to learn anything at all.

Jonxtvk and Macflonal4
CompeSiw DWio.t

10

Leamin and Firm Growth: Propositions 2-4 were driven by the improvement of i' over time.
In contrast, the next two propositions rely on how the firm's cunent know-how interacts with
its learning opportunities. There is a basic tension: Technological laggards may have a greater

incentive to improve through imitation, but the leaders may fmd it easier to learn stifi more
through innovation. Thus whether higher 0 leads to greater or lesser learning effort is unclear.
The next proposition deals with a case in which laggards will improve their technologies

more often than leaders. The following condition implies that greater U reduces learning effort:

for 0' 0, the learning technology is t(9' Il,O,xv)

[1-t'(11.x,v)] +

where the range of 4" is [O 1] and for any x and p, 'P2 is a distribution ftinction; for O < 0,

t(O' •) = 0, as before. This restriction breaks learning into a two-step process. Step one
determines whether the firm gets a technological draw, the probability of success being t'Q,x, it),

a function of learning effort but not know-how. In step two, if the firm does get a technological

draw, it comes from p2(9' Ix,v), which depends neither on effort nor know-how. In this setup,
sampling of new technology is as easy for laggards as it is for leaders. Of course, the firm will

reject any draw less than 6, and since the leaders have larger B's

their returns from

technological sampling are less.

Since greater know-how does not make learning easier or cheaper, laggards, who have
more to gain from learning, wifi try harder and succeed more often:

PROPOSITION 5: The likelihood of learning a better technique, t'[/(O,xv),xv}[1 is decreasing in 9.

PROOF: Since P is increasing in 8, it suffices to show that t'[l(O,x,)x,] is decreasing in 0.

To do so, let 5° <6' and define a c'[l(O°,x,v),x,v], t'(O°)

t'[l(O°,x,),xv] and t2(O°) a

t2(&°)x,p); define &, t'(01) and t1(O) analogously. Writing p' in place of 4(x1v), that a firm
knowing 0° selects 1(O°,x,i#) in preference to I(O',x,) implies

iovazw* sad MacDan&d
Cmyiditiw Dffiisirnz

11

I

V(O',x,v')dt2(O'.x.p)
1-t2(O°)

su—t2(Fmtl(O1)—t1(O°)}{J

—

V(O0,x)Pi}.

In conjunction with the analogous inequality for a fim knowing 0', reanangement gives
I

(*)

[t'(O')-t'(O°)] { [1-t2(O')J
-

[1_2(80))

V(O',x,v')dt2(V ktI)
1—t2(O')

—V(O'xiP')]

[J V(Oxv')dt2(O'Ix.v)_v(oo,,/)]
}
it2(O0)
80

The factor in braces in (*) is equal to
—

I 9(91, 1)di'2(O' lx,p')÷V(O°,x,v')—V(O',x,P')+t2(0')V(0',x,!')—t2(O°)V(0°1xpv').

Integrating the first term by parts and simplifying yields

812

JV
Since 'P2 1, this expression is at most

which is equal to zero. Thus the factor in braces in (*) is negative, in which case (1yields
t'[1(O°,x1p),x,v]

t'[1(O',x,v)1x,v].

JovovicDcnI4

12

ConçditiveD4jThswn

Proposition 5 implies that smaller firms will learn more frequently, but not, however,

that they wifi necessarily grow faster; this is because the secular decline in price could affect

them more than it affects big firms. Something more must be assumed to guarantee faster
growth for smaller firms, and this is done in the next proposition. Given x, growth for a firm

that knows 0 is the random variable q(O',x,k(x,)JIq(O,x,v) - 1; denote its distribution by
G(g18,x,w).

PROPOSITION 6: If is not decreasing in 0, then for fixed x, G(gIO,x.v) is stochastically
decreasing in 0.

PROOF: Let 0' > 9° and g = q[O',x,'(x,v)]/q(O',xv)-1; g 0.
s) Let g' > and define O(g',O,x,v) to be the value of 6' solving q[O',x,4(x,v)} -

gSq(9y) = 0; 0 is increasing in 0. T h e n I - G(g IO',x,v) =
'P2[(g',O',x,v)Ix,v} 'F'[t(O°,x,v),x,v)[l •

=1-

G(g'O°,x,v).

The

inequality follows because t'[l(O,xv).x,} is decreasing in U (proof of Proposition 5) and is
increasing in 0.

ii) Let g' = g. Then O(g',O',x,v) = 0' and G(g' IO',XM is the probability that a firm with
know-how O fails to learn at t. Under the restriction on , the probability that a firm with knowhow 90 grows by as little as g' is either 0 (whenever (x,p) differs from v) or equal to the

probability of failing to learn; the latter, according to Proposition 5. is rising in OY Thus g' is

the minimum in the support of G(g O',x,v) and below the minimum in the support of

I

G(g[8°,x,v), and (kg IO,x,v) G(g'(O',x,v).

The relation between Propositions 4 and 6 requires discussion. First, both results can

0 is

q[O',x,4?(x,v)]/q(8),x,w) - q[O°,x,(x,v)]/q(O°x,v)
equivalent to
q(O',x1v)/q(F,x,v)
0,
which
follows
immediately
from the
q[O',x,4(x,P)]/q[O°,x,tb(x,p)]
10

condition on and P[x,(x,v)] P(x1r).

onnovk and MaCDOIIaJd
CmnpthzAw DØkrion

13

hold simultaneously since both admit the case in which the elasticity of supply is independent
of $. In this case the distribution of normalized output becomes less concentrated over time

while small firms have a greater tendency to grow. This occurs because the tendency for small
firms to grow does not eliminate the fact that some small firms fail to learn, and fall behind,

Propositions 5 and 6 are driven by the assumption that all firms sample from the same
technological pool. But some cost-reducing improvements are incremental -- they build directly

on technology in place-- as opposed to more fundamental improvements based on discoveries

that are either new to all or new to the industry. When improvements are incremental,
technological leaders sample new technology from a better pool than laggards do. The
assumption that increments are sampled seems especially appropriate when it comes to
technological improvements introduced by current leaders. But it also makes sense for advances

achieved through imitation: A firm that is sufficiently far behind may well find it harder to
imitate an advanced technology than will a finn whose know-how is closer to the technology it

is trying to imitate. If learning is indeed of an "incremental" nature in this sense, and if this
effect is strong enough, then in contrast to the assertions of propositions S and 6, higher 0 can

raise the incentive to acquire new know-how. This effect is present in the example at the end
of the paper, in which there are but three technologies: low, medium and high. The invention
process endows medium tech firms with an advantage -- through innovation they can become

high tech much easier than low tech firms can. As a result, in comparison to low tech finns,
medium tech firms devote more effort to innovation during the entire life-span of the industry;
Even though they have less to learn, and imitate less vigorously, they are more likely to succeed

in implementing better technology.

Propositions S and 6 continue to hold even if neither t' nor 'F2 depends on i'. That
is, they hold even f imitation is imp pssible.. These two propositions are driven entirely by the

cross-sectional fishing out effect Thus there are two distinct forces in the model that push the

population of firms towards technological convergence: (a) the diffusion of technology that
results from the laggards' efforts to imitate the leaders, and (b) the fishing out effect that causes

Iovic d McDon1d

14

Ciy,pive D4Ouio

the

laggards to search harder. The first force likely shows up in any industry, while the second

arises only whenever technological laggards are about as efficient in finding better technologies

as the leaders are, as is more likely when new technology is not closely related to old
technology.

Optimality. Unless 1' does not depend on , the distribution of know-how in use affects how
firms learn- an externality; thus a social optimum is not likely to coincide with equilibrium.
The next result shows that there is a sense in which a social planner would prefer that firms
engage in more of all information gathering activities. &me of these activities may be imitative

in the sense that distribution of returns to learning efforts depends on others' know-how,
summarized by p.

Oth information gathering activities may have a return that does not depend

on p, and in this sense it is iuzovative.
Suppose that a social planner ranks outcomes by consumers' plus producers' surplus.
Equilibrium surplus is

E{
where Q(x,,v)

' ff [J'D(z)ciz

—

J c[q(OxM11(8x1v)O,x]dv(O)] },

q(&x1, v)dv(O) is industry output at t. Consider a nonzero vector of learning

efforts l. Suppose that at a date 1', firms' learning efforts are 1(O,ç,,) + ci', for > 0, but that
firms follow the equilibrium policy otherwise. Let W(e) denote the surplus generated by this
behavior.

PROPOSITION 7: Unless i' does not depend on ', dW(€)/d > 0

at = 0. That is, the

planner prefers more learning efforts at tr.h1

'

The proof of Proposition 7 is in Jovanovic and MacDonald (1991). The argument requires

conditions guaranteeing differentiability of W. A related result is in Rustichini and Schmitz
(1991).

Jovaav3vk sad MacDqaJJ

15

CapekM Da&m

In practice, the main policy tool employed to encourage innovative activity j patent

protection. Patents encourage innovation by stifling imitation. From this perspective
Proposition 7 may seem counter-intuitive in that it implies not just that innovation is too low in

equilibrium, but that imitation is too low as well; i.e. detening imitation is, in fact, detrimental,

This occurs because the result does not compare equilibrium to an alternative in which the
planner must intervene solely via a patent system. Rather, the planner has a richer set of policy
tools that influence both imitation and innovation, encouraging both more discoveries and faster
spread of what is found. Of course. equilibrium and optimum coincide if learning is independent

of others' know-how, i.e., if t does not depend on v.
This result suggests caution in the design of policies whose goal is to encourage cost

reduction efforts: If it is possible simultaneously to provide incentives for innovation and
imitation, then imitation is not necessarily a bad thing. The result is limited in two respects,

however. First, it does not compare equilibrium with the planner's global optimum; this
comparison will be made in an example, below.

Second, the result states that the planner

would prefer a small increase in all learning activities, but it does not say what the planner's
favorite small change would look like.

The Lone Run. Is the best technology (0 =
eventually learn U = 1?

1) eventually uncovered? Wifi every firm

Or wifi firms be different forever?" The answers depend on the

learning technology and cost function. If the marginal cost of learning is always positive, then,

at most a fraction of firms wifi ever use the best technology -- not all firms wifi get it After

a point, firms have learned enough that the remaining scope for cost reduction becomes too
small to justify the effort needed to replace an existing method with the best one.

The above scenario admits the possibility that all firms wifi converge to a 0 < 1 and

stay there forever. But if, in addition, the learning technology is such that given 0 the firm

12

Detailed answers to these question are provided in Jovanovic and MacDonald (1991).

16

Joyrovic and MacDonaid
CavwSiw DffiLüofl

might, in one step, learn any greater 0 (i.e. for all 9, the support of t(O' jlO,x,v) is [0,1]), then

heterogeneity persists forever. That is, when the learning technology can yield a diverse set of

new techniques, not offly do some firms never use the best technology, but also there is no
technology ultimately used by all firms -- know-how must remain dispersed. Since the output

of a finn and its value are both positively related to its know-how, long run dispersion of know-

how implies long mn dispersion of output and firm values. This means that even for mature
industries defmed by nanowly defmed commodities, the distribution of output should not be
concentrated, even though firms can imitate one another.

II. Innovation versus Imitation.
This section explores innovation and imitation in two examples of the general model that

ifiustrate the properties of equilibrium and of the social optimum. The second example is then

used to interpret the diffusion of diesel locomotives in the U.S. Neither example wifi have
aggregate risk and so X1 does not appear below.

The general model allowed for a vector of learning activities, 1. In the examples there

wifi be just two ways to learn -- innovation and imitation. Innovative effort t gives the firm

with probability . Observe that N depends on the
firm's own know-how, but not the know-how of others. This is the sense in which effort t
a draw 0' from the distribution N(O'

JO)

is innovative. Likewise, imitative effort, t, gives the firm a draw from a distribution M(9' is)

that dominates p and improves whenever p does;

M( .

= p is an example.

Effort a is

imitative since p represents what others know and the draw does not depend on the firm's own

know-how. M wifi dominate p if,for example, the firm can direct its imitative effort towards

the leaders. Assuming innovative and imitative luck are independent, t(9' k,p,0v)
17+r,N(O'IO)][l-s+y.M(O'Iv)] for O'O,

Example 1: Three Technologies.

and 03 =

15

[1-

and t(O'Ii,p,O,) = 0, otherwise.

Assume that 1) there are three technologies --

-- with all finns knowing offly O at :=O; ii) costs are

= 1,

=

5

c(q,rj,pt,O) =

Jovwiovic and MacDana!

17

Compttivt Dffiuion

ii:) imitation is undirected: M(• I

= v; iv) innovation is such that given a

draw from N, a flm knowing O learns O with probability .05 and °2 with probability .01, and
a flm knowing O learns °2 with probability .05; v) the discount factor is 3= .98; vi) demand IS
D(Q) a2'2.5Q. Let a denote the fraction of firms knowing 0 at t. Then the probability with
which a flm knowing only 0 learns O is .OSq +pPjt-.OS17eLvi,; that is, the probability of either
innovation or imitation yielding Ui, minus the probability of both doing so. Expressions for the

probabilities of other transitions are analogous.

Figure 2 charts the industry's evolution. In Panel a) all firms start out with low tech
know-how, 00. Innovation soon yields the discovery of medium tech know-how, 9, which
diffuses quickly due to imitation. High tech know-how, 021 is also discovered early-- since there

are many finns, any of which might uncover high tech- but its diffusion lags behind the
diffusion of medium tech; this occurs because high tech spreads more easily, via imitation, once

medium tech achieves wide use. Eventually high tech swamps the less efficient techniques.
Panels b) and c) display innovation and imitation effort for a low or medium tech firm. Initially,

since there are few firms to imitate, imitation effort is nil and all advance is due to innovation.

But as innovation breeds heterogeneity in know-how, the return to imitation rises rapidly and
imitation soon substitutes for innovation. Observe that, in comparison to medium tech, low tech
firms devote greater effort to imitation and less to innovation. This occurs because medium tech

firms have only the high tech population to imitate, while low tech finns can learn from any

medium or high tech finn In addition, the cost saving low tech firms realize by learning is
greater than the saving realized by medium tech, which explains why the difference in imitation

never disappears entirely.
Innovation and imitation are substitutes, and this can complicate empirical work on the

effects of R & D. For example, suppose that R & D data are primarily measures of innovative

efforts. Then regressions of industry output growth on R & D expenditures wifi typically

understate the influence of R & D on output growth; this occurs because the substitution
relationship between innovation and imitation tends to cause them to be negatively correlated,

Jovanoic and MacDonald

18

Ct.r'peiüw Dffichn

in which case the familiar omitted variable bias argument leads to the conclusion that the
estimated effect of R & D on growth will be biased downward. In the example, the conelation
of aggregate innovation expenditures with imitation expenditures is --23, and a regression of the
growth rate in output on innovation expenditures and a constant yields a slope coefficient of .53;
including imitation expenditures in the regression raises this figure to .61.
Since firms can learn from one another, and learning leads to output growth, growth is

fastest when the scope for learning — differences in know-how - is greatest. Thus it should be

dispersion in output, not its mean, that drives imitation and raises growth. Figures 2(d) and 3(c

show that equilibrium and optimum both involve a positive conelation between the growth of
the industry's output, and the variance of output among firms. The growth rate of output falls

as the industry evolves, in agreement with observation by Gazi and Klepper (1982). This
generates a negative conelation between growth and level of output; however, growth and
variance in output are positively conelated since imitation occurs in response to variance in
know-how and results in greater subsequent output. Figures 2(e) and 3(e) display the declining

price paths implied by equilibrium and optimum.
Figure 3 depicts diffusion, ilmovation and imitation in a social optimum. In this example

the gains from improved know-how are large, and the dramatic difference between equilibrium

and optimum reflects this. New know-how is discovered more quickly and spreads faster, as

Proposition 7 would suggest. Indeed, the gains to getting high tech are so great that medium

tech never gains widespread use. Instead, great effort is spent on imitation and high tech
spreads quickly.

Example 2: Two Technologies: Assume that 1) there are only two values of 0 -- low tech, O

O. ii) costs are again quadratic, but more general --

and high tech,
c(q,tj ,p,O) =

+

+ çjz2; iii) instead of being downward sloping, demand is perfectly

elastic at price po; iv) given innovation effort ', the probability with which a low tech fim gets

high tech know-how via innovation is 3, where 6 C (0,1); and v) given imitation effort js and

Jovanovic and MacDonaJd

19

Q3nV,d1ÜI€ Dissioi

the fraction ii, of firms knowing high tech at t. the probability with which imitation yields high

tech know-how is ,tvp,.13 This example resembles models for the transmission of disease in
which p would be the fraction of the population that is sick. In contrast to those models,

contagion is endogenous.

Let the net benefit to learning be (v) = VIO11(v)]-V[O0,ft')J; A is falling in v since
imitation becomes easier as the number of high tech firms rises, raising V[O0,(p)], and
4O1 ,4(v)J is independent of v because demand is infinitely elastic. The first order conditions
characterizing a low tech fimi' s choice of tj and u are
—c+flo(1 —,Qa()=O

—tS)àQ') =0.

Ii is not hard to check that i1VvLs(v) is increasing in p1 the firmts innovation effort declines

as p grows, while its imitation effort rises. In what follows, this property wifi be assumed."
Intuitively. A(v) is the net benefit associated with obtaining high tech know how, which declines

over time; this encourages less of both methods of learning, a scale effect of a sort. However,
that imitation is becoming easier promotes a substitution of imitation for innovation. Thus. the

assumption made here is that the substitution effect dominates the scale effect
The variety of industry evolutions is ifiustrated by two polar cases. In "pure imitation",

13

The fraction of high-tech firms is a sufficient statistic for the distribution of technology

over firms, and that is why the symbol p is bonowed to denote this fraction here. This
specification of imitation assumes imitation by low tech firms can be partially directed towards
high tech firms; i.e. given that imitation effort has mmcd up some firm, the probability that the

flmi is high tech is Vv1> 1 (provided v,
14

0).

This property must hold over time in the sense that p A(v0)

time and Iim Vp,• g(p,)> 0.

0, while v is rising over

Jovanovic aM MaDonaid
Campeiziw D1ssion

innovation is almost impossible -- 6

20

= 0 -- and evolution is driven by imitation)5 In "pure

innovation", imitation is ruled out These cases represent the extremes in terms of the
importance of informational linkages; they have distinct implications for, among other things,
the diffusion of technology, the distribution of output, and the productivity of R&D.

A. Diffusion of new technology. From the first order conditions, the rate of adoption of high

tech know-how is v,÷,-v, = $(-)A()1 which is small both early in the industry's evolution,
when p z 0, as well as much later, when p t 1; otherwise, diffusion occurs more quickly, and

in this sense, pure imitation must result in the familiar "S-shaped" diffusion pattern. In fact,
since A is declining in v, the maximal rate of diffusion occurs before a majority of firms use
high tech know-how. In contrast, pure innovation implies that the net return to acquiring high
tech know-how does not fall over time; this is because the composition of existing know-how
does not influence the scope for learning.'6 Thus innovative effort of low tech firms is constant

over time, and v,v, = (5)I+I which is declining and concave in t. Thus under pure
innovation, diffusion is quickest at the outset, while under pure imitation, diffusion is initially
slow, then more rapid, and finally slow once again.

B. The time oath of the distribution of outimt...$ince price is constant over time, the outputs of

high and low tech firms are constant over time and average output is simply a rescaling of v,;
thus the results on diffusion apply immediately to mean output. The variance of output at I is

proportional to v1(1-v,). Thus given the diffusion paths just discussed, pure imitation yields

To allow high tech know how to emerge at all, 6 > 0 must be assumed. An alternative
is to set 6=0 and endow a few firms with high tech know how right at the start. Also, the first
version of this paper (Jovanovic and MacDonald. 1988) contains a variety of comparative
dynamics results for the pure models.
The infinite elasticity of demand plays a role here too. but when comparing the two pure
cases. it is the influence of the distribution of know how on learning possibilities that is central.

.lovanovic and McDcna1d
Comperii 1w t)ffüm

21

heterogeneity in output slowly, with the rapid imitation phase driving it out quickly; pure

innovation results in a more rapid rise in heterogeneity and a more gradual decay.

C. The productivity of R & D spending. Under pure innovation there are no external effects

in the learning technology. Only low tech firms tly to progress, and their effort is constant.
Therefore, the observed productivity of R&D spending (i.e. diffusion per dollar of expenditure)
is a constant. Under pure imitation, on the other hand, the rise in the number of high tech firms

makes it easier for the low-tech firms to copy them, causing productivity to rise over time.

Diffusion of the Diesel locomotive
The twentieth century has seen a host of innovations in the Railroad industry, but all ai
dwarfed by the replacement of steam engines by diesels. This section interprets the data on the

diffusion of diesels using the pure imitation model."
The first usable diesel locomotive was invented by Rudolf Diesel in 1912. Diesels were

first used in the U.S. in 1925, and by 1968 they had displaced steam engines entirely. Panel
a) of Figure 4 displays diesels in use in the U.S. (1925-67) as a fraction of the total number of
locomotives; the data are from the U.S. Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics of the United

States. series Q296-9. Since this fraction is steadily rising, the distribution of technology
increases over time.
Spillovers cause the likelihood of switching technologies to depend on the distribution of

technology in use. Indeed, in the pure imitation model, the "hazard" rate Ii,

(141-v)/(1-)

can be "backed out" of the diffusion data, and is predicted to be rising. Panel (b) of Figure 4
displays the hazard implied by the diffusion in panel (a). The hazard increases through most of

'

In Jovanovic and MacDonald (1988) the pure innovation model is used to study data on
the diffusion of mechanized loading techniques in the U.S. underground coal industry.

'8A few electric and "other" locomotives are ignored in what follows since, altogether, they
never amounted to more than 2% of the total number of locomotives in use.

Jvnovjc .zid MacDoiid
Co1Wduc DDtho

22

its range, and, in fact, only fails to do so when more than 99% of locomotives were diesels; in

this case the denominator of the hazard-- I-v,-- is less than .01 and some enatic behavior for

measured Ii, is not surprising. The pure imitation model has the stronger implication that
imitation effort p = h/Vu, rises over time. Panel (c) displays , calculated from the diffusion

data in panel (a). Imitation effort generally rises and only fails to do so when almost all
locomotives in use are diesels.

While these ifiustrative calculations do not prove that an infoimational model underlies

these data, it is worth noting that the main alternative hypothesis -- a vintage capital model--

leaves much unexplained: First,new steam locomotives were produced long after the
introduction of diesels; see Interstate Commerce Commission (1950. Table A-4 and A-5). And

second, there is no evidence of a bell-shaped distribution of ages of locomotives at the time of

introduction of diesels; a bell-shape is key for a vintage explanation for the S-shape in Panel

a). Nor did the substitution of diesels for locomotives merely reflects the cheapening of oil
relative to coal. In fact, over the 1940-60 period, during which the primaiy displacement of
steam engines occurred, the relative price of oil to coal rose by about 15%; see U.S. Bureau of

the Census. Historical Statistics of the United States, Series M96, M139.

111. Conclusion.

This paper has analyzed competition among firms that differ only in teims of their
productive knowledge. Diffusion of technology takes time as a result of informational bathers
defining tirms Restrictions on observables were driven by this gradual spread of know-how.
Two key assumptions should be emphasized: (i) The infoimational unit is firm, and (ii)

Informational barriers take time and effort to overcome.

The firm is a legal entity: Patents are granted to firms, and infoimation-sharing
mechanisms such as patent-swapping anangements and licensing agreements are made among

flims. On these grounds it makes sense to think of the owner of a piece of information -information that other firms can try to acquire -- as a firm. Patents represent a barrier to the

Jovanovic and

MacDonJd

&rwaàiw DWunon

23

flow of implemented information among firms. Moreover, when a firm's employees work on
the same premises, they can and do share information among themselves differently and more

often than they do with others. These factors point to the firm as the appropriate unit of
analysis.

Important informational bathers may, however, exist within the firm, especially within

large firms. Holmstrom (1982) analyzes incentive problems that arise within the firm -problems that may deter a plant manager from sharing his technological know-how with his

peers. Consistent with this idea, Mansfield (1963) has shown that the spread of a new
technology within the firm can take almost as long as its spread within the industry. To explain

diffusion lags within the flim this model must interpret them as resulting from informational
barriers between decision units making up the firm. Now if plants or individuals are treated as
the decision units, the model's predictions are about plants or individuals, not firms, Whatever

the decision unit is, however, the results apply to the discovery and spread of know-how in a
group of such decision units.

Although informational bathers among firms (and perhaps within firms too) seem to
matter, how much is not yet clear. In particular, is the spread of technological know-how slow
enough to explain much of the variance in firm size within industries, and in the observed timing

of the adoption of new technologies? The answers hinge on how easily firms can imitate one
another; indeed, if imitation were as easy as obtaining a blueprint or recipe, a theory focusing

on institutional features like patents and licenses would be more relevant than the theory
presented in this paper. But imitation is typically not that easy: using another's idea involves
more that simply obtaining a blueprint, just as mastering a subject demands more than buying

a textbook. This explains why finns in fact classify most of their R & D expenditures as
"applied", and why information lags probably are important for understanding how industries
evolve.

Jovovjc and MacDonaid

24

Ctpeüf(w DsoM

References

Andolfatto, David, and Glenn M. MacDonald, "Endogenous Technological Change, Growth,
and Aggregate Fluctuations." revised, June 1993.

Anow, Kenneth, "The Economic Implications of Learning by Doing," Review of
Economic Studies, 29 (1962). 155-173.
Chari, V.V. and Hugo Hopenhayn, "Vintage Human Capital, Growth, and the Diffusion

of New Technology," Journal of Political Economy ,

no.

6 (December 1991):

1142-65.

Flaherty, M. T., "Industiy SUucture and Cost-Reducing Investment," Econornetrica, 48
(July

1980).

1187-1209.

Gort, Michael, and Steven Kiepper, "Time-Paths in the Diffusion of Product
Innovations," Economic Journal, 92 (September 1982). 630-53.
Holmstrom, Bengt, "Moral Hazard in Teams," Bell ehurnal of Economics. 12 (Autumn
1982), 324-340.
Interstate Commerce Commission, Bureau of Transport Economics and Statistics, Study
of Railroad Motive Power, Washington, D.C., 1950.

Jovanovic. Boyan, and Glenn M. MacDonald, "Competitive Diffusion," 1988,
Jovanovic. Boyan and Glenn M. MacDonald, "Competitive Diffusion," Bradley Policy
Research Center, Financial Research and Policy Studies Working Paper FR 9208, December 1991.
Jovanovic, Boyan, and Rafael Rob, "The Growth and Diffusion of Knowledge," Review
of Economic Studies 56, no. 4 (October 1989): 569-82.

Lucas, Robert, "On the Mechanics of Economic Development," Journal of Monetary
Economics, 22 (1988). 3-42.
Mansfield. Edwin, "Intra-firrn Rates of Diffusion of an Innovation, Review of Economics

and Statistics, (5 (November 1963). 34849.
Mansfield, Edwin, Mark Schwartz and Samuel Wagner, "Imitation Costs and Patents:
An Empirical Study," Economic Journal 91 (December 1981): 907-18.

1ovanovc ad MacDond
CnWdivc DLstan

Nabseth,

25

Lars, and George Ray, The Diffusion of New industrial Processes: An

International Study, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1971.
Pakes, Ariel and Mark Shankerman, "The Rate Obsolescence of Knowledge, Research
Gestation Lags. and the Private Rate of Rewrn to Research Resources," in Z,
Griliches (ed.), Patents, R&D, and Productivity, University of Chicago Press,
1984.
Rogers,

Everett M., Diffusion of Innovations. 3rd Ed., New York: Free Press, 1983.

Romer, Paul, 'Endogenous Technological Change," Journal of Political Economy, 98
(October 1990, supplement). S7 1-102.
Rustichini. Aldo and J. SchmiEz1 "Research and Imitation in Long Run Growth," Journal
of Monetaiy Economics, 27 (April 1991), 271-292.
Schumpeter, Joseph A., The Theory of Economic Development, Cambridge: Harvard

University Press, 1934.
Shell, Karl, "A Model of Inventive Activity and Capital Accumulation, in Essays in the
Theory of Optimal Economic Growth, Karl Shell (ed.), Cambridge MIT Press,
1967.

Solow, Robert M., "Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function," Review
of Economics and Statistics, 39 (957), 312-20.

Spence. A. M., "Cost Reduction, Competition, and Industry Performance,"
Econometnca, 52 (January 1984). 101-21.

Figure 1. Dynamic Random Access Memory Industry
a) Diffusion of Chip Density, 1973-1986
1

1k

: 4k t

0.8

:

641

236k

0.6

0,4

02

1973

1975 1977

1979

1981

1983

1985

Figure 1. Dynamic Random Access Memory Industry
b) Industry Output, 1973.86 (l'ril]ions of Bits)
180

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0
1973

1975

19-n

1979

1981

1983

1985

Figure 1. Dynamic Random Access Memory Industry
c) Ftice Per Bit 1978-86 (Real Millicents per Bit)

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
1978

1980

1982

1984

1986

Figure 2. Example of Equilibrium
a) Diffusion
1

0.8

111gb tech

0.6

0,4

02

0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Figure 2. Example of Equilibrium
b) Innovation Effort (ti)
0.45

0.4

035
03

0.25

0.2
Tech

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Figure 2. Example of Equilibrium
c)

Imitation Effort (jt)

0.25

0.2

0.15

Mediujn,
11th.
0.1

0.05

0
10

20

30

40

50

60

Figure 2. Example of Equilibrium
d) Industry Output (C)) am! its Variance Among Firms

0.9

Total Output

0.8

0.5
Variance Among Firnu
0.4

0.3

0,2

0.1

0

I

10

I

I

20

I

I

I

I

30

40

50

60

Figure 2. Example of Equilibrium
e) Pike
0.6

Os

0,4

03

0.2

0.1

0
a

ía

20

30

40

50.

60

Figure 3. Example of Optimum
a) Diffusion

High Tccb

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

U

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Figure 3. Example of Optimum
b) Innovation Effort (q)
4

3.5

3

25

2
Medium

Tech

15

0:
I

0

10

20

I

r

30

I

I

.

I

40

50

.

60

Figure 3. Example of Optimum
o)

Imitation Effort (ii)

2

L8
L6

L4
12
Medium
Tech

0.8

0.6

0.4

02
0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Figure 3. Example of Optimum
d) Total Output (Q) and its Variance Among Firms

12

1

TotAl Output

0.8

0.6

Variucc Among Firms
0.4

02

_____L_________L

0

I

I

10

I

LI
20

30

40

50

60

Figure 3. Example of Optimum
e) Price
0,6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
0

10

20

30

40

50

Figure 4. Diesel Locomotion in the U.S.
Railroad Industry, 1925-1966.
a) Diffusion

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

03

02

Od

U

1925

1930

1935

1940

1945

1950

1955

1960 1965

Figure 4. Diesel Locomotion in the U.S.
Railroad Industry, 1925-1966.
b) Hazard

Rate

0.6

0.5

0.4

03

0.2

0.1

0
1925

1930

1935

1940

1945

1950

1955

1960

1965

Figure 4. Diesel Locomotion in the U.S.
Railroad Industry, 1925-1966.
c) Thiitation effort
0.6

0.5

0.4

03

0.2

0.1

0
1925

1930

1935

1940

1945

1950

1955

1960

1965

Number

Author

4404

John I-I. Boyd

Mark Gertler
440s

Alan J. Auerbach
Kevin A. Hasseu

Date

U.S. Commadal Banking: Trends, Cycles, and
Policy

7/93

Reassessing the Social Returns to Equipment

7193

Investment

Stephen D. Oliner
4406

Janet Curtie
Duncan Thomas

Does Head Start Make a Difference?

7/93

4407

Hilary Williamson }Ioynes

Welfare Transfeis lo Two-Paitni Families:
Labor Supply and Welfare Participation Under
AFDC.UP

7/93

4408

Charles W. Calomiris

Corporate-Finance Benefits from Universal Banking:
Germany aM the United States, 1870-1914

7)93

4409

Hope Corman
Stephen Clialkind

The Effect of Low Birlhweight on the Health,
Behavior, and School Performance of School-Aged
children

7i93

4410

Allan W. lUeidon
Ingrid M. Werner

Round-the-clock Trading: Evidence from U.K.
Cross-Listed Securities

7/93

4411

Andrew Atkcson
Patrick J. Kehoe

Social Thsurance and Transition

7/93

4412

Andrew B. Abel
Janice c. Eberly

An Exact Solution for the Investment

7/93

4413

Steven Ci. Allen

Robert L. Clark
Ann A. McDermed

and Market Value of a Fii Facing Uncenainty,
Adjustment Costs, and Ineversibility
Post-Retirement Increases in Pensions in the 1980s:
Did Plan Finances Mane??

8/93

4414

Edward B. Montgomery

Patterns in Regional Labor Maitet Adjustment:
The United States vs. Japan

8/93

4415

Michael D. Bordo
Charles Evans

Labor Productivity During the Great Depression

8i93

4416

Steven N. Kaplan

Top Executives, Turnover and Firm Perfonnance in
Gemiany

8/93

4417

Dani Rodrik

Trade and Industrial Policy Reform In Developing
Countries: A Review of Recent Theory and Evidence

8,93

4418

Don Fullerton
Seng-Su Tsang

Environmental Costs Paid by the Polluter or the
Beneficiary? The Car of CERCLA and Superfund

8i93

Number

Author

Title

4419

Dani Rcgirik

Trade Liberalization in Disinflation

8fl)3

4420

Herschel I. Grossman
Murat lyigun

The Profitability of Colonialism

8193

4421

Inca Hoshi

The (loice

8193

Date

David ScharfsT.cin

Public and Private Debt: An
Analysis of Post-Deregulation Corporate Financing
in Japan

4422

Michael Bruno

Inflation and Growth in an Integrated Approach

4423

M. Isha4 Nadiri

Innovations and Technological Spillovers

4424

Olivia S. Mitchell

Retirement Systems in Developed and Developing
Countries: Insüwtional Features, Economic
Effects, and Lessons for Economies in Transition

8,93

4425

Graciela (Thichilnisky
Geoffrey Heal

Wirn Should Abate Carbon Emissions?
An International Viewpoint

8/93

4426

Nancy L. Stokey
Sergio Rebelo

Growth Effects of Flat-Rate Taxes

8/93

4427

Canice Prendergast

Favoritism in Organizations

8/93

Anil Kashyap

Between

8fl3

Robcjt H. lope!
4428

James Hecknian

Assessing GinmWs Pmgram on Job Training,
Workfarc, and Education in the workplace

&93

4429

Rebecca lvi. Blank
Patricia Ruggles

When Do Women Use AFI)C & Food Stamps? The
Dynamics of Eligibility vs. Participation

8/93

4430

Andrea Belcxazti

Sustainable Growth and the Green Golden Role

8/93

Graciela Chichilnisky
Geoffrey Heal
4431

Scott Boggess
John Bound

Did Criminal Activity Incitase During the
1980s? Compaiisons Across Data Sources

8/93

4432

Janet currie.

Restrictions on Medicaid Funding of
Abortion: Effects on Pregnancy Resolutions
and Birth Weight

8/93

Lucia Nixon

Nancy Cole
4433

Magnus Blomstrøm
Edwarti N. Wolff

Growth in a Dual Economy

8/93

4434

James M. Poterba
Lawrence H. Summers

Unemployment Benefits, Labor Market Transitions.
and Spurious Flows: A MulLinoznial Logit Model
with Errors in Ciassification

S,3

Number

Author

4435

Jonathan (Jruber
James

4436

M. Poterba

Magnus BlomstrOm

Date
Tax Incenlives and the Decision to Purchase

8,93

Health Insurance: Evidence horn the Self-Employed
Is Fixed Investment the Key to Economic Growth?

3,93

Permanent Income, Import Prices, and the Demand
for Imported Consumer DurabLes: A Stnjctural

8/93

Robert E. Lipsey
Mario Zejan
4437

Richard H. Clazida

EcolxrnieLric Investigation

4438

José De C]regorio
Alberto Cilovannini

International Evidence on Tradables and
Nontradables Inflation

8/93

Holger C. Wolf
4439

Robert E. Hall
N. Gregory Mankiw

Nominal Income Targeting

8/93

4440

Paffic H. Hendershott
William R Schultz

Equity apJ Nonequity Determinants of PHA Single,
Family Mortgage Forcclostues in the 1980s

8/93

4441

Boyan Jovanovic
Glenn M. MacDonald

The Life-Cycle of a Competitive Industiy

8/93

4442

Richard H. Clarida
Mark P. Taylor

The Term SLnlcwrc of Forwani Exchange Premia
and the Forecastability of Spot Exchange Rates:
Cormcting the Errors

8/93

4443

V.V. Cbazi

Optimality of the Friedman Rule in Economics

8/93

Lawrence 3. Oristiano
Patrick I. Kehoe

With Distorting Taxes

4444

David T. Coc
Eihanan Helpman

International R&D Spiliovers

8193

4445

Barry Eichengreen
Douglas A. Irwin

Trade Blocs, Currency Blocs and the
Disintegration of World Trade in the I 930s

8/93

4446

Bernard Dumas

Partial- vs. General-Equilibrium Models of
the International Capital Market

9/93

4447

Orley Ashenfeltez-

Lawycrs as Agents of the Devil in a Prisoner's

9/93

Credibility of Policies versus Credibility
of Poticymakers

9/93

Specification and Analysis of a Monetary
Policy Rule for Japan

9/93

David Bloom
4448

Allan Drazen

Paul R. Mason
4449

Bennett T. McCailum

Dilemma Game

Number

Author

Title

4450

Steven C. Bourassa
Donald R. Haurin
R. Jean Haurin
Panic H. Hendershott

Independent Living and Homoownership: An
Analysis of Australian Youth

9/93

4451

Dani Rodrick

Do Low-lncomc Counhiles Have a High-Wage

9/93

Daic

option?

M. Romer

New Goods, Old Theory, and the Welfare Costs
of Trade Restrictions

9/93

ConsumpUon over t& Life Cycle and over the
Business Cycle

9/93

Martin Browning
Orazio P. Attanasio

A Cohort Analysis of Saving Behavior by

9/93

4452

Paul

4453

Orazio P. Auanasio

4454

U.S.

4455

Boyan Jovanovic

Households

Diffusion Lags and Aggregate FLuctuations

9193

Saul Lxii
4456

Raquel Fernandez
Richard Rogerson

Zoning and the Political Economy of Local
Redistribution

993

4457

Louis Kaplow
Steven Shavdll

The Efficiency of the Legal System versus the
Income Tax in Redistributing Iiwome

9,3

4458

Bernard

Dumas
L. Peter Jenncrgren
BertH Näslund

Realignment Risk and Currency Option Pricing
in Target Zones

9i93

4459

Bernard

Dumas
Bruno Sothik

The World Price of Foreign Exchange Risk

9/93

4460

Martin Gaynor
Gerard F. Anderson

Uncertain Demand, the Struetuit of Hospital
Costs, and the Cost of Empty Hospital Beds

9/93

4461

Kevin Lang
William T. Dickens

Bilateral Search as an Explanation for Labor
Market segmentation and Other Anomalies

9193

4462

Michael D. Hurd

The Effect of Labor Market Rigidities on (lie
Labor Force Behavior of Older Workers

9/93

4463

Boyan Jovanovic
Glenn MacDonald

Competitive Diffusion

9/93

Copies of the above working papers can be obtained by sending $5A30 per copy (plus $ 1O.OWorder for postage

and handling for all locations outside the continental U.S.) to Working Papers. NBER. 1050 MassaChtisettS
Avenue. Cambridge. MA 02138. Advance payment is required on all orders. Please make chccks payable 1° the
National Bureau of Economic Research

