                            NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        A DOMINO THEORY OF REGIONALISM




                                     Richard Baldwin




                                 Working Paper No. 4465




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 1993




This paper is pan of NBERs research program in International Trade and InvestmdnL Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                            NBER Working Paper #4465
                                                            September 1993

                          A DOMiNO THEORY OF REGIONALISM

                                          ABSTRACT

       Regional liberalization sweeps the globe like wildfire while multilateral nude talks
proceed at a glacial pace. Why are countries eager to liberalize regionally but reluctant to do so
multilaterally? The answer of the GAIT-is-dead school is that multilateralism is too cumbersome
for contemporary trade issues, This paper proposes a very different answer. Recent regionalism
is caused by two idiosyncratic events multiplied by a domino effect. The triggering events - the
U.S-Mexico ETA and the EC's 1992 programmeS had nothing to do with GAIT's health. The
domino effect is simple. Political equilibria, which balance anti- and pro-membership forces,
determine governments' stances on regional liberalization. Domestic exporters to regional blocs
are a powerful pro-membership constituency. An event that triggers closer integration within an
existing bloc harms the profits of nonmember exporters, thus stimulating them to boost their pro-

membership political activity. The extra activity alters the political equilibrium, leading some
countries to join. This enlargement further harms nonmember exporters since they now face a
disadvantage in a greater number of markets. This second round effect brings forth more pro-
membership political activity and a further enlargement of the bloc. The new political
equilibrium is marked by larger regional trading blocs. In the meantime regionalism appears to
spread like wildfire.


Richard Baldwin
Graduate Institute of International Studies (GIIS)
hA, rue de la Paix
1202 Geneva
SWITZERLAND
and NEER
                               I. Introduction
         Regional liberalization is sweeping the world trading system like
wildfire while the multilateral GATT talks proceed at a glacial pace. This
conspicuous contrast is curious enough in itself, but it becomes even more
remarkable when one considers specific issues.             Despite more than a
half-decade of talks, all proposals to liberalize agricultural trade, to grant equal
treatment for foreign service firms and to cut tariffs along the lines of the US's
"zero-for-zero initiative' have so far failed in the Uruguay Round. In sharp
contrast more than a dozen countries are pounding on the BC's door,
volunteering to make essentially these same concessions.              In fact BC
membership would require them to open their agriculture, services and goods
markets to BC firms to a far greater extent than would be required under
current Uruguay Round proposals. It is interesting that in many cases, the
potential BC members offered to open these markets with limited internal
debate; it was simply decided that BC accession was a "               Surely some
would-be members may be motivated by the BC's generous handout schemes,
but Austria, Finland, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland would be net financial
contributors.
         This stark contrast between regional and multilateral liberalization
raises the question: "Why are countries eager to open markets regionally but
reluctant to do so multilaterally?" Many conclude that the fault lies in the
multilateral trading system. This GAfl-is-dead school of thought views


           I gratefully acknowledge the help and suggestions of Rikard
Forslid, Robert Baldwin, Kym Anderson, Bernard Hoekman, Carl Hamilton
and Thor Gylfason. This paper was presented at the CEPR-Jahnsson
Foundation conference "Expanding European Regionalism: The EC's New
Members," Finland, May 1993.
    2
      CEPR (1992) estimates that the EFTAns combined net financial
contribution would be approximately 3.5 billion ecu.

                                         1
multilateral trade negotiations as outmoded and too cumbersome to deal with
the complexities of contemporary trade issues. While there may be something
to this line of thought, this paper proposes a very different answer. The stark
contrast does not reflect a GATT failure -- CArl' Rounds have always been
tong, have always been slow and have always been difficult. Indeed it does
not even reflect a systemic phenomenon. I propose that the current wave of
regionalism stems from two idiosyncratic events -- one in the New World and
one in the Old --   that   have been multiplied many times over by a domino
effect.
Domino Effect in the Americas
          In the Western Hemisphere, the US and Mexico announced their
intentions of forming a free trade area in 1990 for reasons that were largely
geopolitical (the desire to foster stability in Mexico by boosting growth and by
locking in pro-market reforms) and philosophical (the Bush and Salinas
administrations were both pro-free trade). The entire Mexican economy is
smaller than that of the Los Angeles basin, while European and Japanese
markets account for more than half the world's economic activity. It seems
highly unlikely that the US views this politically exacting, yet commercially
unimportant, initiative as substituting in any way for global trade liberalization.
          Announcement of the US-Mexico Free Trade Agreement (PTA)
destroyed the political economy sra:us quo in the Americas, thereby touching
off a domino effect. Other North, Central and South American nations, which
are heavily dependent on the US market, faced what appeared to be a fat:
accompli. Mexico-based producers would gain preferential access to the US
market. This could be expected to harm the profits and market shares of Firms
based in third countries, Moreover, the preferential access to the US could be
expected to divert foreign investment to Mexico at the expense of third
countries. Canada, which depends very heavily on the US market, decided


                                         2
that it had to be at the negotiating table and the North American Free Trade
Agreement was born. This choice was nude despite continuing domestic
opposition to its first regional liberalization -- the US-Canada FTA. Other
countries in the Hemisphere, such as Chile, Bral, Argentina, Urnguay and
Paraguay, formally or informally approached the US to begin bilateral PTA
talks. Moreover, interest in President Bush's Enterprise for the Americas
Initiative boomed in 1991 with 26 countries signing so-called Framework
Agreements (these require the countries to make unilateral concessions on
trade and investment to the US in exchange for the promise of closer US
relations leading eventually to an PTA).
Domino Effect in Europe
         In Europe, the political leaders of the EC-12 decided in 1985 to create
a Single Market as a means of renewing their drive towards monetary and
political unity in Europe. Again the primary motives were geopolitical and
philosophical, rather than commercial. Regardless of its raison-d'erre, the EC
1992 project posed a threat to non-PC exporters who depended heavily on the
EC market. In particular cheaper and easier intra-EC trade was expected to
reduce the relative competitiveness of non-EC firms, thereby harming their
sales and profits. Non-PC exporters throughout the region recognized the
threat and called for their governments to counter the losses. Moreover since
non-EC firms could be expected to react by shifting manufacturing to the PC,
many non-PC industrial labour unions echoed the call for action. The EFTA
governments' original solution, the European Economic Area arrangement,
was quickly eclipsed by a drive for full membership.3 In 1989 and 1991
respectively, Austria and Sweden decided to join.
        Now again the domino effect began to operate. The pending EC



      Baldwin (1992).

                                      3
enlargement made the potential lost of competitiveness even more threatening.
That is, each EFTA nation individually faced the prospect of losing out in the
EC-12 markets S in the markets of those EFTAns acceding to the EC. This
effect was especially important for Finland and Norway due to their heavy
dependence on the Swedish market. Since the combined EC and EFTA
markets on average account for three-quarters of EFTA exports, the pressure
on the holdouts mounted. Finland, Norway and Switzerland requested EC
membership in i992. Note that accession would force all these countries to
liberalize radically their agriculture and services markets as well as adopting
a zero-for-zero reduction of remaining EC-EFTA trade barriers.5
Asymmetric Lobbying Effort: Gaining Gains v A voiding Losses
         The political economy forces driving these domino effects are
strengthened by a peculiar tendency of special interest groups; they usually
fight harder to avoid losses than they do to secure gains. In this light it is
important that joining the regional integration in Europe and North America
would allow countries to avoid damage as well as to gain new commercial
opportunities. While there may be many explanations for this asymmetric
phenomenon, I would propose a simple economic interpretation based on sunk
cost.
         Entry into most industries and markets involves large unrecoverable
investments in product development, training, brand name advertisement and
production capacity. In such situations, established firms can earn positive
profits without attracting new finns only in as far as these profits constitute a



         4The Icelandic government, which is giving much thought to
joining, has so far been deterred by the EC's common fishery policy.

      The domino effect caused by the Single Market Program continues.
Turkey, Cyprus, some Magreb countries and virtually all of the Central and
East European countries have expressed interest in joining.

                                       4
fair return on the entry investments. Another way to say this is that sunk costs
create quasi-rents. In such industries, consider the incentive to lobby. If a
country's exporters obtain additional access to foreign markets, their sales and
profits will typically rise. The increase in pure profit, however, will attract
new competition, so the size of the gains must be limited. In the extreme,
entry continues until all pure profit disappears. Correspondingly, the incentive
to lobby for new export opportunities will be limited, and in the extreme will
disappear altogether. Next consider the reaction of an established firm to an
unanticipated policy change (such as the 1992 program, or the US-Mexico
FTA) that would reduce its relative competitiveness and profitability. To be
concrete, suppose that the change would wipe out half of its quasi-rents. Since
it would not actually be losing money, the finn would not shut down. More
to the point, the firm should be willing to spend up to half its quasi-rents on
lobbying for membership, if doing so would reverse the loss of relative
competitiveness,
        The paper has three sections after the introduction. The next section
presents the basic economic and political economic model. The third section
discusses how the domino effect operates in the model, and the last section
contains concluding remarks and suggestions for future research.
                             EL Basic Model
        Formalization of the domino effect presented in the introduction
requires a model that first shows how closer regional integration affects the
fortunes of industries based in nonmember countries and then connects these
changing fortunes to the political decision-making process. The economic
framework adopted is closely related to the setup used by Krugman (1991)
inexamining economic geography issues. The political economy model
employed is related to Grossman and Helpman (1992).
II.A The Economic Framework


                                      5
        Consider a world of 'g" countries, 'h" of which are members of the
regional trade bloc. Without loss of generality, we refer to the trade bloc as
the EC. Each country has two sectors: a differentiated-products sector
(referred to as manufacturing) which is marked by increasing-returns and
imperfect competition, and a perfectly competitive, constant-returns sector
(referred to as the A sector). Technology and preferences over goods are
identical in all countries. There are two classes of workers, labourers and
finn owners. The preferences of the firm owners are:


               U' c.cZ; CM = 1                   (u-LYe) jo/Cu-i),
                                                                          (1)
                               o>1, 0s41
where the summation is over goods that are actually available, a is the
elasticity of substitution between any two varieties and c1 is the consumption
of good i. The income of firm owners derives solely from profits. The
preferences of labourers are given by:


                (JL       CAC;    CM =       ; 4uiYo)    jo/Cu-i),
                                                                          (2)
                               a>1, OAs1

         Utility maximization by the representative consumers, subject to
budget constraints, yields a typical country's demand function for a typical
variety of manufactured good. This is:

                      =   ( 9 )° E,      P   =                            ()
where E is the total expenditure of consumers on manufactured products.
Labourers and firm owners spend a fraction l-X and l-* on A, respectively,



                                      6
        so the demand for the   A" good is:

                              A [(1—A)Et + (1_)EFJ I PA                            (4)

        where PA 5 the price of A, and P and EF are the total expenditures of
        labourers and firm owners,
                 The labour input requirement for a typical manufactured variety is:

                                   11=cc+Iir aj3>O                                 (5)

        where x1 is the output of variety i. Alpha is a fixed cost. The cost of
        introducing a new variety is zero, so as usual, there will be only one firm
        producing each variety. Entry is ruled out, so the number of active firms is
        exogenous and equal to k per country. Each firm is owned entirely by the
        residents of the country in which it produces.
                 Two very strong assumptions on trade costs are made for tractability.
        Trade in the A good is costless while trade in manufactures is costly with the
        costs being of the "iceberg' type.6 That is, shipping of manufactured goods
        between any two countries melts a fraction of the shipment. These trade costs
        are lower for intra-EC trade than for all other international trade. An EC-
        based finn that wants to sell a unit of manufactured goods in another EC
        country must ship ji > I units. All other trade, that is all non-intra-EC trade,
        requires that r > 1 units be shipped for every unit sold, The essence of EC
        membership in this paper is that t C r. There are no trade costs for domestic
•
        sales.
                 The production function of good A is linear homogeneous. Units of


            6 As shall become clear below, these two assumptions facilitate
        calculation of the equilibrium since costless trade in the constant returns
        goods pins down the prices of labor in terms of A in all countries and
    •
        iceberg costs allow consideration of trade costs without altering the
        homogeneity of the manufactures' first order conditions.

                                               7
A are chosen such that A's unit labour input coefficient is unity. With perfect
competition and costless trade prevailing, this choice of units implies that the
price of A is equal to the wage rate. As long as all countries produce in both
sectors, competition in the A good equalizes the equilibrium wage in all
countries. We take labour to be the numeraire.
         Given the demand function, the typical manufacturer faces an iso-
elastic demand curve.7 For producers based in a non-EC country, the first
order conditions are:

                                 =   1, for home sales,
                             0
                                                                           (6)
                            1
                            a
                                     t, for export sales.
where the p's are consumer prices, that is, cif prices. For a firm based in the
EC, the first order conditions for sales to the home market and non-EC
markets are the same as those for a non-EC firm, however for sales to other
EC markets it is:


                    p(1 —2) = 3 p,     for EC export sale;                 (7)


         Manufactured goods are measured in units that are chosen so that the
unit input coefficient "beta" just equals (1-1/c). This implies that optimizing
firms charge the same fob price (namely unity) for all sales regardless of
destination. The cif prices for home sales are unity in all countries, for intra-
EC sales price equals jt, arid all other exports are priced at r.
         To simplify calculations of the general equilibrium demand patterns,




      Actually the elasticity is only approximately constant, with the
approximation improving as the number of varieties increases.

                                         8
we assume 0 to be unity and X to be strictly between unity and zero. By
carefully choosing the units with which to measure national workforces, we
can take EL to be unity. Given manufactured goods prices are determined by
profit maximization, it is easy to calculate sales in the various markets using
the demand curve. With a constant demand elasticity of sigma, operating
profits (i.e. profits gross of fixed costs) in manufacturing equal (1/a) times
sales.   In what follows, a crucial quantity will be the difference between
equilibrium operating profit earned by typical firm when it is based in a
member nation versus when it is not. This difference equals:


                Lnow = __________                + !(P°-P,Q)                (8)


where,


               ec    (k[   lFs10 h('-t') + st'1)°,                          9)

                           P4 =   (k(1 +


The first term in (8) is positive and represents the increase in profits the firm
would experience in all incumbents' markets. The second term, which shows
the change in profits earned on home market sales, is negative. The profit
earned on sales to third nations is unaltered by EC membership and therefore
cancels out.
II.B. I General Political Economy Modelline Considerations
Pressure Group Model vs Median Voter [ifode!          The median-voter model
(see Mayer [1984)) is a popular and elegant framework much used in the
political equilibrium literature. However, it does not seem to capture the
principal aspects of the policy formation process affecting EC membership.
Indeed, one of the most remarkable facts about the trend towards regionalism


                                        9
is the gap between the positions of governments and the positions of their
electorates (as portrayed by public opinion polls). Both in Europe and North
America, governments tend to espouse the views of pro-integrationist business
leaders (and labour leaders as well in most of Europe), while the populace
tends to be more wary. Thus it would appear unreasonable to adopt a model
of the political process in which the government was simply a mouthpiece for
the people. In fact direct democracy is not the usual way in which a country's
government decides whether it wants to join a regional trade bloc.8 Even if
a referendum is held on the final ne2otiated accession treaty, the decision to
engage in the negotiations is usually taken in the setting of representative
democracy. Thus, the decision is influenced by pressure groups.
          Both Hillman (1989) and Baldwin (1985) point out that under realistic
assumptions, elected officials may not be fully aware of the economic interests
of their constituents. And their constituents may not be familiar with all the
policies (and their economic consequences) championed by their elected
representatives. Consequently, Baldwin (1985) notes, groups of voters "may
have to engage in time-consuming and costly lobbying activities to bring its
viewpoint to the attention of legislators. Similarly office-seekers need funds
to inform the voters of how they have served them or will do so in the future."
The so-called pressure group model, or lobbying model, developed by Olson
(1965) and others, focus on the costs and benefits of lobbying and its impact
on policy. Grossman and Helpman (1992) provide a modern, rigorous
treatment of the lobbying model.
Grossman-Helpman Approach to the Pressure Group Model               The basic
political influence technology adopted in this paper is similar to the Grossman



           In the one country where direct democracy is the political norm,
viz Switzerland, the governments demand for membership was effectively
overturned by a referendum on the European Economic Area agreement.

                                      10
and Heipman (1992) approach to the pressure group model. Two assumptions
in the Grossman-Helpman approach are crucial to tractability; the policy
maker's objective function is linear in campaign donations and social welfare,
and interest groups can make donations contingent on (he actions of the policy
maker. Grossman and Helpman (1992) provide several justifications of the
fixed-weight-linear objective function. First, it can be taken as a reduced form
for a political process where politicians' true objective is reelection and the
odds of survival increase linearly in aggregate campaign donations and utilities
of individual voters. Alternatively, they conjecture that it can be interpreted
as a reduced form of a broad class of political process models in Which;
Hpoliticians may value donations not only for the marginal effect that
advertising and other campaign expenditures have on voter behaviour, but also
because the funds can be used to retire campaign debts from previous elections
(which many times are owed to the politician's personal estate), to deter
competition from quality challengers, and to show the candidate's abilities as
a fund raiser and thereby establish his or her credibility as a potential
candidate for higher political or party office. Regardless of the justification,
this fixed-weight linear objective function allows us to think of campaign
donations as direct payments to risk neutral policy makers.
         Grossman and i-Telpman (1992) also assume that organized special
interest groups can specify donation cdntracts, or "contribution schedules' that
stipulate how large a donation will be made for each possible policy stance
chosen. In the first of the two stages - in the Grossman-Helpman model,
contracts are announced by private groups and in the second, the government
sets policy and collects donations. It is useful to think of these schedules as
enforceable employment contracts where special interest groups "employ"
policy makers to do their bidding in exchange for performance-related
compensation. Note that the donations are "cx post" in the sense that they are



                                       11
paid after the policy has been chosen by officials that have already been
elected. Each group chooses the donation contract that maximizes its own
welfare, taking the contracts of other special interest groups as given.
         Plainly one does not observe formal, enforceable contracts between
policy makers and special interest groups (except when they are entered as
evidence by the prosecution). It is, therefore, worthjustifying the assumption
in more depth. Even if not all real-world donations are made on this
'contractual" basis, one can think the donation contracts as a simple way of
capturing the potentially very complicated real-world compacts struck between
special interest donors and policy makers. After all, regardless of the actual
details of the informal agreements between policy makers and interest groups,
the practical intent of these agreements is to reward the policy makers if and
only if they choose policies that benefit the donating special interest group.
         It would seem that the enforceability assumption could be dropped in
a more complex model. For instance, using a repeated game setup and the
Folk theorem, I conjecture that ex ante donations would have the same effect
as enforceable donation contracts. The equilibrium would involve politicians
faithfully sticking to the bargain in order to avoid an off-equilibrium
punishment consisting of the donators backing the politicians' opponents. It
would be very interesting to model such a situation explicitly.
Principle-Agent Interpretation    The fixed-weight linear objective function
together with performance-contingent donation contracts, makes it easy to
frame the political process as a principle-agent problem where the government
is the "agent" and competing interest groups are the principles." This, in
turn, allows direct access to the well-developed literature on principle-agent
problems. Grossman and Helpman (1992) draw on the very general analysis
of Bernheim and Whinston (1986a,b), which enables them to consider an
extremely broad class of "contracts" between special interest groups and policy



                                      12
    makers. This high level of generality makes it difficult to say very much
    about the nature ot' the resulting political equilibrium apart from the fact that
•   it exists. To characterize further the political equilibrium, Grossman and
    Helprnan (1992) impose more structure on the problem in two steps. First
    they consider all donation contracts that are differentiable around the
    equilibrium. Second they focus on the Bemheim-Whinston notion of a
    "truthful Nash Equilibria," which restricts the contracts to a very specific
    form. Namely, the donation of any special interest group equals the group's
    gross welfare minus a fixed amount that is chosen optimally. Bernheim and
    Whinston defend this concept by showing that such contracts would never be
    sub-optimal and that equilibria supported by truthful contracts and only these
    equilibria are stable to non-binding communications among the players.
    lI.B.2 Specific Political Influence Technojpg
             The government of the typical country chooses whether to join the EC
    or not. We capture this choice with the variable "u," which equals unity if
    they decide to join and zero otherwise. The choice is taken to maximize
    political support, which in turn depends positively upon the level of donations
    by industry, the level of social welfare net of donations, and on a third term.
    "R" which reflects the support of groups that oppose EC membership on non-
    economic grounds. Thus, the government's problem is to choose u in order
    to maximize:

               u[(i_a)DM + aWl + (1—u)((1-a)D°" + aW°" + R]

    where 'a" is a parameter that lies between zero and one, the D's and W's are



           The adjective "truthfuY comes from the fact that in the principle-
    agent set up, these contracts imply that the principles pay the agent her full
    marginal product minus some fixed amount. This, of course, means that
    the incentives of the agent to change her behavior on the margin truthfully
    reflects the worth of such changes to the principles.

                                           13
the le'els of donations and social welfare when the country is "in'4 or "out' of
the EC respectively, and R is the support from anti-BC groups that the
government receives if it decides not to join the EC. R, which measures the
country's general resistance to membership, varies across countries. The
parameter "a" measures the extent of the political distortion. If "a" equals
unity, the government acts as a social-welfare maximiser. The further "a"
from unity, the greater is the political distortion. In this model, greater
political distortion leads to the interests of exporters receiving greater weight
in the policy making process. We take social welfare to be the sum of
utilities, that is W = U'+U, so:

                              =   (1A) (X)AP0) + kI1''
                                                                                 (11)
                              =
                                  (1A) (A)AP,(U0)       +   kll'4t


         Following Grossman and l-Ielpman (1992), the donation contracts in
this paper are restricted to be "truthful" in the Bernheim-Whinston jargon and
actual donations to be nonnegative. All manufacturing firms in a country are
organized into a lobbying group. The group's truthful donation contract is:

                          =   kll   +   B,     DOW = kIJou*   + B                (12)

where B is a scalar and k is the number of manufacturing firms per country.
         Given the donation contract, a typical government decides to join the
EC if and only if:

                     I?       (1—a)kfIL"—ll° + a[W—W°"]                          (13)

Which can be rewritten as:

         R       kflJY!_flbn] +
                                                                —
                                                                     pXQ/(Q1)j   (14)




                                             14
Membership: The Supply Side The model so far only describes the demand
for membership. We now turn to the "supply' of memberships. As was
mentioned in the introduction, the truly remarkable fact is that the demand for
membership in regional trading blocs has spread rapidly.            The actual
enlargement of the blocs has proved much slower. In fact as of the middle of
1993, neither the North American Free Trade Area nor the EC enlargement
has yet been completed.
         To focus on why so many countries wish to join trading blocs, as
opposed to focusing on how many actually get in, we assume that the supply
of membership is perfectly elastic. That is to say, that the EC is an open club;
any one who requests membership is admitted. Of course this assumption
does quite a bit of violence to the reality of EC politics. In future research,
it would be quite interesting to specify a more realistic supply of membership
schedule,
Political Choices of Industry Having restricted special interests to "truthful"
donation contracts, the political choice of manufacturers is limited to the size
of the constant term in the donation contract. Since there is only one
organized donator, the level of B has no influence on the shape of policy, as
long as the government is willing to accept the donation contracts, The way
to tie down B in this simple principle-agent problem is to use the voluntary
participation constraint.'0 That is if the agent (in this case the government) is
to accept the contract offered, the level of its equilibrium "utility" must be at
least as great as its reservation level. In our case, the government could
refuse all contingent donation contracts. Thus if the lobbying groups are to
have any influence over the government, they must choose a B such that the
government is at least indifferent to refusing their donation contract.


    LO
      Grossman and Helpman (1992) show how to find the equilibrium B's
when the problem is too complicated to use the participation constraint.

                                       15
Political Heterogeneity Among Nations                 Although all countries are
symmetric economically, we assume that they differ in terms of the degree of
non—economic resistance to EC membership. Arranging the countries in order
of increasing resistance, we can plot the degree of resistance against the
number of EC members. In figure 1, this is shown as the RR. Clearly, we
can think of there being a continuum of countries, so h is a continuous
variable, or we can view RR as the line that connects the points representing
individual countries. In the figure, we have assumed that there is negative
resistance to membership in some countries. That is to say, the government
    loses political support for non-economic reasons, if it does not choose
    membership.


                      IlL 1992 and the Domino Effect
•           The political equilibrium, for a given tau and mu, can be found with
    the help of Figure 1. The locus HE plots the right-hand side of equation (14).
    Since P is decreasing in h, and llnHb              is   increasing in h, it is
    straightforward to show that right-hand side of (12) is upward sloping as
    shown in the figure. The equilibrium number of members will be below the
    maximum of g, if there are countries in which there is sufficient resistance to
    EC membership to ensure that the locus P.R will eventually rise above the HE
    schedule. The equilibrium number of members, h0 in the figure, is given by
    the intersection of the EE and P.R schedules. For all countries to the right of
    h, the non-economic resistance to membership exceeds the net economic
    benefit from switching from nonmember to member status. For all those to
    the left, the political support gained from being I      versus "out" outweighs
    the political resistance to membership. More precisely, respecting the integer
    constraint, we can say that equilibrium h is the highest integer that is less than

    h0.



                                           16
         Given the economic and political economic components of the model,
it is quite simple to see how a domino effect could occur. Consider the impact
of a policy change, such as the Single European Act, that makes intra-EC
trade cheaper. In our model this is reflected by a lowering of t. The impact
of a reduction in mu shows up in figure 1 as a rise in the EE schedule at all
points except h=O. To show this, note that the derivative of the right-hand
side of (14) with respect to mu is:

                                 -Au

         a(A)A(1   A)(*9i)Pe (dP /d1s) +               d(ll -   fl°"1')/dp.



Since the EC price index falls with mu and the operating profit difference
increases with mu, the derivative is clearly positive. Of course at h=O, the
price and operating profit differences are zero. The new equilibrium number
of members is h,. The difference between h1 and h is caused by the
"domino" effect. Namely, falling trade barriers in one set of countries
triggers a fall in the barriers of other countries. Although there are no formal
dynamics in this model (see the discussion by Clylfason for a consideration of
dynamics), it is useful to illustrate the domino effect by telling the story of the
increase from h0 to h. as if the increase in EC applications took place over
time.
         The initial shock ofcloser EC integration (lower t) raises the political
economic gains from membership enough to overcome the intrinsic resistance
to membership in some countries. In particular in the first round of effects,
the political economy support for membership rises from A to B in figure 1.
Thus, in the first round, all countries whose resistance is between A and B
would join, thus boosting membership from h0 to h1. The rise in h, however,
affects the choices of the remaining non-members. In particular, governments
would judge that the political economy support for membership was equal to


                                       17
C in the figure. This would prompt applications from all nonmembers whose
resistance was between B and C. Of course this further rise in membership
would provoke a fresh batch of membership applications and the process
would continue until the new equilibrium was reached. Thus although the
fundamental cause of enlargement is the exogenous deepening of EC
integration, this initial shock is amplified by the way in which enlargement
makes norimembership even more costly.


                       IV. Concluding Remarks
         This paper presents a simple model of how an idiosyncratic shock,
such as deeper integration of an existing regional bloc, can trigger membership
requests from countries that were previously happy to be nonmembers. The
basic logic is simple. The stance of a country's government concerning
membership is the result of a political equilibrium that balances anti-
membership and pro-membership forces. Among the pro-EC forces are firms
that export to the regional bloc. Since closer integration within a bloc is
detrimental to the profits of nonmember firms, closer integration will stimulate
the exporters to engage in greater pro-EC political activity. If the government
was previously close to indifferent (politically) to membership, the extra
activity may tilt the balance and cause the country to join the bloc. If the bloc
enlarges, the cost to the nonmembers increases since they now face a cost
disadvantage in an even greater number of markets. This second round effect
will bring forth more pro-EC political activity in nonmembers and thus may
lead to further enlargement of the bloc. The new political equilibrium will
involve an enlarged regional trading bloc. In the meantime it would appear
that regionalism was spreading like wildfire.
         The actual model presented in this paper is highly stylized. In
particular we ignore the organized opposition to membership based on


                                       18
economic grounds. In both the New and the Old Worlds, this ignores the
potentially important opposition of labour-intensive industries and agriculture
(in some countries). More importantly, we did not model the supply side of
meiithership. That 151 we did not consider whether the incumbents would
welcome the new entrants.
        In future research it should be possible to develop a set of hypotheses
based on this simple model that could he tested against the experience of the
EC. Stepping away from the strong symmetry in the model, it should be
possible to show that those countries that partake in the enlargement should
depend rather heavily on exports to the EC (since their export profits would
be greatly affected) and have a rather small home market (since the loss of
profits on home sales due to the market opening would he small).




                                     19
REFERENCES

Baldwin, Richard (1992) 'The Economic Logic of EFTA Membership in the
EEA and the EC, EFTA Occasional Paper 41.

Baldwin, Robert (1985) The Political Economy of US Import Policy, MIT
Press, Cambridge MA.

Bernheim, B. and Mike Whinston (19 86a) 'Common Agency,' Econometrica,
54, 923-942.

Beruheim, B. and Mike Whinston (1986b) 'Menu Auctions, Resource
Allocation and Economic Influence," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101, 1-
31.

CEPR (1992) Is Bicger Better? The Economics of EC Enlaruement, CEPR,
London.

Dixit, Avinash and Joe Stiglitz(1977) "Monopolistic Competition and Optimal
Product Diversity," American Economic Review.

Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman (1992) "Protection for Sale," NBER
Working Paper.

Hillrnan, Ariel (1989) The Political Economy of Protection, Harwood
Academic Publishers, New York.

Krugman, Paul (1979) 'Increasing Returns, Monopolistic Competition and
International Trade," Journal of International Economics,9,4,469-479.

Krugman, Paul (1991) 'Increasing Returns and Economic Geography," Journal
of Political Economy.

Mayer, Wolfgang (1984) "Endogenous Tariff Formation," American Economic
Review, 74,970-985.

Olson, Mancur (1965) The Logic of Collective Action, Harvard University
Press, Cambridge MA.

filename= C:\wpfiles\helski\nber-ver.dom 5300 words




                                    20
        b:ure I

                      A




                      //
C

c
B


A




         h       rp
                           n
             B




    R
