NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SAVING AND GROWTH:
A REINTERPRETATION

Christopher D. Carroll
David N. Well

Working Paper No. 4470

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1993

Prepared for the Carnegie-Rochester Confeience on Public Policy. We are very grateful to Larry

Summers, who originally suggested reexamining the relationship between saving and growth, and

provided many valuable insights along the way. We are also grateful to Karen Dynan, Greg
Mankiw, Dan Nuxoll, Stephen Oliner, Sergio Rebelo, David Romer, and Jonathan Skinner for
helpful comments and advice. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and notthose of
the Federal Reserve Board or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4470
September 1993
SAVING AND GROWI'H:
A REINTERPRETATION

ABSTRACT
We examine the relationship between income growth and saving using both cross-country

and household data. At the aggregate level, we find that growth Granger causes saving, but that

saving does not Granger cause growth. Using household data, we find that households with
predictably higher income growth save more than households with predictably low growth. We
argue that standard Permanent Income models of consumption cannot explain these findings, but

that a model of consumption with habit formation may. The positive effect of growth on saving
implies that previous estimates of the effect of saving on growth may be overstated.

Christopher D. Carroll
Mail Stop 80
Federal Reserve Board
Washington, DC 20551

David N. Well
Department of Economics
Box B
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER

1.

Introduction
In this paper we re-examine the relationship between the

rate of income growth and the saving rate. The recent literature
on economic growth has found that countries with higher saving

or investment rates have tended to have higher growth rates (see

Levine and Renelt, 1992, for a review). This finding has been
interpreted as being consistent with either the traditional Solow

(1956) growth model, in which higher saving leads to higher
level of income per capita in steady state (and thus to higher
growth rates on the transition path), or with the TMnew growth
models" of Romer and others in which higher saving leads to a

permanently higher rate of growth.

An obvious problem in interpreting the results of a
regression of growth on saving is that the level of growth may

itself affect the saving rate. Modigliani (1970) showed many
years ago that a very simple version of the Life Cycle model can

predict that high growth causes high saving, and he found
empirical support for the theoretical prediction using crosscountry data. More recently, Baumol, Blackman, and Wolfe
(1991), Deaton and Paxson (1992), and Bosworth (1993) have
also provided evidence that growth may produce saving. This
paper explores the empirical relationship between saving and

growth using both aggregate and household data, and from a
variety of different perspectives. We consistently find evidence

1

that higher income growth produces greater saving. We then

argue that our results are not consistent with a strict
interpretation of the usual models of consumption and growth,
and we consider several alternatives.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section

2, we begin by confirming Modigliani's empirical finding that

countries which have high growth also have high saving. We
then examine the predictions of the neoclassical model for the

relation between saving and growth. We show that in that
model, exogenous increases in growth make subsequent saving

fall, while exogenous increases in saving make subsequent

growth rise. We then examine the empirical links between
saving and growth within individual countries over time. We
fmd that increases in growth are followed by increases in saving -

- a result that is not consistent with either of the theoretical
predictions from the neoclassical model.

In Section 3, we turn to household-level data which are

not bedeviled by the general equilibrium effects that cloud
aggregate tests. We use three different data sets, and use both

the saving rate and the wealthlincome ratio as our dependent
variables. Using this data we also fmd that saving is positively
correlated with income growth.

In section 4 we discuss the implications of these results
for the theory of consumption. In looking for explanations of the

2

positive effect of growth on saving in both household and
aggregate data, we are guided by Occam's Razor: a single
explanation that encompasses both phenomena is preferable to
.separate explanations for each of the two. We discuss the ability
of consumption models incorporating uncertainty and liquidity
constraints to explain our findings, and conclude that they axe not

sufficient to do the job. We then argue that our results might
stem from habit formation behavior in consumption, although it

appears that the degree of habit persistence required to explain
our results is rather high. Section Five concludes.

2. Growth and saving at the aggregate level

2.1 Facts on the long term relationship between saving and
growth
We begin by examining the empirical relationship between

growth rates and saving rates in cross-country data. We use two

samples of countries in our work. We started with the Summers

and Heston (1991) Mark 5

data

set, and then excluded all

countries whose data received a grade of lower than "C-." We

further excluded communist countries, countries whose
economies were dominated by oil production, and countries with
1985 populations of less than one million. The remaining sample

consisted of 64 countries; we call this our "full" sample. Our

3

second sample is the 22 members of the OECD with. 1985
populations greater than one million.

Table 1 presents simple cross sectional regressions of
national saving rates' on growth, both including and excluding

the initial log of output per capita from the right hand side.
These regressions resemble the "growth regressions" presented
by Barro (1991), among many others, except that we have made
saving the dependent variable and growth an independent variable

rather than the reverse. Of course, putting saving on the left
hand side does not prove that causation runs from. growth to
saving any more than putting growth on the left hand side proves

that causation runs from saving to growth.2

When growth alone is the right hand side variable, it

'The measure we examine is nominal national saving as a
fraction of nominal national income. Unlike measures of
investment, our measure is not affected by differences in the
relative price of investment goods examined by DeLong and
Summers (1991). An exact description of our measure of saving
can be found in the data appendix.
2King and Levine (1993) run regressions similar to ours, with

growth rates on the right hand side and investment as the
dependent variable. Their results are consistent with a model in
which growth rates differ exogenously across countries and in
which investment acts to keep the capitalloutput ratio constant.
They argue that this model, rather than causation running from
investment to growth, may be the explanation for the observed
correlation between investment and growth.
4

enters significantly in the full sample and with a t-statistic of 1.65

in the OECD sample. The correlations between average growth

and average saving are .35 for the OECD and .26 for the full
sample. When the log of income per capita in 1960 is partialled

out, there is a very significant relation between growth and
saving in the OECD sample, and a borderline significant relation

in the full sample.

In Table 2, we look at the relation between growth and
saving within countries over time by running panel regressions

using the Summers and Heston data. For each country we look

at non-overlapping five-year avenges of growth and savings
rates. We use data from 1958-1987, giving a maximum (if there

are not missing years) of six observations for each country. By
taking five year averages we hope to avoid picking up business-

cycle frequency relations between growth and saving. In all
regressions we include a full set of country dummies on the right
hand side, and in addition we experiment with controlling for the
log of initial income per capita during the period and allowing for

a full set of time period effects. In the full sample, the growth
rate is always significant, while in the OECD sample the growth

rate is significant so long as either year effects or the log of
output is included.

Ours is by no• means the first evidence suggesting a
powerful link from income growth to saving. Modigliani (1970)

5

found results similar to those in our Table 1 long ago. More
recently, in a comprehensive study of the determinants of saving

rates in the OECD countries in the period from the 1960s to the

1980s, Bosworth (1993) found that the growth rate of income

was the most important determinant of saving. Looking over

longer spans of time, Maddison (1992) also finds a positive
relation between saving and growth. For the seven countries for
which data are available for the period 1870-1913, the correlation

between saving and growth rates is .58. For the six countries

for which data is available for the period 19 14-1950, the
correlation is .67. Another important result that comes from
Maddison's work is that Kuznets' (1946) finding that the saving
rate in the United States had been relatively constant for the last

century represents something of an outlier. Of the eleven
countries for which Maddison presents long time series on
saving, the U.S. is the only one in which the saving rate does not

show a significant increase over time. The U.S. is also the only
country which experienced almost no increase in the growth rate

of output over the 120 year period which Maddison examines.

2.2 What does theory predict?
As we remarked earlier, Modigliani (1970, and many

other places) has argued that the positive cross-sectional
Saving data for India are for the period 1890-1913.
6

association of saving and income growth is evidence in favor of

the Life Cycle model of saving. Modigliani notes that if there

were no productivity growth across generations, and no
population growth, the saving of the young would exactly balance

the dissaving of the old, and the net national saving rate would

be zero. Because productivity growth makes the young richer

than the old, the young will be saving more than the old are
dissaving (assuming the saving rate of the young is the same as
the rate at which the current old saved at when they were young).

A peculiar feature Modigliani's model, however, is that
he assumes that the income growth rate for individual consumers

is no higher in a high-growth economy than in a low-growth
economy. Aggregate income growth is the result of increasing

the level of the lifetime income profile for

succeeding

generations. In other words, in Modigliani's framework there
would be no reason to expect that the growth rate of income for

an individual Japanese worker over the last 40 years was any
greater than the growth rate of income for a British worker of the
same age.

Carroll and Summers (1991) muster a range of evidence
against this description of the relationship between aggregate and

individual income growth. They argue that a better description
is that household income growth g is equal to aggregate income

growth g plus adjustments for seniority, occupation, and other

7

individual-specific factors,;.
If household income growth is given by g

g + e1, an

exogenous increase in aggregate growth g will make every
household want to consume more and save less. As noted by
Tobin (1967), under reasonable parameter values this effect
typically outweighs Modigliani's aggregation effect so that the

predicted correlation between aggregate income growth and
saving becomes negative. Thus, even without augmenting the
model with general equilibrium effects, the model's prediction
about the correlation between aggregate saving and growth is
ambiguous.

The Life Cycle model produces much cleaner implications

for the relation between growth and saving at the household level

than at the aggregate level, so we will postpone further
discussion of that model until we have presented the household

level evidence. In the remainder of this section of the paper we
will examine the standard neoclassical model of optimal growth,

in which analysis of general equilibrium effects is at least
somewhat manageable.

2.2.1 The relation between saving and growth in the
neoclassical model

We consider a standard, closed-economy neoclassical
model of optimal growth. Utility in each period is given by a

8

constant relative risk aversion utility function, and consumption

is equal to the level that would be chosen by a social planner
maximizing the discounted sum of future utility:
(1)

where p is the coefficient of relative risk aversion, and fi is the

discount factor equal to 11(1+0), where 0 is the discount rate.
We assume that production is Cobb-Douglas with constant returns

to scale, that labor is supplied inelastically, and that there is no

population growth. We also assume exogenous technological
growth at rate X. Output is thus

Y=AextKtLtlm

(2)

Capital accumulation is given by

(3)

where d is the rate of depreciation.

In the steady state, the growth rate of income in this
model is determined by the technological growth parameter X and

9

does not depend on the saving rate. In the short- and mediumrun, however, there are several different channels through which

saving and growth are related, and the sign and magnitude of the

correlation between the two are theoretically ambiguous.

The most intuitive channel is the direct relation between
saving, capital accumulation, and the level of income, embodied

in equations (2) and (3). Given an initial level of capital and
output, exogenously higher saving will lead to higher capital
accumulation and so higher output growth in the short- to
medium-run.

This is the linkage from saving to growth

examined in Mankiw, Romer, and Weil (1992) among many
other papers in which the long-term saving rate is treated as an
independent variable. We will refer to this as the "mechanical
link" from saving to growth. The length of time over which this

link is important depends on the weight of capital in the
production function. If there are constant returns to capital, as
suggested by Romer (1987), then the effect of saving on growth

lasts indefinitely. If capital is less important, the effect can be
short lived. Mankiw, Romer, arid Well show that, taking the

saving rate as exogenous, the half-life of deviations of output
from the steady state level is inversely proportional to. (1-a).

In a model in which consumption is determined by
forward-looking consumers, however, a powerful link between

growth and consumption runs in the opposite direction.

10

If

growth is exogenously higher, then, ceteris paribus, forwardlooking consumers will feel wealthier and will spend more and

save less. We will call this the "human wealth link" from
expected growth to saving.

A third set of links arises indirectly as a result of the
relationship between interest rates and consumption. If countries

have identical preferences and technologies but differ in their
initial capital endowments, then poor countries should have both

high growth rates and high interest rates.

Traditional

consumption analysis fmds that higher interest rates affect
consumption through the substitution effect (which raises saving),

the income effect (which lowers saving), and the human wealth

effect (which raises saving). The net sign of these effects
depends on parameter values, but Summers (1981) has argued

that for plausible parameter values the model implies that the

interest elasticity of saving should be strongly positive. This

should be particularly true for the effect of temporarily high
interest rates as would be found in a country that was growing

rapidly following a shock. We will refer to the net effect of
higher interest rates on consumption as the "interest rate effect"
on saving.4

4The analysis of the model presented here is for a closed
economy. In the case of an economy open to a world capital
market, the influences leading to a negative relation between
income and saving would be stronger. In particular, while the
11

The parameters of the model determine the strength of the

various linkages.

In particular, p,

the

inverse of the

intertemporal elasticity of substitution, governs the strength of the

interest rate effect. If p is low (the intertemporal elasticity is

high), then consumers will be more willing to postpone
consumption today in order to enjoy more consumption
tomorrow, so the interest rate effect on consumption will be
large. In the experiments below, we consider values of p of one

(log utility) and four. Log utility is often used in analyzing

consumption models because it has convenient analytical
properties. However, empirical evidence appears to indicate
higher values of p, and our second choice of four lies at the low
end of many empirical estimates.5

Another important parameter is a, the exponent on capital
in the production function, which determines the extent to which

a lower capital stock will raise of the rate of return on capital,

which in turn raises the rates of saving and growth. King and
Rebelo (1993) show that for low values of a, the implied interest

rates when output is well below its steady state level are quite
human wealth effect of future wages on consumption would still
be present, neither the mechanical link from saving to growth nor
the interest rate effect would be operative in such an economy.

Hall (1988) found a minimum estimated value of 5 for p
using U.S. aggregate data; Mankiw and Zeldes (1991) found a
minimum value of 6 using household data.
12

high. Mankiw, Romer, and Weil (1992) argue that for an
extended definition of capital that includes human capital, a value

of a of two-thirds is appropriate. This is the value that we use
in our simulations.

Because of the multiple and countervailing influences
linking growth and saving, the relationship between the two that

one should expect to observe in aggregate data is crucially
dependent on the sources of variation across countries. We
consider two experiments which demonstrate this point. The first

is a shock to the discount rate, e. We assume that a country is

in steady state with discount rate of 4%. In year zero, the
discount rate is lowered to 3%. Although we do not think that
people's discounting of future utility is really subject to abrupt
exogenous changes, changing the discount rate can proxy for

other changes that might affect countries. A plausible story
about economic development, for instance, might hold that
development can begin when a country's government realizes the
long-term benefits of increased saving and embarks on a national

program of saving and investment explicitly designed to achieve

growth by exploiting the mechanical link between saving and
growth. The simplest way to model such a shift might be as a
change in the country's discount rate.6

6

In practice this experiment is identical to those considered
by King and Rebelo (1993), in which countries start off with
13

Figure 1 shows the results of this experiment graphically.

When p =

1,

the saving rate increases by 7 percentage points

immediately, and gradually declines toward a new permanent

level that is approximately 5 points higher than before. The

annual growth rate leaps up to about 2.8 percent and then
declines relatively rapidly back toward its 2 percent equilibrium.

When p = 4 (the bottom two panels) the saving rate increases by

little more than 1 percentage point, but does not change
significantly thereafter, while the growth rate of income jumps to

2 1/4 percent and then gradually declines back toward 2 percent.

In both cases, then, the increase in saving is associated with a
substantial and long-lasting subsequent increase in growth.

The second experiment we consider is further outside the

traditional growth literature: a change in the exogenous rate of
technological progress, X. Although we doubt that countries can
be viewed as having permanent differences in their growth rates

of technology, the growth experiences of a number of countries

seem to be characterized by changes in broadly defined
technology (including property rights, the degree and nature of
government interference in markets, and restrictions on trade).

A salient example is the current period of rapid growth in
mainland China, which has been spurred by continuing movement

toward a market economy.
capital below their steady state levels.
14

The experiment we consider is a change in X for a country

that is initially in steady state. We consider a country with an
initial technology growth rate of .02, in which the growth rate is

raised to .03. The results are presented in Figure 2. The
change in the growth rate of technology produces a rising path in

the growth rate of output. Output does not initially grow at the
new rate of technology growth because the stock of capital per
efficiency unit is initially higher than in the steady state. In the

case where p =1, the transition to the new growth rate is fairly

rapid: the growth rate has risen to 2.5% within 11 years of the

shock, and to 2.75% within 26 years. In the case where p =4,
the transition is slower: growth rises to 2.5% after only 31 years,

and to 2.75% after 60 years.

The behavior of the saving rate here is qualitatively
different from that in the previous experiment. In the case where

p =1, saving drops immediately, then begins rising, but remains

lower than its initial level for eight years. Thus, at least in the

medium run, the relationship between saving and growth is
negative. Also, the movement of the saving rate is fairly small

in comparison to the movement of the growth rate: moving
"

Although

the experiment that we consider here is a

permanent change in the growth rate of technology, we also
could have considered a temporary change in X. For changes in

X lasting for a sufficiently long time, the results would be
similar.
15

between the steady state where growth is 2 percent and the steady

state where growth is 3 percent, the saving rate only rises from

42.0% to 44.0%. In the case where p=4,

the saving rate falls

in response to an increase in the growth rate and remains roughly

constant below its initial level. In this case the consumption
smoothing effect dominates the substitution effect of higher
interest rates.

Thus, for both values of p the medium-mn

relationship between growth and saving is negative, and if p =4
the long-run relationship is negative as well.8

The simulations presented above are similar to King and

Rebelo's (1993) analysis of the neoclassical model. In their
model, as well as in Christiano (1989), countries which start out
with capital stocks well below their steady state levels experience

both rapid growth and high saving. This high saving is in turn

a product of high interest rates, which compensate for the
depressing influence on saving of the human wealth effect in the

presence of rapidly growing income. For example, in King and
Rebelo's simulations, annual real interest rates can be higher than
50%.

But

in fact, interest rates to savers in many rapidly

Viard (1993), working analytically with a linearized version

of the neoclassical growth model, reaches a similar conclusion

about the effects of changes in growth rates on saving. He
argues that the failure of saving rates to rise in response to the
post-1973 productivity slowdown, despite the fact that published
forecasts of future long-term growth declined dramatically, is
strong evidence against the Permanent Income Hypothesis.
16

growing countries have been surprisingly thw.9

Thus, we

believe that the high saving rates of rapidly growing countries
such as Japan remain unexplained by the neoclassical model.
We tsike this exploration of the neoclassical model to have

shown that, although the "mechanical link" from saving to

growth is capable of generating a medium-run positive
relationship between saving and growth, the "human wealth" link
from growth to saving means that exogenous increases in growth

can be associated with declines in saving, at least over the
medium run. Our next task is to test whether either of these
theoretical links between saving and growth can be found in the
data.

2.3

Granger Causality results
In the theoretical model presented above, when there is a

change in one of the parameters, both growth and saving change

immediately. In applying the model to the data we might expect

to see a less simultaneous movement. If, for example, it takes

some time to adjust consumption to its new optimal level
following a shock to growth, or if it takes time for consumers to

Christiano reports that the return to the Japanese stock
market in the 1960's and 70's was roughly as high as the return
to capital in his calibrated growth model, but given that most
Japanese household saving is not in the stock market, it is not
clear why this return is the right measure on which to focus.
17

understand that a shock has occurred, then when X changed, we

might expect to see the growth rate of output change first,
followed by a change in the saving rate. Similarly, given that
investment takes time to become productive, we might expect to

see a change in the discount rate reflected first in a change in
saving, and only later in a change in growth.
It is in this spirit that we look more closely at the timing

of movements of saving and growth within countries. The first

experiment above suggested that if there are shocks to the
discount rate, then we would expect saving to Granger cause
growth, with a positive sign. If there are shocks to X, the growth

rate of technology, then at least in the medium run we would
expect growth to Granger cause saving, with a negative sign -the second experiment.

The data that we examine are the panel of nonoverlapping five-year avenges of saving and growth examined in

Table 2.

Table 3 reports the results of our basic Granger

causality tests. All regressions include a fUll set of country
dummies -- thus we are taking out the effect of cross-country

differences in avenge rates of growth and saving. In addition,
in some regressions we included a set of time period dummies,

and report the p-value for the test that the set of dummies is
equal to zero.

In the top panel of the table, we present regressions of

18

saving on lagged saving and lagged growth. In the OECD
sample, lagged growth enters positively and significantly when
year effects are excluded from the regression. When year effects

are included, the coefficient on lagged growth falls only slightly

but becomes insignificant, while the year effects are jointly
insignificant. In the broad sample of countries, lagged growth is
always positive and significant.'°
The bottom panel of Table 3 tests whether saving Granger

causes growth. When year effects are excluded, saving enters
negatively and significantly in both samples. When year effects

are included, however, the coefficient on saving is reduced and

becomes insignificant. Table 4 repeats our basic regressions
using differenced data. That is, the change in saving between
periods t- 1 and t is regressed on the changes in saving and in

growth between t-2 and t-1. In this table, the only significant

result is that in the Full sample of countries, changes in the
growth rate Granger cause changes in the saving rate with a
positive sign.

The most surprising result of these exercises is that
growth Granger causes saving with a positive sign. This finding

is consistent with our cross country findings in Tables 1 and 2,
but not with the consumption model underlying the neoclassical

'° Deaton and Paxson (1992) fmd similar results examining
time series data from Taiwan.
19

growth model. The second experiment above showed that, if

changes in growth rates are expected to persist, changes in
growth. should have a negative effect on saving, at leastover the
medium-run time frame considered here.

The second empirical result, that to the extent that there

is any causality running from saving to growth, it is with a
negative sign, is also interesting. This result is inconsistent with
the common view that the reason cross—country regressions show

a positive association between saving and growth is that high
saving produces high growth via the mechanical link from saving

to capital and capital to output. On the other hand, this result

may not be inconsistent with the optimal growth model if
consumers have advance knowledge about income growth rates.

The logic is that of Campbell (1987), who argues that
consumption should go down in advance of a decline in income
if the income drop was anticipated (this is just the human wealth

effect on consumption).

Examining quarterly U.S. data,

Campbell confirms the prediction that saving Granger causes
income growth with a negative sign. A problem with Campbell's

results, however, was that they could have been produced by a

Keynesian model with completely myopic consumers whose

consumption function was subject to stochastic shocks. A
positive shock to saving would reduce aggregate demand and

therefore cut income in subsequent quarters.

20

Over longer

horizons such as our five year periods the aggregate demand

effect of increased saving should be attenuated, but the
mechanical link between saving and growth should begin to bite,

leaving the net prediction of the model ambiguous.

Our conclusion is that neither of the simple causal
linkages between growth and saving explored in our theoretical

experiments explains our data,1' but there is nevertheless an

important empirical linkage: higher growth leads to higher
saving.

2.4

Single Country Case Studies
As another way of looking at the relationship between

saving and growth in aggregate data, we examine data from
individual countries. We focus on a set of high-saving, highgrowth East Asian countries whose experiences have been crucial

in shaping the growth literature. For example, excluding Japan
from the saving regression for the OECD sample in the second
column of Table 1 reduces the coefficient on growth from 4.73

(standard error of 1.23) to 3.34 (1.55). Similarly, excluding
"To avoid misinterpretation, we should emphasize that,
despite the results of Tables 3 and 4, we both still believe that an
exogenous increase in the saving rate would lead to an increase

in economic growth. The argument here is only that the
observed pattern of data could not have been generated by a
neoclassical model in which the primary shocks were exogenous
changes in the saving rate.
21

Japan, Hong Kong, and South Korea from the regression for the

full sample in the fourth column reduces the coefficient on
growth from 1.06 (.54) to .62 (.69).

In Figures Three through Six we look directly at data
from Japan, South Korea, Singapore, and Hong Kong, to see

what can be learned about the relation between saving and
growth.'2 For each country we plot time series of centered
three-year averages of the growth rate and the saving rate. The
message of these four figures is, to us, fairly unambiguous: in all

four cases, growth was high early, and saving was high later. In

South Korea, for example, over the period 1960-74, growth
averaged 6.1 % while avenge saving was only 10.4%. Over the

period 1975-87, growth avenged 5.3%, while saving averaged
27.8%. In none of the countries does it appear to be the case

that large increases in the saving rate were reflected in
subsequent high growth.

The data from these countries are consistent with our
Granger causality results that high growth is followed by, rather

than preceded by, high saving. Since these countries are to such

a large extent the determinants of the cross-country result that

growth and saving are highly correlated, this examination of
12 Data is from Summers and Heston (1991). See the Data
Appendix for the definition of saving. Singapore is not included
in the regressions in Table 1 because it does not have data for all
of the years 1960-87.

22

time-series data casts further doubt on the conventionally
accepted wisdom that the growth-saving correlation is driven by
causality running from saving to growth.'3

2.5 Conclusions from the Aggregate Evidence

The recent literature on economió growth has typically
explained the positive correlation between saving and growth as

the result of high saving producing high growth via capital
accumulation. Our empirical results suggest, however, that
higher growth precedes higher saving. Furthermore, higher
saving is not followed by higher growth, at least in the medium

run. If our evidence is convincing, it has implications for both

the theory of consumption and for the analysis of economic
growth. We address these implications in Sections Four and
Five, respectively. Before doing so, however, we examine the

relation between saving and growth in household level data,
where the general equilibrium effects that bedevil analysis of
aggregate level data are not present.

some of the countries we examine, high growth seems to
produce no only a high saving rate, but a constantly rising saving
rate.

Although it is probably true that no simple model can

explain all that is going on in these countries, the partial
equilibrium habit formation model that we present below can
produce such a phenomenon in some cases. See in particular

Figure lib.
23

3.

The Household Evidence
In this section we turn to household-level data to examine

the relationship between income growth and saving. The
question we hope to answer by looking at household data is
whether people who have predictably high income growth save

more or less than people who have predictably low income

growth. To address our question we use data from three
household surveys, the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID),

the 1983 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCE), and the 196 1-62

Consumer &penditure Survey (CEX). The basic technique will
be to construct estimates of predicted income growth for each

household based on the age, occupation, and education of the
household head. We then construct estimates of the saving rate
or the wealth/income ratio for each family, and then regress this
measure on predicted income growth.

In all three data sets

we fmd a highly statistically significant positive relationship
between saving or wealth and predictable income growth. We
also find that the level of saving or wealth is positively related to
the level of permanent income, but even controlling for the effect
of permanent income on saving we generally fmd that households

with predictably greater income growth save more.

3.1 The PSID Evidence
Our extract from the PSID contains data on income for a

24

sample of households from 1968 through 1987. Although there

is no direct measure of the saving rate in the survey, in 1984
households were surveyed

about their wealth holdings.

Abstracting from capital gains and losses, wealth must come
either from saving by the household itself or from transfers of
wealth from other households. We restrict our sample to

households which have never received an inheritance, and inter

vivos transfers are included in our definition of household
income, so observed wealth in 1984 for our sample of households

should correspond at least roughly to past saving out of total
income. We further restricted our sample to households with

heads between the ages of 30 and 40 in order to examine
households an early stage of the life cycle when the predictions

of consumption models are clearest. (See Section Four for an
overview of those theoretical predictions.)
We base our crude saving measure for each household on

the ratio of wealth at the end of 1983 to avenge income over the
198 1-1987 period for the household. Since wealth/income ratios

appear to be approximately lognormally distributed over most of

their range, we wanted to take the log. However, net worth is
zero or negative for about 5-10 percent of the sample, precluding

a logarithmic specification. Our solution was to add one to the

WIY ratio before taking the log. Thus, our dependent variable

is S = log(W/Y + 1).
25

We observe income in each year for each household. To
avoid conceptual problems associated with changes in marital
status we restricted the sample to households whose marital

status

djd not change over the period. Because the income of farmers
and the self-employed is much more variable, and more difficult

to measure correctly, than that of people in other occupations, we

excluded the self-employed and farmers from all our results.
After dropping observations with missing wealth, education, or

occupation information, and making a few other sample
restrictions (see the data appendix for details), we were left with

a total of 287 observations.

Before turning to the econometric estimates, we present
some simple plots of the data. Figure 7a plots the avenge values
of the growth rate of income and of our S variable by education

group for our PSID sample. We could have simply plotted the
six (growth, wealth) combinations for the six education groups,
but if we had done so it would not have been possible by looking

at the graph to tell how many households were in each of the six

education groups. Therefore for each education group we plotted

a cloud of points randomly distributed around the group
mean,
where the number of points in the cloud was equal to the number

of households in the group. The figure shows a strong positive
association between income growth and the wealthlincome ratio

across people in different education groups. The next figure

26

performs the same experiment using the six occupational
categories we consider, and also shows a strong positive
relationship between growth and saving.

We turn now to more formal econometric tests. The
prototype equation we wish to estimate in all three datasets is:

S=6o+61gt6Q÷e

(4)

or, combining a constant, g, and Q into a matrix X:

SXÔ+e

(5)

where S is the measure of saving, g is the predictable component

of income growth, and Q is a set of other variables that might
plausibly be related to the saving rate. Specializing this equation

tothePSWcase,Swfflbelog1,y+ l)andgwillbethe
predicted growth rate of income. The key coefficient, ö, shows
the effect of income growth on Saving.

We do not observe households' predictions for income
growth directly. What we do observe, the actual growth rate of

income for each household over the 1981-1987 period, is
presumably the sum of the predictable component of income
growth and an error term. If we were to perform regression (4)

using actual income growth, therefore, we would expect the
coefficient on S to be biased. If the prediction error were

27

uncorrelated with saving, this would be a classic errors-invariables problem, and o would be biased downward. If,
however, the prediction error represented transitory shocks to
income, the LC/PIH model would imply that almost all of the

shock should be saved, i.e. the error would be positively
correlated with S. This amounts to a simultaneity problem.
The solution to both errors-in-variables and simultaneity
problems is to estimate the equation using instrumental variables.

The instruments used are the same education and occupation
variables used for the plots above, along with the age of the

household head. In our basic specification, the only control
variable in Q is the age of the household head.
The results are presented in Table 5. Regression (1) finds

that the coefficient on income growth is 4.69 with a
heteroskedasticityrobust standard error of 1.57, which is
significant at better than the 1 percent level. This coefficient
implies that a one percentage point increase in the predictable

growth rate of income would produce an almost 5 percentage
point increase in the wealth/income ratio.

Using education and occupation as instruments in
regression (1) implicitly assumes that the only channel through
which occupation and education affect wealth is through their
effect on the growth rate of income. One might suspect that
education and occupation are correlated with saving through other

28

channels as well. For example, if people with higher permanent

incomes save more, ceteris paribus, and if education and
occupation are correlated with the level of permanent income,
then the identification assumptions of the model in regression (1)

are wrong and the coefficient on the income growth term could
be biased.

Hansen's (1982) test of overidentifying restrictions is
designed to detect precisely this kind of problem. We therefore
present the p-value for the test of overidentifying restrictions for
our model in the second-to-last column of Table 5. The p-value
of .08 rejects the specification at the 10 percent level, suggesting

that our instruments do indeed have some explanatory power for
wealth independent of their ability to predict income growth. We

therefore added to our specification the natural control variable
suggested above: income. Regression (2) of Table S presents the

results when the log of average 1981-1987 income is added to

regression (1).

This specification appears to fit the data

substantially better than the specification of regression (1): the

OlD test now passes at a significance level of .35,

and the

coefficient on income growth is reduced but still significant at the

10 percent level.

3.2 The SCF and the Pooled PSID/SCF Evidence
The PSID was not designed to collect data on wealth, and

29

although some studies have found that the wealth data in the
sm are reasonably good (see, for example, Curtin,
Juster, and
Morgan (1989)), it would lend credence to our PS1D results if we
found similar evidence in a survey explicitly designed to measure

wealth. We therefore turned to the 1983 Survey of CoMwner
Finances of the Federal Reserve Board to conduct further tests.

The SCF is deficient relative to the PSID in one

respect,

however: it contains data on only a single year of income. It
would therefore be difficult to construct an estimate of expected
income growth using only data from within the SCF
(although

not impossible; see below for the discussion of our income
growth estimates in the CEX). Our solution was to estimate the

relationship between income growth and the instruments
(education, occupation, and age) in the PSID, and then to use the

PID income growth equation to predict income growth for the
SC? consumers.

This amounts to running the first stage

regression of a Two Stage Least Squares estimation in the PSID
and the second stage regression in the SCF, a procedure
we call
Two Sample Two Stage Least Squares (TS2SLS). (This is a
specialization of the Two Sample Instrumental Variables (TSIV)

technique described in Angrist and Krueger, 1990. See the
technical appendix for details of the estimation procedure).

To be concrete, call our instrument set Z, where Z
contains the education, occupation, and age variables described

30

above. Thegoal is toe

ôintheequations =

Xô

+e

even though we do not observe X (or at any rate all elements of

X) in the SCF. However, we do observe the values of
instruments Z, and we can estimate the following (first stage)
regression in the PSI]):

X=Zcx+y

(6)

Estimating a in this equation yields:

a = (Z'Z'(Z'X)

(7)

IntheSCFwecanthenconsnctt = Za, andthenwe
can estimate the equation:
(8)

by OLS in the PSJD, yielding a consistent estimate for 6.
Obtaining, a consistent estimator for the asymptotic variance-

covariance matrix of 6 is somewhat more difficult, and that
exercise is relegated to the technical appendix.'4

14

We should note here, however, that (contrary to an

apparent claim in Angrist and Krueger (1990)), in. order to
construct a consistent variance-covariance matrix for 6 in the
simultaneous equations case where X is correlated with e it is

necessary that at least one of the two datasets contain
observations on all three of S, X, and Z. Since the PSID does

contain all three of S, X, and Z, we are able to construct a
consistent estimate of the variance-covariance matrix.
31

Before presenting our results we should mention some
minor differences between the variables and the samples in the
SCF and the PSID. In the SCF the dependent variable S is again

defined as log(WIY ÷ 1), but W is net worth at the end of 1982
(rather than 1983 as in the PSID), and Y is noncapital income in

1982 (rather than the average of noncapital income over the
1981-1987 period). As in the P5W, the SCF sample consists of
married households whose head is between the ages of 30 and
40. In addition, to construct the W/Y variable we had to restrict

the sample to households with positive labor income in 1982.
For further sample restrictions, see the data appendix.
The results from estimating ô using TS2SLS are presented

in regressions (3) and (4) of Table 5. In general the results are

similar to those from the P5W, but the coefficient on income
growth is somewhat larger and more statistically significant,
comfortably exceeding the 5 percent significance threshold in
both cases. The greater statistical significance probably results,

in part, from the larger sample size of the SCF dataset. As in
the PSJD, the OlD test reveals evidence that the version of the

equation which does not include income as an independent
variable is misspecifled, but once income is included (in

regression 4) the olD

test

provides no further evidence of

misspecification.

32

Once the model has been estimated

separately in both the
SCF and the PSI]), it is a simple matter to estimate it
using the

pooled data from both datasets. All that is required is
to stack
the data on S and t from both datasets and estimate
the stacked

system via OLS. Deriving consistent standard errors is
only
slightly more difficult (again, see the technical appendix). The
results of such a pooled estimation are presented in regressions

(5) and (6) of Table 5. As one would expect, the coefficient
estimates fall between those of the PSID alone and those

from the

SCF alone, and the statistical significance of the coefficients is
greater than that in either dataset alone.

3.3 Evidence from the 196142 Consumer &pendj.ture

Survey
The evidence from both the P511) and the SCF relies on

estimated income growth from a single data source, the
PSID,
over a single time period, 198 1-1987. If this was an atypical

period for the relationship between education, occupation, and
income growth, our results Table 5 could be spurious. This is

of particular concern because extensive research in the labor
economics literature has found that the returns to education and
other observable characteristics were changing over this time
period (see, for example, Katz and Murphy (1992)). Another
problem with the P511) and SCF analysis is that neither data set

contained a direct measure of the saving rate. To further check

33

the robustness of the relationship between income growth and
saving across households we decided to look at data from another

data source covering a very different period: the 1961-62
Consumer Expenditure Survey.

In addition to covering a different time period, the CEX

has the virtue of containing a direct measure of the saving rate
for each household in the survey. Households were asked their
income, their consumption, and their saving for the survey year
and (unlike in subsequent consumer expenditure surveys) a real
effort was made to educate households about the balance sheet

relationship between consumption, income, and saving. As a
result, discrepancies between the quantity (income - consumption)

and reported saving are much smaller than in subsequent
consumer surveys.

The chief disadvantage of the CEX is that it does not
contain any panel data on income growth. We therefore
construct an estimate of predicted income growth for each
household by looking at the income of households in similar
occupational and educational categories who are farther along in

the life cycle. Carroll (1994) also used this technique and found
that income growth forecasts constructed in this manner using the

PSID performed relatively well in comparison with actual
subsequent income experience.

The model of income is as follows:

34

y1=1

[it1 + Age, "5J

+U1

(9)

where y is the log of real labor income, D1 is a set of
dummy variables indicating household i's occupation and
educational group, and Age1 is the household head's age. This
framework allows the estimation of a different intercept rj and

growth rate 'y for each dummy variable j. Grouping all the
dummy variables for household i into a single row vector D, and

grouping the coefficients y into a column vector, we have:
=

D,r

+

Age,Dyy + ii.

(10)

which can be estimated by OLS. The projected income growth

rate for household i is thus given by j =

D1 'i'. These

projected

growth rates cart then be used to estimate the CEX version of
equation (4). This procedure bears some resemblance to twostage least squares estimation, but differs because the value of the

income growth term g is never directly observed, even in the
pseudo-first-stage regression of equation (10).
The sample restrictions for estimating equation (10) were

similar to those used for the PSID and SCF. (For exact sample
restrictions, see the data appendix). In addition we had to decide

the appropriate restrictions to place on the age of the head of
household. In the end we estimated the equation two ways, first
restricting the sample to households whose head was between the
35

ages of 30 arid 40 (as in the PSID

and

SCF), and second

restricting the sample to households whose head was between the

ages of 30 and 60. The expected result of the former technique
should be to produce the projected growth rate of income only

during the early stage of the life cycle (henceforth designated
while the second technique should produce an estimate of

the growth rate of income over essentially the household's
working lifetime (J.
As with the PSID, we present a simple plot of the data

before we turn to formal estimation. (The same technique as in
Figure 7 was used to generate randomized predicted growth and

saving by group). Figures 8a and b plot the avenge value of
against

avenge saving rates for young households (with
heads aged 30 to 40) in the six education groups and the six

occupation groups in oUr sample. Figures 9a and b plot

j

versus average saving for the same households. In all the figures
there is a positive association between the projected growth rate
of income and the saving rate. However, saving appears in these

figures (and in the more formal econometric results below) to be

more closely related to projected lifetime growth than to
projected current growth.

Our explanation of this puzzle is that j is simply a
better measure of the predictable part of income growth (even for

young consumers) than

Intuitively, the quality of our

36

estimates

= D y, and i = Dm. will depend on the

accuracy with which

and 'y are estimated. Thi can be

gauged by estimating equation (10) constraining y to be zero and

comparing the results to those for the unconstrained estimation
described above. We performed such a regression and found that

allowing different growth rates of income by occupation and
education group (i.e. allowing a non-zero 'y,,,,.) only raises the
R2 of the regression from .229 to .235; this increase is not even

close to statistically significant, having a p-value of .36. Of
course, this result does not imply that there were no differences

in income growth by education or occupation group for young
consumers in 1961-62, but it does indicate that the methodology
described in equation (10) was not powerful enough to reliably
identify whatever cross-group differences did exist.

The results for

were much better. Allowing a non-

zero value of 'y raises the R2 of the income prediction
regression by about .01, an amoUnt that is statistically significant

at considerably better than the 1 percent level. It is our view,
therefore, that

is a poorer estimate of the true income

growth rate than is g, even for young households.

.

We proceed now to the estimation of equation (4) using
the constructed values of

and

Regressions (1) and (2)

of Table 6 repeat the experiment of regressions (1), (3), and (5)
of TableS, regressing current saving on projected income growth

37

and current age. As was true in Figures 8 and 9, saving is
positively associated with both measures of income growth, but
the association is substantially stronger with
We

than with

..

suspect, as implied above, that the apparent stronger

.

association with lifetime growth is merely the result of superior

measurement of j relative to

Nelson and Startz (1990)

have shown that for traditional instrumental variables estimation

a poorly performing first stage regression can generate poor
results in the second stage regression, and we believe that the

poor performance of

in these regressions may reflect a

similar problem here.

Regressions (3) and (4) add the log level of income as an
explanatory variable to the model, as in regressions (2), (4), and
(6) in Table 5. The equation is now estimated using instrumental

variables, where the instruments are the same age, occupation,
and education variables used to estimate equation (10). In
contrast with the results in Table 5, the income growth terms are
not statistically significant once the level of income is controlled
for.

The final two regressions substitute the log of
consumption for the log of income, because under the null
hypothesis that consumers behave according to the permanent
income hypothesis, consumption should be a better proxy for
permanent income than is actual income (using consumption was

38

not possible in the previous regressions because the other data
sets contained no data on consumption). Although the coefficient
on

increases, it does not become significant. However, the

coefficient on

returns to near its level in regression (2), and

is statistically significant at the 5 percent level.

Our conclusion from the CEX regressions is that the
positive association between saving and growth we found in the

PSI]) and SCF is not an artifact of the particular time period
covered in those data, or of the particular measure of saving
used. The CEX results provide less unequivocal support for the
existence of a positive effect of growth on saving after the level

of permanent income is controlled for, but certainly do not
provide arty reason to believe that the results from the other data

sets were spurious. Finally, there is certainly no support in this
data for the prediction of the Permanent Income Hypothesis that
income growth should have a negative effect on saving.

4.

Interpretation and Discussion

This section will consider whether any standard
modification of the Life Cycle/Permanent Income Hypothesis

model is consistent with our empirical results. We focus here
primarily on the household-level results because we view them as
the simpler and sharper challenge to the standard model, although

we wifi occasionally appeal to the aggregate results to bolster our

39

arguments.

To fix the analytical framework, we begin by showing
formally that the usual rational expectations LC/PIH model
without income uncertainty predicts a negative correlation
between growth and saving, at least for young consumers. We

then consider whether modifying the model to incorporate
liquidity-constraints, self-selection, precautionary saving, or
habit formation can potentially explain a positive correlation. We

are able to find circumstances under which some of these
modified versions of the model can generate a positive correlation

between growth and saving, but none of the modified models is
fully satisfactory. In the end, we speculate that a combination of
habit formation and income uncertainty may provide the best
explanation for our results.

4.1 The Life Cycle/Permanent Income Hypothesis Model

We consider a standard Life Cycle/Permanent Income
model:

max

E

131t

i—t

u(C,)

s.t.W4=RW,1+Y,-c1
where the gross interest rate P. =
40

(1

(11)

+ r), the gross income

growthrateG=(1 +g),andinftialweaJthandincorne
Y1 are given. If there is no income uncertainty and the utility
function is homothetic, this model can be solved for the optimal
level of consumption at age t:

C,=k[RW,1 ÷H]

(12)

where H1 is human wealth and Ic is a function of the taste
parameters of the consumer's utility function, the real interest

rate, and other features of the problem. Crucially, Ic is no: a
function of 0. If the consumer faces an infinite horizon, the

expression for human wealth is:'5

(13)

The saving rate is given by:
=

I'

+

C

(14)

Suppose, for simplicity, that consumers begin life with
zero assets: W0 = 0. Then the saving rate in the first year of
life is given by:

For a solution to exist, we must assume that R > 0.
41

k1lç

(1—C,)

-

' l-G/R
______

-

1

The derivative of this expression

1-

(15)

1-Gm

with respect to G is

unambiguously negative, because k1 is positive and increasing 0

decreases the denominator of the last expression. Interpreted in

terms of equation (12), the negative correlation between 0 and

saving is due to the powerful effect of 0 on human wealth and
therefore consumption.

After the first year of life, assets will be a function of 0

and of past consumption. A thorough analysis of the problem
shows that among consumers with a high lifetime 0, young
households have a lower saving rate, but their elders have a
higher saving rate, than people of the same ages with a low

lifetime 0. The age at which the saving rate switches from a
being a negative function of 0 to being a positive function is

dependent on all the parameters of the model.'6 This is one
reason we restricted our household-level tests of saving behavior

to young households, for whom the model's prediction of a

negative derivative of saving with respect to growth is
unambiguous.

16

Note, however, that the derivative of the level of assets
with respect to the lifetime growth rate of income is negative for
all age groups.
42

4.2 LiquIdity Constraints

We will first consider a very simple model of liquidity

constraints and show that it can reduce, but not eliminate, the
negative influence of income growth on saving. We will then

examine informally a more complex model of liquidity
constraints in which forward-looking consumers must accumulate

a down payment in order to purchase a house. We show that
such a model at least has the potential to be consistent with our
results.

4.2.1 Simple liquidity Constraints

Consider a liquidity constraint of the form W 0 v t.
For simplicity we will assume that utility is of the Constant
Relative Risk Aversion (CRRA) form, although the qualitative

results do not depend on this assumption. For non-liquidityconstrained consumers with CRRA utility of the form U(C) =
C1"/(l-p), the growth rate of consumption is given by:

___ = (fiR)"

co

(16)

It is straightforward to show in this model that, for a non-

liquidity-constrained consumer who starts life with zero assets,
if co

> (3, i.e. desired consumption growth is greater than

expected income growth, then consumption in the first year will
be less than income. Furthermore, in all subsequent years assets
43

will be positive (indeed, they are growing without bound). For

such consumers, therefore, liquidity constraints would never
bind, so the same negative relationship between saving and G
derived above for the unconstrained LC/PIH model above will
apply.

If, however, co < G, then a non-liquidity-constrained

consumer with zero assets would choose to spend more than
current income; assets next period would become negative. If
such a consumer were liquidity-constrained, consumption would
be limited to current income, and she would enter the next period

with zero assets, at which point she would face exactly the same
maximization problem as in the first period, and would therefore
again be constrained. For such consumers, assets and saving will

always be zero, so the derivative of the saving rate with respect

to the growth rate of income will also be zero. The "human
wealth effect" on consumption is zero because consumption is
already at its maximum obtainable value.

The derivative of saving with respect to G is therefore a

function of tastes, the level of 0, assets, and other parameters.

However, the derivative is always either zero or negative. At
best, therefore, this simple model of liquidity constraints could

explain empirical results in which the saving was unrelated to
income growth. It cannot, however, explain our empirical result
of a positive correlation.

44

4.2.2 Sophisticated liquidity Constraints

Only a small fraction of total consumer debt in the United
States is uncollateralized. Of collateralized debt, the considerable

majority is for home mortgages. A more realistic description of

liquidity constraints might therefore be that consumers can
borrow, but only to finance the purchase of a collateralized asset.

Although we have not been able to complete a formal theoretical

analysis, it appears to be at least possible to generate a positive

correlation between saving and growth in a model in which

consumers purchase houses via mortgage borrowing. Two
assumptions are important for generating such a result: first,
collateralized borrowing must require households to accumulate

a down payment equal to some fraction of value of the house.

Second, the desired value of the house must be a function of
lifetime income.

The intuition for how such a model could generate a

positive correlation between growth and saving is simple.
During the first part of their lives, consumers save only in order

to accumulate the down payment for their home. Holding
income in the first period of life constant, the greater is G, the
larger is lifetime income. The higher is lifetime income, in turn,
the more expensive is the desired home, which requires a larger
down payment, which necessitates more saving.
We illustrate this possibility with a very simple model, not

45

derived from a utility maximization framework. Consider a
consumer who expects his income to grow at rate 0 >

1

over

his entire 50 year economic lifetime (say, ages 25 to 75). The

real interest rate is assumed to be zero (that is, R=1). The
simplest possible assumption about consumption is that, in the
absence of the home-buying motive, it would be constant over the

lifetime (an optimizing consumer would chose constant
consumption if R = fi).

If this consumer were not liquidity

constrained, he would borrow when young, but simple liquidity

constraints of the kind described above would cause him to set
consumption equal to income over his lifetime.

Now assume that the consumer buys a home in the tenth
year of life, and that the value of the home is some proportion h

of lifetime income, V =

h H1.

Assume further that he

accumulates the down payment by depressing consumption by the

same amount in each year of the first ten years of life. Finally,
assume that, after the home is purchased, spending is elevated in

each remaining year of life by a constant amount sufficient, by
the last year of life, to have dissipated the wealth represented by

the down-payment. If the size of the down payment is given by

a factor d times the value of the home, the consumer's lifetime
spending pattern can be summarized by:

46

hdH

(ft10

iol

(17)

hdH

tft>10

=Yt+

The household saving rate (Y - CJ I Y will therefore be
given by:

SI

=

hdH

f t1O
(18)

hdH

V t>1O

4Ø

and assets, which were identically zero in the simple liquidity
constrained case, would be given by:

if tlO

w, =

(19)

if

=

t>1O

Since H1 is a positive function of G, it is clear that in this

model the saving rate for young households will be a positive
function of income growth, as will assets at every age of life.
Although this particular formulation of the lifetime consumption

problem is highly unrealistic, and is flawed in that it is not
derived from an explicit maximization problem, it illustrates at

47

least a potential chamiel through which income growth might be

positively related to saving. Whether a model with a realistic
lifetime income process and in which the timing and the
magnitude of housing purchase were derived optimally could
generate a similar positive correlation is unclear, but could be a
valuable path for future research.'7

4.3 Heterogeneity in Discount Rates

One intuitive explanation for the correlation between
income growth and saving rates observed in household data is
individual differences in the rate at which future utility is
discounted. Patient individuals might be expected not only to
save more, but also to be more willing to choose occupations in
which income starts low but grows quickly.

This argument is not as straightforward as it appears,
however. To begin with, it requires that all young households be
subject to liquidity constraints (of the "simple" kind discussed

above). If there were no liquidity constraints it would not be
necessary for consumers entering a high-growth profession to be

more willing to defer consumption. Each household could
choose, the profession or education that maximized lifetime
"'

Sheiner (1991), provides a complete analysis of this
problem, in which the size of the house purchased and the date
of purchase are endogenous.

48

earnings and could then choose the lifetime consumption profile
independently of the income profile, so there would be no reason

for patience to be related to income growth.

If all young households were pushing against liquidity
constraints, patient consumers would be more willing to endure

low consumption today in exchange for high consumption
tomorrow, so there might be a correlation between income
growth and patience. But there would be no variation in saving
rates because they would all save zero. The correlation between
saving and growth would be zero.

There is a case in which the story can be made to work.
Imagine that there are two young households, one patient and one

impatient, and two occupations, one with a slow income growth
path that starts out high and the other with a fast growth path that

starts out low but has a higher present discounted value. Suppose

young households cannot borrow. Imagine that the impatient

household is unwilling to choose the fast growth occupation
because it would have to depress consumption for too long before

reaping the rewards of higher future consumption, but the patient

household chooses the high growth occupation. The patient
consumer could be so patient that he saves even given his rapid
growth path, while the impatient consumer could be so impatient

that he will be up against the liquidity constraint and will save

nothing, even given his slow growth path. In this case there

49

would be a positive Correlation between saving and growth.
Support for such a story comes from Shapiro and Slemrod's
(1993) study of the effects of the 1992 reduction in income tax
withholding, which should have only affected the consumption of

liquidity constrained households. They find that expected future
income growth made it less likely that a household would report

that it intended to spend the increase in its take-home pay.

Although a model like the one just described could be
responsible for our household-level results, it seems inadequate

as an explanation for our aggregate evidence on growth and

saving. While we cannot rule out permanent differences in
discount rates across countries, and are even willing to entertain

the possibility of exogenous changes in discount rates within

countries, we do not believe that the discount rate within a
country should be a function of lagged aggregate income growth.

Yet in our macro data we find that within countries increases in

growth lead to increases in saving. To explain this correlation
as resulting from discount rates one would have to postulate that

increases in growth lead to decreases in discount rates. We do
not find this plausible.

4.4 Precautionary Saving
All the foregoing analysis was conducted assuming that

the future path of income is known with certainty. However, a

50

growing body of recent research has argued that income
uncertainty has profound consequences for the qualitative and
quantitative predictions of consumption models. One intuitive

result from that literature is that if consumers have a
precautionary saving motive they will be more reluctant to spend

out of uncertain future income than out of certain current income

(see, e.g., Barsky, Mankiw, and Zeldes, 1986). This should
reduce the magnitude of the human wealth effect on current
consumption.

More is required to explain our empirical results than a

reduction of the negative effect of human wealth on saving,
however: there must also be some reason for a positive effect of

growth on saving. The buffer-stock model of saving developed

by Deaton (1991) and Carroll (1992a,b) is promising in this

Carroll (1992b) solves a model similar to that of
equation (11) except that the income process is described as
regard.

follows:
=

GP,1N,
=

(20)

(21)

N is a lognormally distributed white noise error term, so that P

(permanent income) evolves according to a random walk with

drift. Income Y is given by P multiplied by a transitory shock

51

V1. V1 is a mixture of two disthbutions: with a small probability
V1 is equal to zero (representing periods of unemployment), but
if Vt is not equal to zero it is lognormally distributed white noise.

Canon (1992b) shows that in this model consumers who are
sufficiently impatient will have a target wealth-to-income ratio w'

towards which their wealth will converge.'8 At the target
wealthlincome ratio the personal saving rate will be given by:

s

= gw

(22)

The derivative of the saving rate with respect to the
growth rate of income is therefore:

+ ___

=

dg

(23)

dg

Unfortunately it is not possible to derive an analytical
expression for w*, so this equation cannot be signed analytically.

However, Carroll (1992b) reports simulations of the model over

a range of values for g, and finds that the relationship between
saving and growth is strongly positive for the parameter values
he uses.

18

Consumers who are not impatient will accumulate assets
indefinitely. As assets grow large relative to income uncertainty,

uncertainty becomes less and less important, and in the limit
there is no difference between consumption in this model and
consumption in a model without uncertainty.
52

The intuition for the positive association between saving

and growth is simple. If consumers desire to hold a fixed target

wealth/income ratio, then if income is growing faster, wealth
must grow faster. To make wealth grow faster it is necessaiy to
save more. An offsetting effect is that the target wealth/income
ratio is lower when income growth is higher (i.e. dw*/dg C 0).
This is the human wealth effect on saving, and as above it is

negative. The simulations in Carroll (1992b) found, however,
that dw*/dg was quite small, so that on net, ds/dg was strongly
positive. The human wealth effect is diminished in this model

because households are reluctant to consume today out of
expected future income if that future income is uncertain.
Unfortunately, even this model is not fully consistent with

our empirical results. Recall that the regressions in the PSID and

SCF were not of saving rates on growth rates, but rather were of

wealth-to-income ratios on growth rates.

As noted in the

previous paragraph, even in the buffer-stock model the wealth-to-

income ratio should be negatively related to growth. Thus, the
buffer-stock model is consistent with the qualitative result that the

saving rate is positively correlated with the growth rate of
income, but not with our actual empirical result that the
wealth/income ratio is positively correlated with income growth.

4.5 Habit Formation

53

Again, consider a utility maximizing household, but

suppose now that utility is a function of the excess of
consumption over some habit stock carried over from the past.
The simplest such framework is one in which utility is given by
U(C1 - a

Muellbauer (1988) shows that if the utility

C1..1).

function is homothetic, consumption in period t will be given by:
C1 =

(1+r)W + H

___________ + aC1(1—k)

(24)

where Ic > 0, fl > 1 are not functions of 0. Suppose
the consumer begins life with a habit stock C0 equal to initial
labor income Y0. Assume again that initial assets W0 are zero.

Assume, also, that income in the first period of life is given by
Y1 =

r Y0, but income growth is constant at rate G thereafter.

Then the saving rate in the first period of life will be given by:

st=

Y1—c1
-Li

Y

Y1

-

-

1

— aY(l-k)
0
1

(25)

1'i

= 1—

-

k1

(1 -

a(1—k1)

I'

Using this formula it is possible to analyze the effect on
54

saving of two separate growth experiments: increasing the rate of

growth in the first period of life, r, or increasing the rate of
growth over the rest of the lifetime, G. It turns out that the two
experiments have opposite effects: ds1/dr is positive, but ds1/dG

is negative.
The intuition behind each of these effects is simple. The

second captures the positive influence of human wealth on
current consumption, just as in the standard LC/PIH model
above. The first captures the fact that, given a previous habit

stock, consumption will adjust upward only sluggishly in
response to an increase in income. Increasing r raises income

in the first period more than consumption, and therefore
increases the first period saving rate. We call this the habit stock
effect.

If r =

G in the formula above, then under any reasonable

parameter values the total derivative of the saving rate with

respect to 0 is negative, because the human wealth effect
overpowers the habit stock effect. The assumption that income

grows at one rate in the first year of life and another rate
thereafter is clearly artificial, and was designed to provide a
tractable analytical example of how habit formation could at least
potentially cause a positive correlation between short-term growth

and saving. However, an income profile in which income grows

at one rate during the early part of a career and a different,

55

lower, rate for the remainder is quite plausible. In fact, such a

pattern is a good qualitative description of our own data on

income growth from our household data sources.'9 Rapid
income growth in the near future followed by slower growth in

the far future may also be a good description of the experience
of households in rapidly growing economies, such as the highsaving East Asian countries examined earlier. In such cases, the
sign of the correlation between saving and growth will depend on

the relative strengths of the human wealth effect and the habit
stock effect.

The analytical formulas for the saving rate at ages beyond

the first year of life are forbiddingly complex, so we resorted to

simulations in order to explore the model's predictions for the
growth/saving relationship. The first simulation assumes a utility

function of the form .U(C1 - a C.1) = (C - a

C.,)'' / (1 -

where p was set at 4. The income growth factor is P for the first

10 years of life and 0 =

1

for the remainder of an infinite

horizon. We assumed an interest rate equal to the discount rate

at 3 percent. Our experiment was to compare saving rate
profiles for the first part of life when P =

1.01

and when I' =

' In fact, age-earnings profiles in the U.S. appear to follow
just this pattern. In the 1961-62 CEX, for instance, we found
wide dispersion in growth rates by occupation or educational
category for young households, but much less dispersion (and
lower avenge growth) for older households.
56

1.06.

Previous work has argued that habit formation
may be

able to explain excess smoothness in aggregate consumption
(Deaton, 1987) or the equity premium puzzle (Constantinicjes,
1990) if the habit formation parameter a is at least .8. Our first
simulations therefore assume a value of a = .8. The results are

presented in Figure 10 a and b. The top panel shows the path of

income (solid lines) and consumption (dashed lines) under the

two growth assumptions. The bottom panel shows the path of
the saving rate for the low growth (solid line) and high growth
(dashed line) cases.

The bottom panel shows that, for these parameter values,

during the first ten years of life the avenge saving rate is lower

for the fast-growing household than for the slow-growing
household -- the human wealth effect outweighs the habit stock
effect. Nevertheless, the results do represent some progress

relative to the LC/PIH model, because the negative effect of
growth on saving is much smaller than in that model.
The next set of simulations, in Figures 11 a and b, repeats

the previous experiment but with a habit formation parameter of

a=

.9.

This increase in the strength of habit formation is

sufficient to retard consumption enough to generate a higher
avenge saving rate for the high-growth consumer than for the

low-growth consumer in the first ten years of life, although

57

saving is still lower in the first three or four years. A further
boost in the habit formation parameter to a = .95 (not shown)
guarantees that the high-growth household has higher saving in

every year of the first ten years of life.

A value of a =

.9 or .95 implies that consumers care

enormously about how their current consumption compares to
their previous consumption, but care very little about the absolute

level of their consumption. Although our intuition is not strong
for what values are plausible, a value of .9 seems uncomfortably
high. We know of little direct empirical evidence on the value
of a other than a paper by Dynan (1992) using food consumption

data from the PSID. She finds an upper bound of .667 for a.

We should note that the shorter is the period of rapid
growth at the beginning of life, the weaker will be the human
wealth effect on consumption, and thus the easier it will be for
the habit stock effect to outweigh the human wealth effect. The

limit, of course, is the case presented analytically above, where

income grows rapidly only in the first year of life. If income
grows rapidly for the first 20 (rather than 10) years of life, even

with a =

.95

the correlation between saving and growth is

negative.

Our conclusion is that the simple habit formation model

can theoretically explain our empirical results, but only if we
make rather implausible parameter assumptions. The problem is

58

that the human wealth effect is tremendously strong and tends to

overpower the habit stock effect unless habits are also very
powerful.

4.6 Combining Models

In our discussion of liquidity constrained and
precautionary saving models we concluded that, although both

were able to reduce the human wealth effect on consumption,
neither provided a mechanism for producing a sufficiently strong

positive correlation between saving and growth. The problem
with the habit formation model was the opposite: a low initial
habit stock can justify a positive association between saving and
growth, but for reasonable parameter values the powerful human

wealth effect overwhelms the habit stock effect. It is tempting,

therefore, to speculate about whether combining the habit
formation model with one of the other two models could produce

a fully satisfactory explanation of our puzzle. Unfortunately,

analyzing such models formally is beyond the scope of this
paper, but we do wish to indulge now in some brief speculation'
about the likely results from such hybrid models.
We do not believe that adding liquidity constraints to the
habit formation model would solve the puzzle. As in the analysis

of the standard LC/PIH model above, it should be possible to
split the population into those who are constrained and those who

59

are unconstrained. For the unconstrained, the human wealth

effect on consumption would be undiminished.

For the

constrained, saving would again be identically zero.

The
qualitative result should be the same as in the LC/PIH model: the
negative response of saving to growth would be lessened but not
reversed.
We have more hope for the prospects when uncertainty is
added to the habit formation model. As in the usual LC/PIH

framework, uncertainty about future income should significantly
reduce the willingness of households to base current spending on

expected future income.

Uncertainty should also make

households more reluctant tQ consume today for fear of creating

a habit stock which might prove impossible to maintain in the
event of a bad income shock tomorrow. Increasing the expected
growth rate of income while leaving intact the possibility of big

drops might therefore produce little effect on current
consumption. Given the current habit stock, however, the
optimality of slow adjustment of consumption to income should

remain, leaving the positive correlation between growth and

saving intact. We conclude that a model with both habit
formation and income uncertainty may hold out the best hope for

explaining our micro results. To the best of our knowledge, no
such models have been formally analyzed in the literature to date.

Such an analysis would be a valuable contribution.

60

Mother possible way to reduce the human wealth effect

is to add bepiests to the model. If habit formation is strong, a
faster growth rate of income might result mainly in a larger

bequest to one's offspring rather than in an increase in
consumption during one's own lifetime.

5.

Conclusions

We believe that we have established two interesting new

empirical facts. First, at the aggregate level, periods of high
income growth appear to be followed by periods of high saving.
Second, among young households, those households who should
expect faster income growth appear to save more than households

who should expect slower income growth.

Although it is possible that these two findings have
entirely different explanations, a common model which could
explain both results is highly desirable. We therefore considered
whether the most common modifications of the standard LC/PIH

model, including versions incorporating liquidity constraints,

precautionary saving, and habit formation were capable of
reproducing the observed positive correlation between anticipated

growth and saving across households. Although some version of

each of the models was capable of producing a positive
correlation between saving and growth, none of the models was

fully satisfactory. We speculated, however, that a model which

61

combines habit formation and income uncertainty may provide
the best hope for explaining our empirical results.
Returning to the topic of modelling economic growth, the
positive effect of income growth on saving has implications both

for estimating models and for the dynamic response of an
economy to shocks.

In the limit, one could argue that the

common conclusion that raising a country's saving rate is a good

way to raise its growth rate is simply wrong. We do not take
this view. But the endogeneity of saving with respect to growth
does suggest that the estimated effects of saving on growth may

be overstated. In terms of work (such as Mankiw, Romer, and
Weil, 1:992) that uses cross country variation in saving rates and

growth rates in order to estimate parameters of the production
function, this endogeneity problem means that the contribution of

capital to output (the exponent on capital in a Cobb-Douglas
production function) may be overstated. Without a proper
instrument for the saving rate, it is impossible to estimate the
true structural effect of saving on growth. Unfortunately, we do

not know of an eligible instrument. However, recognizing the

endogeniety of saving leads us to moderate the policy
recommendations that come from current growth models.
Recognizing the effects of growth on saving also leads to

a wide range of possible dynamics of growth models. To take

one example, a transitory, negative shock to growth may be

62

propagated via a response of saving: lower growth lowers the

saving rate, further lowering growth. Such a description has
something of a ring of truth in describing the OFSCD in the two
decades since the OPEC shock.

63

Bibliography

Angrist, J.D. and Krueger, A.B. (1990) The Effect of Age at
School Entry on Educational Attainment: An Application

of Instrumental Variables with Moments from Two
Samples." N.B.E.R. Working Paper No. 3571.

Barro, R.J. (1991) "Economic Growth in a Cross Section of
Countries." Ouarterly Journal of Economics 106: 407443.

Barsky, R.B., Mankiw, N.G., and Zeldes, S.P. (1986)
"Ricardian Consumers with Keynesian Propensities."
American Economic Review 76: 676-691.

Baumol Wi., Blackman, S.A.B, and Wolfe, E.N. (1991)
Productivity and American Leadership: The Long View
Cambridge: MIT Press.

Bosworth, B. (1993) Saving, and Investment in a Global
Economy Washington: Brookings Institution.

Campbell, J.Y.
(1987) "Does Saving Anticipate Declining
Labor Income? An Alternative Test of the Permanent
Income Hypothesis." Econometrica, 55.
Carroll, C.D. (1992a) "Buffer Stock Saving and the Permanent

Income Hypothesis." mimeo, Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System.
__________ (1992b) "The Buffer-Stock Theory of Saving: Some

Macroeconomic Evidence." Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 61-156.

________

(1994) "How Does Future Income Affect Current

Consumption?" The Ouarterly Journal of Economics.
64

(forthcoming Feb).

_________ and Summers, L.H. (1991) "Consumption Growth
Parallels Income Growth: Some New Evidence." National
Saving and Economic Performance eds. B.D. Bernheim
and J.B. Shoven, Chicago: Chicago University Press for
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

Christiano, L.J. (1989) "Understanding Japan's Saving Rate: The

Reconstruction Hypothesis." Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis Ouarterly Review.

Curtin, R.T., Juster, F.T., and Morgan, J.N. (1989) "Survey
Estimates of Wealth: An Assessment of Quality." The
Measurement of Saving. Investment, and Wealth. eds.
Lipsey and Tice. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
473-552.
Constantinides, G.M. (1990) "Habit Formation: A Resolution of

the Equity Premium Puzzle." Journal of Political
Economy 98: 519-543.

Deaton, A.S. (1987) "Life Cycle Models of Consumption: Is the

Evidence Consistent with the Theory?" Advances in
Econometrics. Fifth World Congress. Vol. 2. ed. T.F.
Bewley. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
___________ (1991) "Saving and Liquidity Constraints."
Econometrica 59: 1121-1142.
___________ and Paxson, C.H. (1992) "Saving, Growth, and
Aging in Taiwan," mimeo, Princeton University.
DeLong, J.B. and Summers, L.H. (1991) "Equipment Investment
and Economic Growth." Ouarterly Journal of Economics
106:445-502.
65

Dynan, K.
(1992) "Habit Formation in Consumer
Preferences: Evidence from Panel Data." mimeo, Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Hall, R.E. (1988) "Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption,"
Journal of Political Economy. 96: 339-57.

Hansen, L.P. (1982) "Large Sample Properties of Generalized
Method of Moments Estimators." Econometrica, 50:
1269- 1286.

Katz, L.H. and Murphy, K.M. (1992) "Changes in Relative
Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and Demand Factors."
Ouarterlv Journal of Economics, 107: 35-78.

King, R.G. and Levine, R. (1993) "Capital Fundamentalism,

Economic Development and Economic Growth,"
Carnegie-Rochester Public Policy Conference (this
volume).

__________ and Rebelo, S. (forthcoming) "Transitional

Dynamics and Economic Growth in the Neoclassical
Model," American Economic Review.

Kuznets, S. (1946) National Product since 1869, New York:
Arno.

Levine, R. and Renelt, D. (1992) "A Sensitivity Analysis of
Cross-Country Growth Regressions," American Economic
Review, 82: 942-963.

Maddison, A. (1992) "A Long Run Perspective on Saving"
Saving Behavior: Theory. International Evidence, and
Policy Implications eds. E. Koskela and J. Paunio.
Cambridge: Blackwell. 27-59

66

Mankiw, N..G., Romer, D., and Weil, D.N. (1992) "A
Contribution to the Empirics of Economic GrOWth."
Ouarterly Journal of Economics 107: 407-437.
_________ and Zeldes, S.P. (1991) "The Consumption of
Stockholders and Non-Stockholders." Journal of Financial
Economics, 29: 97-112.

Modigliani, F. (1970) "The Life Cycle Hypothesis of Saving and

Intercountry Differences in the Saving Ratio." in
Induction. Growth. and Trade eds. W.A. Eltis, M.FG.
Scott, and J.N. Wolfe. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 197-

225.

Muellbauer, J. (1988) "Habits, Rationality, and Myopia in the
Life Cycle Consumption Function." Annals of Economics
arid Statistics, 9: 47-70.

Nelson, C. and Startz, R. (1990) "The Distribution of the
Instrumental Variables Estimator and its t-Ratio When the
Instrument is a Poor One." Journal of Business, 63: 12540.

Romer, P.M. (1987) "Crazy Explanations for the Productivity
Slowdown." NBER Macroeconomics Annual.
Shapiro, M. and Slemrod, J. (1993) "Consumer Response to the

Timing of Income: Evidence from a Change in Tax
Withholding." NBER Working Paper 4344.
Sheiner, L. (1991) "Housing Prices and the Savings of Renters,"
mimeo, Joint Committee on Taxation.
Solow, R.M. (1956) "A Contribution to the Theory of Economic
Growth." Ouarterly Journal of Economics 70:65-94.

67

Summers, L.H. (1981) "Capital Taxation and Capital
Accumulation in a Life Cycle Growth Model." American
Economic Review 71: 533-44.

Summers, it and Heston, A. (1991) "The Penn World Table
(Mark 5): An Expanded Set of International Comparisons,
1950-88," Ouarterly Journal of Economics 106: 327-368.

Tobin, J. (1967) "Life Cycle Saving and Balanced Growth," in
Ten Economic Studies in the Tradition of Irving Fisher.
John Wiley. 231-56.
Viard, A. (1993) "The Productivity Slowdown and the Savings
Shortfall: A Challenge to the Permanent Income
Hypothesis." Mimeo, Ohio State University.

68

Technical Appendix
This appendix describes the Two Sample Two Stage Least

Squares (TS2SLS) estimation procedure used for the SCF
estimates and the pooled scF/Psn) estimates in Table 5.
Assume

an underlying population in which each member i is

characterized by values for X1, Y1, and Z. Two samples h =
{1 ,2}

are drawn from this population; the first

sample

(corresponding to the PSID in our empirical work) contains

observations on X, Y, and Z, but the second

sample
(corresponding to the SCF) contains observations only on X and

Z. The goal is to estimate 6 in an equation of the form:
(A.1)

in each of the samples. The usual Two-Stage Least
Squares (2SLS) procedure for estimating this equation in the first

data set involves estimating the equation:

(A.2)

X1 Z1cr+u
Under assumptions described below, a consistent estimator

69

for a is given by:
a1 = (Z1'Z1)1 Z1'X1
The 2SLS estimation is performed by constructing t1 =
Z1

a1 and estimating the equation:

(A.3)

via OLS. The usual set of assumptions under which 2SLS

estimation produces a consistent estimate of 6 is given by:
(A.4)

plim (4'XJnb) =
plim

(4';/n) = 0

plim (Zh'udnh) = 0

Consistency is proven as follows. Define ' = X1 Then:

Yitj3+u1t1ô+(e1+b)
Estimating equation (A.3) by OLS yields d1:

= (t1'1y' t1'y1 = (t1'1)-' Z'(X1
70

6

+ u1)

= a + (1'k1)-' 1'u1
= ö + (Z'Z)' Z1'(e1
= 6 + (t1'Z)' 4t1'e1

+ ' 6)

where the last equality follows because

t' =

0 by

construction. d1 is a consistent estimator for S because:
plim (d1-S)

= plim (t1'Z1/n1y' plim (t1'e1/n1)

=010
where the fact that C) exists and is a finite matrix follows

from assumptions (A.4) and plim (Z1'e1/n1)

plim (4';/nh) =

=

0 follows from

0.

Now consider constructing 2 = 4 a1 in the second data
set. OLS estimation of the equation Y2 = Z2 S + u yields:

=

S

+ (121t2)1 Z(e2 + " 5)

plim (d2-S)

= plim (t2'Z/n2y' {plim t2'e2fn2) + plim (Z2'25 / n2)}
= plim (t2't2Iny' plim
(7'e2/n2)

=0.10
Thus the TS2SLS procedure of estimating the first stage

71

equation in the first data set and the second stage regression in
the second data set generates a consistent estimate of 8.
The asymptotic variance-covariance matrix of the 2SLS
estimator is given by:
plim (dh - ô)(dh - 6)'

=0' plim (Z;;Z / nk) 0'

In the usual 2SLS estimation we observe &b = '4-

If the errors

X dh.

are homoskedastic, a consistent estimator of plim

(tb;;Xh mb)

is

given by c,b'h

where

5e,h

= ;ednb.

However, in the second data set for TS2SLS we do not observe

X so we cannot construct éb. Note, however, that:

ee'

= (u - vS) (u = uu' - vb u' -

(vs5)'u

+ (vô)(vâ)'

Assume that all of these terms are homoskedastic, so that

for any household i in either data set, E [u9 = o, E [v18 uJ =
a and E [(v18)1 = o, where c is the covariance between vô

and u. The asymptotic variance-covariance matrix for db is
therefore given by:
plim (dh - ô)(dh - 8)'

72

= (o-2 cy +
If X, Y, and Z were all observed in data set

h

we could

Construct:

2

— Ub Ublflb

= UhVbdb/flb

= (hdh) '(hdh)/nb
and standard proofs demonstrate that plim

= a, and plim

= o, plim

= 4 All three of these terms can be

computed in the first data set, but only the first can be computed
in the second data set (where X is not observed so cannot be
computed). Suppose, however, that the number of observations

in the first data
set,

set

is a function of the number in the second data

n1 = k n2. Then define:
s,2[n2} =

plims2[nJ =

2 ü1'C'1d1/kn2 + (''1d1)'(c'1d1)/kn2

o-2; +

A consistent estimate of the variance-covarjance matrix is

then given by:

73

fl;1 s,2[n2J

(2'Xjn'

because

plim s,2[n2] (2't2/n' = (o - 2; + a) Li'.
In practice, the estimate of

=

s

-2
s,1

+

that we use is given by:

s,

Pooled estimation using all the data from both data sets is

only trivially more complex. Consider constructing a third data

seth = 3bystackingthevaluesofYandZ:

'= r,i
L2J

z= LZJ
rzi

Then estimation of d3 proceeds exactly in parallel with

estimation of d2 as described above, substituting the subscript 3

for 2. The consistent estimate of the variance of the error is
given by:

2_

2

n

5c,3 — 5u,3 — " 5c,1

'

The assumption of homoskedasticity is not essential. It is

74

relatively straightforward to allow for heteroskedasticity of
unknown form in the u's. In practice the empirical results were
not much different when such heteroskedasticity was allowed.

Furthermore, the heteroskedasticity tests reported in Table 5
rarely rejected the null of homoskedasticity, so we do not report

the derivation or results for the heteroskedasticity-robust form of

the test.
The test of overidentifying assumptions reported in Table
5 is

based on Hansen's (1982) proof that the statistic ê'Z(Z'ê

ê'Z'Z'ê should be distributed x2 with degrees of freedom equal
to the number of overidentifying restrictions.

Although this

statistic cannot be directly computed in the second sample
because X2 is not observed (and so ê is not observed), it should

be asymptotically valid to substitute

for ê in the statistic

because plim (Z'b / n) = 0. This is the test whose p-value we
report for the SCF and pooled regressions.
A note is in order about the relationship of this procedure

to the Two Sample Instrumental Variables (TSIV) procedure of
Angrist and Krueger (1990). Angrist and Krueger state that their

procedure can be performed on any two data sets such that, in
one, only Y and Z are observed, and in the other on1' X and Y
are observed. While it is true that their TSR' procedure

produces consistent estimates of the coefficient vector 8, we
believe that the variance-covariance matrix they propose is valid

75

only if plim (X'e/n) = 0, or, equivalently in the notation above,

if; = 0.

(This corresponds to their assumption A2(i)). But this
is the case where simple OLIS estimation would be consistent in

a dataset which contained both X and Y. Thus we believe that
their TSW estimator does not allow for valid hypothesis testing

in the usual instrumental variables case where there is
simultaneity between X and Y.

76

Data Appendix
This appendix describes the aggregate and the household.

level data sources and variables constructed using them.

The Summers-Heston Data Set
Saving was constructed as follows:

say =

1

- (c*pcpcus +
g$'pg*pgus)/(p*1O)

Where the variables are

c=

Real

Consumption (% of RGDP, 1985

international prices)

g=

Real

Public Consumption (% of RGDP, 1985

international prices)

pc =

price

level of consumption (100* PPP of

Consumption/Exchange Rate)

pg = price level of public consumption (100* PPP of
government /Exchange Rate)

p=

Price level of GDP (100*PPP of GDP/Exchange

Rate)

pcus = price level of consumption in the US
pgus = price level of government in the US
The first five variables listed (c, g, pc, pg, and p) are
taken directly from the published data. The other two variables,

77

which are part of the data underlying the published tables, were

supplied to us by Dan Nuxoll of the International Comparison
Project.

The Panel Study of Income Dynamics
The PSID data were taken from Wave XX of the study.

The income variable used was pre-tax noncapital household
income, constructed by subtracting capital income from total
household income. Capital income in the years 1981-1987 in the
P&ID consists of the sum of interest, dividends, and rent for all

members of the household plus the asset portion of business,
farming, and gardening income. The income data were deflated
using the PCE deflator with a base year of 1982. Our measure
of net worth was the sum of all assets minus the sum of all debt
reported in the 1984 wealth survey.

Wave XX of the PSID dataset contains data for 8,129
individuals who were ever heads of households. The sample was
restricted to households which fulfilled the following restrictions:
The individual in question was head of the household in 1981 and

1987, and there was no change in marital status between 1981

and 1987. The head was aged 30-39 in 1984. Valid data were
reported for occupation and education. The head was employed

for the whole year in both 1981 and 1987, and was never self-

employed or a farmer.

Educational status did not change

78

between 1981 and 1987. Enough valid wealth data existed to

create a measure of net worth. The household had never
inherited anything. The household did not report exactly zero
wealth in 1984.

The 3-digit occupation code was compressed into six
occupation categories20 in order to provide a small set of
occupation dummies that would be compatible with the SCF data.

The eight education categories reported in the PSID were
compressed to six, also for compatibility with the SCF.

The Survey of Consumer Finances, 1983
The 1983 SCF contains data on 4,303 households. The

income variable we used was labor income of the head of
household. The wealth variable was total household net worth at
the end of 1982. The occupation and education dummy variables

were constructed from the occupation and education codes

contained in the survey in order to be consistent with the
definitions of occupational and education groups used in the

Psm.
Our sample was restricted to households for whom the
following conditions held. The household head was age 30-39

and was married. Valid data were reported for the occupation
and education of the head, and the occupation was neither selfemployment nor farming. The head reported positive wage and
20

The exact mapping is available upon request.
79,

salary income in 1982, and positive wealth holdings at the end of
1982.

The 196142 Consumer Expenditure Survey
The 1961-62 CEX contains data on 13,728 households.
For estimating the wage equation (10), our definition of income
was total household noncapital income, given by total household
income minus interest, dividend, and rent income. Our definition
of the personal saving rate was the log of total disposable income

(total income minus total taxes) minus the log of total
consumption expenditures. Consumption expenditures in the
CEX include direct out-of-pocket expenditures for durable goods,

including cars. If the car is purchased with a loan, however, in

the year of purchase only the down payment and any loan
payments would appear as expenditures.21

Households which met the following criteria were
included in the estimation of equation (10). Valid occupation and

education data were reported by the head, who was neither a

fanner nor self-employed. There was no change in family
structure over the course of the year. The head worked full
time. The race of the head was white. Household noncapital
income was above the 5th percentile in the income distribution.
21 We repeated the regressions of Table 6, but excluding

households who made car purchases, and found similar results,
although with somewhat greater statistical significance than the
reported regressions.
80

The regressions in Table 6 were subject to two further
restrictions:

The head of household was aged 30-39, and

consumption was above the 5th percentile in the consumption
distribution.

The distributional restrictions for income and

consumption were imposed because otherwise a few outliers with

implausibly low consumption or income unduly influenced the
results.

81

Table 1
Cross-Section Regressions

Dependent Variable: Average Saving Rate 1960-87
sample:

OECD

OECD

Full

Full

constant

.168
(.034)

-.530
(.205)

.169
(.016)

-.063
(.068)

growóO87

1.84
(1.11)

4.73
(1.23)

1.19

1.06
(.54)

ln(y60)

Observations

Root MSE

.0725
(.0211)

22
.076
.0462

22

.0304
(.0088)

59

.400

.051

59
.205

.0372

.0586

.0537

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. grow6O87 is the avenge annual growth of real percapita output over the period 1960-87. ln(y60) is the log of real per-capita output in 1960.
Saving is nominal national saving as a fraction of nominal national income -- see Data
Appendix.

Table 2
Panel Regressions
Dependent Variable:

sample

OECD OECD OECD OECD
.172
(.124)

.432
(.136)

.0287
(.0076)

ln(y)

time effects
Observations

.367
(.150)

K2

132
.817

Root MSE

.022

.364
(.153)

s

Full

Full

Full

Full

.376
(.090)

.528
(.079)

.509
(.092)

.439
(.084)

-.0016
(.0194)

.0750
(.0072)

.000

.055

132

132

132

.837
.0208

.847
.020

.846

369
.671

.0202

.042

.1152
(.0138)
.000

.002

369
.757

369
.715

369
.768

.0358

.0388

.0350

Standard errors in parentheses. All regressions include a full set of country dummies.
The number in the row markS "time effects" is the p-value from the test that coefficient on
the set of included time dummies is zero. s, and & are average saving and growth rates over
five year periods.
Note:

Table 3

Granger Causality Tests in Levels

dependent variable: s
sample

OECD

OECD

Full

Full

.473
(.074)

.457
(.103)

.482
(.046)

.474
(.051)

.257
(.109)

.195
(.149)

.318
(.080)

.268

time effects:

Observations

0.354

(.084)

0.009

P

132

132

353

.869

.869

Root MSE

.0186

.0186

.810
.0308

353
.817

.0303

dependent variable: &
sample

st_I

OECD

OECD

Full

Full

.232
(.090)

-.060
(.105)

-.059
(.068)

-.239
(.065)

-.259
(.061)

-.082

-.117

(.073)

(.039)

-.001
(.039)

time effects:
Observations

Root MSE

.000
132
.248

.0154

.000

132

353

353

.459
.0131

.149
.0260

.315
.0233

Note: Standard Errors in parentheses. All regressions include a full set of country dummies.
The number in the row marked TMtime effect? is the p-value from the test that coefficient on
the set of included time dummies is zero. s, and & are average saving and growth rates over
five year periods.

Table 4
Granger Causality Tests in Differences
dependent variable: 5t5'A
sample

OECD

OECD

Full

Full

.093
(.114)

-.012
(.120)

.118
(.061)

.125
(.061)

.092
(.120)

-.012
(.121)

.244
(.071)

.175

time effects:
Observations

Root MSE

.005

(.071)
.001

110

110

289

.001
.0218

.100
.0207

.057
.0380

289
.105
.0370

dependent variable: g-g1
sample

OECD

OECD

-.451
(.097)

-.0531
(.0923)

time effects:
Observations

Root

MSE

Full

Full

-.552

-.458

-.518

(.085)

(.057)

(.056)

-.0514

-.0052

-.0067

(.0842)

(.0491)

(.0483)

.000

.000

110

110

289

289

.198

.453

.259

.0176

.0145

.185
.0305

.0291

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. All regressions include a constant, but not country
dummies. The number in the row marked "time effects" is the p-value from the test that
coefficient on the set of included time dummies is zero. s and g, are average
saving and
growth rates over five year periods.

Notes:

•

.025

(1.37)

(0.99)

"'

*1

.051

(0.009)

.028

(0.010)

.042

(0.013)

.037

(0.014)

Significant at the 10 percent level
Significant at the 5 percent level
Significant at the 1 percent level

3.80

(1.43)

(0.33)

-5.45

6.08

—0.77

(1.94)

6.76

.012

(0.012)

2.75

(0.010)

(1.64)

"

"

of

Head

Age

0.48

(0.10)

0.51

0.53
(0.14)

(0.14)

0.46

0.14

0.58

0.18

0.01

0.68

0.20

0.31

0.89

0.05

0.35

0.08

750

750

463

463

287

287

p-value for
test of Homo- p-value for Number of
Log(Income) skedasticity
010 test Observations

Sample selection and data are described in the data appendix.
(1) and (2) are estimated by 2SLS with the White
heteroskedasticity correction.
(3)-(6) are estimated using the P5291.5 methodology described in the technical
appendix.
The 010 test is derived from Hansen's (1982) test; see the technical
appendix.

Pooled
P510 and SC?

11.39)

(6)

—5.88

SC?

(4)

Pooled
PSID and SC?

(1.91)

—1.06
(0.47)

SCF

(3)

(5)

4.31

—4.58
(1.24)

P510

(1.57)

4.69

(2)

—0.22
(0.34)

Growth

P910

Intercept

Expected

(1)

Data
Regression Set

+

Table S
1) on Expected Growth in the PSID and the SC?
(Standard errors in parentheses)

Regressions of Log(WJY

Notes:

(6)

(5)

(4)

(3)

(2)

(1)

(1.90)

3.93

"

"

(.0026)

.0005

(.0027)

-.0009

(.0023)

—.0009

(.0021)

—.0014

(.0022)

.0017

(.0022)

.0015

Age of
Head

0.19
(0.08)

(0.05)

0.23

Log(Y)

(0.10)

0.11

(0.08)

0.21

Log(C)

.061

.054

.083

.069

.034

.001

Significant at the 10 percent level
Significant at the 5 percent level.
Significant at the 1 percent level.

1317

1317

1317

1317

1317

1317

p-value for Number of
OlD test Observations

Data sample and variable construction are described in the data
appendix.
Dependent variable is log(disposable income) - log(consumption expenditures).
•

(0.95)

(0.70)
-0.91
(0.86)

1.21

-1.81

1.67
(1.86)

-1.65

(0.81)

(065)

0.53

-1.95

(1.10)

(0.08)

(0.45)

5.37

Growth

Expected
Lifetime

-0.03

2.48
(0.68)

-0.02

Growth

(0.08)

Regression Intercept

Expected
Current

Table 6
Regressions of Saving Rate on Expected Growth in the 1961-62 CEX
(Standard Errors in Parentheses)

Fiqure

Response of Growth and Saving to a Shock to Theta
rho—I
2.9
2.8
2.7

I

C. 2.6

!2.5
2.4
2.2

2.I

2

La
La
50
49

—10

0

20

10

30

40

50

10

50

60

70

iao

rho=4

2.3
2.25

t2,2
2.15

F
2

1.95

1.9

29.5

a

29
28.5

II
1

28
27.5

27
26.5

IC

--

20

30

40

Veer

0

100

Figure 2

Response of Growth and Saving to a ShOCk to Lambda
rho—I

r
3.1
3
2.9

C

2.7
2.5
2.3

2.2
!2.4
Q 2.1
2

lj
1.9

44
43.5

I
r

43 —
42.5
42
41.5
41

•o.5

-10

ID

20

30

d

43

76

16

60

70

80

rho =4
3. I

3

2.9

C 2.7

J2.6
2.5

!

2.3

2.2
I2.4
2.1
2

1.9
I.e

a

I

21.5

27

26.5
26
25.5
25
24.5

—10

0

10

20

30

40

50

Year

96

Fcc

Figures

Saving and Growth In Japan
0.4

0.3

growth rate

saving rate

51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 54 65 66 57 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 53 84 85 86 87

Year

Fgure4

Saving and Growth in South Korea
0.4

0.3

02

growth rate
0. I

0

L

55565758595051525354 6555576859707172737475767778798081628354558687

Year

Rgtifl
Saving and Growth In Singapore

0.5 b

F
0.3 —

sa1nQr\

growth its

3.2

0.1

01.

—

—

62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 61 82 63 64

Year
Agure6
Saving and Growth In Hong Kong
0.35

0.3

selng rate

0.25

0.2 b

/

growth rate

- 3.15

3,1

3.05 H

62 63 54 65 66 67 66 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 62 63 84 85 86 57

Year

Figure 7a
Growth vs. Log(W/Y + I). By Education (PSID)

Leg(WIY + I)
I.0

0.8

L

0.6

0.4

I>

0.2

—

0

I

2

Growth

6

Figure lb
Growth vs. Log(W/Y + I). By Occupation (PS!]))

Log(W/Y+ 1)
1.0

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5
Growth

Figure
Current Growth vs. Saving, By Education (CEX)
Saving Rate

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00

I
0•

'I

2
Growth

3

£
4

Figure 8b
Current Growth vs. Saving. By Occupation (CEX)

Saving Rate
0.15

0.10

.4
0.05

0.00

.

0•

.

I

A

1

Growth

I

2

i

s

I

3

Figure 9a
Lifetime Growth vs. Saving, By Education (CEX)

Saving Rate
0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00
Growth

Figure 9b
Lifetime Growth vs. Saving. By Occupation (CEX)

Saving Rate

0.15 -

S

0.10

.4

4

*
0.05

0.00

*

-

—I

-0.5

.

I

I

0.0

0.5

Growth

1.0

1.5

Figure lOa
Income and Consumption
Habit Parameter a = .8
I and

C

2

-

Income
Consumption

1.8

1.6

1.4

1 .2

10

35

40

45

50

55

60

Age

Figure lOb
Saving Rate
Habit Parameter a = .8

Saving Rate

_____________ Low Income Growth Consumer

High Income Growth Consumer

j

2.5

———

0

40

—2.5

I

I

-5

I

I
/

—7. S

—10

I

'I

I

45

.

SO

55

60

Age

