NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LIMITED INSURANCE PORTABILITY
AND JOB MOBILITY: THE EFFEC1S OF
PUBLIC POLICY ON JOB-LOCK

Jonathan Gruber
Brigitte C. Madrian

Working Paper No. 4479

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1993
We are grateful to John Abowd, Maria Hanratty, Olivia Mitchell, and participants at the Cornell
Seminar on Health Insurance and the Labor Market for helpful comments, and to Aaron Yelowitz
for his help in creating the SIPP exuacts. This paper is part of NBER's research programs in
Health Care, Labor Studies, and Public Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4479
September 1993
LIMITED INSURANCE PORTABILITY
AND JOB MOBILITY: ThE EFFECFS OF
PUBLIC POLICY ON JOB-LOCK

ABSTRACT
The link between health insurance and the workplace in the U.S. has led to concern over

the possibility of insurance-induced reductions in job mobility or 'job-lock". Designing health
insurance reforms which retain employer-based insurance coverage but mitigate the extent of job-

lock requires an understanding of the policy dimensions to which job-lock is most receptive. We
study a policy of limited insurance portability which has been adopted by a number of states and

the federal government over the last 20 years. These "continuation of coverage' mandates grant
individuals the right to continue purchasing health insurance through their former employers for
some period of time after leaving their jobs. We find that the passage of these mandates caused

a significant increase in the job mobility of prime age male workers. This suggests that a
sizeable share of job-lock arises from short run concerns over portability rather than from long
run problems.

Jonathan Gruber
Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER

Brigitte C. Madrian
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER

The predominant feature of private health insurance in the U.S. today is its link with
employment. Workplace pooling of risks has several advantages: it allows for economies of scale

in administration; it reduces the problem of adverse selection as long as workplaces are chosen
independently of health status; and it allows individuals to take advantage of the non-taxation of
employee fringe benefits. However, there is one important disadvantage as well. If wages do not
perfectly offset differences in the valuation of health insurance across different jobs, then individuals

may not change jobs even when new employment opportunities with higher match-specific
productivity arise.
Recent research has demonstrated the empirical significance of this type of job-lock. Madrian

(1992) estimates insurance-induced reductions in mobility of approximately 25%. Given a distortion

of this magnitude, it is obviously important to ask how public policy can alleviate job-lock. One
solution is to divorce health insurance coverage from the employment relationship; pooling could
occur along other dimensions, such as regionally (as proposed in Diamond 1992) or nationally (as
with Canadian National Health Insurance). However, policies which change the fundamental nature

of health insurance coverage in the U.S., where 83% of all private insurance is provided through
the workplace (Gruber 1992a), have enormous transition costs which may make them infeasible.

Another alternative is to maintain employment-based insurance but to ensure portability of

coverage across jobs. A policy of full insurance portability raises a number of difficult design
issues, however. For example, will employees who change jobs frequently be covered by their first

employer, each employer in succession, or the employer of their choice? Each of these policy
options has difficulties. If the initial employer is responsible for all future insurance, this will lead

to both large distortions in initial hiring decisions and massive administrative Costs in tracking

employees through their job changes. If each subsequent employer is responsible, it will be difficult

to guarantee individuals fully comparable coverage on each job; if coverage is less generous
elsewhere, the problem of job-lock remains.
The potentially least disruptive option is to continue having individuals receive insurance from

their current employer but to forbid both the exclusion of preexisting conditions and the growing

practice of medical underwriting.' In this way, individuals could be assured coverage if they
changed jobs. The prohibition of these instruments, however, may make it infeasible for many small
firms to offer insurance, since one very sick employee with sufficiently high medical expenses could

drive the firm out of business. Thus, with no other government action, many small firms may cease

to offer health insurance at all. Even if all firms were mandated to provide coverage, mechanisms

would be required to reinsure small firms against these major shocks to their risk pools. Thus,
effective implementation of this policy option may require much more than simple insurance market
regulation.

The key point is that the design of policies to alleviate labor market distortions without
radical change to our health care system is an important and difficult issue. In considering various
alternatives, it may be useful to reflect upon our experience with the major policy intervention to date

in this area: the limited portability of health insurance provided by "continuation of coverage'

mandates. These mandates grant individuals the right to continue purchasing health insurance
through a previous employer for a specified number of months after leaving the firm, Although
individuals must pay the full average cost of their group insurance, the price may be well below that

A preexisting condition is generally defined as any medical problem which has been treated or diagnosed
within the past six months to two years. In some cases it may be more broadly defined as any medical problem
for which an individual has er received care, It may also be extended to include medical conditions for which
a prudent person would have sought care even if no physician was actually consulted. Insurance companies may
also require medical examinations of all employees which they then use to exclude certain medical conditions on
an individual basis for the life of the contract. This practice is known as medical underwriting.

of a policy purchased in the individual market, especially for individuals with high medical
expenditures. Thus, continuation benefits provide a way for workers who leave their jobs to
maintain their health insurance coverage, for some period of time at least, when the alternative would

most likely be to go uninsured.
In recent research, we have found that these mandates have large effects on the retirement

behavior of older workers (Gruber and Madrian 1993). The goal of this paper is to study whether
these policies have also been effective in alleviating job-lock. If they have, it suggests that we may

be able to reduce job-lock and still retain the advantages of employer-provided health insurance
coverage.

We study the effects of continuation of coverage mandates by exploiting variation in their
timing and generosity. Continuation of coverage laws were passed at different times and in different

states from the mid-1970s through the mid 1980s before being federally mandated in 1986. In
addition, some laws were quite liberal, allowing 15-20 months of coverage, while under others the
extent of coverage was minimal. We use data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation
(SIPP) to study the effects of these laws on job mobility and subsequent insurance coverage.

Our basic finding is that the availability of continuation coverage has significant effects on
job mobility. We estimate that these mandates caused a 10% increase in the mobility rates of prime

age male workers. While small in absolute terms, this is 40% of the reduction in mobility resulting

from job-lock estimated in Madrian (1992). This suggests that a substantial fraction of job-lock is

due to individuals who are hindered by short-run medical expenditures, a conclusion which is

consistent with Holtz-Eakjn's (1993) finding that job-lock appears to be primarily a short-run
phenomenon. We also find significant effects of these mandates on insurance coverage; the estimates

3

suggest that much of the effect of the mandates to increase insurance coverage among individuals
who would have changed jobs even in their absence.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 provides some background on health insurance and

job mobility. Section II describes the continuation of coverage laws and their expected effects on
mobility, and Section III discusses our data and the regression framework. This is followed by our
empirical results on job mobility in Section IV and evidence on the effects of continuation mandates

on insurance coverage in Section V. The paper concludes in Section VI with a discussion of the

public policy implications of our findings.

I. Health Insurance and Job Mobility
The primary problem with workplace pooling of risks is that workplaces are not necessarily
chosen independently of underlying health status. This has led many insurers to exclude preexisting

conditions for some period of time after an individual is hired, typically between six months and two

years. The New York benefits consulting firm Foster Higgins reports that 57% of employers
excluded preexisting conditions in their health plans in 1987 (Cotton 1991). Furthermore, almost
half of full-time workers in firms of 250 employees or more face a length of service requirement
before being eligible for any health insurance coverage (Bureau of Labor Statistics 1989). Although

the length of service requirement is generally short, it may be important for the employee
anticipating major medical expenses.

In addition, for small firms whose insurance premiums are experience rated, hiring a sick

employee can entail large increases in insurance costs. As a result, employees with medical
problems may face potential discrimination in finding a new job with coverage.2 Even if there is

Although such explicit behavior is outlawed under the Americans with Disabilities Act.

4

not explicit discrimination in hiring, many insurance policies at small firms are now medically
underwritten so that sick employees may not be able to qualify for coverage. Furthermore, only
60% of firms with less than 100 employees even offer insurance, so that a new job with insurance
coverage is far from guaranteed for the potential job changer (Gruber I 992a).
The theory of compensating differentials predicts that in a perfectly competitive labor market,

differences in the generosity of benefits across firms will be reflected in wages or other aspects of
compensation. However, as Rosen (1986) notes. the compensating differential for a given health
insurance package will equate the wage reduction to the valuation of that package by the marginal

worker who is just indifferent between wages and benefits. In a heterogenous population, some

workers will value health insurance more highly than the marginal worker; these "inframarginal'
workers will receive a surplus from their excess valuation of the benefit. That is, these workers will

value total compensation at their current job at above the sum of their wages plus the cost to the

employer of providing the benefit.
As a result, these workers may turn down alternative employment opportunities for which

their total productivity would be higher and which pay higher wages but which do not offer
comparable health insurance. The potential market failure here arises from the lack of a complete
market for worker/job specific compensation packages. If firms could truly identify worker valuation

of benefits, and if they could offer each individual a customized wage and benefits package, then
workers would move to jobs where their productivity would be highest.

However, offering worker-specific compensation packages is generally not feasible for a
number of reasons. First, such packages would violate a number of rules designed to guard against

discrimination in the design of benefit plans. One clear example is the ruling under the Employee
Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) that all firms offering health insurance must do so for any

5

employee working more than 1000 hours per year. Second, even if worker-specific compensation

were allowed, it is difficult to elicit true worker valuation of these benefits, so that such workerspecific compensation would be difficult to design. Finally, the costs involved in administering such

packages may be large enough to absorb most of the rents which the worker would earn from their
existence.

Although this market failure will exist for any job amenity, such as workplace safety,
pensions, or parking, there are two reasons why it may be more important for health insurance than
for other job amenities. First, the variance in employee valuation of health insurance is, in general,

much greater than the variance in the valuation of other benefits. This is due to both the high cost

of medical care and the substantial variation across individuals in their underlying health status.
Medical expenditures among those aged 20-54 averaged $1200 in 1990, with a standard deviation

of $3878. Large differences in the productivity of an employee across different firms may
therefore not be sufficient to induce mobility if other firms do not provide health insurance or if the
insurance excludes preexisting conditions or is medically underwritten.

Second, there are very large differences across firms in the costs of providing health
insurance, particularly by firm size. The costs of insurance in the largest (10,000+ employee) firms
is estimated to be 40% lower than the cost in smaller (1-4 employee) firms (Congressional Research

Service 1988). This will make it difficult for small firms to offer insurance, even if they know that
they could attract much higher productivity workers by doing so.4

Authors' calculations using data from the 1980 National Medical Care Utilization and Expenditure Survey
(inflated to $1900).

'One other interesting point about health insurance, relative to other job amenities such as workplace safety,
is that it does not, by definition, need to be tied to the employment relationship. This allows the use of a range of
policy instruments, such as regional or national pooling of risks, to alleviate job-lock of this type. As noted in the
introduction, our discussion focuses on policy options which retain the link between health insurance and
employment.

6

The welfare consequences of health insurance-induced job-lock are unclear (Madrian 1992).
Many studies have found large increases in wages for workers who switch to new jobs (Minter 1992;

Bartel and Borjas 1977; Mincer 1986; and Topel 1986). This may represent a gain to society from
the increased productivity of an improved job match. On the other hand, it may be that some jobs
offer rents to workers, and that individuals tend to move into these jobs as their careers advance.

Furthermore, a key consideration will be the temporal nature of the job-lock. If individuals are
locked in by chronic illnesses, this could have major and long lasting consequences for their job
productivity; lock-in by short-term conditions such as pregnancy may be less important from a lifecycle perspective.

Finally, it can be argued that job-lock allows firms to reap the returns from general human
capital investments by reducing the ability of workers to use those investments elsewhere. However.

job-lock seems a particularly inefficient mechanism for achieving this goal, relative to back-loaded
compensation devices such as pensions, since presumably it is not just the sickest workers that the

firms wishes to retain.

II. Alleviating Job-Lock Through Continuation Benefits
State and federal continuation of coverage laws mandate that employers sponsoring group
health insurance plans offer terminating employees and their families the right to continue their health

insurance coverage through the employer's plan for a specified period of time. The laws generally
apply to all separations (except those due to an employees gross misconduct), although in some states

benefits are restricted to those who leave their jobs involuntarily.5 They often also provide benefits

We consider only states with laws that cover both voluntary and involuntary separations since we on]y have
very noisy data on the nature or the separation.

7

to divorced or widowed spouses and their families. The first such law was implemented by
Minnesota in 1974. More than 20 states passed similar laws over the next decade before the federal

government, as part of its 1985 Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA),
mandated such coverage at the national level.

The various state statutes are summarized in Table 1 . The length of coverage is generally

quite short, from 3-6 months, although 10 states mandate coverage of nine months or more. Most
state laws stipulate that an employee must have been covered by an employer's insurance for 3-6
months before being eligible for continuation coverage. The states laws also apply only to firms that

actually purchase insurance through an insurance company; self-insured firms, under the 1974
Employee Retirement Income and Security Act (ERISA), are not subject to these (or any other) state
mandates.

Although similar in spirit, the state and federal laws differ in a number of important ways.
First, the length of coverage mandated under the federal law, 18 months, equals or exceeds that
mandated by all but one state (as of January 1987, Connecticut law provides for up to 20 months of

coverage).7 Second, there is no minimal length of time for which an employee must be covered

under an employer's plan before being eligible for continuation benefits. Third, the federal law
applies to self-insured firms, who are exempt from the state laws, as well as to those who purchase

their coverage from insurers. The federal law, however, does not apply to small firms employing
less than 20 workers. Finally, employees of religious organizations and the federal government were

6 Details on state laws are from Hewitt (1985) and Thompson Publishing (1992) and have been cross-checked
against the actual statutes. Table I lists only those states with laws that apply to employees who terminate their

employment voluntarily.
18 months is the maximum length of coverage available following the voluntary or involuntary termination
of employment. COBRA also provides up to 36 months of coverage for family members who would otherwise lose
their insurance coverage through events such as an employees death, divorce from the employee, or the employees

eligibility for Medicare.

8

exempt from COBRA, although federal employees have subsequently been included (beginning in

1990). When the specific details of the state and federal statutes are at odds, firm provision of
continuation benefits is governed by the law which provides for more generous coverage.
An important feature of continuation coverage from our perspective is the interaction between

continuation coverage from an old job and insurance coverage from a new job. Before 1990, once

individuals who were continuing their health insurance benefits from their old jobs obtained new
employment which offered health insurance, the former employers could drop their continuation
benefits, regardless of whether they were covered by the new policy. This is important because
moving to a firm which offers insurance does not guarantee coverage if the firm excludes preexisting

conditions from its policy, or if it has a length of service requirement. After 1990, individuals were
allowed to continue their COBRA coverage even if they started a new job with health insurance, as

long as they continued to pay the required premiums. This improved the portability features of
COBRA, since it could now be used to bridge periods of non-coverage due to either length of service

requirements or preexisting conditions exclusions.t
The effective dates of the state laws are listed in Table 1. The federal coverage mandated

under COBRA was phased in. Beginning in July 1986, firms had to offer continuation benefits at
the start of their next plan year. For workers provided health insurance under union contracts, such

benefits did not have to be offered until the next contract negotiation after January 1987.

Both the state and federal laws stipulate that the employee must pay the full cost of the
coverage. At the federal level, this is defined specifically as 102% of the average employer cost of

providing coverage. The coverage must be identical to that provided to similarly situated active

Whether this was much of a change in practice it unclear, since it it not obvious how the old employer could
verify that the employee had obtained new employment which offered health insurance coverage.

9

employees, including the option to continue enrollment in supplemental insurance plans (such as for

vision or dental care) if these are available. While this is substantially more than the individual
generally had to pay as an employee, it may still be much more attractive than purchasing individual
insurance, due to the economies of scale in administering group insurance and the reduced potential

for adverse selection with large employee groups.
In Massachusetts, the average cost of family health insurance coverage per employee in 1989

was $3882. When inflated by the medical care component of the Consumer Price Index, this is
equivalent to $5047 in 1993 dollars. In contrast, a New England commercial insurance company is
offering a family policy for a 40 year-old male with a wife and two children, with a 1-year exclusion

of preexisting conditions, for $7000. Thus, there is a non-trivial financial savings for such an
individual in purchasing continuation benefits over individual coverage.
Furthermore, for less healthy persons or those with high family medical expenses, individual

coverage will be even less attractive for two reasons. First, it is often medically underwritten, so
that it may be much more expensive than the figure given above, or not available at all. Second,
individual coverage is typically much less generous than group policies. For example, the policy
cited above excludes preexisting conditions for one year, while such conditions would be covered

for someone continuing a group policy. Table 2 compares the health insurance benefits of
individuals covered under group and nongroup policies in 1977. In every category, those covered
under nongroup policies receive more limited benefits. Relative to those with nongroup coverage,

those with group policies are more than twice as likely to receive major medical coverage or
coverage for physician office visits and prescription drugs, and more than 50 percent more likely to

Authors' calculation using unpublished data from the Health Insurance Association of America.
10

receive ambulance, mental health, and outpatient diagnostic service coverage.

Furthermore,

nongroup policies generally feature both higher deductibles and higher copayments.

Thus, while for a healthy person continuation coverage may provide only modest savings,
for persons with high expected medical expenditures the difference in costs may be quite sizeable.
Since this is exactly the population for which job-lock is potentially the largest problem, continuation

mandates may potentially have some effect in alleviating this distortion.
Table 3 tabulates the sources of health insurance coverage among 20-54 year-old males from

the 1987 National Medical Expenditure Survey. 66% of persons in this age group have employerprovided health insurance; the majority of that coverage is in their own name. Individuals who leave
jobs are much less likely to have had insurance coverage on those jobs. This could be construed as
evidence of job-lock; on the other hand, it may just be that individuals are more likely to leave "bad"

jobs which do not offer health insurance.
An important indication of the potential effectiveness of continuation mandates is the extent

to which eligible persons take up these benefits. Using data from a company which administers
COBRA claims, Flynn (1992) estimates that 19.3% of individuals who were terminated, laid-off, or

quit from firms which had health insurance chose to take up continuation benefits)° As Klerman
and Rahman (1992) note, this represents a lower bound on the takeup rate of benefits among the
eligible population since many of these persons will move to new jobs with health insurance or are

covered by their spouses. Data from the 1987 National Medical Expenditure Survey (NMES)
suggest that about two-thirds of those who leave jobs with health insurance move to jobs where they

This figure excludes retirees. This is important. as takeup among this population is likely to be substantially
higher (see Gruber and Madrian 1993).
11

also receive health insurance;" these are individuals who we would not expect to take-up
continuation benefits (this figure actually represents and upper bound on the fraction who move to

jobs with health insurance as the NMES does not distinguish between those who receive health
insurance through their current employer and those who receive COBRA benefits through a former

employer). Klerman and Rahman estimate that and additional 10% of job leavers who don't find

jobs with health insurnace are covered by their spouse's health insurance, a group we would also
expect to not be affected by COBRA.
Based on this information, we would expect approximately 30% of those who leave jobs with

health insurance to be affected by COBRA. This implies COBRA takeup rates among those for
whom we would expect it to matter of about 65%. It therefore appears that a sizeable fraction of
eligible job changers avail themselves of continuation benefits, despite the high out-of-pocket costs.

Should we expect continuation mandates to alleviate job lock? The answer depends on the

nature of this distortion, If much of job-lock arises due to short-run medical considerations, such

as pregnancy, then these policies may be quite effective. On the other hand, if individuals are

worried about long-run coverage, then even 18 months of continuation benefits may not be
sufficient.'2 Furthermore, if job-lock arises from fear of moving to jobs with length of service
requirements or limited pre-existing conditions exclusions, then temporary coverage may be all that

is necessary'3; if it is fear of being medically underwritten out of coverage, then more permanent

portability is required. Finally, if job-lock primarily occurs among individuals with very high
Authors' calculation.
12 Prior evidence on this front is mixed. Madrian (1992) finds job-lock arising from both pregnancy, which is
a short-run expenditure, and larger families, which gives rise to longer run expenditures. Holtz-Eakin (1993) finds
that job-lock appears to operate for short-run job changes oniy; mobility rates over periods of more than one year
do not show evidence of job-lock.
° Although, in this case, continuation benefits in the period after 1990 would be much more effective.
12

expected medical costs, then continuing to pay the cost of group health insurance will not be a major

deterrent to the use of continuation benefits. However, if job-lock represents risk aversion on the
part of the average person, then continuation benefits may not seem a reasonable option financially.

Thus, by examining the effects of continuation mandates on mobility, we can hopefully draw some
lessons as to the nature of the job-lock problem itself.

HI. Data and Regression Framework
The data we use come from the 1984, 1985, 1986 and 1987 panels of the Survey of Income
and Program Participation (SIPP). This nationally representative survey collected information on
the economic and demographic characteristics of individuals and their families through a series of

quarterly interviews, referred to as "Waves', for roughly 2½ years.'4 Because the panels overlap,
as many as three panels may be interviewed concurrently. Altogether, these four panels span the

period from June of 1983 to April of 1989)
During each interview, respondents were asked questions on up to two jobs held during the
previous 4 calendar months, including the industry, occupation, hours worked, and pay of each job,
as well as the date that an individual commenced and/or terminated each job, if it was held for less

than the full quarter. With this information, we are able determine whether an individual changed
jobs or ceased to be employed during the quarter.

The 1984 Panel of the SIPP. which has 9 waves, covers 3 years. The 1985 Panel consists of 8 waves (32
months), while the 1986 and 1987 Panels both include 7 waves.

3 While we would ideally like to have data from before 1983 in order to study the 14 State continuation of
coverage laws that were passed prior to that time, the period that is covered by the data provides a window around
the passage of the federal law and includes 19 state laws which took effect after June of 1983.

13

Our sample is restricted to men between the ages of 20 and 54 who were not in school over

the course of their participation in the SIPP and who were not self-employed. ' We exclude
individuals from Hawaii, which has mandated health insurance for all employees, and West Virginia,

for which we were unable to definitively date their continuation mandate. Individuals from several
other small states are also excluded because, out of concern for confidentiality, the SIPP has grouped

these states together, thereby making it impossible to assign the appropriate state laws to individuals

in these states" The final sample consists of 155,151 quarterly observations on 29,841 individuals.

We use these data to estimate a model of quarterly job turnover. Turnover is defined as
changing employers, becoming self-employed, or becoming unemployed.18 Overall, the quarterly

turnover rate for our sample is 10%, while 24% of each panel changes jobs within the first year.
This is similar to the annual turnover rate of 22.6% that is estimated from the 1987 National Medical
Expenditure Survey.
To calculate the wages associated with the job that an individual left, we divide the quarterly

wage and salary earnings of the job by the usual hours worked per week multiplied by the number
of weeks in the quarter for which an individual was employed in that job. The wage rate computed
in this manner is highly correlated with the hourly wage rate reported by those who are paid hourly.

' We exclude 55-64 year olds because the effects of continuation mandates on retirement behavior may be quite
different than their effects onjob mobility. We focus on the older group of workers in Gruber and Madrian (1993),
finding sizeable effects of continuation mandates on retirement. We excluded women because the process
determining their job mobility may be quite different than that for men.

' These states are Alaska, Idaho, Iowa, Maine, Mississippi, Montana, New Mexico. North Dakota, South
Dakota, Vermont and Wyoming.
While our definition of turnover includes the switch from employment to self-employment, It does not include
moving from one self-employed job to another as individuals are excluded from the sample when they are self.
employed.
14

Each individual is assigned the maximum months of continuation coverage available at the

beginning of the Wave under either COBRA or the appropriate state law. Because the federal law

was phased-in between July of 1986 and June of 1987, we increment the months of coverage
available under COBRA by 1.5 months for each month over this period. By June of 1987, therefore,

months of continuation coverage equals 18 for all individuals except for those who live in
Connecticut where state law allows for 20 months of coverage.

Because continuation coverage is only available for those with employer-provided health
insurance, an important variable in our analysis is whether or not an individual is covered by such

insurance. In each wave, the SIPP asks if an individual is covered by health insurance, if this

coverage comes from a policy in one's own name, and, if so, if this policy is provided by an
employer or union. In quarters in which individuals do not change jobs, we code them as having
employer-provided health insurance if they report being covered by health insurance provided by an

employer or union.

In quarters in which individuals change jobs and report coverage from

employer-provided health insurance, it is not clear from the SIPP questions whether or not the
employer-provided health insurance was attached to the first job, the second job, or both. For these
individuals, we code their coverage by employer-provided health insurance based on whether or not

they report having such coverage in the previous wave of the SlPP.9

"This definition of coverage by employer-provided health insurance will still be somewhat problematic for
individuals who change jobs in two consecutive quarters. Of the job changes in our sample, 15% are immediately
preceded by another quarter with a job change, so that only 1.5% of our sample are consecutive job changers. Our
conclusions about the mobility and insurance coverage effects of the mandates are unchanged when we exclude this
group from the analysis.
15

The means for our data sample are presented in Table 4. Each observation is a quarter in
which a member of our sample does any work.2° 11% of the sample is non-white, and the average
educational level is approximately one year of college. 77% of the sample holds employer-provided

health insurance. As noted above, the quarterly turnover rate is 10%.
The model which underlies the analysis is presented in detail in Madrian (1993). Individuals

have different valuation of health insurance, which leads to job-lock through the mechanism
described above. We assume that these valuations are distributed randomly in the population that
we are studying.2' We can examine the effectiveness of continuation benefits in alleviating job-lock

through a probit regression of the form:

Pr(Leave Job) = t'(a +

+ 132.Stafe1

j33.Time, • 13,.Law.,)

where i indexes individuals, j indexes states, and I indexes time. X, is a set of individual
demographic and job characteristics, State, is a set of state dummies, Time, is a set of year and month

dummies,22 and Law, is the number of months of continuation coverage available in state i at time

t. The regression models the probability that an individual leaves his job in a particular quarter.
We control for a number of characteristics of individuals (education, experience, race) and
their jobs (log hourly wage, eight industry dummies, six occupation dummies, and a dummy for the

° Thus, there are be multiple observations on each individual. Accounting for the resultant intra-personal
correlation in the error term has little effect on the results. There is also a potential left-censonng problem which
may lead to the type of 'dynamic sample-selection' bias noted by Diamond and Hausman (1984). Individuals who
left their jobs in response to the availability of continuation benefits, but who were still unemployed one quarter
later, will be excluded from our sample. In a bivanate setting, this would lead to a downward bias to our estimated
effect: in a multivariate setting, the effect is unclear. We tested for the importance of this bias in our study of the
effect of continuation mandates on retirement (Gruber and Madrian 1993) and found it to be small.
21 Ideally, one would account for these individual differences in valuation and to use them to help identify any
potential effects of continuation benefits. We discuss one attempt to do so below.
22 The month dummies are actually a dummies for the month itt which the quarter begins. The year dummies
are dummies for the year in which the panel begins.

16

provision of health insurance). The year dummies control for any national time trends in mobility,
and the month dummies control for seasonal mobility patterns. The state dummies control for any
time invariant differences across states which may be correlated with their propensity to legislate
continuation mandates, such as differences in the underlying valuation of health insurance among the

population. The regressor of interest measures the number of months of continuation benefits for

which workers are eligible if they leave their current jobs. If continuation of coverage mandates
alleviate job-lock, then this regressor should have a positive coefficient.

IV. Effects on Mobility
A. Basic Results
The basic mobility results are presented in Table 5. The covariates have their expected
effects. Well-educated and older workers are less likely to change jobs, and workers are much less

likely to leave jobs with high wages or health insurance. The negative coefficient on health
insurance in the second and third columns of Table 5 cannot be taken as causal evidence of job-lock.

since there are a number of other reasons why individuals may be reticent to depart from the "good

jobs" that provide health insurance (Madrian 1992). Further evidence for this point is provided by
the fact that the wage coefficient in the first column is substantially reduced when health insurance

coverage is added to the regression.
The coefficient on the months of continuation coverage variable in the third column is highly

significant.

In this and the remaining tables, the probability derivative for this coefficient is

presented in the last row. It indicates that one year of continuation benefits increased the mobility

u Madrian (1993) also finds that the wage coefficient falls substantially when health insurance is added as a
regressor. Mitchell (1982) finds a similar result for pensions.

17

rate for individuals in our sample by 0.9 percentage points. This represents approximately 9% of
the baseline quarter-to-quarter mobility rate for the sample. While small in absolute magnitude, this

effect is quite sizeable relative to Madrian's (1992) estimate of job-lock; it implies that a year of
continuation coverage reduces job-lock by almost 40%.

B. Specification Checks
The key identiliing assumption behind our model is that the passage of these mandates
represents an exogenous change in the opportunity set of the worker making a mobility decision.
An alternative hypothesis is that the laws themselves are endogenous responses to the pattern of

mobility across states. For example, if more individuals are changing (or losing) jobs, states may
respond by mandating benefits that cover individuals during this transition. To the extent that the
state mandates are responses to long-standing mobility differences across states, the state fixed effects

included in the regression will control for this endogeneity. However, to the extent that legislatures

are responding to changes in mobility, then state fixed effects will not be sufficient controls.

There is a natural test for this alternative hypothesis, however. Note that only individuals
who have health insurance on the job are eligible to receive continuation benefits. Thus, workers

without health insurance on the job provide a natural control group for assessing the effects of
continuation mandates. If these mandates are simply correlated with, or due to, exogenous changes

in mobility propensities, then the laws should be correlated with the mobility of workers both with

and without health insurance on the job. However, if the laws are causing changes in mobility
patterns, this should only affect workers with employer-provided health insurance.

18

Table 6 therefore divides the sample into those with and those without employer-provided

health insurance on their current jobs.24 For those with health insurance (column I), the effect of
continuation coverage is even greater than that estimated for the full sample and is more significant
as well. The coefficient estimate implies that one year of continuation coverage leads to an increase

in the likelihood of changing jobs of .84 percentage points; this is 14% of the baseline mobility rate

for this group.
The second column of Table 6 looks at those without health insurance. In fact, there is a
positive effect of the mandates on mobility for this group as well. This suggests that the passage of
thecontinuation regulations was correlated with other factors causing increases in mobility in these

state/years. However, the implied mobility increase for those without health insurance is not
significant, and it represents only 3.4% of the baseline mobility rate for this group. Furthermore.
if we use the estimated effect of these mandates on mobility for those without health insurance to
control for secular changes in mobility, the evidence in Table 6 is consistent with that in Table 5,
namely that continuation mandates increase mobility by about tO percent (that is, 14% minus 3.4%).

As noted earlier, the effect of continuation mandates will be mitigated by factor such as the

extent to which firms self-insure (as they are exempt from state mandates) and the distribution of

workers by firm size (as small firms are exempt from the federal mandates).

In order to

appropriately measure the effect of continuation coverage, we need to account for variation in these

factors across states. We do this by constructing a corrected" months of coverage variable. The

Appendix details the calculation of these correction factors, one for those who have employer-

' Note that this is an imperfect split due to the noise in assigning insurance coverage to a given job for persons
who change jobs in consecutive quarters.

19

provided health insurance which adjusts for the factors just described, and one for all individuals
which also adjusts for the likelihood of being insured.
Briefly, we use unpublished data from the Health Insurance Association and America (HIAA)

and the Current Population Survey to estimate, by state, the fraction of workers actually offered
employer-provided health insurance, the fraction in self-insured firms, and the fraction in small (<20

employee) firms. If a slate law only is in effect, we adjust the months of coverage to reflect the fact
that the state law applies only to those offered insurance and only to those who do not work in a firm

that self-insures. If a federal law only is in effect, we adjust the months of coverage by the fraction

of individuals who are offered insurance and the fraction who work in small firms. When both a
state and federal law are in effect, the corrected months of coverage accounts for the fact that the
state law will affect insured individuals working in small firms that do not self-insure. When we
adjust for these factors, the average length of continuation coverage in states that offer coverage falls

from 6.88 months to 4.55 months.
The results using the corrected months of coverage variables are presented in Table 7. The

findings are very similar; the magnitudes of the coefficients are somewhat increased, as are the

standard errors, although the effects are still highly significant. This is to be expected from a
procedure which multiplies our coefficient of interest by a noisy correction factor which is less than

one. The estimates in columns 1 and 2 of Table 7 suggest that one year of coverage increases
mobility by between 12% and 15%.25
Finally, one potential problem with this model which was discussed above is that the variable

of interest is measured with considerable noise. In particular, we are not focusing on the individuals

This regression is not run for those without health insurance, since their corrected months of continuahon
coverage is zero by definition.

20

limited portability of continuation
who most value their health insurance benefits and for whom the
mandates may be the most useful. One such group for whom these

mandates should be important

is married workers, whose higher family medical expenditures may increase their
insurance.

valuation of health

It is true that married workers are more likely to have coverage from an alternative

source (namely their spouse), and thus potentially less likely to need continuation benefits. Madrian

(1992) estimates that 33% of married men had coverage through a spouse's employment in 1987.

But family health care expenditures for married men are three times greater than those for single

men.26 Thus, on net, being married would appear to raise the costs of leaving a job with health
insurance.27

In results not reported, we have repeated the regressions of Table 5-7 for only married

individuals and found slightly larger, although less precisely estimated, effects. For

the basic

specification, there is a .0085 percentage point increase in mobility which is 97% of the baseline

mobility rate for this subsample. This implies that the mandates had a slightly larger effect on a
population which was more likely to be affected by their presence.

V. Continuation Mandates and Insurance Coverage
A necessary (but not sufficient) precondition for continuation of coverage mandates to affect

job mobility is that they affect insurance coverage.28 Moreover, the

effects of these mandates on

Authors' tabutations from the 1980 National Medical Care Utilization and Expenditure Survey.
21 of course, if these higher expected expenditures are reflected in lower wages, then the mobility distortion
feasible is
for married males will be no higher than that for single males. Whether shifting by manial status is
uncertain; see Gruber (t992b) for evidence in favor of the ability of employers to shift increased insurance costs
to the wages of identifiable demographic groups within the workplace.
and remained
Some evidence that these mandates did increase coverage among those who left their jobs
unemployed is presented in Klerman and Rahman (1992). However, for comparability to our mobility regressions.
we wish to examine the effects on the insurance coverage of any worker who leaves his job.
21

insurance coverage may be important for assessing their welfare implications. Ostensibly, the
purpose of these mandates was to correct a failure in the market for private insurance for job teavers.

Such market failure seems likely given the adverse selection in the takeup of continuation coverage
benefits documented by Huth (1991) and Long and Marquis (1992).

In this case, increasing

insurance coverage among those who would have left their jobs even in the absence of the regulations

represents a clear welfare improvement. However, the welfare implications of reducing job lock are

less clear, as discussed earlier. Thus, the net welfare effects of the mandates may depend on the

relation between their effect on 'inframarginal" individuals, who would have left their jobs in the
absence of a mandate, and their effects on 'marginal' individuals whose mobility decision is made
in response to the mandate.

To model the effect of these mandates on insurance coverage, we examine the sample of
worker/quarters in which there was ajob change. We then create a dummy variable which is equal

to one if an individual has insurance coverage in the quarter after his job change. We regress this

dummy variable on the set of covariates used earlier.29 These results are presented in Table 8.
Since there are relatively few individuals in some states, we run the regressions without state effects;

the coefficients are quite similar, although less precisely estimated, if state effects are included.
Once again, we use a probit specification.

For the full sample (column 1), the coefficient on months of coverage suggests that
continuation mandates have a positive but insignificant effect on the probability of being insured after

changing jobs. The implied increase in insurance coverage is 1.4 percentage points. In the second

and third columns of Table 8, we split the sample as before into those with and without health

We do not include thejob charBcteristics (hourly wage, industry, and occupation), since it isnt obvious which
job (the one left or the one gained) to use. The results are similar if the characteristics of the former job are
included.

22

insurance. For those with health insurance, the effect of continuation coverage is statistically
significant and implies a 4.1 percentage point increase in insurance coverage after changing jobs.

For those without employer-provided health insurance, the likelihood of having insurance after

leaving a job falls by 2.2 percentage points. Thus, the effect for those with health insurance is
strengthened if we consider other trends correlated with the passage of the mandates. Compared to
the effect on mobility for those with health insurance (0.84 percentage points), this result suggests
that the effect of the mandates was largely to cover individuals who would have left their jobs even
in the absence of continuation availability.

Vt. Condusion
The problem of job-lock has caught the public's attention and one key measure of the success

of health care reform in the U.S. will be its ability to reduce insurance-induced mobility reductions.

However, reducing this distortion is only one of a number of goals towards which reform must
strive, goals which may be not be mutually compatible. Thus, if it is possible to alleviate much of

the job-lock problem by modest policy changes, this may offer policy-makers more degrees of
freedom with which to design other elements of the reform package.
This research suggests that continuation benefits may have had some success in alleviating
job-lock. We find that one year of continuation benefits is associated with a 5% increase in mobility

for those with health insurance. This is moderately large in reference to the estimates of job-lock
provided by Madrian (1992). Furthermore, continuation mandates were successful in increasing the

insurance coverage of job leavers above and beyond inducing job leaving behavior.

Our findings imply that a substantial portion of the job-lock problem can he alleviated by
limited portability. This is supportive of Holtz-Eakin's (1993) contention that job-lock is a short-run

23

problem. Presumably the expansion of eligibility for COBRA coverage after 1990 that allows for
coverage even after individuals are employed if they are subject to length of service requirements
or preexisting conditions exclusions will only strengthen its effects. Future work to model the effects

of this change would be very useful.
While our estimates imply that limited portability does remove a sizeable share of job-lock.
there are a number of dimensions along which this portability may have to be enhanced to mitigate

this distortion for the entire population. The important point from an economic perspective is that

the policy-changes required to fully remove job-lock may be very costly relative to the changes
necessary to greatly mitigate its effects. If even this limited portability had a substantial effect,

policies which strengthen COBRA, while perhaps allowing for a public reinsurance pool for the
worst risks, may be all that is necessary to greatly reduce this key labor market distortion.

24

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Bai-tel, Ann and George Borjas (1977). "Middle-Age Job Mobility: Its Determinants and
Consequences." In Seymour Wolfbein, editor, Men in the Pre-Retirement Years.
Philadelphia: Temple University Press.

Congressional Research Service (1988). Costs and Effects of Extending Health Insurance Coverage.
Washington, DC: Library of Congress.

Cotton, Paul (1991). "Preexisting Conditions 'Hold Americans Hostage' to Employers and
Insurance." Journal of the American Medical Association, vol. 265, 2451-2453.
Diamond, Peter A. and Jerry A. Hausman (1984). "The Retirement and Unemployment Behavior
of Older Men." In Henry J. Aaron and Gary Burtless, editors, Retirement and Economic
Behavior. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
Diamond, Peter A. (1992). "A Proposal for Universal Coverage Through Compulsory Group Health

Insurance." Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Department of Economics, mimeo.
Cambridge, MA.

Flynn, Patrice (1992). "Employment-Based Health Insurance: Coverage Under COBRA
Continuation Rules.' In U.S. Department of Labor, Pension and Welfare Benefits
Administration, Health Benefits and the Workforce. Washington, DC: Government Printing
Office.

Gniber, Jonathan (1992a). "State Mandated Benefits and Employer-Provided Health Insurance,"
forthcoming Journal of Public Economics.
Gruber, Jonathan (1992b). "The Efficiency of a Group-Specific Mandated Benefit: Evidence From
Health Insurance Benefits for Maternity,' forthcoming American Economic Review.

Gruber, Jonathan and Brigitte C. Madrian (1993). "Health Insurance and Early Retirement:
Evidence From the Availability of Continuation Coverage.' Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Department of Economics, mimeo.

Hewitt Associates (1985). Continuation of Group Medical Coverage--A Study of Stale Laws.
Lincolnshire, IL: Hewitt Associates.
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas (1993). "Health Insurance Provision and Labor Market Efficiency in the
United States and Germany." Syracuse University, Department of Economics, mimeo.
Syracuse, NY.

25

Klerman, Jacob Alex and Omar Rahman (1992). 'Employment Change and Continuation of Health
Insurance Coverage." In U.S. Department of Labor, Pension and Welfare Benefits
Administration, Health Benefits and the Workforce. Washington, DC: Government Printing
Office.

Madrian, Brigitte C. (1992). "Employment-Based Health Insurance and Job Mobility: Is There
Evidence of Job-Lock?'. Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Department of Economics,
mirneo. Cambridge, MA.
Mincer, Jacob (1986). 'Wage Changes in Job Changes." In R.G. Ehrenberg, editor, Research in
Labor Economics, vol. 8, part A. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

Minter, Caroline (1992). 'Tests of Job-Matching Models Using Turnover and Wage Growth."
Massachusetts Institute of Technology mimeo. Cambridge, MA.
Mitchell, Olivia S. (1982). 'Fringe Benefits and Labor Mobility." Journal of Human Resources,
vol. 17, 286-298.
Rosen, Sherwin (1986). 'The Theory of Equalizing Differences.' In Orley Ashenfelter and Richard
Layard, editors, Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 1. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Thompson Publishing Group, Inc. (1992). Employer's Handbook: Mandated Health Benefits--The
COBRA Guide. Salisbury, MD: Thompson Publishing Group.

Topel, Robert (1986). 'Job Mobility, Search and Earnings Growth: A Reinterpretation of Human
Capital Earnings Functions.' In R.G. Ehrenberg, editor, Research in Labor Economics, vol.

8, part A. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics (1989). Employee Benefits in Medium and
Large Firms. Washington DC: Government Printing Office.

26

APPEND LX

Calculating Correction Factors for the Impact of
State and Federal Continuation Laws

In our basic regression specification, we assign to individuals the maximum number of

months of continuation coverage mandated under either federal or state law. There are several
factors, however, that lead to less than full coverage of these laws. First, those who are not covered

by employer-provided health insurance should not be affected by any of these laws. Before the
federal law took effect, employees of self-insured firms should not have been affected by the state
laws because, under the 1974 Employee Retirement Income and Security Act (ER ISA), self-insured

firms are exempt from state mandates. And those who work in firms with fewer than 20 employees

will not be affected by the federal law, which does not apply to small firms, although they will be
influenced by state laws which pertain to all firms.

To the extent that these factors differ across states, we would expect laws which mandate
equivalent months of coverage to have different effects. To account for the less than full coverage

of these laws, we compute a "corrected" measure of months of coverage. As before, if there is no

state or federal law in effect, we assign no months of coverage to an individual. If a state law is
operative but the federal law has not yet taken effect, the corrected months of coverage equals

[Coverage

)•

Offered
Insurance

—

J

Self-Insured

Firn:)]

If the federal law is in effect but there is no state law, the corrected months of coverage equals

27

Months
of Federal
Coverage

Fraction
I Offered
L Insurance

•I

—

Fraction
Insured in

<20 Firm

Finally, if both a state and the federal law are in place, the corrected months of coverage equals
Fraction

Fraction 1

Coverage

L Insurance

<20 Firm j

Months
of State

II Fraction

Months

of Federal •

Coverage

Offered • 1 — Insured in

Offered
iL Insurance

+

Fraction
.
Fraction in Firm • Insured in
iY — Self—Insured

<20 Firm

We measure the various components of the corrected months of coverage using data from
the Health Insurance Association of America (HIAA) 1989 employer survey and the May 1988

Current Population Survey (CPS) pension supplement. In using data from this late date, we are
assuming that these factors are constant over time. This is clearly not true for self-insurance which
grew dramatically during the 1980s. As long as self-insurance did not grow in a way correlated with
the passage of these laws, however, this will not bias our results. Recent research suggests that
mandates

play little role in the firm's decision to self-insure.

The fraction of workers offered employer-provided health insurance and the fraction of
insured workers in firms with less than 20 employees are measured directly, by state, from the CPS.

The fraction in self-insured firms are estimated from the HIAA data. In using the l-IAA data, we
have tried two different approaches. The first is to calculate the average of these quantities by state.

This strategy, however, is problematic, as the state cell sizes in the HIAA data are quite small. Our

second approach, therefore, is to use the HIAA data to run a regression predicting the rate of self-

insurance as a function of firm size, industry, and census division. We then use these estimated
coefficients to impute values of these quantities for each individual in the May CPS. Our correction
factors are state-wide averages of these imputed values.

28

We did this imputation for all male workers between 20 and 54 years old. In our empirical

work, we use the corrected months of coverage computed as outlined above when the sample
includes all workers. When the sample is restricted to only those with health insurance, we use a
similarly constructed corrected months of coverage which does not adjust for the fraction of workers
in the state with employer-provided health insurance.

29

18
10

6

1/1/88
8/22/81

7/1/83

Virginia
Wisconsin

Utah
Vermont

Sources: Hewitt (1985), Thompson Publishing Group (1992), and state statutes.

Missouri
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Mexico

12

9

6
5/14/86
4/17/86
5/14/80

3
18

2

3
6

18

2
6
3

7/1/86

9
6

7/15/80

18

Tennessee
Texas

9/28/85

1/1/81
1/1/81

South Dakota

6

1/1/78

Kansas

8/1/74
3/19/83
6/1/87

1/1/79
1/1/90
7/1/84
3/3/88

6

1

6

18

South Carolina

Kentucky
Minnesota

3

10

/ /88

Iowa

of

Coverage

Months

1/1/82

Effective
Date
1/1/82
7/1/83
1/1/86
1/1/76

9
9

Oregon
Rhode Island

New York
Oklahoma

6

3

Laws

North Carolina
North Dakota

State

of Coverage

1

8/23/85
7/1/87

Illinois

Georgia

10/1/75
1/1/87
7/1/86
1/1/84
20

3
10

1/1/85

7/1/86

4
3

Coverage

7/20/79

Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut

of

Effective
Date

State

Months

State Continuation

TABLE

TABLE 2
Group and Nongroup Health Insurance Benefits

Fraction of Individuals with
Specified Benefit
Group Plans

Nongroup Plans

A. Primary benefits
Major medical coverage

86.9%

Hospital room and board

98.4

91.4

Surgery

97.6

91.6

Physician office visit

87.9

40.4

Ambulance

89.0

54.0

Outpatient diagnostic services

95.9

66.0

Prescribed medicines

87.3

30.3

Mental health

92.2

66.0

Major medical deductible < $100

94.3

61.6

Full semi-private room charge

77.8

38.2

80-100% of UCR surgical charge

70.6

60.0

80-100% of UCR physician charge

91.8

81.3

39.1 %

B. Other benefits

C. Generosity of benefits
(conditional on having benefit)

Source: Fancy (1986), Tables 45-58.

TABLE 3
Sources of Health Insurance Coverage

AU

Employer-provided

Job Stayers

Job Leavers

Any

66.1%

72.0%

45.1%

Own name

57.5

64.2

33.9

Union

3.5

3.6

3.1

Other group policy

1.2

1.0

1.9

Non-group policy

6.!

6.2

5.6

CHAMPUS

2.5

2.1

4.0

Medicaid

1.1

0.6

2.9

Authors calculation using data from the 1987 National Medical Expenditure Survey.

TABLE 4
Descriptive Statistics
Standard

Variable
Non-white

Mean

0.113

Deviation
0.316

Years of school completed

12.94

3.021

Experience

16.42

10.044

Log hourly wage

$2.20

0.619

Holds employer-provided
health insurance

0.772

0.420

Leave Job

0.101

0.301

Months of continuation

6.88

7.257

coverage
Authors' calculation using data on men aged 20-54 from the 1984-1987
Panels of the Survey of Income and Program Participation. The

sample consists of 155,151 quarterly observations on 29,841
individuals.

TABLE 5
Effect of Continuation Coverage on Job Turnover

(1)

(2)

(3)

.0118

-.0087
(.0144)

-.0087
(.0144)

-.0130
(.0019)

-.0072

-.0071

(.0020)

(.0020)

-.0127

-.0106

-.0106

(.0005)

(.0005)

(.0005)

-.2645

-.1327

-.1338

(.0078)

(.0084)

(.0084)

--

-.5546

-.5542

(.0108)

(.0108)

A. Coefficient Estimates
Non-white

(.0142)
Education

Experience

Log hourly wage
Health insurance

--

Months of coverage

.0046
(.0011)

Log-likelihood

N=Sample Size

-47,098

N155,151

-45,794
N='155,151

-45,785
N= 155,151

--.0087
13. Marginal effect of 12 months
19.1 %]
of continuation coverage
[% of baseline mobility raId _______________ _______________ ________________
The table gives estimates from a probit equation for whether or not an individual changed 1ohs in a
quarter using data from the 1984-1987 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The sample is
comprised of men aged 20-54. Coefficients for panel, state, month, industry and occupation dummies
are not reported.

TABLE 6
Effect of Continuation Coverage on Job Turnover
Have Health
Insurance

No Health
Insurance

.0038
(.0195)
-.0105
(.0026)
-.0103
(.0007)
-.1770
(.0118)
.0059
(.0014)
-27,180

-.0238
(.0216)
-.0026
(.0030)
-.0103
(.0008)
-.0862
(.0121)
.0021
(.0018)

A. Coefficient Estimates
Non-white
Education
Experience

Log hourly wage

Months of coverage
Log-likelihood

-18,469
N=Sample Size
N=119,700
N=35,451
B. Marginal effect of 12 months
.0084
.0075
of continuation coverage
(14.3%J
13.4%]
[% of baseline mobility rate] ______________ ______________
The table gives estimates from a probit equation for whether or not an individual
changed jobs in a quarter using data from the 1984-1987 Survey of Income and
Program Participation. The sample is comprised of men aged 20-54.
Coefficients for panel, state, month, industiy and occupation dummies are not
reported.

TABLE 7
Effect of Continuation Coverage on Job Turnover (Corrected)
Have Health

Full Sample

Insurance

A. Coefficient Estimates
Non-white
Education

-.0088
(.0144)
-.0072
(.0020)

Experience

Log hourly wage
Health insurance

-.0106
(.0005)
-.1339
(.0084)
-.5542

.0038

(.0195)
-.0105
(.0026)
-.0103

(.0007)

-.1769
(.0118)
--

(.0 108)

Months of coverage

Log-likelihood
N=Sample Size
B. Marginal effect of 12 months
of continuation coverage
% of baseline mobility rate]

.0063

.0063

(.0016)

(.0017)

-45,785
N= 155,151

N=1 19,700

.0122

[12.7%]

-27,181
.0091
I 15.3 %J

______________ ________________

The table gives estimates from a probil equation for whether or not an individual
changed jobs in a quarter using data from the 1984-1987 Survey of Income and
Program Participation. The sample is comprised of men aged 20-54.
Coefficients for panel, state, month, industry and occupation dummies are not
reported.

TABLE 8
The Effect of Continuation Mandates on Insurance Coverage

Full Sample

Have Health

No Health

Insurance

Insurance

-.3227
(.0617)

-.1392
(.0500)

.0929
(.0077)

.1179
(.0070)

A. Coefficient Estimates
Non-white

-.2961

(.0350)
Education

.1242

(.0046)
Age
Age2

Months of Coverage

Log-likelihood
N=Sample Size

B. Marginal effect of 12 months
of continuation coverage

.0112

.0368

-.0289

(.0096)

(.0174)

(.0146)

.0001

(.0001)

-.0002
(.0002)

(.0002)

.0034
(.0027)

(.0048)

.0112

.0005

-.0048
(.0043)

-7,535

-2,513

-3,347

N'12,285

N4,959

N5,070

.0145

.0411

-.0219

The table gives estimates of the probability of being insured in the quarter after a job
change using data from the 1984-1987 Survey of Income and Program Participation. The
sample is comprised on men aged 20-54 who change jobs or become unemployed.
Coefficients for panel dummies are not reported.

