NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

POPULATION INCREASE, EXTRALEGAL
APPROPRIATION, AND THE END OF
COLOMALISM

Herschel I. Gmssman
Mural lyigun

Working Paper No. 4488

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October, 1993

Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4488
October 1993
POPULATION INCREASE, EXTRALEGAL
APPROPRIAnON, AND THE END OF
COLONIALISM

ABSTRACT
Between 1946 and 1976, the European powers granted independence to all of their large

colonies in Africa and Southeast Asia. This paper attempts to provide an economic explanation

for this remarkable ending to the era of colonialism. The main theoretical innovation is to
consider the effect of population increase on the allocation of time by the indigenous population

between productive and subversive activities. The analysis suggests that the increase in
population during the colonial period increased the potential return toextralegal appropriation of

the profits of colonial companies until the colonies became a net burden on the metropolitan
governments. The analysis also suggests that there was less subversive activity in colonies in

which the market for indigenous labor was monopsonized because

monopsonistic employers

internalized the potential negative effect of extralegal appropriation on net profits.
Herschel I. Grossman
Department of Economics

BoxB
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER

Murat lyigun
Department of Economics

BoxB
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912

At the end of World War II, most of Southeast Asia as well as most of Africa consisted

of European colonies. But, between 1946 and 1976 the European metropolitan

powers

granted independence to all of their large colonies in Southeast Asia and Africa (with the
exception of Southern Rhodesia, which became independent in 1981). Is there an economic

explanation for this remarkable series of decisions that brought the era of colonialism to
an end?
The large European colonies in Southeast Asia and Africa were similar in important

respects. An important motivation for establishing each of these colonies was the income
to be earned by exploiting their natural resources. In most of the colonies the main natural
resource was agricultural land, but in some colonies (for example, Northern Rhodesia and

the Belgian Congo) extractable minerals were more important. Moreover, in all of the
colonies the exploitation of natural resources involved the employment of large amounts

of indigenous labor. Perhaps most interestingly, in all of the large European colonies in
Southeast Asia and Africa the indigenous
population and, hence, the potential supply of
indigenous labor apparently increased substantially during the colonial period.'
There were also important differences
among the large European colonies in Southeast Asia and Africa. In some colonies, especially colonies like Algeria, the Dutch East
Indies, French Indochina, British India, and Kenya, in which production was carried out
on many relatively small farms, the market for indigenous labor seems to have been com'Holland (1985) refers to "a population explosion.., almost everywhere in the colonial world." For all of
Africa Matas (1973) estimates that total population, whichapparently was not growing prior to the colonial
period, increased by more than 150 percent from 1900 to 1971. In individual African colonies, Can-Saunders
(1936) and Clark (1967) estimate that the population of Algeria increased by about 90 percent from 1901 to
1931 and by about 92 percent from 1920 to 1962, the Colonial Office
(1964) reports that population growth

began in Kenya in the 1920's and readied an annual rate of three
percent by the 1960's, Thompson and
AdloIt (1957) report estimated population increase in Fench Subsaharan Africa of 37 percent from 1926 to
1951, and Allen (1964) estimates that the population of Northern Rhodesia grew at an annual rate of about
2.5 percent from 1923 to 1943. For all of Asia, Matras estimates that total population increased by about
146 percent from 1900 to 1971. In individual Asian colonies, Nitisastro (1970) estimates that the population
of Java the major island in the Dutch East Indies, increased by about 90 percent from 1916 to 1960 and
Kumar (1983) estimates that the population of British India increased by more than 50 percent from 1872
to 1941.

1

petitive, whereas in other colonies, like those in French Subsaharan Africa, British West
Africa, Northern Rhodesia, and the Belgian Congo, in which one or a fewlarge plantations,

trading companies, or mining companies employed, either directly or indirectly, most of
the indigenous labor, the labor market seems to have been monopsonized.2 in addition, in
some colonies, such as Algeria, the Dutch East Indies, French Indochina, British India, and

Kenya, subversive activity by the indigenous population was intense in the period before

independence and seems to have played a major role in inducingihe metropolitan power
to grant independence, but in other areas, such as French Subsabaran Africa, British West
Africa, Northern Rhodesia, and the Belgian Congo, subversive activity seems to have pre-

sented only a minor problem for the metropolitan power. Interestingly, the cases in which
anticolonial subversive activity was intense are also cases in which the market for indigenous labor seems to have been competitive, whereas in the cases in which the labor market

seems to have been monopsonized subversive activity was not intense.

This paper attempts to provide an economic explanation for the end of colonialism

in Southeast Asia and Africa. The main theoretical innovation is to consider the effect
of population increase on the allocation of time by the indigenous population between
productive and subversive activities. Among other questions, the analysis asks whether
and, if so, how the increase in population during the colonial period was a factor in the
process leading to the end of colonialism. The analysis also seeks to explain the apparent

relation between the structure of the colonial labor market and the amount of anticolonial
subversive activity.

The Indigenous Population
Consider the following model of a representative colony. The population of the colony
2These inferences about the structure of labor markets come from the discussions in Larreg (1916)
and
Prochaska (1990) on Algeria, Vlekke (1960) on the Dutch East Indies, Robequain (1944) on French
Indochina,
Kumar (1983) on British India, van Zwanenberg (1975) on Kenya, Suret-Canale (1971) on French Subsaharan

Africa, Kay (1972) on British West Africa, Thompson and Woodruff (1953) on Northern Rhodesia, a,d
Lemarchand (1964) on the Belgian Congo.

2

consists of a large number, N, of identical indigenous families. The indigenous families
divide their time between productive and subversive activities. The productive activity
is wage employment offered by the colonial company or companies that are exploiting the

natural resources of the colony.3 The subversive activity is banditry or similar forms of
extralegal appropriation of the profits of the colonial company or companies.4
The income of an indigenous family from wage employment is w, where w is the

wage rate and I is the fraction of its time that this family allocates to wage employment.
The total income of indigenous families from extralegal appropriation is f3Rir, where R
is the total number of units of indigenous natural resources, lr is the gross profits obtained
from each unit of indigenous natural resources, and /3 is the fraction of gross profits lost to

extralegal appropkation. This total income from extralegal appropriation is dividedamong

the indigenous families proportionately to the time allocated by each family to extralegal
appropriation. Thus, the income of an indigenous family from extralegal appropriation is

(iRirb/NB, where & is the fraction of its time that this family allocates to extralegal

appropriation and B is the fraction of its time that the average family allocates to
extralegal appropriation.5

A natural assumption is that, for /3 < 1, /3 is an increasing function of NB/B,
3TIIIS model does not consider other employment arrangements, such as sharecropping, and abstracts
from the possibility of employment in an indigenous sector. Introducing these complications would not
change the qualitative conclusions drawn below.

4An alternative would be to model subversive activity as an attempt to take control of the natural

resources of the colony — that is, as a direct attempt to drive out the metropolitan power and its colonial
companies — rather than as an attempt only to appropriate the current profits of colonial companies. The
main results of the analysis would obtain in this alternative framework as well.

51n this model the allocation of time to extralegal appropriation reduces aggregate output and income
by taking time away from productive activities. But, given aggregate output and income, the total gain to
indigenous families from extralegal appropriation exactly equals the total loss to colonial companies from
extralegal appropriation. In other words, the analysis abstracts from the possibility that the process of
extralegal appropriation destroys output. This possibility would leave the indigenous families with a total
gain that is smaller than the total loss to colonial companies. The analysis also abstracts from the possibility
that, in addition to the income from extralegal appropriation, indigenous families receive a nonpecuniary
benefit because extralegal appropriation advances the cause of independence. This possibility would make
the total gain to indigenous families larger than the total loss to coloniai.eompanies. Introducing these
complications also would not change the main results of the analysis.

3

which is the total time that indigenous families allocate to extralegal

appropriation per

unit of indigenous natural resources. A simple technology of extralegal appropriation that

incorporates this assumption is
for

for t4i

11
where

0. In equation (1) the parameter

(1)

determines the effectiveness of time

allocated to extralegal appropriation. As long as jI is less than unity, the larger is

the

larger is both the average and marginal effect of NB/R on j3.° Given equation (1), the
income of an indigenous family from extralegal appropriation, f3Rirb/NB, is equivalent,

for /3<1, to irb.

Each indigenous family takes to and qnr as given and selects £ and ii, subject to
the constraint L + b = 1, to maximize its income i. The above assumptions imply that

i=wt+,rb.

(2)

Given equation (2), the Kuhn-Tucker conditions for maximizing i imply

for

0

1=

wct

[0,1} for w=Ø
1

for

(3)

w>Ø

and 6 = i—i. Equation (3) indicates, among other things, that each family would allocate
all of its time to one activity only if the return to that activity is not smaller than the
return to the other activity and that each family would allocate time to both activities only

if the returns to both activities are equal. In equilibrium, because all indigenous families
aTh piecewise.Iinear specification of the technology of appropriation simplifies the analysis of the model.

To simplify the aaalysj further we incorporate in the parameter
the effect of whatever efforts the
metropolitan government makes to suppress subversive activity in the colony. In addition, we implicitly
include expenditure on suppressing subversive activity in the fixed costs of administering the colony that
are introduced below. For a more general model of extralegal appropriation activity and its suppression, see
Grossman (1991).
4

are identical, £ is equal to L, which is the fraction of its time that the average family
allocates to wage employment, and 6 is equal to B.

A Competitive Labor Market
Suppose that each colonial company exploits one unit of indigenous natural resources
— for example, each unit could be a standard sized farm —
and

that the number, R, of

such resource units and, hence, the number of colonial companies is large. With a large
number of employers, the labor market is competitive.

Output per unit of indigenous natural resources, which is the same as output per
colonial company, is A/i0, 0 C a c 1, where ii is units of labor time employed on each
unit of indigenous natural resources and where A is a parameter that reflectsproductivity

as well as the relative price of product produced by the colonial companies. Given this
technology, the gross profits obtained from each unit of indigenous natural resources, which

is the same as the gross profits of each colonial company, are

,r=Aha_wh.

(4)

Each company takes the wage rate as given and selects h to maximize lr. This maximization implies that h satisfies

=

Aa

()

The market-clearing condition for the labor market is

Rh=NL.

(6)

Taken together, equations (4), (5), and (6) imply that the market-clearing wage rate
equals the marginal product of labor and satisfies
Aa
W = (iLL\1—a'

-

(')

and that the resulting gross profits of each colonial company are
(8)
5

Equations (7) and (8) show that the wage share of output is a and that the profit share
of output is 1 — a. Total gross profits of the colonial companies are

Rir=(1—a)Y,

(9)

where Y = AJP_0(NL)0 is the total output of the colonial companies.7 The
profits of
the colonial companies net of extralegal appropriation are

(1- /3)R7r = (1- fI)(1 - a)Y.

(10)

By substituting equations (7) and (8) for wages and profits into equation (3), which

describes the labor-supply behavior of each indigenous family, and equating £ to L, we
can calculate the equilibrium behavior of the average indigenous family. Then, substituting
into equations (7) and (10), we can calculate the equilibrium wage rate and the equilibrium
net profits of the colonial companies. There are three possible cases depending on the value

of N/fl.
I) If

then we have to > 7r and indigenous families choose £ = 1.
In this case, the population is sufficiently small that, even with all time allocated to
.<

wage employment, the wage rate is larger than the return to extralegal appropriation.
Consequently, indigenous families allocate all of their time to wage employment. Moreover,
with B = 1 — L = 0, the fraction of profits lost to extralegal

appropriation, /3, is also

zero. Accordingly, from equation (7) the equilibrium wage rate is

=

(N/R)'—'

(11)

and from equation (10) the net profits of the colonial companies are
(1 — $)Rir

= Rir =

A(1

—

a)R.'"N°.

(12)

TThis setup abstracts from the cost of any capita] invested by the colonial companies. In another paper,
Grossman & lyigun (1993), we analyze the profitability of colonial investment.

6

Equations (11) and (12) imply that with a small population the equilibrium wage rate is
a decreasing convex function of population and that net profits are an increasing concave
function of population. In other words, with a small population the conventional wisdom
is correct that population growth depresses wages and raises profits from the exploitation
of natural resources.

II) If

L=

c

we have vi = 1r and indigenous families choose
In this case, with a fraction of time allocated to
wage employment that is
then

positive, less than unity, and a decreasing function of population, the marginal product
of labor and the wage rate are equal to the return to extralegal appropriation. Moreover,

with B =

1 —

L, we have, from equation (1), /3 =

— j-, and both B and /3

are positive and increasing functions of population. In this case, from equation (7) the
equilibrium wage rate is

i

= (1 ..S_\i—a

* 1—al
and from equation (10) the net profits of the colonial companies are

(1 —$)Rr =

—

— a)N.

(13)

(14)

Equations (13) and (14) imply that with a larger population the equilibrium wage rate as
well as gross profits become independent of population and act profits are a decreasing
linear function of population. In other words, with a larger population the opportunity to
engage in extralegal appropriative activity overturns the conventional wisdom that population growth depresses wages and raises profits.

III) If

>

j-1,

Moreover, with B =

then we have vi =

and indigenous families choose L = a.

—

L, we have, from equation (1), /3 = 1. In this case, the
population is so large that, in order for the wage rate to equal the return to extralegal ap1

propriation, the indigenous families must allocate enough time to extralegal appropriation

to appropriate all profits. In this case, net profits are zero.
7

Taken together, these three cases imply that, if population is positive, but not too

large, then the net profits of the colonial firms are positive. Moreover, the highest net

profits occur at a population such that = j-, which is the largest population for which
no time is allocated to extralegal appropriation. In sum, with a competitive labormarket,
if the indigenous population is small — specifically, if
— then population
C
growth increases the profits earned in the colony, but that, if population continues togrow
— specifically, if
— then
reaches
further population growth generates extralegal
appropriative activity and steadily reduces the net profits earned in the colony.
Suppose that the government of the metropolitan power incurs a positive cost, dl, to

administer this colony and provide necessary infrastructure. Equations (12) and (4) imply

that, if the population of the colony is within.a critical range such that
is larger than
but smaller than #fl')[l —
then the net profits of the colonial firms

f()_0J,

exceed dl. Accordingly, assuming that this critical range is not empty, if the criterion
for establishing and maintaining a colony is that the metropolitan government can impose
sufficient taxes on the colonial firms to cover the cost of administration and infrastructure,

then this colony will be viable if and only if its population is within this critical range.
If the metropolitan government is willing to subsidize this colony (for example, because
of strategic geopolitical considerations), then the critical population range can be larger.
But, as long as the metropblitan government is not willing to bear the entire cost dl,
the bounds of the critical population range are positive and finite. This analysis suggests

that a colony with a competitive labor market and a growing population has a life cycle
in which a period of falling wages and rising profits is followed by a period of constant
wages, positive and increasing subversive appropriative activity, and declining net profits,
until finally, assuming that there is not an offsetting decrease in the ratio c/a, the colony

becomes a net burden on the metropolitan government and is given its independence.S
1The analysis of two related models, in Grossman (1993, 1994), suggests that, it either a tax-financed
wage subsidy or a lasd reform were administratively feasible, then these policies could reduce the amount

8

With independence, sovereignty is transferred to an indigenous government, which can
redistribute the profits from the exploitation of indigenous natural resources either by
taxing or by expropriating the colonial companies.

A Monopsonized Labor Market
Suppose that, instead of R colonial companies each exploitingone unit of indigenous

natural resources, a single colonial company exploits all 1? units of indigenous natural
resources. As the only employer of indigenous labor, this company monopsothzes the labor
market.

Assume, for heuristic purposes, that this monopsonist faces the same technologies
of production and extralegal appropriation as the competitive companies. Specifically, for
the monopsonist output per unit of natural resources is M and ji is the fraction of gross
profits lost to extralegal appropriation. Accordingly, the monopsonist's net profits are
(1 — fl)R1T

=

(1

—

— tv/i), with h =

(15)

To maximize (I — /3)1?r, the monopsonist chooses a wage rate and an amount
of employment to offer to each and every indigenous family, subject to the labor.supply
behavior of each indigenous family, as given by equation (3), the dependence of j3 on B,

asgivenbyequation(]j,and L+B = 1. Thesolutiontothisproblemistoset w equalto
r and to set I and, hence, L equal to unity. in other words, the monopsonist sets the
wage rate such that each indigenous family is indifferent between allocating time to wage

employment and to extralegal appropriation and the monopsonist offers the indigenous
families sufficient wage employment to absorb all of their time.

Accordingly, in the monopsonistic equilibrium indigenous families allocate no time

to extralegal appropriation. This property obtains because the monopsothst internalizes
the potential negative effect of extralegal appropriation on net profits. In other words, the
of extralegal appropriation and could prolong temporarily the viability of a colony with a competitive labor
market and a growing population.

9

monopsonist does not take /9 as given, but rather takes into account that an increase in

L both increases output and decreases B and, hence, decreases the amount of

profits

lost to extralegal appropriation. In contrast, each competitive
employer took L, B, and
/3 as given and considered only the effect of the choice of employment on output.
Substituting to = ir and L = 1 into equation (15), we can solve for the equilibriun
gross and net profits of the monopsonist, which are

ARNa
l+Øt/R

(16)

and we can solve for the equilibrium monopsonistic wage rate, which is
—

'

—

3A(N/R)°

l+çbN/R

17

Equations (16) and (17) imply that both the monopsothstic wage rate and the profits of
the monopsonist are smooth hump-shaped functions ofpopulation and that both functions

have a maximum at a population such that

=

In other words, with a small

population, population growth raises profits, but also raises wages as the monopsonist
equates the wage rate to the potential return to extralegal appropriation. With a larger
population, however, population growth depresses both profits and wages. As population
continues to grow, both profits and wage approach zero asymptotically.

Comparing equation (16) to equations (12) and (14), we see the following: First,
<
then the profits of a monopsonist are larger than the total
profits of
competitive companies. But, as population grows, the profits of a monopsonist increase
more slowly than the total profits of competitive companies. Second, if population grows
until
= j-9—, then both the profits of a monopsonist and the total profits of
competitive
companies are at their highest levels, and they are equal. Third, if population continues to
grow so that % >
then the profits of a monopsonist decrease more slowly than the
if

total net profits of competitive firms and the net profits of a monopsonist again become

larger than the total net profits of competitive firms. Note, however, that in this case
10

the profits of a monopsonist are smaller than the total gross profits of competitive firms.
With a large population, the larger net profits of a monopsonist result from the ability of
the monopsonist to internalize the potential negative effect of extralegal appropriation

on

profits.

Comparing equation (17) to equations (11) and (13), we see the following: First,
if

<

then the monopsonistic wage rate is less than the competitive wage rate.
But, as population grows, the monopsonistic wage increases, whereas the competitive
decreases. Second, if population grows until

wage

=

then the monopsonistic wage
and the competitive wage become equal. Third, if population continues to grow so that
> 1S.., then the monopsonistic wage decreases and
again becomes less than the com-

petitive wage, which remains constant. Note that with a large population the indigenous
families allocate no time to extralegal appropriation in the

monopsonistic equilibrium, but

not in the competitive equilibrium, even though the monopsonistic wage is less than the
competitive wage. The explanation is that the total gross profits of competitive companies,

but not their net profits, are larger than the profits of a monopsonist.
Most importantly, equation (16) implies that, similarly to the competitive case, if
the population of the colony is neither too small nor too large, then the monopsonist's

profits exceed cl?1 the cost of administering and providing necessary infrastructure for
the colony. Thus, a colony with a monopsonized labor market and a growing pop ulation
will have a life cycle that is similar to the life cycle of a colony with a competitive labor

market. Specifically, with either a monopsonized labor market or a competitive labor
market, population growth produces a period of rising profits followed by a period of
declining profits, until finally the colony becomes a net burden on the metropolis. But, for

any given level of dl?, or any given level of dl? less the subsidy that the metropolitan
government is willing to provide to the colony, the critical population range for which the
colony remains viable is larger with a monopsonized labor market than with a competitive

labor market. In addition, with a competitive labor market the period of rising profits has
11

falling wages arid the period of falling profits has both constant wages and positive and
increasing extralegal appropriative activity, whereas with a monopsonized labor market
wages rise when profits are rising and wages fall when profits are falling and there is no
extralegal appropriative activity.

Summary

-

This paper has suggested an economic explanation for the decisions of the Euro-

pean metropolitan powers between 1946 and 1976 to grant independence to all of their
large colonies in Southeast Asia and Africa. This explanation emphasizes the substantial
population increase during the colonial period and argues that this increase in population

increased the potential return to extralegal appropriation of the profits of the colonial
companies. The analysis suggests that a colony with a growing population has a life cycle
in which population growth produces a period of rising profits followed, because of the

increasing potential return to extralegal appropriation, by a period of falling net profits
until the colony becomes a net burden on the metropolitan government.
The analysis also distinguished between colonies in which the market forindigenous
labor was competitive and in which subversive activity by the indigenous population was

intense prior to independence and colonies in which the labor market was monopsonized

and in which subversive activity was not intense. The analysis attributes this relaéion
between the structure of the labor market and the amount of subversive activity to the
ability of a monopsonist to internalize the potential negative effect of extralegal appropriation on net profits. Although with a monopsonized labor market subversive activity
was not intense and the colony remained viable for a larger population, population growth

still depressed net profits and the colony still eventually became a net burden because
the monopsonist had to keep the wage rate equal to the potential return to extralegal
appropriation.

In most of the colonies in Africa and Southeast Asia, population increase reflected

12

mainly natural population growth, but in some colonies immigration was important. In either case, population increase during the colonial period presumably was not an exogenous
event, but rather a result of changes produced by colonialism itself — specifically, increased

employment opportunities and decreased mortality due to the introduction of European
technologies. Given the relation between population increase and the net profits of colonial

companies, the metropolitan powers at first would have welcomed the population growth

that colonialism induced, but eventually this population growth. became the undoing of
colonialism itself.

13

References
William Allen, Studies in African Land Usage in Northern Rhodesia (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1949).

A. M. Cart-Saunders, World Population: Past Growth and Present Trends (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1936).

Cohn Clark, Population Growth and Land Use (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1977).
Colonial Office, Kenya Report, 1962 (London: HMSO, 1964).
Herschel Grossman, "A General Equilibrium Model of Insurrections," American Economic
Review, 81, September 1991, 912-921.

Herschel Grossman, "Robin Hood and the Redistribution of Property Income," unpublished, May 1993.

Herschel Grossman, "Production, Appropriation, and Land Reform," American Economic
Review, forthcoming 1994.

Herschel Grossman and Murat lyigun, "Extralegal Appropriation and the Profitability of
Colonial Investment," unpublished, August 1993.
R. F. Holland, European Decolonization 1918-1981: An Introductory Survey (New York:
St. Martin's Press, 1985).

C. B. Kay, The Political Economy of Colonialism in Ghana (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1972).

Dharma Kumar, The Cambridge Economic History of India, Volume 2, c.1757 — c.1970
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 1983).
Marnia Lazreg, The Emergence of Classes in Algeria (Boulder: Westview Press, 1976).

René Lemarchand, Political Awakening in the Belgian Congo (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1964).
Judah Matras, Population and Societies (New York: Prentice-Hall, 1973).

WidJoJo Nitisastro Population Trends in Indonesia (Ithaca: Cornell University Press,
14

1970).

David Prochaska, Making Algeria French (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1990).
Charles Robequain, The Economic Development of French Indo- China (New York: Oxford

University Press, 1944).

Jean Suret-Canale, French Colonialism on Tropical Africa, 1900-19(5 (New York: Pica
Press, 1971); translation of Afrique Noire, Vol. II; L 'Etc Coloniale 1900-19(5 (Paris:
Editions Sociales, 1964).

C. H. Thompson and H. W. Woodruff, Economic Development in Rhodesia andNyasaland
(London: Dennis Dobson, 1953).
Virginia Thompson and Richard Adloff, French West Africa (Stanford: Stanford University
Press, 1957).

R. M. A. van Zwanenberg, An Economic History of Kenya and Uganda, 1800-19 70 (London: Macmillan, 1975).

Bernard H. M. Vlekke, Nusantara: A History of Indonesia, revised edition (Chicago:
Quadrangle Books, 1960).

15

1970).

David Prochaska, Making Algeria French (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1990).
Charles Robequain, The Economic Development of French Indo-China (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1944).

Jean Suret-Canak, French Colonialism on Tropical Africa, 1900-1945 (New York: Pica
Press, 1971); translation of Afrique Noire, Vol. II; L 'Ere Coloniale 1900-1945 (Pails:
Editions Sociales, 1964).

C. H. Thompson and H. W. Woodruff, Economic Development in Rhodesia and Nyasaland
(London: Dennis Dobson, 1953).
Virginia Thompson and Richard Adloff, French West Africa (Stanford: StanfordUniversity
Press, 1957).

R. M. A. van Zwanenberg, An Economic History of Kenya and Uganda, 1800-19 70 (London: Macmillan, 1975).

Bernard H. M. Vlekke, Nusantara: A History of Indonesia, revised edition (Chicago:
Quadrangle Books, 1960).

15

