                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       STICKING IT OUT: ENTREPRENEURIAL
                     SURVIVAL AND LIQUIDITY CONSTRAINTS




                                   Douglas Holtz-Eakin
                                     David Joulfaian
                                    Harvey S. Rosen




                                 Working Paper No. 4494




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  October, 1993



We are grateful to Karin D'Agostino, Esther Gray and Kathleen Staudt for their assistance in
preparing the manuscript, and to Bharat Anand, David Blanchflower, Bruce Meyer, Andrew
Oswald, James Powell, Sherwin Rosen, Kenneth Small and an anonymous referee for useful
suggestions. Financial support for this research was provided by the Center for Economic
Policy Studies at Princeton University. The views in this paper do not represent the views of
any of the institutions with which the authors are affiliated or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Public Economics.
                                                                       NBER Working Paper #4494
                                                                                   October 1993


                          STICKING IT OUT: ENTREPRENEURIAL
                        SURVIVAL AND LIQUIDITY CONSTRAINTS


                                           ABSTRACT

       We examine why some individuals survive as entrepreneurs and others do not.                 In

addition, we analyze the growth of entrepreneurial enterprises, conditional on surviving. Our
focus is on the role of access to capital --   to   what extent do liquidity constraints increase the
likelihood of entrepreneurial failure?

       The empirical strategy is based on the following logic: If entrepreneurs cannot borrow
to attain their profit-maximizing levels of capital, then those entrepreneurs who have substantial
personal financial resources will be more successful than those who do not. The data consist of
the 1981 and 1985 federal individual income tax returns of a group of people who received
inheritances. These data allow us to identify those individuals who were sole proprietors in 1981,
and to determine the extent to which the decision to remain a sole proprietor was influenced by
the magnitude of the inheritance-induced increase in liquidity.
       The results are consistent with the notion that liquidity constraints exert a noticeable
influence on the viability of entrepreneurial enterprises. For example, a $150,000 inheritance
increases the probability that an individual will continue as a sole proprietor by 1.3 percentage

points, and conditional on surviving, the receipts of the enterprise increase by almost 20 percent.


Douglas Holtz-Eakin          David Joulfaian              Harvey S. Rosen
Metropolitan Studies Program U.S. Dept. of the Treasury   Department of Economics
Syracuse University          Main Treasury Building       Princeton University
400 Maxwell Hall             1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW Princeton, NJ 08544
Syracuse. NY 13244-l09()     Washington, D.C. 20220       and NBER
and NBER
       INTRODUCTION

       Entrepreneurs are central to many issues in both economic theory and public policy.

Accordingly, economists have done a great deal of empirical research on entry into

entrepreneurship -- who becomes an entrepreneur and under what conditions?' However, the

net quantity of entrepreneurs is just as dependent on departures from entrepreneurship as on the

flows into entrepreneurship, and the former has received much less attention. A key issue in

this context is one that is central to virtually all discussions of entrepreneurship -- access to

capital. Do some entrepreneurs face liquidity constraints which make it more likely that their

enterprises will fail? Even if they survive, are these entrepreneurs hobbled because they are

under-capitalized? The notion that lack of capital inhibits the growth of small firms has been

around at least since Adam Smith. Smith used the example of a small grocery store to

illustrate this proposition: The owner of such an enterprise

           must be able to read, write, and account, and must be a tolerable judge too,
        of perhaps fifty or sixty different sorts of goods, their prices, qualities, and the
        markets where they are to be had cheapest. He must have all the knowledge, in
        short, that is necessary for a great merchant, which nothing hinders him from
        becoming but the want of sufficient capital. "

        To date, there is little evidence with respect to whether "want of sufficient capital"

affects firm survival and growth.3 Much of the empirical discussion of firm survival has taken

place in the context of "Gibrat's Law," which states that a firm's rate of growth is independent

o its size. Evans [19871 and Audretsch [19911 recognize that endogenous exit decisions may

bias conventional statistical estimates of the relationship between firm growth and firm size.

The corrective statistical procedure requires estimating models of firm exit rates. These

models, however, do not include any consideration of liquidity constraints.4 Bates [1990]

allows the probability of exit to depend on the entrepreneur's demographic characteristics, and

explicitly considers the possibility that access to capital markets may affect survival
probabilities.5 Specifically, Bates attempts to estimate how the amount of debt and equity

capital obtained by entrepreneurs affects the viability of their enterprises. Unfortunately,

because of severe multicollinearity problems, he is unable to include these variables in a logit

analysis of exit decisions. In any case, as Bates recognizes, such variables are likely to be

endogenous. Thus, the relationship between liquidity constraints and the viability of

entrepreneurial enterprises remains an open issue.

        In this paper, we examine why some individuals survive as entrepreneurs, and others

don't. In addition, we analyze the growth of entrepreneurial enterprises, conditional on

surviving. Section 2 introduces our analytic framework, which explicitly recognizes that there

are several different paths out of entrepreneurship -- becoming a wage earner, joining a

partnership, or simply retiring from the labor force.

       In Section 3 we discuss the data and econometric issues. The data consist of the 1981

and 1985 federal individual income tax returns of a group of people who received inheritances

in 1982 and 1983, along with information about the size of their inheritances. Any individual

who is a sole proprietor must file a Schedule C" with his or her tax return. Hence, we can

construct a sample of individuals who were sole proprietors in 1981, identify those who ceased

being sole proprietors between 1981 and 1985, and determine the extent to which this decision

was influenced by the size of the inheritance-induced increase in assets. For those who

remained entrepreneurs, we can assess how the inheritance affected the success of the

enterprise, ceteris paribus. A problem that faces virtually all researchers who analyze the

impact of liquidity constraints on firm behavior is that the measure of liquidity may be

endogenous to various decisions of the firm. (See Hall [1992].) A particular appeal of this

data set is that, as noted by Blanchflower and Oswald [1990], the receipt of an inheritance is


                                               -2-
about as close to a 'natural experiment' as one is likely to get in this area, which reduces

potential endogeneity problems.

       Section 4 presents the results. They are consistent with the notion that liquidity effects

exert a noticeable influence on the viability of entrepreneurial enterprises. For example, a

$150,000 inheritance increases the probability that an individual will continue as a sole

proprietor by 1.3 percentage points, and the receipts of any surviving enterprise increase by

almost 20 percent. We conclude in Section 5 with a summary and suggestions for future

research.



2.      ANALYTIC FRAMEWORK

2.1     Income Opportunities

       We analyze the choice faced by an individual who is currently self-employed. A

preliminary analysis of the data indicated that four options are relevant for such an individual:

retirement, employment as a wage and salary worker, continuing as a solo entrepreneur, and

participation in a partnership or S corporation.6 Although the four activities are not all

mutually exclusive, it is convenient to consider the income opportunities of each in isolation.

        Retirement. If the individual's assets are A and the net rate of return is r, then income

as a retiree is yR = rA.

        Wae-Earnine. Denoting the individual's earnings potential as a wage-earner by w, the

individual's income as a wage-earner is Y,' = w + rA. The variable w is uncertain; its value

is revealed to the individual only after he makes a decision to become a wage-earner.

        Entrepreneurial Activities.7 As an entrepreneur, an individual's gross receipts are

0 f(k,)€, where f(.) is a production function whose only input is capital (ic), 0 is the


                                                -3-
individual's ability as an entrepreneur, and     is a random component to the production process.

Individuals know their ability (6), but ability varies across individuals and is not observed by

the analyst. We assume that has mean one and finite variance, and thatf(O) > 0-- the finn

can produce output even in the absence of capital input.8 Recalling that A, is personal assets,

A, - /c is available to earn capital income, and the individual's net income as an entrepreneur is

Y, =   0   f(k,) + r(A,    - k).   By definition, Ic - A, is the amount of capital financed by

borrowing. We assume that the amount of borrowing, and thus capital invested in the

enterprise, is bounded by a liquidity constraint generated by the financial markets. The size of

the constraint depends on the individual's net assets: /c 1 (A,), where 1 (A,) >          OY

        An entrepreneur's optimal amount of capital, /c,', maximizes the expected value (where

expectations are taken over E) of Y,1. This maximization problem has three possible solutions.

In the first, the entrepreneur employs capital and the liquidity constraint is not binding. In this

case, the net rate of return equals the expected marginal product of capital: Of (k') =          r, and
k,' rises with the entrepreneur's ability. The second possibility is that the liquidity constraint is

again not binding, but the entrepreneur's ability is sufficiently low that the marginal product of

capital is below the interest rate. Hence, k,' = 0. The final possibility is that the liquidity

constraint is binding, so k' = lk(AI).

        In what follows, we will need to trace the impact on the firm of changing A,. The

effect depends on whether the firm is liquidity constrained. If so,

                      =   lk(A) > 0.                                                               (2.1)

Otherwise,




                                                 -4-
                       = o.                                                                       (2.2)

In general, then, k, is a function of r,8, andA, as is-total output of the firm. Thus, we can

write the firm's revenues, R, as

               R1 =   8f(k,')        R(81,A,r,f)                                                  (2.3)

Expression (2.3) embodies the prediction that an increase in the assets of a liquidity constrained

entrepreneur increases the receipts of his enterprise, ceteris paribus -- higher assets lead to

more capital, which generates greater output. Similarly, income as an entrepreneur is a

function of these variables:

               yE     = Of(k)s   +   r(A—k,)       YE(O,A,r,e).                                   (2.4)

Because an increase in A enables a liquidity-constrained entrepreneur to move closer to his

optimal capital stock, economic profits or entrepreneurial income rises when he experiences an

increase in assets.

        Partnerships/S Corporations. To model the income opportunities associated with this

option, one must address its fundamental nature. There are two possibilities. First, a

partnership/S corporation may be a bona fide business venture that permits the entrepreneur to

expand his enterprise. Alternatively, it may be a tax shelter that is essentially unrelated to the

entrepreneur's original enterprise. As noted below, our data do not allow us to confront this

issue on an observation-by-observation basis because we do not have information on either the

entrepreneur's or the partnership's line of business. However, existing evidence suggests that

by and large, the tax shelter view is more correct. Specifically, Statistics of Income data on

partnerships for 1985 indicate that about 62 percent of partners were limited partners,' i.e.,

investors who played essentially no role in the day-to-day activities of their enterprises. Hence,

in developing our analysis, we focus on tax-shelter opportunities.'0

                                                -5-
        The essence of tax-shelter investments is the ability to earn a net rate of return in excess

of the net return on 'regular' financial investments. However, these investments typically

require a minimum level of investment before participation is possible. Denote the amount of

tax-sheltered investment for an individual by T, the minimum investment level by T,, and the

net return by .   Hence, the individual's income is Y =     7   + r(A   - 7)   where T > T,. By

their nature, tax shelters represent arbitrage opportunities, and as expressed here these

opportunities are unbounded. In the spirit of our treatment of borrowing for an entrepreneurial

enterprise, we assume that capital markets limit the ability to borrow for tax shelter

investments: 7. .   1T()


2.2     Effects of Inheritance

        We now turn to the question of how an increase in personal assets -- especially an

increase due to an inheritance -- affects the relative attractiveness of being an entrepreneur. An

increase in assets affects the income associated with each option. It raises capital earnings in

retirement or as a wage-earner, possibly increasing the desirability of these activities.

Similarly, higher levels of personal assets make tax-shelter activity more attractive, either by

enabling individuals to meet the minimum investment requirements, or by relaxing constraints

on the amount invested.

        Finally, by relaxing liquidity constraints, asset windfalls may raise the income

associated with remaining an entrepreneur. However, for those entrepreneurs whose investment

decisions are not liquidity-constrained, changes in personal assets do not affect the enterprises'

receipts and profits. For these individuals, there are no incentives countering the increased

attractiveness of the other three alternatives. Thus, some entrepreneurs may enter wage and


                                                -6-
salary employment or retire. Others may remain as entrepreneurs, but in addition make tax-

shelter investments.

        Indeed, the minimum investment requirement for tax shelters may make it optimal for

some to exit entrepreneurship entirely. Consider a low-O" entrepreneur. Such an individual

has few assets invested in his enterprise, even if not liquidity-constrained. At the same time,

he may not be able to meet the minimum investment requirements for tax-shelter activities

whose return dominates that for his personal and entrepreneurial assets. An inheritance permits

such an individual to liquidate his firm and move into tax shelters.



2.3     Empirical Implementation

        We assume that the entrepreneur's choice among the four options is made along the

lines suggested by Domencich and McFadden [1975]. The individual compares differences in

the utilities of the various options and chooses the option with the highest utility. In order to

make this framework operational, the first step is to postulate a distribution for the stochastic

components of utility. We assume that these follow an extreme value distribution. The

differences across options then follow a logistic distribution function. Under the conditions

specified by Domencich and McFadden, this leads to the multinomial logit model as the

appropriate framework for estimating how inheritance (and other variables) affect the income-

earning choices made by current entrepreneurs.

        The second step is to specify a set of explanatory variables for the multinomial logit.

The entrepreneur's decision depends on A, (because assets affect the income of each option),

and the personal attributes that affect the shape of his or her utility function. That is, the

decision depends upon relative ability in each mode, resources, and tastes. Our data allow us


                                                -7-
to include the following personal attributes; the value of each is taken before any transition is

made:

              An individual's age may be correlated with his attitudes toward risk and toward

the various nonpecuniary aspects of being an entrepreneur. In addition, age is related to the

individual's years of labor market experience, and hence his or her human capital. To allow

for nonlinearities, we include a quadratic term in age. In order to avoid confounding the

effects of inheritance with those that occur when the individual reaches normal retirement age,

we exclude from our sample entrepreneurs whose ages exceeded 58 years in 1981.

        Marital status and number of children. These two demographic variables may affect

tastes for the various modes, although the direction of their effect is not clear. Having to

support a family, for example, might make a person less likely to continue in relatively risky

ventures. At the same time, however, the presence of family support might make it easier to

keep a business going.

        Adiusted Gross Income (AG!). AG! is the most comprehensive measure we have of

household income. It includes the earnings of both spouses as well as capital income. It

controls for any income effects that may be involved in the choice among modes.

        Employment status of donor. Lentz and Laband [1990] and others have argued that

children of entrepreneurs acquire informal business experience from their parents. In terms of

our theory, children of entrepreneurs may be 'high-O" people. Of course, tax returns do not

ask about parents' lifetime occupations. However, we were able to obtain the 1981 personal

income tax returns of the donors and determine whether they included a Schedule C. We

include a dichotomous variable indicating whether or not the donor filed a Schedule C.

Assuming that this effect depends on the closeness of the relationship between the donor and


                                               -8-
the beneficiary, we also include a variable that interacts the donor's Schedule C variable with

an indicator for whether the recipient is a son or a daughter. A reasonable question is whether

these variables are in some sense reflecting the budget constraint -- children of entrepreneurs

may be more likely to inherit physical assets that may be of direct use in their own businesses.

However, as noted below, we have a separate variable that indicates whether the estate included

a business.

        Another indicator of the individual's ability to function as an entrepreneur is the actual

performance of his enterprise prior to the time that the inheritance is received. How do we

measure the firm's "performance?" According to our model, one relevant measure of the

finn's performance is its gross receipts (see equation (2.3)). This variable is included in our

data. A second possible indicator is the finn's economic profits. We have no information on

the amount of capital invested in the enterprise, so we cannot compute economic profits.

Instead, we use an admittedly imperfect alternative, reported net income or loss plus

depreciation allowances, which we call 'cash flow.       In our empirical work, we estimate all

of the models twice, once with receipts and once with cash flow, to see if the substantive

results are robust with respect to the choice of performance measure.

       Importantly, we expect the enterprise's prior performance to be a function of variables

that are not available in our data. Examples are the entrepreneur's education, race, and

gender. In addition, performance depends on characteristics of the business, such as age of the

enterprise, line of business, and prior investments in reputation and physical capital. Previous

analyses have argued that these variables are important determinants of the decision to enter or

leave entrepreneurship.'2 By including prior performance in the multinomial logit, we are at

least partially taking these variables into account.


                                               -9-
        We turn next to the measurement of A, the individual's assets.'3 Our data provide

different amounts of rnforination on various assets. Dividends and interest are reported on tax

returns; with suitable assumptions on capitalization rates, we can impute the stock of assets that

generated these flows and include it in the model.'4 Preliminary analysis of the data indicated

that the stock of liquid assets has a nonlinear effect on our dependent variables; hence, a

quadratic term is also included. We are unable to make any meaningful imputations on the

value of owner-occupied housing, but on the basis of information on mortgage interest and

property tax deductions, we can create a dichotomous variable indicating whether or not the

family owns a home.

        The centerpiece of our analysis is the entrepreneur's inheritance. As noted above, we

wish to view the coefficient on the inheritance as telling us something about the presence or

absence of liquidity constraints. In this regard, several issues arise. First, if bequests include

businesses, then there may be a positive correlation between surviving as an entrepreneur and

the size of an inheritance that has nothing to do with liquidity constraints. To allow for this

possibility, we include a dichotomous variable (DBUS) that is equal to one if the estate included

a business. Another possibility is that the inheritance proxies for the transfer of business skills.

However, as noted above, we include a variable to capture transfers of entrepreneurial skills

from donors. In addition, one expects that superior entrepreneurial human capital would

manifest itself in above-average performance of the firm, and our model includes a measure of

the firm's prior performance.

       Finally, certain bequest motives might generate a spurious correlation between

inheritance and entrepreneurial survival. For example, individuals might choose to leave

particularly large inheritances to their relatives who are working very hard at developing new


                                               - 10 -
businesses. Such behavior could generate a positive relationship between the size of an

individual's inheritance and his business success that has nothing to do with liquidity

constraints)3 In his examination of the U.S. Treasury estate tax files from which our data are

drawn, Wilhelm [19931 found that roughly two-thirds of the estates provided equal division

among the beneficiaries. In the remaining one-third of the estates, the division was not equal,

but It was uncorrelated with income, ceterisparibus. While the controversies surrounding

bequest motives remain far from settled, there appears to be no evidence in our data that

inheritances are endogenous with respect to skill as an entrepreneur.



3.      DATA AND ECONOMETRIC ISSUES

3.1     Data

        As noted earlier, our empirical analysis is based on tax return data. One issue that

arises when using such data relates to a problem faced by every empirical researcher in this

area -- making operational the notion of entrepreneurship. How do we know who is an

entrepreneur? In the nonstatistical literature on this topic, entrepreneurs are characterized in

terms of their daring, risk-taking, animal spirits, and so on:

       'To act with confidence beyond the range of familiar beacons and to overcome
       that [social] resistance requires aptitudes that are present in only a small fraction
       of the population and that define the entrepreneurial type..."
       (Schumpeter [1942], p. 132)

       Those who do statistical work must settle for observable (and hence, more prosaic)

criteria for classifying someone as an entrepreneur. With tax return data, the most sensible

proxy for 'entrepreneurship" is the presence of a Schedule C in the tax return.

       One could argue that the presence of Schedule C is not really indicative of

entrepreneurial activity. For example, some academic economists report their consulting

                                               -11 -
income and honoraria on Schedule C, but do not consider themselves entrepreneurs. However,

data from the 1985 Statistics of Income indicate that such personal service activities are

undertaken by only a small proportion of Schedule C filers, about 16 percent.'6 And surely at

least some of these activities reflect Schumpeterian entrepreneurial behavior.17

        Other users of tax-based data have employed broader criteria for classifying people as

entrepreneurs. For example, the Characteristics of Business Owners data characterize as

!entrepreneurs! members of partnerships and S corporations as well as sole proprietors.

However, as described earlier, we believe that in many cases partnerships and S corporations

may be more reflective of tax shelter activity than entrepreneurship. A practical advantage of a

Schedule C criterion is that this schedule includes some specific information on the activities of

the enterprise. In contrast, individual tax return data do not provide such information about

partnerships and S corporations.'8 Nevertheless, to assess the robustness of our results, we

report below the result of classifying members of partnerships and S corporations as

entrepreneurs.

        Of course, an individual can file a Schedule C while also being involved in a

partnership. For that matter, he can simultaneously be employed as a wage and salary worker

as well. It is infeasible to estimate models of transitions out of and into all of the possible

combinations of the various states. Therefore, the empirical model maintains the four-way

classification embodied in our theoretical model, adopting the following algorithm for allocating

individuals to the various modes. If an individual files a Schedule C, he is classified as an

entrepreneur," regardless of any other information included on the return. If an individual has

partnership/S corporation income but no Schedule C, he is categorized as being in a

'partnership/S corporation." If an individual has wage income but no Schedule C and no


                                               -   12   -
 partnership/S corporation, he is categorized as a "wage-earner." Finally, if he has none of the

 above, he is "retired."

        A final issue concerns the representativeness of the data set. The sample consists only

of individuals who received inheritances from substantial estates. Such individuals tend to have

very high pre-inheritance incomes. The mean 1981 AGI per return in our sample is $31,700,

about $12,000 above the mean for all tax filers. The AGIs on returns with a Schedule C are

even higher, with a mean value of over $67,000. (See Table 3.1.) Clearly, such individuals

are not typical, and we make no claims that our results apply to the population as a whole.

However, the results do allow us, in effect, to bound the importance of liquidity constraints If

anyone has good access to capital markets, it should be such high income individuals. To the

extent that their decision-making is affected by liquidity constraints, it is likely that capital

market constraints will be at least as important for lower income individuals.

        Construction of our data set began with an Internal Revenue Service (IRS) sample of

estate tax records. The IRS selected a one percent random sample of estate tax returns of

people who died in 1982 and whose estate tax returns were filed in 1982 and 1983. Returns

with total assets over one million dollars were selected at a 100 percent rate. The sample

included over 8,500 individuals with gross estates over $300,000.

       The next step was to match the estate tax returns with the decedents' personal income

tax returns for 1980 through 1982, and with the beneficiaries' personal income tax returns for

1980 through 1982 and 1985. We dropped some observations because of the inability to make

matches, missing data, etc. The number of observations with usable information for these two

years was 7,036. As noted above, our focus is on the survival probabilities of individuals who

were entrepreneurs in 1981. In our data, 1,892 individuals were sole proprietors in 1981; these


                                                -13-
observations comprise our basic sample. The means and standard deviations of the variables

for this sample are reported in Table 3.1.

        The mean inheritance in the sample is $178,250. The range of this variable is wide;

some donees received bequests of as little as $100, while the maximum exceeded $3 million.

The members of this group are quite wealthy -- the mean value of liquid assets is over

$325,000. We should note, however, that this figure is an estimate arrived at by capitalizing

interest receipts using a rate of return of 10 percent, and dividends using a rate of return of 5

percent. (See Skinner and Feenherg [1990].) Clearly, such a measure of liquid assets is only a

rough approximation to the true value. In contrast, the inheritance variable is based on

administrative records and is quite accurately measured. Hence, it is this variable to which we

pay most attention when trying to gauge the impact of personsl wealth on various decisions.

       The focus of our analysis is on what entrepreneurs do after they receive their

inheritances. The matrix in Figure 3.2 contains information on the transitions made by

membersof our sample by size of inheritance. The columns of the matrix show the possible

modes in 1985: remaining in Schedule C, being in a partnership/S corporation and not having a

Schedule C, earning wages and not having any business income, and retiring. The rows group

the individuals into "low" (under $25,000), "medium" (between $25,000 and $150,000) and

"high" (greater than $150,000) inheritance classes, The fourth row and fifth column provide

corresponding summary information. The first figure in each cell is the number of individuals

in that cell; the second number is the proportion of observations in the corresponding row that

fall in that cell; and the third number is the standard deviation of the proportion. Thus, for

example, the figures in the second row and first column tell us that of the entrepreneurs who




                                               -   14   -
 received a mid-sized inheritance, 461 continued as entrepreneurs and this represents about 70

 percent of the entrepreneurs who were in that inheritance class.

         According to Table 32, a substantial proportion of the entrepreneurial enterprises do

 not survive -- only about 72 percent of the enterprises that were present in 1981 are alive in

 1985. Moreover, the survival rate increases with inheritance, going from 67.4 percent in the

 low inheritance class to 76.5 percent in the high inheritance class, a difference that is

 statistically significant at the 1 percent level.20 About 15 percent of the individuals who cease

being entrepreneurs become involved in partnerships or S corporations. However, there

appears to be no obvious relationship between the propensity to enter a partnership/S

corporation and the size of inheritance. The third column indicates that the proportion who

leave entrepreneurship for wage earning declines with the inheritance; these declines are also

statistically significant. The last column shows that the proportion of entrepreneurs who retire

altogether rises with inheritance. More generally, a test of the null hypothesis that all the

transitions are invariant with respect to inheritance levels is rejected at the 1 percent level.2'

        While the tendencies exhibited are generally consistent with out theoretical model, the

theory suggests that a number of other variables in addition to inheritance may affect transition

decisions. We next turn to a discussion of some econometric issues that arise in doing a

multivariate analysis.



3.2     Econometric Issues

       Our goal is to develop an econometric framework for analyzing the aspects of

entrepreneurship highlighted by our theory: the likelihood of surviving as an entrepreneur, and

the success of the enterprise, conditional on its surviving.


                                                -   15 -
        The probability that an individual makes a transition out of entrepreneurship depends on

the unobserved components of utility, as well as observed assets (including inheritance) and

personal characteristics. For reasons discussed in Section 2, we also include a measure of the

performance of the enterprise prior to receiving the inheritance. As noted above, we use a

multinomial logit model. Turning now to the performance of the firm, equation (23) indicates

that the firm's receipts (R1) depend on the levels of personal assets and unobserved

entrepreneurial ability (e). As in the modal choice equations, we also include the lagged

value of performance as a partial control for "entrepreneurial ability."

       The model in Section 2 suggests that the decision to remain an entrepreneur and the

performance of the firm, conditional on surviving, are inextricably linked, as both R and utility

are driven in part by the variable 0,, unobservable (to the analyst) entrepreneurial ability. This

joint role for 0 means that the error terms in the relationships determining the probability of

surviving and the performance (conditional on surviving) will likely be correlated. The

situation differs somewhat from the usual selectivity bias problem discussed by Heckman

[l976J, because the error term in the first stage is not normally distributed. However, Lee

[1983] provides a generalization of Heckrnan's two-stage procedure that can accommodate this

situation. In the first stage, conventional multinomial logit estimation is used to estimate the

transition probabilities. In the second stage, the performance equation is estimated by ordinary

least squares (augmented with the inverse Mills ratio, computed as indicated by Lee), with the

required correction of the standard errors.




                                              - 16 -
4.      RESULTS

4.1     Basic Results

        As indicated earlier, we expect that the probability of exiting will depend on the

previous performance of the enterprise, inter alia, and we have two alternative measures,

receipts and cash flow. Because the two measures give substantially the same qualitative

results, we focus in this section on the receipts measure; the estimates with cash flow are

included in the Appendix (Table A. 1 and equation (A. 1)).

        To begin, we report in Table 4.1 the multinomial logit results for entrepreneurial

survival rates. The first colunm shows the determinants of the odds of surviving as an

entrepreneur relative to becoming a wage-earner. From a statistical point of view, the most

significant of the demographic variables is age.22 The negative quadratic term begins to

dominate the positive linear term at roughly the age of 44, indicating that past this age, people

become more likely to opt out of entrepreneurship in favor of wage-earning, ceteris pan bus.

This might be due to an increased desire for security as age increases, but other forces could

also be at work.

        With respect to liquidity constraints, the key variables are inheritance and liquid assets.

The inheritance variable s a positive coefficient that exceeds its standard eor by about a

factor of three. Thus, receiving an inheritance increases the probability that an entrepreneur

will stay in business rather than become a wage earner. Similarly, the coefficient on the level

of liquid assets is positive and statistically significant. (Although the negative quadratic term in

assets is statistically significant, it does not dominate the linear term until it is outside the range

of our data.) These findings are consistent with the presence of liquidity constraints. Finally,

we note that, unsurprisingly, the more successful the enterprise was prior to receiving an


                                                 - 17   -
inheritance, the more likely the entrepreneur is to continue in business rather than become a

wage earner -- the coefficient on RECPT8I, the level of receipts in 1981 (measured in 1985

dollars), is positive and exceeds its standard error by about a factor of three.

        Column (2) has the results for the probability of joining a partnership or S corporation

relative to becoming a wage earner. To make comparisons to the probability of sticking it out

as an entrepreneur, we must compare the coefficient in column (2) to the corresponding

coefficient in column (1)23 Doing so indicates thatthe receipt of an inheritance makes it less

likely that an individual will move to a partnership/S corporation.

        The positive coefficient on RECPT81 in column (2) must be interpreted in a similar

fashion. Even if the coefficient were statistically significant, it would not imply that an

increase in prior performance increases the attractiveness of a tax shelter relative to remaining

an entrepreneur, because the point estimate (1.983) is less than the corresponding coefficient in

the first column (4.3 19). As conunon sense suggests, better previous performance increases the

probability of sticking it out relative to joining a partnership.

        The last column of Table 4. 1 examines the probability of retiring relative to entering

wage earning. Consistent with earlier work on the relationship between inheritance and labor

force behavior, inheritances are an inducement to retire . Indeed, if we compare the

coefficient on INH to its counterparts in columns (1) and (2), we see that an increase in

inheritance increases the odds of retirement relative both to joining a partnership, and

remaining an entrepreneur. The age variables in column (3), although individually

insignificant, are jointly significant. (A Wald test produces a chi-squared statistic of 13.79;

with two degrees of freedom, the critical value at a 0.99 significance level is 9.21.) The




                                                -   18   -
positive quadratic term dominates throughout essentially the entire relevant range of ages -- the

probability of retirement increases with age, an intuitive finding.

        So far, our focus has been on the qualitative effects of inheritance on transition

probabilities. To investigate the quantitative impact, we used the estimated coefficients in

Table 4. 1 to compute at the sample means the predicted probabilities of remaining as an

entrepreneur (0.776), moving to a partnership/S-corporation (0.147), becoming a wage-earner

(0.0737), or retiring (0.00290). We then increased inheritance by $150,000 (in 1985 dollars),

and re-computed the probabilities. The result is that the probability of surviving as an

entrepreneur rises by 0.013, which is virtually offset by a 0.014 decline in the probability of

becoming a wage-earner. The impact on the remaining probabilities, while positive, is

minuscule.

        However, our theory suggests that the possible influence of liquidity constraints may

extend beyond the survival probability. As implied by expressions (2.1) and (2.2), liquidity

constraints may be present if firm performance depends on any of the asset variables,25 We

therefore used the sample of individuals who remained as entrepreneurs to see if the asset

variables affect receipts in 1985 (RECPT85):

       RECPTS5 = - 0.04024 + 0.6637 RECPT8J + 0.003637 ASST + 0.006618 HOME
                   (0.02557) (0.02028)        (0.005552)      (0.01235)
                       +   0.004769 DBUS + 0.1002 INH + 0.08429X
                           (0.009951)              (0.01735)     (0.03953)                     (4.1)


where X is the inverse Mills ratio.26 The results with respect to inheritance are quite

striking.27 The coefficient exceeds its standard error by almost a factor of six. To assess the

quantitative implications of the estimate, note that the mean value of RECPT85 is $79,129. An

inheritance of $150,000 would increase this to about $94,160, an increase of nearly 20 percent.

                                               -    19   -
Even this computation may understate the full effect. The results of Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian,

and Rosen [1993] suggest that receipt of an inheritance reduces labor supply, conditional upon

not retiring. If so, holding labor supply constant would yield an ever greater increase in

receipts. In short, by relaxing capital market constraints, inheritances have a substantial impact

on the success of on-going concerns.



4.2     Alternative Specifications

        To the extent that people respond differently to anticipated and unanticipated

inheritances, our failure to distinguish between these is a source of specification error, Of

course, we have no direct way to decompose an inheritance into its anticipated and

unanticipated components. However, it is possible that children of a decedent are more likely

to anticipate their inheritances than other relations. Hence, comparing the transition

probabilities of children of decedents with other recipients might shed some light on this issue.

We therefore defined a dichotomous variable that equalled one if the donee was a child of the

donor and zero otherwise, multiplied it by 1NH, and augmented the multinomial 10gb equation

with this interaction term.

        The interaction term was insignificant -- a likelihood ratio test produced a statistic of

5.8, while the critical value of a chi-square distribution with 3 degrees of freedom at the 95

percent level is 7.81. Taken at face value, this suggests no difference between anticipated and

unanticipated inheritances. However, one must take this observation with a grain of salt, since

the interaction variable may not adequately reflect the extent to which an inheritance is

anticipated.




                                               - 20   -
        Another possible source of specification error arises from the fact that liquidity

constraints may not be very important for people who have high income or wealth. Perhaps it

is inappropriate to assume that high- and low-asset people respond in the same way to receipt

of an inheritance. Therefore, despite the problems in measuring liquid assets discussed above,

it seemed worthwhile to permit the coefficients on inheritances for people with liquid assets

greater than some cutoff level to differ from those with less than that amount. Choosing

$65,000 (the approximate median) as the break point, we found that the point estimates for the

high-asset group are slightly larger, but one cannot reject the null hypothesis that the

coefficients are the same. For example, in the multinomial logit equation, the chi-square test is

2.6 with 3 degrees of freedom. Thus, at least within the range of liquid asset values present in

our data, the effect of inheritance is independent of the size of liquid assets.

        An additional potential problem relates to the criteria for classifying an individual as an

entrepreneur. As noted above, we have treated partnerships and S corporations as tax shelters

rather than entrepreneurial enterprises. Do our substantive results change if they are accorded

the same status as sole proprietorships? To answer this question, we pooled all the 1981

returns that had income from a sole proprietorship or a partnership or an S corporation. This

gave us a sample of 3,520 observations, which we deemed to be the group of initial

entrepreneurs. We then estimated multinomial logit equations for transition probabilities into

three states: remain an entrepreneur (Schedule C, partnership, or S corporation), wage and

salary earner, and retirement. The full set of results is reported in the Appendix (Table A.2).

For our purposes, the key finding is that inheritance continues to exert a positive and

statistically significant impact on surviving as an entrepreneur relative to becoming a wage-

earner. (The coefficient on INH is 1.641 with a standard error of 0.409.) Hence, while we


                                               - 21 -
 prefer the Schedule C criterion for entrepreneurship, a more inclusive criterion does not lead to

 very different results.

        A related concern is that, as noted above, the mere filing of a Schedule C may not be

indicative of serious' entrepreneurial activity. We therefore reestimated the basic model using

the criterion that an individual file a Schedule C and have a cash flow that exceeds $5,000.

The results with respect to inheritance are quite similar to those in Table 4.1. The coefficient

on INH in the survive as entrepreneur branch is 1.610 (se. = 0.770); in the partnership/S

corporation" branch 1.723 (s.e. = 0.812); and in the 'retire" branch 2.448 (se. = 0.928).

(The complete set of results is available upon request.) Hence, a more stringent definition of

an entrepreneur does not affect the basic story.

        In summary, the substantive results reported in Table 4.1 do not appear to be sensitive

to the distinction between anticipated and unanticipated inheritances, to interactions between the

level of liquid assets and inheritance, and to reasonable changes in the criteria for classifying an

individual as an entrepreneur.



5.     SUMMARY

       Are U.S. entrepreneurs undercapitalized? Our investigation of this question has been

based on the following logic: if entrepreneurs cannot borrow to attain their profit-maximizing

levels of capital, then those entrepreneurs who have substantial personal financial resources are

more successful than those who do not. Their enterprises are more likely to survive, and

conditional on surviving, they perform better. In order to execute this research strategy

convincingly, one needs a source of asset variation that is both precisely measured and

exogenous to the entrepreneur's decisions. Our data are uniquely well-suited for this purpose.


                                               - 22 -
The sample consists of the 1981 and 1985 federal tax returns of a group of people who

received inheritances in 1982 and 1983, along with information on the size of those inheritances

from a matched set of bequest tax returns. Hence, we can examine how the exogenous receipt

of capital affects the probability of entrepreneurial survival and the performance of the

enterprise

        Straightforward tabulations of the data indicate that after receiving their inheritances,

our entrepreneurs do a variety of things -- some remain entrepreneurs, some enter tax shelters,

some take employment as wage earners, and a few simply retire. Hence, our theoretical and

empirical models encompass all these options. The results suggest that the effect of inheritance

on the probability of surviving as an entrepreneur is small but noticeable -- a $150,000

inheritance raises the probability of survival by about 1.3 percentage points. Conditional on

surviving, inheritances have a substantial impact on entrepreneurial enterprises --   the   $150,000

inheritance, for example, is associated with a nearly 20 percent increase in an enterprise's

receipts.28

        Our finding that sole proprietorships are undercapitalized is consistent with the results of

Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen [1988], Hall [19921, and others, which suggest that even

corporations are constrained in capital markets. Thus, there is growing evidence that capital

market imperfections exert an important influence on business and capital formation.




                                               - 23 -
                                               Appendix

                                      Alternative Specifrcations

        This Appendix presents the results when we depart from the specification in Table 4. 1.

Table A. 1 shows the outcome when the multinomial logit equations in Table 4.1 are re-

estimated using cash flow in 1981 to replace receipts as the measure of the firm's prior

performance. A comparison of Tables 4.1 and A.l suggests that the results are virtually

unchanged. The second stage equation for this specification is:

CASHS5            -0.04169 +  0.8811 CASH81 + 0.006272 ASST +                  0.006776 HOME
                  (0.008667) (0.02122)        (0.001890)                                (0.004081)

                 +0.OO3O76DBUS +                  0.015421NH         +         0.07725 X,
                  (0.003278)                      (0.005853)                   (0.01339)         (A.!)

where CASH85 and CASH8I are cash flow in 1985 and 1981 (measured in 1985 dollars),

respectively, and the other variables are as defined in the body of the paper. Just as was the

case when receipts were used as the measure of firm performance (equation (4.1)), inheritance

and liquid assets are both statistically significant. Substituting into equation (A. 1), the

coefficient on INH implies that a $150,000 inheritance would increase CASH85 by $2,313.

The mean value of CASH85 is $22,492; hence, this represents a 10 percent increase.

       We next turn to the results when the definition of entrepreneurship is expanded to

include participants in partnerships and S corporations, as well as sole proprietors.

Mechanically, this involves combining the sole proprietors and participants in partnerships and

S corporations into a single category in 1981. In 1985, they may remain in this category,

become wage earners, or retire. The multinornial logit estimates are presented in Table A.2.29

As in Table 4. 1, the probability of remaining an entrepreneur (relative to becoming a wage

earner) increases with inheritance.

                                                - 24 -
                                             Endnotes

 1.    See, for example, Evans and Leighton [1989], Evans and Jovanovic [1989], and Holtz-
       Eakin, Joulfaian, and Rosen [1992]. Meyer [1990] surveys much of this literature.
2.     Quoted in Shorrocks [1988, p. 2561.
3.    Brock and Evans [1986, Chapter 3] survey the theory of firm exit decisions.
4.    Other empirical studies include Baldwin and Gorecki [1991] and Schary [1991],
      Schary's analysis of the cotton textile industry uses working capital per spindle as a
      measure of liquidity. She finds that it has no statistical effect on survival probability.
      However, this variable is likely to be endogenous. See Hall [19921.

5.    Meyer [1990] also examines individuals' transitions out of self-employment, but his
      analysis is confined to the first eight months of the life of the enterprise.

6.    An S corporation is a corporation whose income is treated like that of a partnership --
      the income is taxed at the individual level and escapes the corporate "double tax. An S
      corporation may have no more than 35 stockholders.

7.    This discussion of the income potential of an entrepreneur is based on Evans and
      Jovanovic [19891 and Holtz-Ealcin, Joulfaian, and Rosen [1992].

8.    This assumption conforms with the empirical fact that roughly 60 percent of new
      entrepreneurs have no depreciable capital. See Meyer [1990].
9.    We do not pursue here the source of these constraints. A number of papers have shown
      how liquidity constraints can emerge even in a model where all individuals optimize.
      See, for example, Stiglitz and Weiss [1981].

10.   Nevertheless, the possibility remains that such enterprises should be treated
      symmetrically with sole proprietorships. In the empirical work presented below, we
      estimate a variant of the basic model that does so.

11.   Our treatment of depreciation allowances is dictated by the Economic Recovery Tax Act
      of 1981, which made depreciation schedules more generous in 1985 than they were in
      1981. This change makes it problematic to compare incomes net of depreciation across
      the two years.

12.   See Meyer [1990] on the role of race, Bates [1990] on education, and Evans [19891 on
      age of enterprise. Unfortunately, the 'principal business code' from Schedule C was
      not included in our data, so we were unable to categorize the firms by line of business.

13.   We restrict attention to the assets of the individual as tax-return data provide no measure
      of the assets of the firm.



                                             - 25 -
14.   We have no data on tax-exempt assets.

15.   An alternative mechanism, along the lines suggested by Cox [19871, is one in which
      higher skill and thus higher income individuals teceive larger inheritances in order to
      induce them to provide services to their benefactors.

16.   This figure includes "business services" (advertising, management consulting, public
      relations, computer services, etc.) and "accounting and bookkeeping services.

17.   A possible problem is that the mere filing of a Schedule C may not be indicative of
      "serious" entrepreneurial activity. We therefore also estimate the model using the
      criterion that the Schedule C reported a cash flow of at least $5,000.

18.   Specific information on a partnership is recorded on Form 1065, Partnership Income
      Tax Return. Our data are from Form 1040 (Individual Income Tax Return), which
      contains only the net income or loss allocated to the partner filing the return.

19.   Of the 1,892 returns that included a Schedule C in 1981, 220 also reported
      partnership/S corporation income; 840 also reported wage income; and 498 also
      reported both partnership/S corporation and wage income. Of course, the need to make
      some fairly arbitrary classifications is not unique to these data. For example, in the
      Survey of Income and Program Participation, a number of individuals report income
      from both wage and self-employment. Typically, classification is made on the basis of
      the individual's income or hours of work in each mode; see Meyer [1990]. However,
      we have no measure of income that meaningfully reflects the intensity of involvement in
      each mode.

20.   One might like to augment this analysis with information on the behavior of a control
      group receiving no inheritances. Unfortunately, income tax data do not identify
      recipients of inheritances, so it is not possible to construct such a sample. To allow at
      least a rough comparison we use a random sample of nearly 6.5 million schedule C
      filers drawn from 1981 tax returns. In this sample, 66.2 percent survived as
      entrepreneurs until 1985, 3.2 percent made a transition to a partnership/S corporation,
      29.1 percent became wage and salary earners, and 1.53 percent retired. Hence, as we
      move from the low-inheritance group to the "no inheritance" control group, the
      tendencies in Figure 3.2 persist. For example, the fraction of entrepreneurs who
      survive is greater for the low inheritance group than for the random sample.

21.   The chi-square test statistic is 36.5 with six degrees of freedom.

22.   Note that the family background variables, DC and DCx CHILD, are not statistically
      significant. Bates [1990] found that a similar variable, which indicated whether any
      close family members had been self-employed, did not affect survival probabilities.

23,   This is because, in general, the log of the odds of remaining an entrepreneur relative to



                                             -   26 -
      moving into a partnership is     (i - l) Z, where the superscripts E and P denote
      entrepreneurship and partnership, respectively.

24.   See Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian, and Rosen [1993].

25.   A possible source of concern is that liquid assets and receipts might be correlated
      simply because larger firms require greater working capital. However, we examine the
      relationship between receipts in 1985 and liquid assets in 198], a time span much longer
      than would be dictated by working capital considerations. Also, we control for the size
      of the business by including the lagged level of receipts. In any case, as noted above,
      our focus is on inheritance rather than liquid assets, because of the potential for
      endogeneity in the latter.

26.   Recall from Section 3 that the variable X is computed according to the method suggested
      by Lee [19831. The fact that its coefficient is positive is consistent with the view,
      embodied in our model, that the likelihood of survival and firm performance,
      conditional on survival, are both driven by the individual's unobservable ability as an
      entrepreneur.
27.   In this equation, INH is measured in 1985 dollars rather than dollars in the year
      received (1983) in order to facilitate comparisons to receipts in 1985.

28.   These results are reminiscent of those in Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian and Rosen [1992], who
      find that inheritances have a relatively small direct impact on the decision to launch
      entrepreneurial ventures, but a larger influence on the capitalization of new firms.
29.   Unlike Table 4.1, there is no measure of previous performance" such as receipts,
      because we do not have this information for partnerships and S corporations.




                                           - 27   -
                                        References

Audretsch, David, "New-Firm Survival and the Techhological Regime," The Review of
      Economics and Statistics, 1991, PP. 44 1-450.

Baldwin, John R. and Paul K. Gorecki, "FirmEntry and Exit in the Canadian
      Manufacturing Sector, 1970-1982," Canadian Journal of Economics, May 1991, pp.
       300-323.

Bates, Timothy, Entrepreneur Human Capital Impacts and Small Business Longevity, The
       Review of Economics and Statistics, 1990, pp. 55 1-559.

Blanchflower, David, and Andrew Oswald, What Makes an Entrepreneur? London School
      of Economics, mimeo, 1990.

Brock, William A. and David S. Evans, The Economics of Small Business, New York:
       Holmes and Meier, 1986.

Cox. Donald, "Motives for Private Income Transfers,' Journal of Political Economy, 95,
      June 1987, pp. 508-546.

Domencich, Thomas and Daniel McFadden, Urban Travel Demand, Amsterdam: North
     Holland Publishing Company, 1975.

Evans, David S., "Tests of Alternative Theories of Firm Growth," Journal of Political
      Economy, August, 1987, pp. 657-674.

Evans, David S. and Linda Leighton, "Some Empirical Aspects of Entrepreneurship,"
      American Economic Review, 1989, pp. 519-535.

Evans, David S. and Boyan Jovanovic, "An Estimated Model of Entrepreneurial Choice
       Under Liquidity Constraints," Journal of Political Economy, 1989, pp. 808-827.

Fazzari, Steven, R. Glenn Hubbard and Bruce C. Petersen, "Financing Constraints and
       Corporate Investment," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 1, 1988, pp.
       141- 195.

Hall, Bronwyn H., "Investment at the Firm Level: Does the Source of Financing Matter?"
       National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 4096, June 1992.

Heckman, James, "The Common Structure of Statistical Models of Truncation, Sample
     Selection, and Limited Dependent Variables and a Simple Estimator for Such
     Models," Annals of Economic and Social Measurement, 1976, pp. 475-492.



                                          - 28 -
 Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey S. Rosen, "Entrepreneurial Decisions
        and Liquidity Constraints," mimeo, Syracuse University, 1992.

Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and HarveyS. Rosen, The Carnegie Conjecture:
      Some Empirical Evidence," Quarterly Journal of Economics, CVIII, No. 2, May
       1993, pp. 413-436.

Lee, Lung-Fei, "Generalized Econometric Models with Selectivity," Econometrica, March
       1983, pp. 507-512.

Lentz, Bernard S. and David N. Laband, 'Entrepreneurial Success and Occupational
       Inheritance Among Proprietors," Canadian Journal of Economics, XXIII, August
       1990, pp. 563-579.

Meyer, Bruce, "Why Are There So Few Black Entrepreneurs?" National Bureau of
      Economic Research, Working Paper No. 3537, 1990.

Schary, Martha, "The Probability of Exit," RAND Journal of Economics, Autumn 1991, pp.
      339-353.

Schumpeter, Joseph, Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy, New York: Harper and Row
     Publications, 1942.

Shorrocks, Anthony, "Wealth Holdings and Entrepreneurial Activity" in Kessler, D. and A.
      Masson (eds.) Modeling the Accumulation and Distribution of Wealth, Oxford:
      Clarendon Press, 1988, pp. 241-258.

Skinner, Jonathan and Daniel Feenberg, "The Impact of the 1986 Tax Reform Act on
      Personal Saving," National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 3257,
       1990.

Stiglitz, Joseph and Andrew Weiss, "Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect
        Information," American Economic Review, June 1981, pp. 393-410.

Wilhelm, Mark 0., "Bequest Behavior and the Effect of Heirs Earnings: Testing the
      Altruistic Model of Bequests," mimeo, The Pennsylvania State University, 1993.




                                          - 29 -
                                         Table 3.1

                      Means and Standard Deviations of the Variables

INH                                                                     0.1783
(Inheritance in 1982 or 1983 x 10.6)                                   (0.2595)
AGE                                                                      40.4
(Donee's age in 1981)                                                   (11.8)
AGE2                                                                     1.770
(Age-squared x 10)                                                     (0.8706)
AGE?                                                                   0.02378
(= I if age unknown)                                                   (0.1524)
MARRIED                                                                 0.8219
(= 1 if married in 1981)                                               (0.3827)
KIDS                                                                     1.268
(= number of dependents in 1981)                                        (1.233)
DC                                                                      0.1876
(=   1   if decedent filed Schedule C)                                 (0.3905)
DCxChild                                                                0.1126
(= DC if donee the child of decedent)                                  (0.3162)
ASST                                                                    0.3258
(Liquid assets in 1981 x 10.6)                                         (0.85 18)
.4SST2                                                                  0.83 14
(Assets-squared x 1012)                                                 (5.7 13)
HOME                                                                    0.7653
(=1 if homeowner in 1981)                                              (0.4239)
DBUS                                                                    0.3652
(=1 if estate included a business)                                     (0.48 16)
AG!                                                                     0.06777
(Adjusted Gross Income in 1981 x 10.6)                                  (0.1386)
CASH8I                                                                  0.01593
(Schedule C cash flow in 1981 x 10.6)                                  (0.07525)
CASH85                                                                  0.02249
(Schedule C cash flow in 1985 x 10.6)                                  (0.09381)
RECPT8J                                                                 0.06455
(Schedule C receipts in 1981 x 10.6)                                    (0.2346)
RECPT85                                                                 0.07913
(Schedule C receipts in 1985 x 10.6)                                    (0.2513)
N                                                                         1892


'Standard deviations are shown in parentheses. Statistics for CASH85 and RECPT85
are based on the 1,352 observations for surviving entrepreneurs.

                                          - 30 -
                                           Table 3.2

                                       Transition Rates


                                                     Partnership/
                                      Schedule              S       Wages
                                          C           corporation   Only     Retirement Total
                                          362              74         91        10
 Low Inheritance
  INH < $25,000                         0.674            0.138      0.170     0.0186      537
                                        0.0202          0.0149      0.0162    0.0058
                                         461                108       79        15
 Medium Inheritance
                                       0.6953             0.163     0.119     0.0226      663
 ($25,000 INH $150,000                 0.0179             0.0143    0.0126    0.0058
                                         529               95         46        22
High Inheritance                        0.765              0.137    0.0665    0.0318      692
( LVH> S150,000 )                      0.0161             0.0131    0.0095    0.0067
                                         1352              277       216        47
All                                     0.715             0.146     0.114     0.0248      1892
                                       0.0104             0.0081    0.0073    0.0036




• The first number in each cell is the number of individuals in that cell; the second number
is the proportion of observations in the corresponding row that fall in that cell; and the third
number is the standard deviation of the proportion.




                                               -   31 -
                                          Table 4.1

        Multinomial Logit Analysis of Entrepreneurs' Transition Probabilities'
                                                       -
                                (1)                       (2)                    (3)
                            Survive as                Partnership!
      Variable             Entrepreneur              S Corporation             Retire
INH                            1.637                       1.558                 1.968
                             (0.5382)                   (0.5881)              (0.8056)
AGE                           0.1439                   -0.06551               -0.06660
                            (0.06951)                  (0.08189)              (0.1495)
AGE2                          -1.640                     0.5421                  1.559
                             (0.8531)                    (1.011)               (1.795)
AGE(?)                         3.692                     -0.9994                2.884
                              (1.526)                    (1.769)               (3.024)
MARRIED                       0.2789                     0.1136                 -1.014
                             (0.2114)                   (0.2620)              (0.4 108)
KIDS                         -0.04762                  0.007679               -0.4 166
                            (0.0753 1)                 (0.09148)              (0.2299)
DC                            -0.1520                    -0.1100              -0.5152
                             (0.2785)                   (0.3460)              (0.6977)
DCx CHILD                     0.4304                      0.3365               -11.22
                             (0.3729)                   (0.4458)               (181.2)
AGI                            1.963                       1.637              -.09119
                              (1.871)                    (1.925)               (3.036)
DBUS                          0.3079                      0.5104               0.3564
                             (0.1691)                   (0.2029)              (0.3812)
ASST                           2.418                      2.750                 2.849
                             (0.5627)                   (0.5820)              (0.7112)
ASST'                         -0.2545                    -0.3061              -0.2898
                            (0.06458)                  (0.06975)             (0.09264)
HOME                          0.1934                      0.5253              -0.6352
                             (0.1808)                   (0.2347)              (0.3903)
RECPT8I                        4.319                       1.983               -1.656
                              (1.411)                    (1.625)               (4.213)
CONSTANT                       -2.359                     0.5304               -1.227
                              (1.311)                    (1.523)               (2.871)

Loglikelihood                                           -1488.0

N                                                          1892


'Figures in parentheses are standard errors. The 'omitted category" is the transition to
being a wage earner. Thus, each column shows the determinants of the log of the ratio of
the probability of making a transition to the state described at the top of the column to the
probability of making a transition to wage earning. Variables are defined in Table 3.1.

                                            - 32 -
                                           Table A.l

            Multinomial Logit Analysis of Entrepreneurs' Transition Probabilities'
                        (Cash Flow Measure of Firm Performance)

                                 (1)                          (2)               (3)
                             Survive as                   Partnership!
       Variable             Entrepreneur                 S Corporation         Retire
INH                             1.697                        1.586             1.969
                               (0.5400)                     (0.5910)         (0.7993)
AGE                             0.1489                      -0.05939         -0.07501
                              (0.06939)                    (0.08175)         (0.1482)
AGE'                            -1.699                       0.4720            1.643
                               (0.8527)                      (1.010)           (1.779)
AGE(?)                           3.791                      -0.8618             2.687
                                (1.522)                      (1.765)           (3.000)
MARRIED                         0.3390                       0.1467            -1.072
                              (0.2102)                      (0.2611)          (0.4054)
KIDS                          -0.04985                     0.004763           -0.3976
                              (0.07484)                    (0.09104)          (0.2268)
DC                             -0.1468                      -0.1130           -0.5126
                              (0.2778)                      (0.3465)         (0.6967)
DCx CHILD                       0.4983                       0.3726            -11.24
                              (0.3735)                      (0.4476)          (184.2)
AGI                              1.060                       0.6793            -1.418
                               (1.463)                      (1.508)           (2.376)
DBUS                            0.3332                       0.5146            0.3869
                              (0.1689)                     (0.2031)          (0.3815)
ASST                             2.540                        2.907             3.028
                              (0.5720)                     (0.5902)          (0.7169)
ASST'                          -0.2421                      -0.3043           -0.2892
                             (0.06587)                    (0.07055)         (0.09363)
HOME                           0.185!                        0.5224           -0.6832
                             (0.179!)                      (0.2336)          (0.3894)
CASH8J                         9.301                         5.667              8.287
                              (3.035)                       (3.293)           (4.365)
CONSTANT                       -2.443                       0.4122             -1.113
                              (1.308)                       (1.520)           (2.846)

Loglikelihood                                              -l495.7

N                                                           1892


See note to Table 4.1.



                                            -   33   -
                                    Table A.2

      Multinomial Logit Analysis of Entrepreneurs' Transition Probabilities'
                   (Expanded Definition of Entrepreneur')

                                       (1)                           (2)
                                    SOrvive   as
           Variable                Entrepreneur                    Retire

INH                                   1.641                         1.531

                                     (0.4093)                      (0.5788)
AGE                                 -0.01012                       -0.1903
                                    (0.04264)                     (0.06404)
AGE2                                  0.1086                         3.076
                                     (0.5323)                      (0.8296)
AGE(?)                                -0.4857                       -0.5653
                                     (0.9008)                      (1.235)
MARRIED                              0.08741                        -1.392
                                     (0.1711)                     (0.3034)
KIDS                                  0.05353                      -0.1705
                                     (0.05712)                     (0.1497)

DC                                   -0.1282                       -0.2255
                                     (0.2256)                     (0.4967)
DCxCHILD                              0.1319                        -1.732
                                     (0.2952)                      (1.135)
AGI                                    3.240                      -0.07840
                                      (1.184)                      (1.784)
DBUS                                  0.2748                       -0.1955

                                     (0.1300)                      (0.2747)
ASST                                    1.6452                       2.085
                                      (0.3394)                     (0.4600)
ASST2                                  -0.1688                     -0.2191
                                     (0.04055)                    (0.07362)
HOME                                   0.1368                        -1.072
                                      (0.1536)                     (0.2974)
CONSTANT                                 1.459                        1.864
                                      (0.7746)                      (1.112)

Loglikelihood                                      -1322.3

N                                                    3,520



'See note to Table 4.1.

                                      - 34 -
