                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           FIXING EXCHANGE RATES: A
                       VIRTUAL QUEST FOR FUNDAMENTALS




                                     Robert P. Flood
                                     Andrew K. Rose




                                  Working Paper No. 4503




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  October, 1993




Part of this work was completed while Rose was visiting the IMF Research Department and
the lIES. We have benefitted from discussions with Allan Drazen, Peter Garber, Lars
Svensson, and comments from seminar participants at the University of Maryland and lIES.
This paper is part of NBER's program in International Finance and Macroeconomics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4503
                                                                               October 1993


                             FIXING EXCHANGE RATES: A
                         VIRTUAL QUEST FOR FUNDAMENTALS


                                         ABSTRACT

       Fixed exchange rates are less volatile than floating rates.        But the volatility of
macroeconomic variables such as money and output does not change very much across exchange
rate regimes.    This suggests that exchange rate models based only on macroeconomic
fundamentals are unlikely to be very successful. It also suggests that there is no clear tradeoff
between reduced exchange rate volatility and macroeconomic stability.


Robert P. Flood                                     Andrew K. Rose
Research Department                                 School of Business Administration
International Monetary Fund                         350 Banows Hall
700 19th Street, NW                                 University of California
Washington, D.C. 20431                              Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER                                            and NBER
An Introduction and Some Motivation
      It is clear that exchange rate volatility is costly; expensive and enduring institutions

have been developed to combat exchange rate volatility. Currently, most countries in the
world manage their exchange rates in some way, and indeed this has been the norm
throughout the twentieth century. Why do most countries control their exchange rates?

When exchange rates are ignored by central banks, they are typically extremely volatile;
when exchange rates are managed, much of this volatility vanishes. Fixing the exchange
rate "fixes' the "problem" of exchange rate volatility. This paper is motivated by the
question: What happens to the volatility? Most models of exchange rate determination
argue that this volatility is transferred to other economic loci. For instance, monetary
models of the exchange rate imply that stabilization of the exchange rate is achieved at the
cost of a more volatile money supply. In this paper, we argue empirically that the
volatility is not in fact transferred to some other part of the economy; it simply seems to
vanish. When exchange rates are stabilized, there do not appear to be systematic effects on
the volatility of other macroeconomic variables. This result is intuitively plausible: the
volatility of variables such as money and output does not appear to be significantly
different during regimes of fixed and floating exchange rates, and is rarely considered to be
different by empirical macroeconomic researchers.
      If exchange rate stability can be bought without incurring the cost of other
macroeconomic volatility, then it is possible that floating exchange rates may be
excessively volatile. Countries that choose not to manage their exchange rates, implicitly
allow exchange rate turbulence to persist when it could be reduced with few apparent
effects on volatility of other macroeconomic variables. While it is not possible to make a
definitive policy prescription in the absence of a model that can explain exchange rate
volatility, it seems intuitively possible that much exchange rate volatility is not welfare-
improving.
                                                 2

       Our primary objective in this paper is to study the implications of exchange rate
 volatility in regimes of fixed and floating rates for typical OECD countries. However, we
 also seek to make a methodological contribution, by developing a technique that allows
 economists to identify potential fundamental determinants of exchange rates. Economists
 typically model exchange rates as linear functions of fundamentals. It is indisputable that
 conditional exchange rate volatility depends dramatically on the exchange rate regime. We
 argue that this fact can be used to distinguish potentially interesting exchange rate models
 from non-starters which are doomed to have little empirical content.

       Suppose that the structural-form linking fundamentals to exchange rates does not
 change dramatically across regimes, as is true in many theoretical models. The conditional
 volatility of a typical exchange rate rises dramatically when a previously fixed exchange

 rate begins to float. Any potentially valid'exchange rate fundwneiual determinant must also
 experience a dramatic increa.se in conditional volatility when a previously fixed exchange
 rare is floated. As we shall see, the empirical relevance of this point is particularly strong,
 since it depends only on structural equations, rather than reduced-forms with unknown and
possible unstable coefficients. Empirically, we cannot find macroeconomic variables with
volatility characteristics which mimic those of OECD exchange rates even approximately.
Intuitively, if exchange rate stability varies across regimes without corresponding variation
in macroeconomic volatility, then macroeconomic variables will be unable to explain much

exchange rate volatility. Thus existing models, such as monetary models, do not pass our
test; indeed, this is also true of any potential model which depends on standard
macroeconomic variables. We are driven to the conclusion that the most critical
determinants of exchange rate volatility are not macroeconomic.!!




  1/ Further, our evidence shows that any (e.g., microeconomic) factor which operates by
affecting money market equilibrium is also at odds with the data.
                                              3

      The following section of the paper lays out the theory and methodology for the
analysis which follows. The data is then presented in section II. The core of the paper is
section III, which presents our basic empirical results. The paper ends with a brief
conclusion.


I: The Theory and Methodology
      Monetary models of the exchange rate are natural choices for our study, since they
are simple and conventional. But we hope to show that the thrust of our analysis is much
more general.
Ia: Virtual and Traditional Fundamentals for the Flexible-Price Monetary Model
      The generic monetary exchange rate model begins with a money-market equilibrium
condition, expressed in logarithms as:


              fl\-pIy-ai+€1                                                     (1)

where: m denotes the (natural logarithm of the) stock of money at time t; p denotes the
price level; y denotes real income; i denotes the nominal interest rate; and f denotes a well-
behaved shock to money demand.
      We assume that there is a comparable equation for the foreign country, and that
domestic and foreign elasticities are equal. Subtracting the foreign analogue from (1) and
solving for the price terms, we have:

                    =   (m_m*) - $(y..y*) + o(i_i*) -   (*)                     (1')

      If we assume that prices are perfectly flexible, then in the absence of transportation
costs and other distortions, purchasing power parity holds, at least up to a disturbance:

              (p-p'') = e + p                                                   (2F)
                                                 4
 where: e denotes the domestic price of a unit of foreign exchange; and v is a stationary
 disturbance. Substituting this equation into (1'), it is trivial to solve for the exchange rate:

                = (m-m''),    -
                                  (yy*) + a(ii*)t - (f.*) +                          (3)

       At this point, it is traditional to invoke uncovered interest parity (UIP):

             (ii*) =      E1(dej/dt                                                  (4)

 where E(de,3/dt is the expected rate of change of the exchange rate. The canonical
structural-form single factor exchange rate equation can be expressed as:

                =   f,   + aE(deJ/dt                                                 (3')

where f1 denotes the "fundamental determinant" of the exchange rate.
      In the flexible-price model, a standard way to measure f is the "traditional
fundamental" (TF), defined by:

             TF" (mm*) (yy*)                                                         (5)

We will also examine a variant of (5), augmented to include a term for money demand

disturbances:


            ATFL (mm*) - (y_y*) - (fE*)                                              (5A)

Neither f3 nor (E*) is known in reality, although this will not turn out to be
                                                                               very
important for our empirical work.
      ATF and TF differ in a number of respects. In our empirical work, we parameterize
TF explicitly, but measure ATF without an explicit money demand model. Thus one
advantage of using ATF rather than TF is that mis-specification of TF will not affect our
                                              5

measured   ATF. Another reason to prefer ATF to TF is that it is closer to the latent
"fundamental" variable.

      By way of contrast, our "virtual fundamental" (VF) can be derived from (3) (or by
assuming UIP and backing a measure of fundamentals out of (3')):


             VF,    e, - a(ii*X.                                                  (5')

The key a parameter is unknown, but our results will prove to be robust across a wide
range of interesting and plausible values.
      Virtual fundamentals, unlike traditional fundamentals, will always be tightly related
to the exchange rate within the sample in a statistical sense for reasonable choices of a.
Virtual and traditional fundamentals are merely alternative ways of measuring the same
latent variable. Both are model-based, use raw economic data, and rely solely on the

structural equation (3).
      In the absence of substantive measurement error, virtual and traditional fundamentals
should behave similarly if the monetary model with flexible prices describes reality "well"
(i.e., v is relatively unimportant in the sense of having small unconditional and conditional
variance). Much of the analysis which follows hinges on comparing the time-series
characteristics of VF, TF and ATF (the latter differ only by (-&")). Our chosen metric is
conditional volatility, which we choose because: a) it is intrinsically interesting; b) it has
proven to be difficult to explain with current exchange rate models; c) it allows us to avoid
non-stationarity issues; and d) it seems to vary in an interesting and systematic (regime-

specific) way.
Ib: Tangential but Brief Notes on the Literature
      Our paper differs from the literature in emphasizing regime-specific fundamental
volatility. Many models of managed exchange rates assume that exchange rate management
does not alter the conditional volatility of fundamentals substantially. For instance, the
                                               6

early target zone literature (Krugman, 1991) typically assumed that the conditional
volatility of fundamentals did not change with the exchange rate regime. Instead, the
conditional volatility of the exchange rate was dampened because of a change in the
(reduced-form) functional form of the relationship linking the exchange rate to
fundamentals, often dubbed the "honeymoon effect". Related recent work which
emphasizes "leaning against the wind" (Lewis (1992), Lindberg and Soderlind (1992) and
Svensson (1992)) still assumes that the conditional volatility of fundamentals does not
change much.
      As should become obvious below, our use of "fundamental" is not synonymous with
"exogenous"; we intend to compare virtual and traditional fundamentals through regimes of
both fixed and floating exchange rates, without claiming that either fundamentals or the
regimes themselves are exogenous in any relevant sense. This is completely reasonable in
the context of our monetary model. A set of (ff*)     shocks striking the money-market

should affect the volatility of money if the exchange rate is fixed completely exogenously;
but during a pure float, these shocks drive the exchange rate, since money is exogenous.
Thus, the monetary model with flexible prices implies that the conditional volatility of both
virtual and traditional fundamentals should be substantially higher during regimes of
floating exchange rates than during fixed-rate regimes.
      The typical exchange-rate model in the literature consists of: a set of structural
equations; a set of equilibrium conditions involving the structural equations; a set of
relations for the forcing processes; and an expectations assumption, all of which lead to a
reduced-form relation between the exchange rate and a set of variables deemed to be
fundamental to the exchange rate. The best known theoretical papers concerning exchange-
rate volatility, Dornbusch (1976) and Krugman (1991), direct attention to the shape of the
reduced-form relation. For instance, the Dornbusch "overshooting" result showed how the
reduced-form relation can result in conditional exchange rate volatility that is a multiple of
                                               7
the conditional volatility of monetary variables. Krugman's work, which was directed
toward an exchange rate floating inside an explicit "target zone', showed how the reduced-
form relation can result in conditional exchange rate volatility that is a fraction of the
volatility of the relevant market fundamentals. Empirical work directed toward studying
reduced-forms, e.g., Meese and Rogoff (1988) and Flood et. a!. (1991) has been almost
uniformly unsupportive of the theory. In contrast, our derivation of virtual and traditional
fundamentals did not rely on reduced-form equations; nor will our empirical work rely on
reduced-form estimates.
      It is well known that models of exchange rates work poorly in floating exchange rate
regimes (e.g., Meese and Rogoff (1988)). This leads most economists to conclude that
there is an important variable (or set of variables) omitted from standard models. The
contribution of this paper consists in pointing out a striking characteristic of the omitted
(set of) variable(s), namely that it has regime-specific conditional volatility, and does not
appear in traditional measurements of macroeconomic fundamentals (including deviations

from money market equilibrium).
Ic: The Sticky-Price Model
      In reality prices look sluggish, and deviations from purchasing power parity (i.e., i',
are large and persistent. Further, across exchange rate regimes, nominal and real exchange
rate volatility are highly correlated (except possibly at very low frequencies). For all these
reasons we examine models which do not rely on perfectly flexible prices.
      A standard way to allow for price stickiness is to substitute a Phillips-curve equation
in place of the assumption of continuous purchasing power implicit in equation (2F) (e.g.,
Obstfeld and Rogoff (1984)):

                    = j,(y..yLR) + g, + E,(,÷1-)

             Y = e'(e+p*p), + cL'r
                                                  8

       => P+IP = O(e+p*p) +               + g1          ÷-)                               (2s)

where: y is the long-run level of output (ignored for simplicity); g is a well-behaved

shock to goods market equilibrium; r,         i1-E(p÷i-P) is the ex ante expected real interest
rate; and   is defined by:


             O(e+p*), + 'r1 + gj = 0.                                              (6)

Obstfeld and Rogoff (1984) provide a detailed discussion of the latter term.
      Equation (6) can be solved for f and thus E11-J; when these expressions are
substituted back into (2s), one arrives at:


            Pt÷iPt = O(e+p*p)1 + + g + -p)
                     + E(e-e,) + 9'E1(g1-g1) + 4IOE(r11-rJ.                        (2s)

Solving this for the exchange rate by substituting into (1'), one can derive:

               = (m_m*)1 - f3(y_y*) +
                                      cr(i_I*)1
               -
                   O1Ej(e1+1e)+(p*11p*JJ + 0(Pi+tPt)                               (7)
               - Og1 - O2E(g11-g1) -   r1 -

      The analogues to (5) and (5A) for the sticky-price model are therefore:


            TP (mm*).. 3(y...y*)1 - 4r1 - /OE(r+1-r)                               (8)
                   = TF1 -     - 4/OE(r%+I-r)


and


            ATFS       (rnm*)1 - f3(y_y*)1 +(€_e*)1 -   r1 - /OF(r÷1-r)            (8A)

                       ATF' - 4r, -
                                              9
      If the sticky-price monetary model provides an accurate description of the data (so
that the goods market shock g, is relatively unimportant), then virtual and sticky-price
traditional fundamentals should have similar properties.

H: The Data
Ha: Discussion of the Raw Data
      Our empirical work focuses on bilateral American dollar exchange rates from 1960
through 1991 inclusive. We choose this sample because we are interested in comparing
exchange rates and their fundamental determinants during regimes of both fixed and
floating rates. The Bretton Woods regime of the 1960s is a good example of a fixed
exchange rate regime. The exchange rate bands were narrow (± 1%, compared with e.g.,
the           of the narrow band of the Exchange Rate Mechanism in the European

Monetary System). The Bretton Woods system was a regime of universally pegged
exchange rates, with a clear commitment to intervention by the associated central banks
(the EMS is a system of exchange rates which are pegged vis-a-vis each other but float
jointly relative to other major currencies). One disadvantage of the Bretton Woods era is
that Euro-market interest rate data (which are unaffected by political risk) are unavailable
for much of the sample. As we discuss below, this will not turn out to be a very serious
problem, since few of our results depend on UIP holding exactly.
      Since much of our interest is on conditional volatility of both exchange rates and
macroeconomic fundamentals, we choose to work at the monthly frequency. A coarser
frequency (e.g., quarterly) would enable us to use national accounts data, but limit the
number of observations severely; a finer frequency would preclude use of standard
macroeconomic fundamentals such as money and prices. This issue is also discussed
further below.
                                              10

      We use industrial production indices for our measure of output. We also use narrow

(Ml) money indices, the consumer price index for prices, and three-month treasury bill
returns as interest rates. Our data are transformed by natural logarithms unless otherwise
noted (interest rates are often annualized and always measured as nominal rates divided by

100 so that e.g., an interest rate of 8% is often used as .08). The data is taken from the

IMF's International Financial Statistics and has been checked and corrected for e.g.,
transcription and rebasing errors. We consider eight large industrial countries (above and

beyond the United States): the United Kingdom; Canada; France; Germany; Holland; Italy;
Japan; and Sweden. The United States is always considered to be the domestic country so
that our exchange rates are measured as the price (in American dollars) of one unit of

foreign exchange (e.g., $2.80/i).
      Time-series graphs of our raw data are presented in figures 1-5. The exchange rate
data are graphed with the 1% bands during the Bretton Woods regimes that we consider.
Tick marks on the abscissa denote the end of the Bretton Woods era (and the beginning of
the relevant Bretton Woods regime for Canada, Germany, and Holland, countries which
adjusted their pegs early in the 1960s). The actual exchange rate pegs and explicitly
declared bands are tabulated in Table I. Interest rate differentials are the difference
between annualized American and foreign rates; prices, money and output are portrayed as
the ratio of the (natural logarithms of the) American to the foreign variable. Throughout
our empirical work, the scales in our graphics are country-specific; comparisons should be
done across exchange rate regimes for a given country, rather than between countries.
      We note that the nominal exchange rates are obviously quite stable during the Bretton
Woods era, but quite volatile during the period which followed. (This well-known
characteristic is also true of real exchange rates (Stockman (1983))). However, this
dramatic increase in volatility does not characterize such traditional fundamental
determinants of exchange rates as money arid output (a fact noted by Baxter and Stockman
                                              11

(1989) in a slightly different context). Unless the link between fundamentals and exchange
rates varies dramatically across regimes, this constitutes prima fade evidence that variables

such as money and output are not in fact important determinants of exchange rate volatility,

at least for our sample. In some sense, the rest of the empirical work in this project

merely extends this result.
fib: Some Naive Evidence on Volatility Tradeoffs
      Frenkel and Mussa (1980, 379) state:
               while as a technical matter, government policy can reduce
            exchange-rate fluctuations, even to the extent of pegging an
            exchange rate, it may not be assumed that such policies will
            automatically eliminate the disturbances that are presently reflected
            in the turbulence of exchange rates. Such policies may only
            transfer the effect of disturbances from the foreign exchange
            market to somewhere else in the economic system. There is no
            presumption that transferring disturbances will reduce their overall
            impact and lower their social cost. Indeed, since the foreign
            exchange market is a market in which risk can easily be bought and
            sold, it may be sensible to concentrate disturbances in this market,
            rather than transfer them to other markets, such as labor markets,
            where they cannot be dealt with in as efficient a manner.
In this sub-section, we attempt to get a handle on this issue in a very naive way.

      For each of the nine countries in our sample, we obtained the monthly IFS measure

of the nominal effective exchange rate. These data (which are discussed in detail in

International Financial Statistics) were obtained from 1975 through 1990. After dividing

our sample into eight two-year samples, we computed the sample standard deviation of the

first-difference of the natural logarithm of the effective exchange rate for each of the eight
periods and nine countries. We then computed the analogues for domestic output, interest
rates, and money. We are then left with a panel of 72 observations (nine countries by

eight sample periods) of volatility. Scatter plots are provided in figures 6-8, which
respectively graph exchange rate volatility against the volatility of output, interest rates,
and money. In these graphs, observations are marked by country (America, Britain,
Canada, France, Germany, Holland, Italy, Japan, Sweden).
                                               12

      The graphs indicate that there is no substantial tradeoff between exchange rate
volatility and the volatility of (domestic) interest rates. Some evidence of a tradeoff
between exchange rate volatility and both output and money volatility is apparent in the
graphs, mostly because of a few outliers in the lower right part of the graphs. Significantly
negative simple correlations between 0(e) and both a(y) and a(m) can be confirmed
statistically at traditional confidence levels. However, the finding of a negative correlation
between 0(e) and 0(m) vanish when the outliers are excluded; the only robust result is the
tradeoff between exchange rate and output volatility.1/
      It may be interesting to note parenthetically that there is also no clear sign of a
tradeoff between exchange rate and stock return volatility. Figure 9 is a scatter plot of
exchange rate volatility and stock market volatility computed in an analogous manner (that
is, the standard deviation of the first difference of the log of the IFS aggregate stock
market index, computed for samples of two years of monthly data). Our data also do not
reveal any signs of a simple tradeoff between exchange rate volatility and either the level
or volatility of inflation.
      To summarize, with the exception of a negative, statistically significant correlation
between nominal effective exchange rate volatility and output volatility, there do not appear
to be simple tradeoffs between exchange rate volatility and the volatility of standard
macroeconomic variables. The absence of a correlation between exchange rate and money
volatility is especially striking in the context of monetary models.
Hc: More on Reserves

      Monetary models of the exchange rate imply that stabilization of the exchange rate is
achieved at the cost of a more volatile money supply. Thus, the tradeoff between exchange


 1'   The R2 of this relationship is approximately .2. None of these results depend on the
absence (or presence) of either country- or time-specific "fixed effects" (or both). Also,
there is no significant tradeoff between the volatility of the exchange rate and the levels of
the macroeconomic variables considered.
                                               13

rate volatility and money supply volatility should be more apparent for narrower concepts
of money such as the monetary base, or indeed international reserves (e.g., Stockman
(1983)). The correlation between exchange rate and money volatility was not well
determined from the evidence above, given the important outliers. It is therefore
interesting to see whether a clearer picture can be obtained from an examination of more

narrow monetary aggregates.
        Figure 10 is a scatter plot of nominal effective exchange rate volatility against the
volatility of total reserves, computed in the same fashion as in the sub-section above. The
hypothesis that there is no correlation between exchange rate and reserve volatility can only
be rejected at the 40% confidence level. Figures 11 and 12 show similar results for two
more narrow reserve concepts, total non-gold reserves and reserves of foreign exchange

only.
        It may seem striking that there is no apparent tradeoff between exchange rate
volatility and the behavior of international reserves. Some further detail on this issue can
be found in Figure 13, which shows time-series plots of the percentage change in total
reserves for each of the nine countries. In figure 13, the plots are broken into two distinct
segments: the period during the Bretton Woods regime when the country was obligated to
intervene to maintain the currency within tight bands; and the period after June 1973. Of
course, the period after 1973 does not correspond to a generalized float, since many
countries managed their floats either implicitly (as is true in e.g., the Canadian case) or
explicitly (as is true of the ERM countries). There are sometimes major differences in the
time-series characteristics of reserves between the Bretton Woods era and the post-1973
era. However, there is little evidence of a general decrease in reserve volatility as
countries moved from the Bretton Woods regime of adjustable pegs to the post-1973 era.
                                              14

Indeed the volatility of reserves for Canada, France, Germany, Italy, and Sweden seems to
be systematically higher after the demise of Bretton Woods. 11,2/

U!: Empirical Results
lila: Virtual Fundamentals
      The construction of virtual fundamentals requires oniy one piece of non-observable

information, i.e., a.
      The literature indicates that a, the interest semi-elasticity of money demand, is likely
to be a small number (e.g., the discussion in Flood et. al. (1991)). We believe that a value
of a =. 1 is reasonable, and that a = 1 is excessively high. While we believe that a = .5 is
implausibly high, we pick it as our default value so as to make our case under adverse
conditions (lower, more realistic, values of a will typically strengthen our arguments).
However, it turns out that our results do not really depend on a that much; even a values
of substantially greater than unity deliver our main point./




  1/ This result is not true of narrower concepts of reserves. For both total non-gold and
foreign exchange reserves, the U.K., France, Germany, Holland and the USA experienced
decreases in reserve volatility.
  2/ European monetary arrangements (beginning with the Snake and continuing with the
EMS) may explain some of this increase in reserve volatility for France, Germany and
Italy. However, this is by no means clear, given the exchange controls, loose bands, and
 I
poor credibility of European exchange arrangements, especially in the early 1980s.
      We have attempted to estimate a directly. We derive our estimating equation by
using UIP in (3') and taking first-differences:
                = a(ii*)1 +
where the fundamental process is given by f, = f1.1 + andi is a well behaved
disturbance term (white noise if f1 is a random walk).
      To estimate this equation, we use IV, using 3 lags of both e and (ii*) as
instrumental variables. The results are poor in the sense that a is usually imprecisely
estimated, always with a negative point estimate. (While we doubt that our instrumental
variables are highly correlated with the regressor, we note that OLS delivers similar
results, although positive but insignificant estimates are obtained for the U.K. and Canada).
      We have also tried to estimate a directly through various money demand equations
with similarly poor results; a typically turns out to be small and insignificant, often
negative.
                                              15

      Figure 14 is a series of time series piots of the first-difference in virtual fundamentals

for our eight different exchange rates, using a value of a = .5. (An analogue for our
preferred value a=.l is included in the appendix, and leads to similar conclusions.) If
fundamentals follow a random walk, then the first-difference is also the innovation.f As

usual, in our time series plots we graph the variables for both the Bretton Woods regime
when the exchange rate was pegged, and the period of more floating rates which began
after June 1973. The graphs show a striking phenomenon which is central to this paper,
namely that the volatility of virtual fundamentals is much higher in regimes of floating rates
than during regimes of fixed rates. This result does not depend on the exact choice of a.
ifib: Traditional Fundamentals for the Flexible-Price Monetary Model
      A fi value is required to measure traditional fundamentals. This parameter
corresponds to the income elasticity of money demand; we choose =1 as a reasonable
benchmark (Goldfeld and Sichel (1990) provide a relevant survey).
      For simple money demand functions, all that is required for ATF construction is a.
This can be seen by considering OLS on the differenced money demand function:


             (m_m*)j -   (p-p' = (y.y*) - a(ii*X +                                (9)
       =>                (mm*)1 - (p_p*) - (y.y*) + &(ii*)
       =>    ATF', = (pp*)     -   &(ii*).                                        (5A)

       It might be objected that a simple static (differential) money demand function such as
 (9) is likely to fit the data extremely poorly. While this point is surely true, our interest in
 (9) is peripheral, since we are only interested in the conditional innovations of the



   1/ The hypothesis that virtual fundamentals (and, parenthetically, traditional
 fundamentals) contain a unit-root cannot typically be rejected at conventional significance
 levels. However a first-order autoregressive coefficient (typically with a coefficient of
 around .4) is often significant, so that the hypothesis of a pure random walk can frequently
 be rejected.
                                               16

rraditionalfundamentals. That is, including extra dynamics in (9) will result in the
presence of extra lagged terms in (5''), but unchanged ATF innovation volatility.
        Time series plots of the first-differences of TF generated with 3=1 are presented in
figure 15; comparable plots for ATF generated with cz=.5 are presented in figure 16.
There are some country-specific differences in TF volatility between regimes of fixed and
floating rates. However, these are relatively small and subtle. Again, the appendix
contains analogues for different parameter values. All are consistent with the conclusion
that in contrast with vi rrual fundamentals, the volatility of traditional fundamentals does not

vary dramatically across &change raze regimes.
mc: Comparing Alternative Fundamentals for the Flexible-Price Monetary Model
        We now compare virtual and traditional fundamentals for the flexible-price model.
This can be done directly by comparing figure 14 (i.e., VF) with figures 15 and 16 (TF
and A1T respectively). Clearly, the conditional volatility of VF rises when one compares
the Bretton Woods regime with the post-Bretton Woods data, sometimes by an order of
magnitude. This is true for all reasonable values of alpha, and all currencies. Equally
clearly, there is no comparably large difference in TF or ATF volatility across exchange
rate regime, at least for the tabulated currencies and parameter values.

        Although we find the plots in figures 14-16, (or their analogues in figures Al-A3)
convincing, the evidence is ocular rather than econometric. Nevertheless, it is remarkably
easy to produce the statistical analogues. Suppose that TF1 ( TF1-TF), ATFL, and
iVF are normally distributed. Then the ratio of the regime-specific sample variances,
e.g.,                        suitably scaled by a factor to correct for degrees of freedom, is
                                              17

distributed as F under the null hypothesis of equal variances across exchange rate

regimes. j/
      Table II contains estimates of the ratio of the standard deviation of the first-

difference of fundamentals during the post-Bretton Woods era to the standard deviation of
the first-differences of fundamentals during the Bretton Woods regime. (We tabulate ratios
of standard deviations (rather than the corresponding F-statistics) in order to highlight
situations where fundamental volatility was actually lower in the post-1973 regime than in
the Bretton Woods regime.) Different lines correspond to different concepts of
fundamentals and different parameter values. The relevant F statistics can be obtained by

simply squaring the tabulated statistic (or Ix-11 + 1 if x < 1 where x is the statistic). Under
the null hypothesis of equal volatility, the appropriate number of degrees of freedom in the
numerator is approximately 220, and the number of degrees of freedom in the denominator
is approximately T, tabulated in Table I. As the .05 and .01 critical values for F(200, 100)
are 1.32 and 1.48 respectively, the statistics tabulated in Table H are inconsistent with the
null hypothesis at the .05 (.01) confidence level if they surpass approximately 1.15 (1.22).
Starred statistics denote combinations where the null hypothesis of no substantial increase
in volatility cannot be rejected at different confidence levels. This hypothesis is wholly at
odds with all the VF series; it fares much better (but is still frequently rejected) for
traditional fundamentals.2/




  11 We checked for normality by looking for excess skewness and kurtosis. For some
currencies and some alpha values, there are clear signs of non-normality which lead one to
reject the hypothesis of normality at conventional confidence levels. We conclude that the
hypothesis of normality is not literally true, but does not seem to be grossly at odds with
the data. Thus we try not to take the exact confidence levels of our tests too literally; i
turns Out that there is no reason for us to do so.
  2/ The end of an exchange rate peg is often associated with a large change in e and VF.
It is therefore interesting to note in passing that the dramatic increase in VF volatility when
a fixed rate begins to float also characterizes VF time series when the fixed-rate regime is
extended through the month(s) at the end (and beginning) of the Bretton Woods peg.
                                               18

      It is striking that the traditional fundamentals often do not show a marked secular
increase in volatility across exchange rate regimes; indeed, there are a number of instances
of lower traditional fundamental volatility in the post-Bretton Woods regime. Nevertheless,
we are not really interested in the null hypothesis that fundamental volatility is equal across
reimes. Rather, we are interested in the question: do virtual and traditional fundamentals
have similar time-series characteristics? In particular, do the TF and ATF series mimic the
increase in volatility experienced by all the VF series? The answer is clearly negative; the
hypothesis that the ratio of post-Bretton Woods to Bretton Woods volatility is equal for the
virtual and traditional series can be rejected at better than the .99 level for all currencies
and parameter values considered.

      Scatter plots of ATF against VF for a=.5 are contained in Figure 17 (the TF:VF
analogue is contained in figure A5). In the graph, non-parametric data smoothers are
drawn to "connect the dots"; Bretton Woods observations are highlighted by diamond
marks. It is clear that virtual and traditional fundamentals are only loosely associated.
This finding can be corroborated with standard regression techniques, which show that
virtual and traditional fundamentals are positively but very imperfectly correlated (the R2 in
a regression of virtual on traditional fundamentals is typically around .05).1/
      To summarize, there is overwhelming evidence that the volatility of virtual

fundamentals rises significantly when a fixed rate begins to float. However, this is by no
means clear for traditional fundamentals; for reasonable a values, there is no substantial




  1/ Since (ii*) enters both ATF and VF, deviations from UIP cannot explain the different
volatility characteristics between the two. Indeed, deviations from UIP which are not
regime-specific cannot explain regime-specific volatility patterns. Insofar as there are
regime-specific UIP deviations, they are likely to be smaller during the floating rate
regime, since capital controls have gradually diminished in importance; however, this
makes the jump in VF volatility in even more striking.
                                               19

increase in volatility. Traditional and virtual are positively correlated for reasonably high
values of a (e.g., .5), but the relationship is very noisy.JJ

md: Traditional Fundamentals for the Sticky-Price Monetary Model
        Construction of virtual and traditional fundamentals for the monetary model with
flexible prices required only a and above and beyond raw data. In order to construct
traditional fundamentals for the monetary model with sticky prices, we need estimates of 9,
4), E(e1,.1-eJ, (p*11..p*J, and r.
        We use the literature to guide us in choosing appropriate 0 and 4) values. The largest
estimate we have found for 0 is in Frankel (1979), who uses a variant of (7) with quarterly
data and estimates 0 to be .19. Papell (1985) also uses quarterly data and estimates 0 to be
between .02 and .12 for four different countries. Meese and Rogoff (1988) estimate 6 to
be between .01 and .03, insignificantly different from zero; Mark (1990) finds comparable
results. We consider 0=.01 to be quite reasonable, and 0=.1 to be an extreme upper
bound at the monthly frequency.2/ As higher values of theta make our case harder to
prove, we choose 0 =.1 as the default. We also choose 4) =.1 as our default, although
there is a much smaller empirical literature on 4) values (Papell estimates 4) to be between
.01 and .76, though with large standard errors).
        We use uncovered interest parity to substitute (ii*X for E(e+1-e.J. We construct a

proxy for Ep*11 by regressing p*t+I against a "reasonable" information set, typically
consisting of         ip*1,       q,1 y* y*1} In order to construct a proxy for the
real interest rate, we construct a proxy for E1(p,+i-P) by regressing iPt+ on a comparable




  1' Parenthetically, for ar.I, the slope of the e:VF relationship is often insignificantly
different during regimes of fixed and floating exchange rates,
 2/ Direct estimation of 0 leads to estimates of around .01, insignificantly different from
zero.
                                              20

domestic information set, and subtracting the fitted value from the nominal interest rate,

since r1

      Figures 18 and 19 are the time series piots of our benchmark TF and ATF series for
the sticky-price model; figures A4 and A5 are analogues for different parameter values
while figures A7 and A8 are scatter plots of VP against the sticky-price TF and ATF. It is
clear that none of our conclusions are changed substantially by modelling prices as sticky
rather than perfectly flexible. The reason for this is that, even apart from the size of 0 and
4', the volatility of r1 does not vary much across exchange rate regimes. Adding a term
with relatively constant volatility to the traditional fundamental reinforces the fact that the
volatility of TF (or ATF), unlike that of VF, does not vary much across exchange rate
regimes. Indeed, for this reason, we expect that virtually all known macroeconomic
exchange rate models will deliver broadly comparable results, since they depend on
variables whose volatility does not systematically vary much across exchange rate regimes
(Baxter and Stockman (1989) provide some relevant evidence).V
       On a different note, we note in passing that the volatility of traditional fundamentals

is not always roughly constant, since TF volatility rises dramatically during hyper-
inflationary periods. For instance, the volatility of the growth of German prices and
money rises by an order of magnitude from 1921 to 1923. Thus, the poor correspondence
between VF and TF volatility which characterizes "normal" periods, disappears during

hyperinflations.




 It With the exception of Holland, the relationships between inflation and the information
sets are often tight, with R2 values ranging up to .5.
 2 The results which have been presented in the paper have been computed with monthly
data. As it is well-known that the time-series with which we are concerned can all be
empirically modelled as processes with unit-roots, it is plausible to believe that our results
will also hold at coarser frequencies. Nevertheless, we temporally aggregated all of our
data up to the quarterly frequency and recomputed our test statistics; none of our
conclusions were substantially altered.
                                              21

 V: A Summary and a Tentative Conclusion
      Economists know remarkably little about exchange rates. In this paper, we have
tried to exploit a fact that we do know: conditional exchange rate volatility is
                                                                                   substantially
higher in floating rate regimes than it is during regimes of fixed rates. We propose a
simple benchmark as a specification test: any plausible empirical model of exchange rates
should be able to account for this stylized fact. This indisputable fact has considerable

power: for instance, flexible- and sticky-price monetary models cannot account for it.
Indeed, as few macroeconomic variables for OECD countries experience dramatic changes
in volatility which coincide with exchange rate regimes, we doubt that any exchange rate
models based only on macroeconomic fundamentais can pass our simple empirical hurdle,
at least during periods of tranquility.

      Given that exchange rate volatility frequently seems to change dramatically when the
volatility of macroeconomic variables does not, it should not be surprising that we cannot
find any strong tradeoff between exchange rate volatility and the volatility of a variety of
different macroeconomic variables (e.g., interest rates, relative prices, money, reserves,
and stock returns). That is, we can see little empirical evidence that reducing exchange
rate volatility compromises the stability of other macroeconomic variables. We are
unwilling to make policy recommendations in the absence of a fully articulated model
which can explain exchange rate volatility (let alone sustainable exchange rate levels).
Nevertheless, we can see few economic advantages of pure exchange rate volatilityper se.
      We believe that future research should shy away from macroeconomic fundamentals,

and concentrate on more microeconomic detail. Krugman and Miller (1992) introduce
stop-loss traders into a simple model of the foreign exchange market. A microeconomic
focus like this may well provide a future rationalization for the phenomenon of regime-
varying VF volatility.
                                           22

References
Baxter, Marianne and Alan C. Stockman (1989) "Business Cycles and the Exchange-Rate
System" Journal of Monetaly Economics 23, 377-400.
Dornbusch, Rudiger (1976) "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics" Journal of
Political Economy 84, 1161-1 176.
Flood, Robert P., Andrew K. Rose and Donald J. Mathieson (1991) "An Empirical
Exploration of Exchange-Rate Target Zones" Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public Polic
35, 7-66.
Frankel, Jeffrey A. (1979) "On the Mark: A Theory of Floating Exchange Rates Based on
Real Interest Differentials" American Economic Review 69-4, 610-622.

Frenkel, Jacob A. and Michael L. Mussa (1980) "The Efficiency of Foreign Exchange
Markets and Measures of Turbulence" American Economic Association Papers and
Proceedings 70-2, 374-381.
Goldfeld, Stephen M. and Daniel E. Sichel (1990) "The Demand for Money" in Handbook
of Monetary Economics (B.M. Friedman and F.H. Hahn, eds; North-Holland, Amsterdam).
Krugman, Paul "Target Zones and Exchange Rate Dynamics" Quarterly Journal of
Economics 106, 669-682.
    and    Marcus Miller (1992) "Why Have a Target Zone" mimeo.
Lewis, Karen K. (1992) "Occasional Interventions to Target Rates" mirneo.
Lindberg, Hans and Paul Soderlind (1992) "Target Zone Models and the Intervention
Policy: The Swedish Case" mimeo.
Mark, Nelson C. (1990) "Real and Nominal Exchange Rates in the Long Run" Journal of
International Economics 28-1/2, 115-136.
Meese, Richard A. and Kenneth Rogoff (1988) "Was It Real?" Journal of Finance XLIII-4,
933-948.

Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff (1984) "Exchange Rate Dynamics with Sluggish
Pnces under Alternative Price-Adjustment Rules" International Economic Review 25-1,
159-174.

Papeil, David K. (1985) "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics after a Decade of
Floating" Journal of International Economics 25, 303-317.
Stockman, Alan C. (1983) "Real Exchange Rates under Alternative Nominal Exchange-
Rate Systems" Journal of International Money and Finance 2-2, 147-166.
Svensson, •I2rS E.O. (1992) "Recent Research on Exchange Rate Target Zones: An
Interpretation" Journal of Economic Perspectives, forthcoming.
</ref_section>
                                             23

Table I: Bretton Woods Regimes of Fixed Exchange Rates after 1960

  Country     Par Value          Declared Range       T            Dates
  UK          $2.8=f             (2.78,2.82)          94     through 11-18 1967
  Canada      C$1=$.9275         (+1- 1%)             95     5-2 1962         5-31 1970
  France      Ffr4.93706=$       (4.9,4.974)         115     through 8-10 1969
  Germany     DM4=$              (3.97,4.03)         101     3-6 1961 through 9-30 1969
  Holland     fl3.62=S           (3.5295,3.6475)     121     3-7 1961 through 5-9 1971
  Italy       Lit625=$           (620.5,629.5)       139     through 8-15 1971
  Japan       Y360=$             (357.3,362.7)       139     through 8-27 1971
  Sweden      SkrS.17321=$       (5.135,5.2125)      139     through 8-23 1971



Table II: Vo latility Ratios of First-Differenced Fundamentals

  Country           U.K.    Canada France Germ'y Holland Italy             Japan   Sweden
  Benchmark Parameters (a=.5, /3=1, O=4=.1)
  VF              9.07      3.38     9.31     7.44         8.63    9.74    3.95    5.82
  Flexible-Price Model
  TF                1.02** 1.15*      5Ø** 1.19*           1.70    1.10 1.06** l.00
  ATF             1.66    1.60       1.39     1.07** .88** 1.79            1.28    1.40
  Sticky-Price Model
  TF              l.14** 1.33         .80** 1.25           1.48    l.06** 1.08** 1.13**
  ATF             1.27    1.26       1.26     1.10 1.32            1.47    l.04 1.40
  Perturbations
  VF (=.1)         18.37 4.27        18.68    10.68        13.42   15.74   9.45    12.78
  VF (a=1.)      5.26   2.59   5.44    4.90   6.05                 6.33    2.28    3.54
 Flexible-Price Model
 TF (/3=1.5)      1.06** 1.16* 2.34 l.11** 1.72                    1.08* l.00 1.02**
 ATF (cr=.1)      1.47   1.52   1.06** 1.16* 1.99                  1.19*   l.14t* 1.22
 ATF (a=l.)       1.89   1.67   1.63   1.30    1.41                2.39    1.36    1.54
 Sticky-Price Model
 TF (8=4=.0l) 1.28 1.30 1.30 1.15* 1.17*                           1.35    1.09 1.28
 ATF (")          1.30  1.28    1.27   1.13** 1.17*                1.40    1.09 1.32
                                             Gi




                                                                   Italy




                                             s—a—
                Monthly Nominal   B3lateral Dollar Pates, 1960-1991
                                  Exchange Rates
Figure 1: Time series of raw e data




                                                                   ;'


                  Industrial Production Oaflerentials, 1960—1991
                                         Output
Figure 2: Time series of raw (yy*)    data
                                           G2




                                                                   it
                                          "01.00




              J&ONI                       s—a—
                 Three Month TreSur hill differentials 1960-1991
                                     Interest Pates
Figure 3: Time series of raw (jj*) data




                                     -




                                 S                    0
                A




                          V




                              Ml CfOrntI i•—i
Figure 4: Time series of raw (mm*) data
                                                                                 G3




                                                                                —011.00



          0.




                                     /
                                                       cci fe"entia1s, 1960-1991
                                                                Prices
Figure 5: Time series of raw (pp*) data

                   €tt.rtto. I .cna,.ne l3ate atM, tM{J,ttt.12,Ct,..CttO                             No.In.i I tt.ctt,.   acn.ng, 0.,. W0 1—0011     r.tl
   0] —                                                                                       OM—


                                                                                                           S
                                                                                                            r
                                                                                              Qt
                    tale


                       at
                                                                                              °'                                      .                                       S




           -
                            3:                              'b             OR                                                                                      a
               ;t-tol.d 0..,. ,oh. Q.1.,t,.-te. II 2                                                    Pooled 0ata oCtOSS 9 cotooftin. S 2                            ci..
                 Eocrtant)t 18t0      Outcut    utilatli 'I                                            Eocflange aria Interest Pate Volatility


Figure 6: a(e) against (1(y)                                                              Figure 7: 00(e) against 0(i)

      •c.It..t Etfettto. E.C.t'0. 5.te S00 at I,.!,,.                                                00.00.] Eftetl100 E,ofl,000 Pall Sn @ IF S   S too.   Ito..
                                                                                              01 —




                                                                                              02 -




                                                                                                               I.

               0001.0 Ca,. aotots OlcOcOttolOt S 2-,..:
                                                           d               OS
                                                                                                        0001.2 0.f.
                                                                                                                     .d.
                                                                                                                   •0t000 S 0M,.2
                                                                                                                                       oh                  on
                                                                                                                                  & 2_I... .&.,ttti, S..010.
                 EoChencje Pate: 'lone3 Volatility                                                         EoCrtarge Pate. Stock Volatility

Figure 8: 0(e) against a(m)                                                               Figure 9: 0(e) against o(Stocks)
                                                                                    G4

                          rJom,flal Ef'ective E xcflan;e Oet e 0-0 Total Peser-ves
                 .03 —

                                                      50                  C


                  02                                            F

                                                  S                                     C
                                          C                     C
                                          BH                                                                            B

                                                      S
                 01 —                                  a        AG0
                                                                          S

                                                                          Cs       SR
                                              S        i   •j

                                                                    JU         H
                                                           F

                    0
                            0                                       .05   15
                                Pooled Data across S C0Lcntres, 8 2-year eoritPly samples
                                      Exchange Pate: Pesenve Volatility
Figure 10: a(e) against o(Reserves)
         ceira0 €f(tCti. €octoanoa R.te .oC Moo-Solo Mese-on                                         Mo.sral Ftlecti..e E.cn.og. Mate •oo to Moser,..
    03                                                                                          03   —



                  ..,
                                                                                                         5.

    02 —
                     0,



    — •—    :.
       s_f,..                         •
                                                                                                         Ft


                              COttrlfl B a-v.a. ..OntMty •aspl.s
               000I.d Oat. .Crot. S                                                                      Pooled 0.1. across
                                                                                                                                                                      I-,
                                                                                                                              co.,,tr... a 2—Vest •0555 IV S..,. fl
                £ocnange Rate: Reserve Volatility                                                             EoCflane Rate Reserve Volatility

Figure 11: 0(e) against a(Non-GoId Resrv)                                                   Figure 12: 0(e) against .l7(FX Reserves)




               4-!.

               ____________ _____
           :
                                                                      -                                                               'r1t HJl5 '!'l



               iI
                                 Pe'cen'age Tano                                              T3j                       --v
Figure 13: Time series of Reserves during Fixed and Floating Exchange Rate Regimes
                                         G5




                Je   L                                                          41III l i
                                                                          !nrl
                                                                   r
                                                                          i i,
                                                                                        34.
                                                                     11.1,




                                            r13

              Jog—                       s—age

                                       Alpfla=.5
                             VF Finst—Diffenences
Figure 14: Time series of Benchmark Virtual Fundamentals



                                                           :. -J
                                                                                        ,4.
                                         C.d.

                                            1Ll tiZILi
                                                             JI..hiLi
                                   Tw1iIp
                                            1111Ii!iI1       '!Tr
                                                                        1(31!




                            Eea=1, Flexible—Price Model
                             IF First—Dffenences
Figure 15: Time series of Traditional Fundamentals, Benchmark Flexible-Price Model
                                             G6




                   fly                                              11.1,




              .flD.fl
                               Alphar.5, Flexible—Price Model
                               ITF First—Differences
Figure 16: Time series of Augmented Traditionaj Fundamental, Flexible-Price Model

  Diamonds are Bnettcn Wooas Observations




    :::.                                  TiT
           TIT.                   :::
                                         711,

                         ra=, F1exWIe—Pne Moe1, 1o—.9Y
                           T            VF Frst-Dl±fepEflces
Figure 17: Direct Comparison of ATF arid VF, Flexible-Price Benchmark
                                          G7




     w                            -Ii


                            —I
                                         non and                     !IIU
                                                                                  *




                      Beta=1, ThetaPhi=.1, Sticky—Price Mode'
                             IF First—Dj.fferences
Figure 18: Time series of Traditional Fundamental, Benchmark Sticky-Price Model




          W


      ,
                     Alpha=5, TrietaPriir1, Sticky-Price iode1
                            ATF Fir-st—Differences
Figure 19: Time series of Augmented Traditional Fundamental, Sticky-Price Model
                                                            Pi
                                           Al




                                  H-MØ    C.,,...




                                    .
                                          ,Ofl.fld




                l'"'f!T 'ii'                         I




                                       Alpna=.1
                             VF First—Differences




     .
Figure Al: Time series of "Realistic" Virtual Fundamental




                                                             4*
                                              44*
                                          :iPnce Moc:c
                                 t—D1ienpnGes
Figure A2: Time series of Trad'l Fundamental, Flexible-Price Model with "Large" Beta
                                                   A2




Figure A3: Time series of Augmented Trad'l Fundamental, "Realistic" Flex-Price Model




                 r!1IP'111r                                                -
                                                                                        '        I   .IIi   IL1dlL
                                                                                                 f7'If !l'lf'
                                     ',     '                                                                   'S.




       w                                                                   -    ilIJkI.L
                                                                               l1'r,Iflhl,,nfl
                                                                                                            LL

                                                   .01 l.a.



                        dLllLJ
                 r fT
                        rPI))fl' ''r'[          'vr'u         'kiipnIr 1


                          Betar , ThetdrPNi=Q1, Stick-Prce McCei
                                         IF First—Differences
Figure A4: Time series of Traditional Fundamental, "Realistic" Sticky-Price Model
                                                              A3


       Ik._LJI1     lii .            [a
                                                      I
                                                      I7!(l
                                                                          •'   L.
                                                                          1 1!!''          i 'r    ¶F1 1




                                                 I,
                  .r..ny                                      OI IO                               U.',



       i1 IT '         T rlrrn '' rrji


                                                              5—a.,
                            Alpha=5, TbetazPtir 01, Sticky—Price MoOn
                                      AIF First—Di-f±erences
Figure AS: Time series of Augmented Trad'I Fundamental, "Realistic" Sticky-Price Model


  Diamoncs are enetton wooos Otservations




                            I             I                           I




                                Betaz 1       F 1exibe-Pnce -ocoI,                  -t3C-- IDD1
                                   r anc         VF   rIn•stLfenenreE,
Figure A6: Direct Comparison of TF and VP, Flexible-Price Benchmark
     :
                                                       A4

                        bfletCfl VI000S Ueflvaticfls




             .1.                                 &.           S       oi                  0
                                                       $011 WOO                               11.10




      - I,

                        taz 1, Theta=Pbiz 1, Sticky—Price                  H 3d e I   1950- 99 1
                                 IF and VF First—Dierences
Figure A7: Direct Comparison of TF and VF, Sticky-Price Benchmark


  D13Ta:: 3? 9reton i'13005             0 t sen vat ann s




              --4- —,        I      I    —.5.    —5.              I
                                                                                      —




                                                        s—c..
                        ,1phaz5, ThetaPri.1, Sticky—Price Model, 1960- 1991
                               ATF and VF Finst-Difference5
Figure AS: Direct Comparison of ATF and VF, Sticky-Price Benchmark
