                           NIBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           FIXED EXCHANGE RATES AS A
                            MEANS TO PRICE STABILiTY:
                            WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED?




                                  Lars E. 0. Svensson




                                 Working Paper No. 4504




                  NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 October, 1993



Given at the Eighth Annual Congress of the European Economic Association in Helsinki,
August 27, 1993. The author especially thanks Andrew Rose for many discussions and
comments. He also thanks Clacs Berg, Bernard Dumas, Barry Eichengreen, Kits Ekiund,
Harry Flarn, Peter Garber, Nils Gottfries, Lars Honigren, Assar Lindbeck, Hans IJndberg,
Ragnar Lindgren, Maurice Obstfeld, Torsten Persson, and Charles Wyplosz for discussions
and comments: Joaldm Pcrsson for research assistance; and Molly Akerlund for secretarial
and editorial assistance. This paper is part of NBER's research program in International
Finance and Macroeconomics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4504
                                                                               October 1993


                              FIXED EXCHANGE RATES AS A
                               MEANS TO PRICE STABILITY:
                               WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED?


                                          ABSTRACT

       The paper discusses what we have learned from last year's currency crises in ERM and
the Nordic countries about fixed exchange rates as a means to achieve price stability. After
discussing the explanations for the crises, the paper concludes that fixed exchange rates are not
a shortcut to price stability. Monetary stabiLity and credibility have to be built at home and
cannot easily be imported from abroad. Fixed exchange rates are more fragile and difficult to

maintain than previously thought They may even be in conflict with price stability, by inducing
a procyclical destabilizing monetary policy, and by inducing an inflation bias. Building monetary
credibility is even more imporumt with flexible exchange rates.


Lam E. 0. Svensson
Institute for Intcmadonal Economic Studies
Stockholm University
S-106 91 Stockholm
SWEDEN
and NBER
Alfred Marshall Lecture

Fixed Exchange Rates as a Means to Price Stability:
What Have We Learned?0
Lars E. 0. Svensson
Institute for International Economic Studies, Stockholm University


1. Ilntrodssction

    Pegging the exchange rate to a stable low-inflation foreign currency can be seen as a
means to achieve price stability in the domestic country. Pegging the exchange rate
means that domestic monetary policy has to be focused solely on maintaining the
exchange rate peg, which in turn implies implicit or explicit coordination of domestic and
foreign monetary policy. Given this monetary coordination, price stahility is supposed to
be achieved through a simple disciplining mechanism: First, if a higher domestic than
foreign inflation occurs, it leads to a domestic real exchange rate appreciation, that is,
domestic goods become more expensive relative to foreign goods. This reduces the
demand for domestic goods and indoces a recession which reduces the domestic inflation
subsequently to the same long-run level as the foreign one.                Second, wage- and
price—setting behavior will to some extent anticipate these consequences of too high wage
and price increases, which will make a higher domestic inflation less likely to occur in the
first place. In this lecture I shall discuss what we have learned from the past year's events
in Europe about fixed exchange rates as a means to achieve price stability.


    Given at the Eighth Annual Congress of the European Economic Association in
Helsinki, August 27, 1993. The author especially thanks Andrew Rose for many
discussions and comments. He also thanks Claes Berg, Bernard Dumas, Barry
Eicbengreen, Klas Ekiund, Harry Flam, Peter Gather, Nils Gottfries, Laos Horngren,
Assar Lindbeck, Hans Lindberg, Ragnar Lindgren, Maurice Obstfeld, Torsten Perssun,
and Charles Wyplos for discussions and comments; Joakim Persson for research
assistance; and Molly Akerlund for secreterial and editorial assistance.
    There are other reasons for fixed exchange rates, for instance to achieve a possible
                                             2


    Let me start by recalling the conventional view in the spring of 1992 of the ERM, the
Exchange Rate Mechanism, that is, the exchange rate cooperation within the European
Monetary System. At that time the ERM was generally considered a successful way of
importing German monetary Stability into the rest of the ERM. Since its commencement
in 1979 the ERM had achieved an impressive convergence of inflation and interest rates
among its members. There had been no general realignment after 1987. Realignment
expectations had gradually decreased, and the system's credibility had increased (Frankel
and Phillips (1991), Svensson (1993), Rose and Svensson (1993)). The Maastricht Treaty
about European Monetary Union had been signed in February 1992. Further convergence
was anticipated, and the ERM was generally considered to be heading towards the EMIJ.
    In the Nordic countries that were outside the ERM, the Finnish markka, the
Norwegian krone and the Swedish krona were in the spring of 1992 each unilateraliy
pegged to the ecu, the European currency unit. Finland, Norway and Sweden had filed
applications to join the European Community and thereby the ERM. The credibility of
the Nordic exchange rate regimes differed markedly, though. Realignment expectations
were low or non-enistent for the Norwegian krone, whereas they were higher for the
Finnish markka and the Swedish krona. The markka and the krona bad experienced
several currency crises in the past few years, and the nsarkka had been devalued by 12% in
November 1991.2

    An unusually dramatic year followed. By the late spring of 1993 eleven currencies had
been attacked altogether, eight in the ERM and three in the Nordic countries outside the
ERM. Of these, only three (the Belgian franc, the French franc and the Danish hone)


reduction of relative price variability in order to promote trade and general economic
integration. These other reasons will not be discussed here.
2   See   Lelimussaari, Suvanto and Vajanne (1993) and ROrngren and Lindberg (1993) for
details on the Finnish and Swedish experiences, respectively, including measures of
realignment expectations. Lindberg, SOderlind and Svensson (1993) report realignment
expectations for Sweden. Realignment expectations for Norway and Sweden are also
reported in Section 5 below.
                                             3


had not been floated or devalued. By August 1993 the ERM bands for these bad been
widened to '15 percent. The only currencies that had not been attacked were the Dutch
guilder which remained within the narrow band relative the deutsche mark, and the
Austrian sdhilling which maintained its unilateral peg to the deutsche mark.
    So, what have we learned from the past yea's crises in the ERM and Nordic countries
about fixed exchange rates as a means to price stability? In order to discuss this, I shall
answer in turn the following questions:          (1) What happened?     (2) What are the
explanations? (3) Was the September 1992 crisis anticipated? (4) What have we learned?
Before doing that, let me state that I do not claim any originality of the views and
conclusions expressed here; most or all I have to say is a synthethis and interpretation of
the existing literature.1.


2. What happened?
    Next I shall recall a few important events doring dozing 1992 and 1993. On
February 7, 1992, the Maastricht Treaty was signed, in an atmosphere of general
optimism about the EMU's future. During the spring it was quiet in the ERM and for the
Norwegian krone, whereas there were some realignment expectations for the Finnish
markka and the Swedish krona. On June 2 the first Danish referendum took place, with a
oa.rrow majority for a "no" to EMIL Witb polls reporting increased support for a "no" in
the French referendum to occur on September 20 and hence increased uncertainty about
the future of EMU, market pressure mountcd on some ERM currencies in August.
Increased pressure on the Finnish markka forced it to be floated on September 8. The
Italian lira also devalued by 7 percent on the same day. On September 16, Black


    The literature on last year's currency crises includes Bank for International
Settlements (1993b), Committee of BC Governors (1993), Eichengreen and Wyploss
 1993), Goldstein et at (1993), Group of Ten. (1993), llârngren and Lindberg (1993), IMF
 1993), Fortes (1993) and Rose and Svensson (1993).
   See Groop of Ten (1993, Annex V) for a more detailed chronology.
                                             4

Wednesday, the British pound was forced to float. Sveriges Riksbank (the Swedish
central bank) made monetary history by raising the overnight marginal lending rate to
500 percent per year, thus maintaining the krona's parity in spite of strong speculative
attackr. The bra fell through its BEN floor. On September 17 the bra was floated and
the Spanish peseta devalued by 5 percent. On September 20 France voted "yes" to EMU
by a very narrow majority. Pressure continued throughout September on the French
franc, the Irish punt, the peseta and the Portuguese escudo. Sveriges Riksbas.k lowered
interest rates to less extreme levels.
    In November a new speculative attack on the Swedish krona occurred. On November
19, after having lost foreign exchange reserves worth about S25 bn in 6 days, the Riksbank
let the krona float. Three days later the peseta and escudo were devalued by 6 percent.
Pressure on the French franc, the Danish hone, the punt and the Norwegian krone
continued into December. On December 10 the Norwegian krone was floated. The punt
was eventually devalued by 10 percent on February 1, 1993. Pressure continued during
the spring on the escudo and peseta, in March for the first time there was also pressure on
the Belgian franc. On May 13 the escudo and peseta were devalued by 6.5 and 8 percent,
respectively.
    In July enormous pressure mounted on the Belgian franc, the Danish krone, the
French franc, the escudo and the peseta. At a long meeting with ERM finance ministers
and central bank governors that ended at 1.45 am on Monday morning, August 2, tbe
bilateral exchange rate bandwidths in the ERM were increased to         percent, except for
the deutsche mark and guilder which by a separate German-Dutch agreement remained
within the narrow band.


3. What axe the explanations?
    What are the explanations for these calamities? I will consider five main explanations
that have been discussed in the literatore, all of which I believe have some explanatory
                                               S


power.
3.) increased international capital mobility
    During the last decade a highly integrated global capital market was created in which
huge volumes of capital can be moved at short notice. Capital markets were deregulated
and capital controls were removed as part of ECs 1992 Single Market Program. The
turnover on the global foreign exchange market is estimated to have tripled between 1986
and 1992, and turnover adjusted for double—counting is estimated to have been about
$1,000 bn per day in the spring of 1992. As a comparison, the total foreign exchange
reserves of the G—10 central banks amounted to about $400 bn. In August 1992, on the
eve of the September crisis, the foreign exchange reserves of Banque de France amounted
to about $29 bn. Central bank foreign exchange reserves, even if augmented by official
borrowing, are clearly small in relation to the huge turnover on foreign exchange markets,
suggesting that central bank foreign exchange interventions alone are unlikely to withhold
speculative attacks.5
    A more specific phenomenon has been labelled "convergence trading."6 Many
investors exploited the interest rate differentials between the low yield deutsche mark and
high yield currencies like the Era and the Swedish krona, borrowing in deutsche mark and
lovesting in bra and krona. After the September crisis investors have reported in
interviews that they did this mostly expecting further convergence and disappearance of
the interest rate differentials, in which case they would make a capital gain.
Alternatively, in case a realignment would appear iniminent, they expected to be able to
dose their open positions, for instance by hedging their investments on the forward foreign
exchange market, receiving help by central banks intervening to postpone the realignment.
As a result, a large volume of capital was invested in the high—interest currencies, capital
that niigbt quickly move out in case of increasing reai.ignrnent expectations.


    See Bank for International Settlement (l993a) and Goldstein et al (1993) for details.
6   See Group of Ten (1993) and Goldstein et al (1993).
                                                6


    The existence of initial long positions from convergence trade is not a necessary
condition for a speculative attack on a currency, though. A speculative attack can be
made from an initial dosed position v-ia short selling of a currency on the forward foreign
exchange market, or any other derivative market.
12 Real exchange rote divergence from nominal shocks to prices and wages
    For several years some tension built up in the ERM and in the Nordic countries
because real exchange rates diverged because of too high domestic inflation in some
countries. This inflation can be seen as the result of nominal shocks to wages and prices,
in turn caused by a combination of lath of monetary credibility, loose fiscal policy, and an
inflation bias in the wage formation process. Considerable real exchange rate appreciation
relative to tbe deutsche mark is apparent in Figure 1 for Italy, Portugal and Spain within
tbe ERM, and for Finland and Sweden within tbe Nordic countries. The resulting tension
would eventually have to he resolved, by lower inflation in these countries or by exchange
rate depredation.
5.5 Required real exchange rate adjustment from asymmetric real shocks
    Asymmetric real shocks, that is, real shocks that hit one country but not the others,
may require a real exchange rate adjustment, a change in the price of the country's goods
relative to other countries goods.        Such real exchange rate adjustment may create
problems in a fixed exchange rate regime, whether achieved via a nominal realignment or
via different inflation rates across countries. An expected nominal realignment may
induce a speculative attack, and may also create expectations of future realigments.
Adjustment through differknt inflation rates may be too slow, too inflationary or, if rapid
disinflation or even deflation is required, too painful.
    Cei-man uuiJlcntzon is the most obvious asymmetric real shock that has hit the ERM


     The Balassa-Samuelson effect, that the price level tends to he higher in high-income
countries because the price of nontraded goods is higher, may perhaps explain some of the
real appreciation of Portugal and Spain, since these countries were growing rapidly during
this period.
                                             7


the last few years. The unification lead to a German fiscal expansion, since German taxes
were not sufficiently raised to balance the increased public expenditure. This increased
demand for German goods and services, which should result in German goods and services
becoming more expensive relative to non-German goods and services. That is, an initial
real appreciation of the deutsche mark was required.8 This was required when several
ERM currencies instead of real depreciation experienced a real appreciation towards the
deutsche mark, as we saw above.
    A real deutsche mark appreciation can be achieved in three ways, not mutually
exclusive. The first way is a nominal revaluation of the deutsche mark. This was
suggested by Bundesbank at an early stage, but blocked by France. The second way is
higher German inflation. Eundesbank allowed German inflation to increase somewhat,
but not by very much in order to avoid endangering Germany's price stability goal.
There remained the third way, lower inflation outside Germany. This required a tight
monetary policy in the European countries outside Germany, in conflict with a deepening
recession and increasing unemployment in some of the countries. Eventually this third
way failed, and in the end a nominal appreciation of the deutsche mark was achieved
anyhow. It appears that an early deutsche mark revaluation as suggested by Bundesbank
would have been the optimal response, and that in that case perhaps ERM could have
been saved for several years. The route to a deutsche mark revaluation turned out to be
long and painful, indeed.



    In the longer run, the real deutsche mark rate should depreciate back at least to its
initial level, perhaps further, as output eventually increases in East Germany.
    In my view Bundesbank has suffered completely unwarranted criticism for its
insistance on maintaining German price stability and its refusal to give in to demands
from all over Europe to loosen its monetary policy. Critics seem to have forgotten that
German price stability was in fact the nominal anchor of the ERM, that Bundesbank has
no reason to compromise on German price stahility because other ERM countries refuses a
nominal deutschemark revalutation, that Bundesbank was against the generous conversion
of East German marks, and that Bundesbank was in favor of increasing German taxes
more in order to pay for the unification. Eundesbank's position instead appears fully
consistent and responsible.
                                              S



     A second example of a real asymmetric shock is the Finnish loss of erports to the
former Soviet Union. During 1991 alone Finland's export to the Soviet Union dropped
from 13% to a% of total exports (SOderstrom (1993)). Such a fall in the demand for
Finnish goods should require Finnish goods becoming cheaper relative to other countries'
goods, that is, real depredation of the markka is needed. With a fixed exchange rate, this
had to be achieved through less inflation, or even deflation. With downward price- a.nd
wage ridity this proved too difficult, and a nominal devaluation of the markka was
undertaken in November 1991.          This proved insufficient and the markka further
depredated after it was floated in September 1992.
     A third example is the volatility of Swedish consumption at the end of the 1980s and
early lYYOs. The thick line in Figure 2 shows the Swedish savings ratio from 1982 to 1992.
After having been about 2 percent (of household disposable income) it dropped to minus 6
percent between 1986 and 1989.'° This implied a big increase in consumption demand,
most of which would fall on Swedish goods and services, and it required a real
appreciation of the krona. With a fixed exchange rate, this could only be achieved
through inflation. The thin hne in the Figure shows the inflation rate. Inflation indeed
went op and reached tO percent per year in 1990.
     By then, however, the savings ratio increased dramatically to reach 8 percent in 1992,
corresponding to a dramatic fall in consumption.'1 Such a collapse in consumption
demand requires a real depreciation. With a fixed exchange rate that has to be achieved
by low inflation, or even deflation. Inflation indeed fell to almost 2 percent per year in
1992. A further real depredation. was achieved by floating the krona in November 1992.



     Among tbe reasons for this consumption boom is the deregulation of the Swedish
credit market while income taxation favoured borrowing, resulting in low after—tax real
interest rates.
11
     Among the possible reasons for the increase in the savings ratio are a tax reform that
favored saving, uncertainty about future pension payments due to rapidly increasing
budget deficit, incresed uncertainty about future employment prospects, and increased
after—tax real interest rates.
                                                   9


     54 Ezpectations of a more expansionary monetary policy after a collapse
         A country may pursue a tight monetary policy and defend its fixed exchange rate in
     spite of domestic recession, high unemployment and subs tancial short-run costs for several
     reasons. One reason may be a determination not to lose hard-won improvements in
     exchange rate credibility and prospects of futnse monetary stability. Another reason may
     be to fulfill the EMU convergence criteria and eventually reap the long term benefits of
     entering the EMU (not having had a realignment within two years is one of the criteria
     for entering EMU in the Maastricht Treaty). As long as the long-run benefits outweigh
     the short-run costs it makes sense to defend the exchange rate.
         However, if a realignment would be forced upon the country, monetary credibility and
     prospects of future price stability would be diminished, as would the probability of being
     accepted into the EMU. Hence the long-run benefits from the tight monetary policy
     would be less, and if they fall below the short—run costs of the policy, it is rational to shift
     to a more expansionary monetary policy. Put differently, if one's virtue is lost, one might
     as well enjoy oneself.
         In a situation like this multiple equilibria are possible.t2 In one equilibrium no
     speculative attack occurs, the exchange rate remains fixed, and monetary policy remains
     tight. In the other equilibrium a speculative attack occurs, a realignment or a free float
     follows, and monetary policy switches to become more expansionary, ex post rationalizing
     the speculative attack.      The Danish "no" and the uncertainty about the French
     referendum contributed to make the EMU more uncertain and to make the second
     equilibrium more likely. The multiple-equilibria explanation seems relevant for Italy,
     Britain and perhaps France. Among the Nord.ic countries it appears to apply for Finland
     and Sweden, where it is clear that more expansionary monetary policies in response to
     domestic recessions have been pursued after the collapse of their fixed exchange rates.

     12  Eichengreen and Wyplosz (1993) extend on the multiple-equilibria explanation for the
     crises in ERM. Multiple equilibria in models nf speculattve attacks have previously been
:a   examined by Flood and Garher (1984) and Ohstfeld (1986).
                                              10



 3.5 Problems wit/i the tactical defense against speculative attack

     The tactical defense against speculative attacks turned out to he more difficult than
anticipated. Central banks mainly used two methods of defense, steriliaed interventions
(interventions without interest rate increases) anti interest rate increases (non—sterilized
interventions).
    Sterilized interventions were very large bat still inefficient. That they were inefficient

is actually not surpnsing given the empirical evidence in the literature that sterilized
interventions indeed have little effect on exchange rates. As an example of the magnitude
of interventions, recall that Banque de France had foreign exchange reserves worth $29 bn
in August 1992. Banqne de France interventions at previous ERM crises had some days
reached $1.5 bn. In the September crises, interventions were reported to be about 5 times
bigger iome days, $5-9 bn (Goldstein et al (1993)). On July 29, 1993, Eanque de France
was estimated to have intervened for more than $27 hn (Financial Times, August 13,
1993).

    Central banks can borrow foreign currency to increase their reserves. This is risky,
though, since the borrowing central bank will suffer a capital loss if a realignment
eventually occurs. In the ERM the accounting is in terms of ecu: this means that both
borrower and lender (read Enndesbank) loses in the case of an ERM realignment, since
the ecu is an average of the EC currencies. Such capital losses can easily wipe out a
central bank's own capital, which is usually a modest share of its balance sheet, and put
the bank in the embarrassing position of having to ask its government or parliament to
put up more capital.
    Large interventions eventually become difficult to sterilize, and tend to torn into
nonsterilized interventions, that is, interest rate changes. For Enndesbank, this means
interest rate decreases, which may be in conflict with German price stability. Therefore,
llirndesbank has good reasons to resist too large interventions, and there is evidence that

   Irlarsd Portugal and Spain also used temporary capital controls.
                                              11


Bundesbank's support of ERM currencies wa.s selective and limited, even though ERM
rules stipulate that interventions shall be unlimited.'4
    This brings me to the other main type of defense, interest rates increases for the weak
currency. The idea with interest rate increases      is    to increase the opportunity cost of
speculating and in the limit make speculators indifferent between keeping thrir
investment in the weak currency and getting out. The Swedish experience showed that
very high interest rates may be needed: expectations of a 10 percent devaluation in one
week with probability one corresponds to an interest rate differential of 520 percent per
year. Very high short interest rates are costly for several reasons, and the costs vary
depending upon the institutional setup and economic conditions in each country. A fragile
financial sector may suffer severe disruptions. The speed at which high interest rates are
transmitted to households and firms vary across countries. Sweden with mostly fixed rate
mortgages has slower transmission than Britain with mostly floating rate mortgages. The
Italian public deficit is financed with large treasury bill auctions, auctions that may turn
sour with too much interest rate volatility.                A domestic recession with high
unemployment makes the tolerance for interest rate hikes less and may quickly erode the
political support for defending the exchange rate, This is particularly problematic when
the central bank is not independent and monetary policy is in the hands of the
government, for iustance in Britain.           "Which will fail first, the pound or the
government?" was then a relevant question, as some have observed.
     Once some currencies were devalued or depreciated through floating, the crisis
worsened as the pressure then was concentrated on the remaining currencies. One reason
for this is that deteriorating international competitiveness because competitors' currendes
are being depreciated makes maintaining a fixed rate more costly for the remaining



'   See Bichengreen and Wyplosz (1993) for written evidence prior to the September crisis
that Bundesbank and the German government felt committed to ERM interventions only
in so far as these did not jeopardize German price stability.
                                             12


 currencies.



 4. Was the September crãta anticipated?
      Nert I would like to discuss whether the September crisis 1992 came as a surprise or
 whether it was antscipated. Here I rely on joint work with Andrew Rose (Rose and
 Svensson (1993)). First, with regard to the Finnish markka and the Swedish krona, there
 were clear realignment expectations and several previous currency crises, so the eventual
 collapse of their fixed rates in September and November was certainly anticipated
 (Lehmussaari, Suvanto and Vajanne (1983) and Lindberg, Soderlind and Svensson (1993)).
 What about the ERM?

      There were ample warnings from some economists about mounting problems for the
 FIRM, both about its vulnerability to increased capital mobility and about the required
real appreciation of the deutsche mark.1           Some economists therefore displayed
considerable foresighL What about policymakers and markets?
      That policymakers lacked foresight is evident from their failure to revalue the
deutsche mark in spite of the good reasons to do so. What about markets? The evideuce
shows that markets did not anticipate the ERM Septembei crisis, except rather late in
August.        Figure 3 shows 95 percent confidence intervals for estimated realignment


t5 A sometimes mentionend sixth explanation for the September crisis is the weak dollar.
The dollar reached a new historic low towards the deutsche mark on September 2, 1992
(1.387 DM71251)). A weak dollar has previously been correlated with tension in the FIRM,
As reasons for such tensions has been mentioned that trade shares with the US vary across
FIRM countries, the trade share being highest for Britain. FIRM countries are therefore
affected differently from export difficulties to the US. A general FIRM export slowdown to
the US would also hit already weak economies harder. It has frequently been suggested
that deutsche marks are a closer substitute to dollars than other ERM currencies, and
tbat investors leaving the weak dollar would invest in deutsche mark rather than other
FIRM currencies. I remain unconvinced that a weak dollar was a decisive factor in the
September crises, except in so far as it reflects a relative tight German monetary policy,
and believe that the main explanations are internal rather than external. Also, since the
dollar was strengthened considerably by the summer of 1993, it cannot explain the July
crisis.
s There were for instance many both technical and non-technical publications from the
CEPR with such warnings, as documented by Portes (1993).
                                             13


expectations relative to the deutsche mark for the the six original non-German ERM
currencies, as well as the Austrian schiliing, the Norwegian krone and the Swedish krona.
The period extends through the September crisis. Vertical bars denote realignments. The
estimates have been constructed according to the "drift-adjustment" method, that is, by
adjusting the interest rate differentials relative to the deutsche mark for expected
exchange rate movements within the hand. The resulting expected rates of realignment
can be interpreted as the product of the probability per unit of time and the expected size
of a realignment in case a realignment occurs. The estimates are done on 3—month
interest rates, hence they concern expected realignments within a 3-month horizon.
Estimates of 1-month and 12-month horizons give the same impression. 17

    The hypothesis of zero realignment expectations can be tested by examining whether
the honzontal line corresponding to zero realignment expectations falls within the
confidence interval. We see in Figure 3 that for the six ERM currencies realignment
expectations decreased over the years and that they were small and insignificant in the
spring of 1992. This was also the case for the Austrian schilling and the Norwegian krone,
whereas there were some realignment expectations for the Swedish krona. Figure .      shows

the period from January 1991 through October 1992 in greater detail. The Danish
referendum on June 2 and Black Wednesday, September 16, 1992, are marked by vertical
bars. We see that realignment expectations increased and became significant for Italy in
July, whereas for the other countries they remained insignificant well into August. As
concluded in Rose and Svensson (1993), market participants did not anticipate the crisis
until weU into August, except for Italy. I




17 The same impression results from an application of the "simplest test of target zone
credibility" in Eichengzeen and Wyplosz (1993), where 12-month forward exchange rates
are plotted relative to the ERM bands.
18 For the multiple-equilibria explanation referred to above, no anticipation of the crisis
implies attaching zero probability to the equilibrium with a speculative attack.
                                             14


5. What have we learned?
    What have we then learned from this dramalic period about fixed exchange rates as a
means to achieve price stability?
.5.1 Fixed exchange rates are fragile
    I think we should acknowledge that fixed exchange rates have proved to be much
more fragile and difficult to maintain than many of us thought. The increased
international capital mobility has made them more vulnerable to speculative attack.
Fundamentals need to converge much more to avoid real exchange rate divergence or, put
differently, the tolerance for diverging fundamentals is much less. Asymmetric real shocks
that require real exchange rate adjustment cause problems. The effective tactical defense
against speculative attack turned out to be more difficult tban anticipated. It has mainly
to be done by interest rate increases. These may need to be large and costly, the precise
costs varying with the institutional and economic conditions in each country; often the
costs are much too high for the defence of the exchange ratge to be credible.
5.2 Fixed erchange rates may be in conflict with price stability
    Even if fixed exchange rates could be maintained, they are less efficient in achieving
price stability than we thought. They may even be in conflict with and hence detrimental
to price stability.
    First, the disciplining mechanism of a fixed exchange rate, that higher inflation brings
a real appreciation which brings a recession which lowers inflation, seems to work too
slowttc Fixed exchange rates have not been credible enough to modify wage and price
setting and prevent nominal shocks and too high inflation in some countries. The
resulttng real exchange rate appreciation has lasted for several years, as demonstrated by
Figure 1. Instead of a quick return to equilibrium, tension has continued to build up so
much that an eventual lowering of inflation has not been enough to restore equilibrium;
depreciation by a devaluation or a float has resulted instead.
    Second, a fixed exchange rate may result in procyclicai, hence destabilizing, monetary
                                              15



policy. The argument goes like this. Suppose a boom starts, because of an increase in
consumption, loose fiscal policy, or some other reason. The boom results in higher
inflation. Suppose the fixed exchange rate is credible. Then with free capital mobility the
nominal interest rate is given from abroad. When inflation increases, the reel interest rate
falls, and monetary policy in that sense become expansionary and contributes to the initial
boom. This is the well-known critique of the ERM that has already been formulated by
Walters (1986). I believe that it lisa to be taken more seriously than before, and also that
it should be taken one step further, namely to consider realignment expectations:
    The central bank may contemplate a revaluation of the domestic currency in order to
dampen the initial boom. Suppose expectations of a revaluation arises. Then an incipient
capital inflow in order to capture the possible capital galn from a revaluation will tend to
appreciate the exchange rate, and the central ban.k will have to stop the capital inflow by
creating an unfavorable interest rate differential relative to the foreign currency and hence
lower the domestic interest rate. This lowers the real interest rate forther, and makes
monetary policy even mbre expansionary.
    The argument is of course symmetric for the recession case: An initial recession lowers
the inflation rate, which with a given domestic interest rate increases the real interest rate
and makes monetary policy contractionary. Vevaluation expectations forces the central
bank to increase the interest rate which implies an even higher real interest rate and an
even more contractionary monetary policy. 5 0

    Figure 5 gives an example of this phenomenon for Sweden. The intermediately thick
curve shows the unemployment rate from 1992 into 1993. The economy experienced a
boom after 1986, from the increase in consumption illustrated in Figure 1. This shows op


' Rigorous modelling of the Walters critique requires either inflation inertia as in
Giavazzo and Spaventa (1990) or some inconsistency between inflation expectations in
financial markets and labor markets as in Milier and Sutherland (1991).
20 Note that this is counter to the standard textbook result for monetary policy in a
fixed exchange rate, namely that monetary policy is neutral and has no effect on aggregate
demand.
                                             16



in unemployment steadily falling until reaching 1.4 percent in 1989- This resulted in
inflation picking up after 1986, as shown by the thin line, the inflation [ate. At the time
realignment expectations were rather low (see Figure 2). Domestic nominal interest rates
were given from abroad and rather moderate. With the increased inflation, real interest
rates became rather low. The thick line shows the 12—month ex post real interest rate.
We see that it became very low at the peak of the boom in 1989 and presumably
contributed to the boom. After 1990 a quickly deepening recession set in. Inflation came
down dramatically in 1991. Furthermore, inc[eased devaluation expectations lead to
increased nominal interest rates. As a result the 12—month ex post real interest rate
became very high and went from less than a half pe[cent per year to 10 percent per year in
less than two years, certainly contributing to the deepening recession.21
     This tendency for monetary policy to be procycical implies that the demand on fiscal
policy to stabilize the economy increases. Given the repeatedly demonstrated difficulty of
conducting an appropriate fiscal policy, it seems realistic to doubt that fiscal policy can
fulfill these demands.
     Third, real exchange rate variability from real shocks, combined with downward price
and wage rigidity, may result in an iofiation bias with fixed exchange rates, a bias away
from price stability. Consider first unilateral regimes. A required real appreciation is
easy to achieve: a bit of inflation will do it, as in the Swedish boom at the end of the
1980's. A real depreciation with fixed exchange rates requires disinflation or even
deflation. With downward price and wage rigidity this will be difficult to achieve, and
may end with a depreciation through a devaluation or a float instead, as the Swedish
consumption collapse in the early 1990's or the Finnish loss of export to the former Soviet


21  Instead of the crude ex post real interest rate in Figure 5, an ex ante real interest rate
can be computed with the help of survey data of households inflation expectations. This
ex ante real interest rate gives the same impression as the ex post real interest rate. (In
the diagram the cx post real interest rate from January 1989 to January 1990 is plotted on
January 1989, whereas the ex post inflation rate for the same 12 months is plotted on
January 1990.)
                                               17


Union shows. This may create an inflation bias and make price stability difficult to
achieve.

     In a multilateral regime like the ERM any real exchange rate adjustment is easy, as
long as it is done by inflating the strong currency. The German unification provides an
example. The French resistance to a nominal realignment of the dentsche mark and
insistence on the Bundeshank lowering interest rates can be interpreted as an attempt to
achieve the real appreciation of the deutsche mark by German inflation. This method of
handling required exchange rate adjustment would certainly have increased average ERM
inflation, in addition to weakening ERM's anchor currency, the deutsche mark)2
5.3 Fired erchange rates are in qeneral no shortcut to credible price stability
    This brings me to my main conclusion; Fixed exchange rates are in general no
shortcut to credible price stability. This does not deny that fixed exchange rates may
achieve considerable temporary snccess. Twelve years of substantial inflation convergence
in the ERM certainly appears impressive. But in the longer ron fixed exchange rates are
much less effective in achieving price stability. Monetary stability and credibility are not
easily imported, they must be built at home.
    The way to build credibility at home has been extensively discussed. It has several
components. One component is an institutional reform making the price stability the goal
of monetary policy and increasing the independence of the central bank. To build
credibility, an institutional reform needs to have three parts, namely to put price stability
in the central bank charter, to give the central bank sufficient independence so that it can
fuiflU the goal of price stability, and to make the central bank accountable for fulfilling its

22 The inflation bias for fixed exchange rates is counter to the previously mentioned
"ratchet effect" in Crockett and Goldstein (1976), who attribute the ratchet effect to
Mundell, Laffer and Wanniski. According to their ratchet effect there would be an
inflation bias with flexible exchange rates because prices of traded goods in domestic
currency would easily rise when the exchange rate depreciates, whereas they would fall
less when the exchange rate appreciates. Huwever, empirical estimates reported by
Crockett and Goldstein failed to find any inflation bias for flexible exchange rates
compared to fixed rates, suggesting that things other than the exchange rate regime are
crucial to price stability.
                                              18



goal. A second component is a fiscal policy consistent with price stability. A third is
improvement in the functioning of labor markets so wage setting may be sufficiently
flexible to be consistent with price stability and full employment.
    A fourth component is political support for a price stability policy. There seems to be
a danger of a vicious circle of low credibility for initiating a price stability policy and low
political support for price stability. Low initial credibility and high inflation expectations
imply that wages, prices and interest rates are set incorporating expected inflation.
Pursuing a price stability policy, resulting in lower than expected inflation, is then costly
in terms of output, employment and ex post real interest rates. This makes a shift to a
policy of price stability unpopular, which in turn reduces the credibility of such a policy
shift.
     Breaking such a vicious circle may not be easy. To do so, public and policy makers
need to be convinced that price stability is desirable, that institutional reform is necessary
for credibility, and policy makers need to pursue a fiscal policy consistent with price
stability. It is good news that moves seem to be underway in France, Italy, Spain and
Portugal to reform the status of the central bank.
5.4 With flerible crr.hauge rate it is even more importent to build rnonetonj credibility
     What have we learned about monetary policy with a flexible exchange rate from the
period after the fall of the fixed exchange rate regimes? The previous nominal anchor, the
fixed exchange rate, has been lost. A new nominal anchor is needed, and there are very
strong arguments to provide that new anchor by a price stability goal for monetary policy:
A low and stable inflation provides the best environment for efficient resource allocation
and growth, and it prevents the arbitrary and unfair wealth redistributions associated
with high and variable inflation.
     In the new situation with flexible exchange rates, there is pressure for inflation and
exchange rate depreciation from many special interest groups, monetary credibility is
damaged, there is more uncertainty about future monetary policy, and there is a risk for a
                                             19


return to a sustained high inflation. In this unstable situation, buildiog credibility for a
price stability policy is even more important than previously.
    Let me only point out one thing that is sometimes forgotten. Price stability does not
exclude using mnnetary policy for short-run stabilization. First, there is some degree of
automatic stabilizing of aggregate demand shocks in a monetary policy that aims at price
stability, namely with tight monetary policy in booms to prevent inflation and loose
policy in recessions to prevent deflation. Second, with long-run credibility for a price
stability policy, there is more scope to use monetary policy for short-run stabilization
(Bernanke and Mishkin (1992)). Without long-run credibility a short-run monetary
expansion may be interpreted as the beginning of a new period of sustained inflation.
Then inflation expectations rise, long interest rates go up, nominal prices and wages
increase, and the positive effect on output and employment is smaller and more
short-lived. With long-run credibility, a short-ron monetary expansion does not increase
inflation expectations, prices and wages as much, and the effect on output and
employment is larger.
    ft is instructive to contrast Germany and the 115 with Britain and Sweden. Germany
and the US seem to have achieved long-run credibility for their monetary policy which
shows up as relatively low long interest rates and tow long-run inflation expectations.
This allows considerable short-run scope for monetary policy. For instance, the US could
in the 1990-93 recession pursue a very expansionary monetary policy with very low short
interest rates without getting high long interest rntes and high long-run inflation
expectations.
    In Britain and Sweden, in contrast, there is less long-run credibility which shows up
in higher long interest rates and higher long-run inflation expectations. This means that
there is less scope for short—run monetary policy. Britain's lowering of short interest rates
hnve for instance resulted in substantial long-run inflation expectations, as documented in

Bank olE England's quarterly /nfintiou Report (Bank of England (1993)).
                                             23


& Sum up
    Let me end by summarizing my message in three points. Fixed exchange rates now
seem much less effective as means to price stability than many of us thought before.
Therefore, monetary stability and credibility has to be built at home with other means. A
move to flexible exchange rates makes it no less essential for a price stability policy to
build monetary credibility.
    This shouid not be interpreted as an argument that flexible exchange rates are always
to be preferred to fixed exchange rate. There are other arguments than price stability for
fixed exchange rates, for instance the reduction of relative price variability in order to
promote trade, foreign direct investment and general economic integration. Fixed
exchange rates may be a complement to monetary stability and credibility at home, as
they appear to be for Austria and the Netherlands, although they are certainly not a
substitute. They are simply neither necessary nor sufficient for credible price stability.
                                           21



References

 Bank of England (1993), Inflation Report, August 1993.
Bernanke, Ben, and Frederic Mishkin, (1992), "Central Bank Behavior and the Strategy
   of Monetary Policy: Observations from Six Industrialized Countries, NBER
    Macroeconomics Annual 1992, 183—228.

Bank for International Settlements (1993a), Central Bank Survey on Foreign &chonge
   Market Activity in April 1992, Basle.
Bank for International Settlements (1993b), 6Srd Annual Report 1992- 1998 Basic.
Committee of EC Governor's (1993), Annual Report 1992.
Crockett, Andrew U., and Morris Goldstein (1976), 'Inflation under Fixed and Flexible
   Exchange Rates," !MF Staff Papers 23, 509-544.
Eicbengreen, Barry, and Charles Wypiosz (1993), "The Unstable EMS," Brookings
   Papers on Economic Activity, 1:1993, 51—143.
Flood, Robert P., and Peter M. Garber (1984), "Gold Monetization and Gold
   Discipline," Journal of Political Economy 92, 90—107.

Frankel, Jeffrey, and Steven Phillips (1991), "The European Monetary System: Credible
   at Last?", NBER Working Paper No. 3819.
Giava.zzo, Francesco, and Luigi Spaventa (1990), "The 'New' EMS," in Paul De Grauwe
   and Lucas Papademos, eds., The European Monetary System in the 1990s, Longman,
   London and New York.

Goldstein, Moms, David Folkerts—Landau, Peter Garber, Liliana Rojas-Suá.rez and
   Michael Spencer (1993), International Capital Markets.      Part L Exchange Rate
   Management and International Capitol Flows, IMF,
Group of Ten (1993), International Capital Movements and Foreign Exchange Markets: A
   report to the Ministers and Governors by the Group of Deputies, Rome.
Uörngmen, Lars, and Hans Lindberg (1993), "The Struggle to Turn the Swedish Krona
   into a Hard Currency," Working Paper No. 8, Sveriges Riksbank.
                                          22


international Monetary Fund (1993), World Economic Outlook: Interim Assessment,
   January 1993.
Lehmussaari, Olli-Pekka, Antti Suvanto and Laura Vajanne (1993), 'Currency Band and
   Credibility: Finnish Experiences," Working Paper, Bank of Finland.
Lindberg, ilans, Paul SoderLind and Lars E.O. Svensson (1993), "Devaluation
   Expectations: The Swedish Krona 1982—1992," Economic Journal, forthcoming.
Miller, Marcus and Alan Sutherland (1991), "The 'Walters Critique' of the EMS - A
   Case of Inconsistent Expectations?," The    Manchester School 59, Supplement, 23—37

  June 1991.

Obsifeld,   Maurice (1986), "Rational and Self-Fulfilling Balance—of—Payments Crises,"
   American Econemic Review 76, 72—81.

Fortes, Richard (1993), "EMS and EMU After the     Fall,"   World Economy 16, 1-15.
Rose, Andiew K., and Lars E,O. Svensson (1994), "European Exchange Rate Credibility
   Before the Fall," European Economic Review, forthcoming.
Sderstrhn, Hans Tson (1993), "Finland's Economic Crisis," SNS Occasional Paper
   No 47, Stockholm.
Svensson, Lars E.O. (1993), "Assessing Target Zone Credibility: Mean Reversion and
   Devaluation Expectations in the ERM, 1979-1992," Euro peon Economic Re view        37,

   763—802.

Walters, Alan (1986), Britain's Economic Renaissance, Oñord University Press, Odord.
                                   la                           Ilelgi un — [lix000t hail    ij                           no   il
                                                         4511
(40                                                      140                                          411
130
           L—'                                           130                                         130
100                                                      400                                         120
I   (0                                                   1(0                                         110
    11(1                                                  or —             —•-•--—-                  lOll
    110                                                   00                                          OIl
    60                                                    90                                          60
    711                                                   70                                          70
    (III                                                  90                                          ——
            1060        I111(11      1990      II 14              4989    1090        1002    10            1986   11(00        1002

                       El rib     iid                                    France                                    Holland
1111                                                     151
140                                                      110                                         140
130                                                      139                                         130
120                                                      120                                         LOG
hO                                                       1(9                                         110
                                                         100                     51                         —
                                                                 7rtt2                               loll
                                                         00                                           90
                                                         00                                           80
IL                                                       70                                           70
60                                                                                                    00
            999         1990         (29219      14              1080    1900         4092   4004           1986   1090        1902    10   I5

                       Ire] arid                                          Italy                                    Norway
150                                                      lot
140                                                     140                                          140
130                                                     130                                          130
100                                                     120                                          100
110                                                     110                                          110
lee                                                     100
                                                         so
                                                         90
                                                         70
                   -
           1299         1990        1990      1904               1888    4980         1992   100.1          1089   1000




                                        Figure 1. Nominal and Real Exchange Rates via-a-via Germany.
                                  Thin (thick)curve is nominal (real based on consumer prices)
                                                                                               exchange rate.
                                                       Source: International Financial Statistics.
               PorE tog at                Spain                        Sweden
                                                          190
 40                                                       140
130
120
110
Lot,
90
80
39
       1999     1990    1992   11                               0)18   890   1992   1)))))

         UniLed Kingdom

140




80     11189     090    1992   1994




                                      Figure 1 mtiaued.
                    0)             V
                                  C',
                             E    0
                    C             C
                             C
                    0)            C
                         g        0
                                  V
                    0)
                    0)




                    C)




                         , . I0
                    N
                    C
                    0)
                                  C'




                    C)
                                  I
                                  C?


                                  0


                    tt
                    C
                    C)
                             V
                             C?



                    C
                    0)


                    C
                    C)




CC?   C   CC?   C
                  A   1st ri a                      Belgium —Luxem bo ii rg                                  Ce n cii o rio
    25                                                                                        20   —   —
    20                                                                                        20

    to                                        rifir
                                                                                              —
           OttO   195-1    1999    992                1980        984   1008     1092                        1994     1901    1592
                                             i±!t                                                  i89T
                                                                                                       I!'-
                   France                                        Holland                                      Ireland
                                                                                   +
                                              21.       —
    20                                        20

    IS
    IS


     I
    —5
—   ii]    992    190-I    988    1992
                                             j1M%mTn  1980       1984   1985    1902


                   Italy                                         Norway                                      Sweden
    25 — —        — —             +— -                                                        05
                                                                                              oc
                                                                                              19
                                                                                              FT
                                                                                               5
    J4                                                                                         0
                                                                                              —5   1
                                                                                              IT
          1095    92!     1990    1992                1990    1984      1980    1990               1981      1981    1029     1902
:-y                                         I                                                                --
                                                    Figure 3+ Expected Rates or Realignment.
                           3-month measures in %/year, 95% enriUdenceintervals vertical lines are          realignments.

                                                       Source:    Rose and Svenseon (1993).
Belgium— Luxembourg                    Denmark                               France




     unhand                            Ireland                               Italy




                                                                   o
                                                                                      Li
                                                                  5    991
                                                                                       U
                                                                             1902




              Figure 4. ExpectedRat of Reaiignment in EIIM 1991-1992.
                 3—month   measur in %fyear 95% confidence intertaiB,
               orertical linces are Danish referendum and Black Wednesday

                           Source: Roie and Svensnon (1093).
1   2



II)



    El




    1)
                                  1986              1986              1990               1992   1   9.91
         19El2   1951


                        Figure 5. UiiemploymenI Inflation   ad Re1 Intert Rite in Sweden.
                        Thin curve is inflationin %fyear, medium curve is unemploymentin %,

                             thick curve ig teal 12-month cx post interest rate in %fyeat.

                              Source: Centra' Statistical Office and Sveriges Riksban.
