                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       MINIMUM WAGES AND EMPLOYMENT:
                        A CASE STUDY OF THE FAST FOOD
                          INDUSTRY IN NEW JERSEY AND
                                PENNSYLVANIA




                                       David Card
                                     Alan B. Krueger




                                  Working Paper No. 4509




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  October, 1993


We are grateful to the Institute for Research on Poverty, University of Wisconsin, for
financial support. Thanks to Orley Ashenfelter, Charles Brown, Richard Lester, Gary Solon,
and seminar participants at Princeton, Michigan State, Texas A&M, University of Michigan,
University of Pennsylvania and the NBER for comments and suggestions. We also
acknowledge the expert assistance of Susan Belden, Chris Burns, Katy Grady, Geraldine
Harris. and Jonathan Orszag. This paper is part of NBER's program in Labor Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Researvh.
                                                               NBER Working Paper #4509
                                                                           October 1993

                       MIMMUM WAGES AND EMPLOYMENT:
                        A CASE STUDY OF THE FAST FOOD
                         INDUSTRY IN NEW JERSEY AND
                                PENNSYLVANIA


                                       ABSTRACT

      On April 1, 1992 New Jersey's minimum wage increased from $4.25 to $5.05 per hour.
To evaluate the impact of the law we surveyed 410 fast food restaurants in New Jersey and
Pennsylvania before and after the rise in the minimum. Comparisons of the changes in wages,
employment, and prices at stores in New Jersey relative to stores in Pennsylvania (where the
minimum wage remained fixed at $4.25 per hour) yield simple estimates of the effect of the
higher minimum wage.
       Our empirical findings challenge the prediction that a rise in the minimum reduces
employment. Relative to stores in Pennsylvania, fast food restaurants in New Jersey increased
employment by 13 percent. We also compare employment growth at stores in New Jersey that
were initially paying high wages (and were unaffected by the new law) to employment changes
at lower-wage stores. Stores that were unaffected by the minimum wage had the same
employment growth as stores in Pennsylvania, while stores that had to increase their wages
increased their employment.


David Card                                               Alan B. Krueger
Department of Economics                                  Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University                                     Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544                                      Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER                                                 and NBER
   How do employers in a low-wage labor market respond to an
increase in the minimum wage?             The prediction from
conventional economic theory is unambiguous: a rise in the
minimum wage leads profit-maximizing employers to cut
employment (Stigler (1946)). Although studies in the 1970s
based on aggregate teenage employment rates usually confirmed
this prediction', earlier studies based on comparisons of
employment at affected and unaffected establishments often did
not (e.g. Lester (1960, 1964)). Several recent studies that rely on
a similar comparative methodology have failed to detect any
negative employment effects of higher minimum wages. Analyses
of the 1990-9 1 increases in the Federal minimum wage (Katz and
Krueger (1992), Card (1992a)) and of an earlier increase in the
minimum wage in California (Card (1992b)) find no adverse
employment impact. A study of minimum wage floors in Britain
(Machin and Manning (1993)) reaches a similar conclusion.
    This paper presents new evidence on the effect of minimum
wages on establishment-level employment outcomes. We analyze
the experiences of 410 fast food restaurants in New Jersey and
Pennsylvania following the increase in New Jersey's minimum
wage from $4.25 to $5.05 per            hour.    Comparisons of
employment, wages, and prices at stores in New Jersey and
Pennsylvania before and after the rise in the minimum offer a
simple method for evaluating the effects of the minimum wage.
Comparisons within New Jersey between initially high-wage
stores (those paying more than the new minimum rate prior to its
                                2

effective date) and other stores provide a further contrast for
studying the impact of the new law.
    In addition to the simplicity of our empirical methodology,
several other features of the New Jersey experience and our data
set are also significant. First, the rise in the minimum wage
occurred during a recession. The increase had been legislated
two years earlier when the state economy was relatively healthy
and the Democratic party controlled the state legislature. By the
time of the actual increase, the unemployment rate in New Jersey
had risen substantially and the Republican party controlled the
legislature.   Last-minute political action almost succeeded in
reducing the minimum wage increase. It is unlikely that the
effects of the higher minimum wage were obscured by a rising
economy.
       Second, New Jersey is a relatively small state with an
economy that is closely linked to nearby states. We believe that
a control group of fast-food stores in eastern Pennsylvania forms
a natural basis for comparison with the experiences of restaurants
in New Jersey. Wage variation within New Jersey, however,
allows us to compare the experiences of high-wage and low-wage
stores in New Jersey and        the validity of the Pennsylvania
control group.
      Third, we successfully followed nearly 100 percent of
stores from a first wave of interviews conducted before the rise
                               3

in the minimum wage (in February and March of 1992) to a
second wave conducted 7-8 months after (in November and
December of 1992). We have complete information on store
closings and use the employment changes at the closed stores in
our analyses. We can therefore measure the overall effect of the
minimum wage on average employment and not simply its effect
on surviving establishments.
      Our analysis of employment trends at stores that were open
for business before the increase in the minimum wage says
nothing about the potential effect of minimum wages on the rate
of new store openings. To measure this effect we analyze
interstate differences in growth rates in the numbers of
McDonald's fast food outlets between 1986 and 1991. Finally,
to extend our conclusions beyond the franchised fast food
industry, we compare relative changes in teenage employment
rates in New Jersey, New York and Pennsylvania in the year
following the minimum wage increase.


I. The New Jersey Law
    A bill signed into law in November 1989 raised the Federal
minimum wage from $3.35 per hour to $3.80 effective April 1
1990, with a further increase to $4.25 per hour on April 11991.
In early 1990 the New Jersey legislature went one step further,
enacting parallel increases in the state minimum wage for 1990
                                 4
and 1991 and an increase to $5.05 per hour effective April 1,
1992. The scheduled 1992 increase gave New Jersey the highest
state minimum wage rate in the country and was strongly opposed
by business leaders in the state.2
    In the 2 years between passage of the $5.05 minimum wage
and its effective date, New Jersey's economy fell into recession.
In addition, the state legislature shifted from a Democratic
majority to a Republican majority. Concerned with the possible
impact of the scheduled minimum wage hike, the legislature voted
in March 1992 to split the increase over two years. The vote fell
just short of the margin required to over-ride a Gubernatorial
veto, and the Governor allowed the $5.05 rate to go into effect
on April 1 before vetoing the two-step legislation. Faced with the
prospect of having to roll back wages for minimum-wage earners,
the legislature dropped the issue. Despite a strong last-minute
challenge, the $5.05 minimum rate took effect as originally
planned.


II. Sample Design and Evaluatiofl
    Early in 1992 we decided to evaluate the impending increase
in the New Jersey minimum wage by surveying fast food
restaurants in New Jersey and eastern Pennsylvania. Our choice
of the fast food industry was driven by several factors. First, fast
food stores are a leading employer of low-wage workers: in 1989
                                5

franchised restaurants employed 45 percent of all workers in the
eating and drinking industry.3 Second, fast food restaurants
comply with minimum wage regulations and would be expected
to raise wages in response to a rise in the minimum wage. Third,
the job requirements and products of fast food restaurants are
relatively homogeneous, making it easier to obtain reliable
measures of employment, wages, and product piices. The
absence of tips greatly simplifies the measurement of wages in the
industry. Fourth, it is relatively easy to construct a sample frame
of franchised restaurants, unlike the case for many other low-
wage employers. Finally, past experience (Katz and Krueger
(1992)) suggested that fast food restaurants have high response
rates to telephone surveys.4
    Based on these considerations we constructed a sample frame
of fast food restaurants in New Jersey and eastern Pennsylvania
from the Burger King, KFC, Wendy's, and Roy Rogers chains.5
The first-wave of the survey was conducted by telephone in late
February and early March 1992, a little over a month before the
scheduled increase in New Jersey's minimum wage. The survey
included questions on employment, starting wages, prices, and
other store characteristics. Copies of the questionnaires used in
both waves of the survey are available on request from the
authors.
                                 6

    Table   1 shows that 473 stores in our sample frame had
working telephone numbers when we tried to reach them in
February-March 1992. Restaurants were called as many as 9
times to elicit a response. We obtained completed interviews
(with some item non-response) from 410 of the restaurants, for
an overall response rate of 87 percent. The response rate was
higher in New Jersey (91 percent) than in Pennsylvania (72.5
percent), reflecting the fact that our interviewer made fewer call-
backs to non-respondents in Pennsylvania.6 In the analysis
below we investigate possible biases associated with the degree of
difficulty in obtaining the first wave interview.
    The second wave of the survey was conducted in November
and December of 1992, about 8 months after the minimum wage
increase. Only the 410 stores that responded to the first wave
were contacted in the second round of interviews.              We
successfully interviewed 371 (90 percent) of these stores by
telephone in November 1992. Because of a concern that non-
responding restaurants might have closed, we hired an interviewer
to drive to each of the 39 non-respondents and determine whether
the store was still open, and conduct a personal interview if
possible. The interviewer discovered that 6 restaurants were
permanently closed, 2 were temporarily closed (one because of a
fire, one because of road construction) and 2 were under
renovation.7 Of the 29 stores open for business, all but one
                                7

granted a request for a personal interview. As a result, we have
second wave interview data for 99.8 percent of the restaurants
that responded in the first wave of the survey, and information on
closure status for 100 percent of the sample.
    Table 2 presents the mean values of several key variables in
the survey, taken over the subset of non-missing responses for
each variable. Employment is set to 0 for the permanently closed
stores in Wave 2 but is treated as missing for the temporarily
closed stores. Means are presented for the full sample and
separately for stores in New Jersey and Pennsylvania. We also
show the t-statistics for the null hypothesis that the means are
equal in the two states.
    Rows la-le show the distribution of stores by chain and
ownership status (company-owned versus franchisee-owned). Our
sample contains 171 Burger King stores, 80 KFC stores, 99 Roy
Rogers stores, and 60 Wendy's stores. Restaurants in the Burger
King, Roy Rogers, and Wendy's chains have comparable
employment levels, hours, and prices. KFC stores are smaller,
are open fewer hours, and charge more for their main entree
(chicken) than other chains.
    In Wave 1 average employment was 23.3 full-time equivalent
workers per store in Pennsylvania, compared with an average of
20.4 in New Jersey.8 Starting wages were very similar among
stores in the two states, although the average price of a "full
                                 8

meal" (medium soda, small fries, and an entree) was significantly
higher in New Jersey. There were no significant interstate
differences in average hours of operation, the fraction of full-time
workers, or the prevalence of bonus programs to recruit new
workers.9
    The average starting wage at fast food restaurants in New
Jersey increased by 10 percent following the rise in the minimum
wage. This change is illustrated in Figure 1, where we have
plotted the overall distributions of starting wages in the two states
from the two waves of the survey.           In Wave 1 the wage
distributions in New Jersey and Pennsylvania were very similar.
After the increase in the minimum wage virtually all restaurants
in New Jersey that had been paying below $5.05 per hour
reported a starting wage exactly equal to the new rate. On the
other hand the minimum wage increase had no apparent
"spillover" effect on higher-wage restaurants in the state: the
mean percentage wage change for these stores was -3. I %.
    Despite the increase in relative wages, full-time equivalent
employment increased in New Jersey relative to Pennsylvania.
Whereas New Jersey stores were initially smaller, employment
gains in New Jersey coupled with losses in Pennsylvania rendered
the interstate difference small and statistically insignificant in
Wave 2. Only two other variables show a relative change
between Waves 1 and 2: the fraction of full-time employees, and
                                 9

the price of a meal. Both variables increased in New Jersey
relative to Pennsylvania.
    We can assess the reliability of our survey questions by using
the responses of 11 stores that were inadvertently interviewed
twice in the first wave of the survey.'0            Assuming that
measurement errors in the two interviews are independent of each
other and independent of the true variable, the correlation
between responses gives an estimate of the "reliability ratio" (the
ratio of the variance of the signal to the combined variance of the
signal and noise). The estimated reliability ratios are fairly high -
- ranging from 0.70 for full-time equivalent employment to 0.98
for the price of a meal."
    We have also examined whether restaurants with missing
responses for certain key variables are different from those with
complete responses. To summarize, we find that stores with
missing wages or prices are similar in other respects to stores
with complete data. Stores that reported employment in Wave I
but not in Wave 2 have about average employment in Wave 1,
whereas stores that reported employment in Wave 2 but not in
Wave 1 are slightly larger than average in Wave 2. There is a
significant size differential associated with the likelihood of
closing after Wave 1. The 6 stores that closed were smaller than
 other stores (with average employment of 12.4 full-time
 equivalents in Wave 1 versus the overall average of 21.0).12
                                10

III. Employment Effects of the Minimum Wage Increase
Differences-in-Differences
    Table 3 summarizes the levels and changes in average
employment per store in our survey. We present data for the
overall sample (column 1), by state (columns 2 and 3), and for
stores in New Jersey classified by whether the starting wage in
Wave 1 was exactly $4.25 per hour (column 5), between $4.26
and $4.99 per hour (column 6), or $5.00 or more per hour
(column 7).    We also show the differences in average
employment between New Jersey and Pennsylvania stores
(column 4), and between stores in the various wage ranges in
New Jersey (columns 8-9).
    Row 3 of the table presents the changes in average
employment between Waves 1 and 2. These entries are simply
the differences between the averages for the two waves (i.e., row
2 minus row 1).    An alternative estimate of the change is
presented in row 4. Here we have computed the change in
employment over the subset of stores with non-missing
employment in both waves, which we refer to as the balanced
sample of stores. Finally in row 5 we present the average change
in employment among stores with non-missing employment in
both waves, treating Wave 2 employment at the 4 temporarily
closed stores as 0 rather than as missing.
                                11

    As noted in Table 2, New Jersey stores were initially smaller
than their Pennsylvania counterparts, but grew relative to
Pennsylvania stores after the rise in the minimum wage. The
relative gain (the "difference in differences" of the changes in
employment) is 2.76 FTE employees (or 13 percent), with a t-
statistic   of 2.03. Inspection of the averages in rows 4 and 5
shows that the relative change between New Jersey and
Pennsylvania stores is virtually identical when the analysis is
restricted to the balanced subsample, and is only slightly smaller
when Wave 2 employment at the temporarily closed stores is
treated as 0.
     Within New Jersey employment expanded at the low-wage
stores (those paying $4.25 per hour in Wave 1) and contracted at
the high-wage stores (those paying $5.00 or more per hour).
Indeed, the average change in employment among the high-wage
stores (-2.16 FTE employees) is very similar to the change among
Pennsylvania stores (-2.28 FTE employees). Since high-wage
Stores in New Jersey should have been largely unaffected by the
new minimum wage, this comparison provides a specification test
of the validity of the Pennsylvania control group. The test is
clearly passed. Regardless of whether the affected stores are
compared to stores in Pennsylvania or high-wage stores in New
Jersey, the estimated employment effect of the minimum wage is
positive.
                               12

     The results in Table 3 suggest that employment contracted
between February and November of 1992 at fast food stores that
were unaffected by the rise in the minimum wage (stores in
Pennsylvania and stores in New Jersey paying $5.00 per hour or
more in Wave 1). We suspect that the source of this trend was
the continued worsening of the economies of the middle-Atlantic
states during 1992.13 Unemployment rates in New Jersey,
Pennsylvania and New York all trended upward between 1991
and 1993, with a larger increase in New Jersey than Pennsylvania
during 1992 (see below). Since sales of franchised fast food
restaurants are pro-cyclical, the rise in unemployment would be
expected to lower fast food employment in the absence of other
factors. 14




Regression-Adjusted Models
     The comparisons in Table 3 make no allowance for other
sources of variation in employment growth, such as differences
across chains. These are incorporated in the estimates in Table
4. The entries in this table are regression coefficients from
models of the form:

(la) zE1=a+bX.+cNJ.+.
or
(ib) zE1 =    a'   + b' X1 + c' GAP + '
                                   13

where F is the change in employment or the proportional
change in employment from Wave 1 to Wave 2 at store i, X1 is
a set of characteristics of store i, and NJ1 is a dummy variable for
stores in New Jersey. GAP1 is an alternative measure of the
impact of the minimum wage at store i based on the initial wage
at that store (W11):

GAP1 = 0               for stores in Pennsylvania

       =   0           for stores in New Jersey with W11 $5.05

       = (5.05 - W11)/W11        for other stores in New Jersey.

GAP1 is proportional increase in wages at store i necessary to
meet the new minimum rate. Variation in GAP1 reflects both the
New Jersey-Pennsylvania contrast and differences within New
Jersey based on reported starting wages in Wave 1. Indeed, the
value of GAP1 is a strong predictor of the actual proportional
wage change between waves 1 and 2 (R-squared=0.75), and
conditional on GAP1 there is no difference in wage behavior
between stores in New Jersey and Pennsylvania.'5
       The estimate in column 1 of Table 4 is directly comparable
 to the simple difference-in-differences of employment changes in
 column 4, row 4 of Table 3. The discrepancy between the two
 estimates is due to the restricted sample in Table 4. In Table 4
 and the remaining tables in this section we restrict our analysis to
 the set of stores with non-missing employment and wage data in
                                14

both waves of the survey.'6 This restriction results in a slightly
smaller estimate of the relative increase in employment in New
Jersey.
      The model in column 2 introduces a set of 4 control
variables: dummies for three of the chains, and another dummy
for company-owned stores. As shown by the probability values
in row 6, these covariates add little to model, and have no effect
on the size of the estimated NJ dummy.
      The specifications in columns 3-5 use the GAP variable to
measure the effect of the minimum wage. This variable gives a
slightly better fit than the simple New Jersey dummy, although its
implications for the New Jersey-Pennsylvania comparison are
similar. The mean value of GAP1 among New Jersey stores is
0.11. Thus the estimate in column 3 implies a 1.72 increase in
FTE employment in New Jersey relative to Pennsylvania.
      Since GAP1 varies within New Jersey, it is possible to add
both GAP and the New Jersey dummy to the employment model.
The estimated New Jersey coefficient then provides a test of the
Pennsylvania control group. When we estimate these models the
coefficient of the New Jersey dummy is insignificant (with t-ratios
of 0.3 to 0.7), implying that inferences about the effect of the
minimum wage are similar whether the comparison is made
across states or across stores in New Jersey with higher and
lower wages.
                              15

     An even stronger test is provided in column 5, where we
have added dummies representing 3 regions of New Jersey
(North, Central and South) and 2 regions of eastern Pennsylvania
(Allentown-Easton, and the northern suburbs of Philadelphia).
These dummies control for any region-specific demand shocks,
and identify the effect of the minimum wage by comparing
employment changes at stores in the same region of New Jersey
with higher and lower starting wages in Wave 1. The probability
value in row 6 shows no evidence of regional components in
employment growth. The addition of the region dummies
attenuates the GAP coefficient and raises its standard error,
however, making it no longer possible to reject the null
hypothesis of a 0 employment effect of the minimum wage.
Nevertheless, measurement error in the starting wage would be
expected to lead to some attenuation of the estimated GAP
coefficient when region dummies are added to the model, because
some of the true variation in GAP is explained by region.
Indeed, calculations based on the estimated reliability of the GAP
variable (from the set of 11 double interviews) suggest that the
fall in the estimated GAP coefficient from column (4) to column
(5) is   just equal to the expected change attributable to
measurement error.'7
      The models in columns 6-10 repeat the previous analysis
 using as a dependent variable the proportional change in
                                16

employment at each store.'8 The estimated coefficients of the
NJ dummy and the GAP variable are uniformly positive in these
models but insignificantly different from 0 at conventional levels.
The implied employment effects of the minimum wage are also
smaller when the dependent variable is the proportional change in
employment. For example, the GAP coefficient in column 3
implies that the increase in minimum wages raised employment
at New Jersey stores that initially paid $4.25 per hour by 14
percent -- about the same magnitude as the differences in Table
3. The corresponding proportional model (column 8) implies
only a 7 percent effect. As we show below, the difference is
attributable to heterogeneity in the effect of the minimum wage
at larger and smaller stores. The proportional change in average
total employment is approximately a weighted average of the
proportional changes at individual stores, using as weights the
initial employment shares of the stores. Weighted versions of the
proportional change models give rise to larger and statistically
significant coefficients.


Speci Ii cation Tests
      The results in Tables 3 and 4 seem to directly contradict the
prediction that a rise in the minimum wage will reduce
employment. Table 5     presents several alternative specifications
to investigate the robustness of this conclusion. The first row of
                                 17

the table reproduces the "base specifications" from columns 2, 4,
7 and 9 of Table 5.        These   are models that include chain
dummies and a dummy for company-owned stores. Row 2
presents alternative estimates when we set Wave 2 employment
at the 4 temporarily closed stores to 0 (expanding our sample size
by 4).     This addition has a small attenuating effect on the
coefficient of the New Jersey dummy (since all 4 stores are in
New Jersey) but less effect on the GAP coefficient (since the size
of GAP is uncorrelated with the probability of a temporary
closure within New Jersey).
      Rows 3-5      present   estimation results using alternative
measures of full-time equivalent employment.             In row 3,
employment is defined to include non-management workers only.
This change has no effect relative to the base specification. In
rows 4 and 5, we include managers in FTE employment but re-
weight part-time workers as 40% or 60% of full-time workers
(instead of 50%).' These changes have little effect on the
models for the level of employment but yield slightly smaller
point estimates in the proportional employment change models.
         In row 6 we present estimates obtained from a subsample
that excludes 35 stores in towns along the New Jersey shore.
The exclusion of these stores -- which may have a different
 seasonal pattern than other stores in our sample -- leads to slightly
 larger minimum wage effects. A similar finding emerges in row
                                18

7 when we add a set of dummy variables for the week of the
Wave 2 interview in November or December of 1992.20
      As noted earlier, our interviewer made an extra effort to
survey New Jersey stores in the first wave of the survey. In
particular, a higher fraction of stores in New Jersey were
contacted 3 or more times. To check the sensitivity of our results
to this sampling feature, we re-estimated the employment models
on the subset of stores that were called back at most twice. The
results, in row 8, are very similar to the base specification.
      Row 9 presents estimation results for the overall sample
when the proportional employment changes are weighted by the
initial level of employment in each store. In principle, weighting
of the proportional changes should give rise to coefficients that
are more similar to the implied proportional changes from the
models estimated for changes in levels. The weighted estimates
are substantially larger than the unweighted estimates, and
significantly different from 0 at conventional levels. The
weighted estimate of the New Jersey dummy (0.13) implies a 13
percent relative increase in New Jersey employment -- exactly the
same effect as the simple difference-in-differences in Table 3.
      One explanation for our finding that a rise in the minimum
wage has a positive employment effect is that unobserved demand
shocks within New Jersey counteracted the disemployment effects
of the minimum wage. To address this possibility, rows 10 and
                                 19

11 present estimation results for stores in two narrowly defined
areas: towns around Newark (row 7) and towns around Camden
(row 8). In each case the sample area is identified by the first 3
digits of the store's zip code.2' Within both of these local areas
changes in employment are positively correlated with the increase
in wages necessitated by the rise in the minimum wage, although
in neither case is the effect statistically significant. To the extent
that fast food product market conditions are similar within
geographic areas, these results suggest that our findings are not
driven by unobserved demand shocks. Our analysis of price
changes (reported below) also supports this conclusion.
     A final specification check is presented in row 12 of Table
5.   In this row we define the GAP variable for Pennsylvania
stores as the proportional increase on wages necessary to raise the
wage to $5.05 per hour. We then fit the employment models to
the subset of Pennsylvania stores. In principle the size of the
wage gap should have no systematic relation with employment
changes for stores in Pennsylvania. In practice, this is the case.
There is no indication that the wage gap is spuriously related to
employment growth.
       We have also investigated whether the first-differenced
specification used in our employment models is appropriate. A
first-differenced model implies that the level of employment in
period t is related to the lagged level of employment with a
                                 20
coefficient of 1.     If employment fluctuations are smoothed,
however, the true coefficient of lagged employment may be less
than 1. Imposing the assumption of a unit coefficient may then
lead to biases. To test the first-differenced specification we re-
estimated models for the change in employment including Wave
1 employment as an additional explanatory variable.             To
overcome any mechanical correlation between base period
employment and the change in employment (attributable to
measurement error) we instrumented Wave 1 employment with
the number of cash registers in the store in Wave 1 and the
number of registers in the store open at 11:00 a. m. In all of the
specifications the coefficient of Wave I employment is close to
zero. For example, in a specification including the Gap variable
and ownership and chain dummies, the coefficient of Wave 1
employment is 0.04, with a standard error of 0.24. We conclude
that the first-differenced specification is appropriate.


Full-Time and Part-Time Substitution
    Our analysis so far has concentrated on full-time equivalent
employment and ignored possible changes in the distribution of
full- and part-time workers. An increase in the minimum wage
could lead to an increase in full-time employment relative to part-
time employment for at least two reasons.              First, in a
conventional model one would expect a minimum wage increase
                                21

to induce employers to substitute skilled workers and capital for
minimum-wage workers. Full-time workers in fast food
restaurants are typically older and may well possess higher skills
than part-time workers. Thus, a conventional model predicts that
stores may respond to an increase in the minimum wage by
increasing the proportion of full-time workers. On the other
hand, 81% of restaurants paid ful 1-time and part-time workers
exactly the same starting wage in Wave 1 of our survey.22 This
suggests either that full-time workers haye the same skills as part-
time workers, or that equity concerns lead restaurants to pay
equal wages for unequally productive workers. If full-time
workers are more productive (but equall y paid), there may bea
second reason for stores to substitute full-time workers for part-
time workers; namely, a minimum wage increase enables the
industry to attract more full-time workers, and stores would
naturally want to hire a greater proportion of full-time workers if
they are more productive.
    Row 1 of Table 6 presents the mean changes in the
proportion of full-time workers in New Jersey and Pennsylvania
between Waves I and 2 of our survey, and coefficient estimates
from regressions of the change in the proportion of full-time
workers on the wage gap variable, chain dummies, a company-
ownership dummy, and region dummies (in column 6). The
results are ambiguous. The fraction of full-time workers
                                 22

increased in New Jersey relative to Pennsylvania by 7.3 percent
(t-ratio = 1.84), but regressions on the wage gap variable do not
indicate a statistically significant shift in the fraction of full-time
workers within New Jersey.23


Other Employment-Related Measures
    Rows 2-4 of Table 6 present results for other outcomes that
we expect to be related to the level of restaurant employment. In
particular, we examine whether the rise in the minimum wage is
associated with a change in the number of hours restaurants are
open during a weekday, the number of cash registers in the
restaurant, and the number of cash restaurants typically in
operation in the restaurant at 11:00 AM. Consistent with our
employment results, none of these variables shows a statistically
significant decline in New Jersey relative to Pennsylvania.
Similarly, regressions including the gap variable provide no
evidence that the minimum wage increase led to a systematic
change in any of these variables (see columns 5 and 6).


IV. Nonwage Offsets
    One explanation for our finding that a rise in the minimum
wage does not lower employment is that restaurants can offset the
effect of the minimum wage by reducing nonwage compensation.
For example, if workers value fringe benefits and wages on a
                                23

dollar-for-dollar basis, employers can simply reduce the level of
fringe benefits by the amount of the minimum wage increase,
leaving their employment costs unchanged. The main fringe
benefits for fast food employees are free and reduced-price meals.
In Wave 1 about 19% of fast food restaurants offered workers
free meals, 72% offered reduced-price meals, and 9% offered a
combination of both free and reduced-price meals.               Meal
programs are obvious fringe benefits to cut if the minimum wage
increase forces restaurants to pay higher wages.
      Rows 5 and 6 of Table 6 present estimates of the effect of
the minimum wage increase on the incidence of free and reduced-
price meals. The proportion of restaurants offering reduced-price
meals fell in both New Jersey and Pennsylvania after the
minimum wage increased, with a somewhat greater decline in
New Jersey. Contrary to an offset story, however, the reduction
in reduced-price meal programs was accompanied by an increase
in the fraction of stores offering free meals. Relative to stores in
Pennsylvania, New Jersey employers actually shifted toward more
generous fringes (i.e., free rather than reduced-price meals).
However, the relative shift is not statistically significant.
      We continue to find a statistically insignificant effect of the
minimum wage increase on the likelihood of receiving free or
reduced-price meals in columns 5        and   6, where we report
coefficient estimates of the GAP variable from regression models
                                24

for the change in the incidence of these programs. The results
provide no evidence that New Jersey employers offset the
minimum wage increase by reducing free or reduced-price meals.


      Another possibility is that employers responded to the
increase in the minimum wage by reducing on-the-job training
and flattening the tenure-wage profile (see Mincer and Leighton
(1981)). Indeed, one manager told our interviewer in Wave 1
that her workers were foregoing ordinary scheduled raises
because the minimum wage was about to rise, and this would
give all her workers a raise.        To determine whether this
phenomenon occurred more generally, we analyzed store
managers' responses to questions on the amount of time before a
normal wage increase, and the usual amount of such raises. In
rows 8 and 9 we report the average changes between Waves 1
and 2 for these two variables, as well as regression coefficients
from models that include the wage gap variable.24 Although the
average time to the first pay raise increased by 2.5 weeks in New
Jersey relative to Pennsylvania, the increase is not statistically
significant. Furthermore, there is only a trivial difference in the
relative change in the amount of the first pay increment between
New Jersey and Pennsylvania stores.
      Finally, we examined a related variable: the "slope" of the
wage profile, which we measure by the ratio of the typical first
                                25

raise   to the amount of time until the first raise is given. As
shown in row 10, the slope of the wage profile flattened in both
New Jersey and Pennsylvania, with no significant relative
difference between states. The change in the slope is also
uncorrelated with the GAP variable. In summary, we can find no
indication that New Jersey employers changed either their fringe
benefits or their wage profiles to offset the rise in the minimum
        25
wage.


V. Price Effects of the Minimum Wage Increase
        A final issue we examine is the effect of the minimum wage
on the prices of meals at fast food restaurants. A competitive
model of the fast food industry implies that an increase in the
minimum wage will lead to an increase in product prices. If we
further assume constant returns to scale in the industry, the
increase in price should be proportional to the share of minimum-
wage labor in total factor cost. The average restaurant in New
Jersey initially paid about half its workers less than the new
minimum wage. If wages rose by roughly 15 percent for these
workers, and if labor's share of total costs is 30 percent, we
would expect prices to rise by about 2.2 percent (= .15 x .5 x
.3) due to the minimum wage rise.26
      In each wave of our survey we asked managers for the
prices of three standard items: a medium soda, a small order of
                                26

french fries, and a main course. The main course was a basic
hamburger at Burger King, Roy Rogers, and Wendy's
restaurants, and two pieces of chicken at KFC stores. We define
a "full meal" price as the after-tax price of a medium soda, a
small order of french fries, and a main course.
      Table 7 presents reduced form estimates of the effect of the
minimum wage increase on prices. The dependent variable in
these models is the change in the logarithm of the price of a full
meal at each store. The key independent variable is either a
dummy indicating whether the store is located in New Jersey, or
the proportional wage increase required to meet the minimum
wage (the GAP variable defined above).
      The estimated NJ dummy i n column 1 shows that after-tax
meal prices rose 3.2 percent faster in New Jersey than
Pennsylvania between February and November 1992.27 The
effect is slightly larger controlling for chain and company-
ownership (see column 2). Since the New Jersey sales tax rate
fell by 1 percentage point between the waves of our survey, these
estimates suggest that pre-tax prices rose 4% faster as a result of
the minimum wage increase in New Jersey -- slightly more than
the increase needed to fully pass through the cost increase caused
by the minimum wage hike.
      The pattern of price changes within New Jersey is less
consistent with a simple "pass through" view of minimum wage
                                27

cost increases. In fact, meal prices rose at approximately the
same rate at stores in New Jersey with differing levels of initial
wages. Inspection of the estimated GAP coefficients in columns
3-5 of   Table 7 confirms that these are all positive, but
insignificant at conventional significance levels.
      In sum, these results provide mixed evidence that higher
minimum wages result in higher fast food prices. The strongest
evidence emerges from a comparison of New Jersey and
Pennsylvania stores. The magnitude of the price increase is
consistent with predictions from a conventional model of a
competitive industry. On the other hand, we find no evidence
that prices rose faster among stores in New Jersey that were most
affected by the rise in the minimum wage.
VI. Store Openings
      An important potential effect of higher minimum wages is
to discourage the opening of new businesses. Although our
sample design allows us to estimate the effect of the minimum
wage on existing restaurants in New Jersey, we cannot address
the effect of the higher minimum wage on potential entrants.28
 To assess the likely size of such an effect, we used national
restaurant directories for the McDonald's restaurant chain to
compare the numbers of operating restaurants and the numbers of
newly opened restaurants in different states over the 1986-91
period. Many states adopted state-specific minimum wages in the
                                 28

late 1980s. In addition, the federal minimum increased in this
period. These policies create an opportunity for measuring the
impact of minimum wage laws on store opening rates across
states.
          The results of our analysis are presented in Table 8. We
regressed two measures of the growth rate in the number of
stores in each state on measures of the minimum wage in the state
and other control variables (population growth and the change in
the state unemployment rate). The first minimum wage measure
we use is the fraction of workers in the state's retail trade
industry in 1986 whose wages fell between the existing Federal
minimum wage in 1986 ($3.35 per hour) and the effective
minimum wage in the state in April 1990 (the maximum of the
Federal minimum wage and the state minimum wage as of April
1990).29       The second is the ratio of the state's effective
minimum wage in 1990 to the average hourly wage of retail trade
workers in the state in 1986. Both of these measures are
designed to gauge the degree of upward wage pressure exerted by
state or Federal minimum wage changes between 1986 and 1990.
    The results provide no evidence that higher minimum wage
rates (relative to retail trade wages in a state) exert a negative
effect on either the net number of restaurants or the rate of new
openings. To the contrary, all the estimates show positive effects
of higher minimum wages on the number of operating or newly
                               29

opened stores, although many of the point estimates are
insignificantly different from 0. While this evidence is limited,
we conclude that the effects of minimum wages on fast food store
opening rates are probably small.


VII. Broader Evidence on Employment Changes in New Jersey
    Our establishment-level analysis suggests that the rise in the
minimum wage in New Jersey increased employment in the fast-
food industry. Is this just an anomaly associated with our
particular sample, or a phenomenon unique to the fast-food
industry?   Data from the monthly Current Population Survey
(CPS) allow us to compare state-wide employment trends in New
Jersey and the surrounding states, providing a check on the
interpretation of our findings. Using monthly CPS files for 1991
and 1992 we computed employment-population rates for teenagers
and adults (age 25 and older) for New Jersey, Pennsylvania, New
York, and the entire U.S. Since the New Jersey minimum rose
on April 11992, we computed the employment rates for April-
December of both 1991 and 1992. The relative changes in
employment in New Jersey and the surrounding states then give
an indication of the effect of the new law.
    Table 9 presents the estimated employment rates. Comparing
employment changes for adult workers it is apparent that the New
Jersey labor market fared slightly worse over the 199 1-92 period
                                30

than either the U.S. labor market as a whole or labor markets in
Pennsylvania or New York. Among teenagers, however, the
situation was reversed. In New Jersey, teenage employment fell
slightly from 1991 to 1992. In New York, Pennsylvania, and in
the U.S. as a whole teenage employment rates dropped faster.
Relative to teenagers in Pennsylvania and New York, the teenage
employment rate in New Jersey rose by about 2.0 percentage
points. Consistent with our results for the fast-food industry, the
relative employment of workers most heavily affected by the
minimum wage rose, rather than fell, following the enactment of
the new law. We believe this state-wide evidence lends further
credence to our detailed findings for the fast-food industry.


VIII. Interpretation
      Our empirical findings on the effects of the New Jersey
minimum wage are inconsistent with the predictions of a
conventional competitive model of the fast food industry. Our
findings with respect to employment are consistent with several
alternative models, although none of these models can also
explain the apparent rise in fast food prices in New Jersey. In
this section we briefly summarize the predictions of the standard
model and some simple alternatives, and highlight the difficulties
posed by our findings.
                                 31

Standard Competitive Model
    A standard competitive model predicts that establishment-level
employment will fall if the wage is exogenously raised. For an
entire industry, total employment is predicted to fall and product
price is predicted to rise in response to an increase in a binding
minimum wage. Estimates from the time-series literature on
minimum wage effects can be used to get a rough idea of the
elasticity of low-wage employment to the minimum wage. The
surveys by Brown, Gilroy, and Kohen (1982, 1983) conclude that
a 10 percent increase in the coverage-adjusted minimum wage
will reduce teenage employment rates by 1 to 3 percent. Since
this effect is for J.i teenagers, and not just those employed in
low-wage industries, it is surely a lower bound on the magnitude
of the effect for fast food workers. The 18% increase in the New
Jersey minimum wage is therefore predicted to reduce
employment at fast-food stores by 0.4 to 1.0 employees per store.
Our empirical results clearly reject the upper range of these
estimates, although we cannot reject a small negative effect in
some of our specifications.
      A possible defense of the competitive model is that
unobserved demand shocks affected certain stores in New Jersey:
specifically, those stores that were initially paying wages less than
$5.00 per hour. However, such localized demand shocks should
also affect product prices.     (In fact, in a competitive model
                                32

product demand shocks work through a rise in prices). Although
lower-wage stores in New Jersey had relative employment gains,
they did not have relative price increases. Furthermore, our
analysis of employment changes in two major suburban areas
(around Newark and Camden) reveals than even within narrowly-
defined geographic areas, employment rose faster at the stores
that had to increase wages the most because of the new minimum
wage.


Alternative Models
        An alternative to the conventional competitive model is one
in which firms are price-takers in the product market but have
some degree of market power in the labor market. If fast food
stores face an upward-sloping labor supply schedule, a rise in the
minimum wage can potentially increase employment at affected
firms and in the industry as a whole.3°
        This same basic insight emerges from an equilibrium search
model in which firms post wages and employees search among
posted offers (see Mortensen (1988)). Mortensen and Burdett
(1989) derive the equilibrium wage distribution for a non-
cooperative wage-search/wage-posting game, and show that the
imposition of a binding minimum wage can increase both wages
and employment relative to the initial equilibrium. Furthermore,
                                 33

their model predicts that the minimum wage will increase
employment the most at firms that initially paid the lowest wages.
    Although monopsonistic models provide a potential
explanation for the observed employment effects of the New
Jersey minimum wage, they cannot explain the observed price
effects. According to these models, industry prices should have
fallen in New Jersey relative to Pennsylvania, and at low-wage
stores in New Jersey relative to high-wage stores in New Jersey.
Neither prediction is confirmed: indeed, prices rose faster in New
Jersey than Pennsylvania, although at about the same rate at high-
and low-wage stores in New Jersey.            Another puzzle for
equilibrium search models is the absence of wage increases at
firms that were initially paying $5.05 or more per hour.
    The strict link between the employment and price effects of
a rise in the minimum wage may be tempered if fast food stores
can vary the quality of service (e.g., the length of the queue at
peak hours, or the cleanliness of stores). Another possibility is
that stores altered the relative prices of their various menu items.
Comparisons of price changes for the three items in our survey
show slight declines (-1.5 %) in the price of french fries and soda
in New Jersey relative to Pennsylvania, coupled with a steep
relative increase (8%) in entree prices. These limited data
suggest a possible role for relative price changes within the fast
food industry following the rise in the minimum wage.
                                34

      One way to test a monopsony model is to identify stores
that were initially "supply constrained" in the labor market, and
test for employment gains at these stores relative to other stores.
A potential indicator of market power is the use of recruitment
bonuses. As we noted in Table 2, about 25% of stores in Wave
1 were offering cash bonuses to employees who helped find a
new worker. We compared employment changes at New Jersey
stores that were offering recruitment bonuses is Wave 1, and also
interacted the GAP variable with a dummy for recruitment
bonuses in several different employment change models. We do
not find faster (or slower) employment growth at the New Jersey
stores that were initially using recruitment bonuses, or any
evidence that the GAP variable had a larger effect for stores that
were using bonuses.


IX. Conclusions
  Contrary to the central prediction of a text book model of the
minimum wage, but consistent with a growing number of studies
based on cross-sectional-time series comparisons of affected and
unaffected markets or employers, we find no evidence that the
rise in New Jersey's minimum wage reduced employment at fast-
food restaurants in the state. Regardless of whether we compare
stores in New Jersey that were affected by the $5.05 minimum to
stores in eastern Pennsylvania (where the minimum wage was
                               35

constant at $4.25 per hour) or to stores in New Jersey that were
initially paying $5.00 per hour or more (and were essentially
unaffected by the new law), we find that the increase in the
minimum wage slightly increased employment. We present a
wide variety of alternative specifications to probe the robustness
of this conclusion. None of the alternatives shows a negative
employment effect.In addition, we find no evidence that
minimum wage increases reduce the number of McDonald's
outlets opened in a state. We check our findings for the fast food
industry by comparing changes in teenage employment rates in
New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and New York in the year following
the increase in the minimum wage. Again, these results point
toward a relative increase in employment of low-wage workers in
New Jersey.
      Finally, we find that prices of fast food meals increased in
New Jersey relative to Pennsylvania, suggesting that much of the
burden of the minimum wage rise was passed on to consumers.
But within New Jersey we find no evidence that prices increased
more at stores that were most affected by the minimum wage.
Taken as a whole, these findings are difficult to explain with the
standard competitive model or with models in which employers
face supply constraints (e.g., monopsony or equilibrium search
models).
                              36

                           References

Brown, Charles, Curtis Gilroy and Andrew Kohen. 1982. "The
Effect of the Minimum Wage on Employment and
Unemployment." Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 20, No.
2 (June), pp. 487-528.

Brown, Charles, Curtis Gilroy, and Andrew Kohen. 1983. "Time
Series Evidence on the Effect of the Minimum Wage on Youth
Employment and Unemployment." Journal of Human Resources.
Vol. 18, Winter, pp. 3-3 1.

Burdett, Kenneth, and Dale T. Mortensen. 1989. "Equilibrium
Wage Differentials and Employer Size." Center for Mathematical
Studies in Economics and Management Science, Northwestern
University, Discussion Paper No. 860, October.

Bureau of National Affairs. 1990. Daily Labor Report, No. 62,
March 30.

Bureau of National Affairs. Undated. Labor Relations Reporter
Wages and Hours Manual. Washington, DC.

Card, David. 1992a. "Using Regional Variation in Wages to
Measure the Effects of the Federal Minimum Wage." Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, 46, No. 1, October, pp. 22-37.

Card, David.      1992b.      "Do Minimum Wages Reduce
Employment? A Case Study of California, 1987-89." Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, 46, No. 1, October, pp. 38-54.

International Franchising Association, 1991. Franchising in the
Economy. Washington D.C.
                             37

Katz, Lawrence, and Alan Krueger. 1992. "The Effect of the
Minimum Wage on the Fast Food Industry. " Industrial and Labor
Relations Review, 46, No. 1, October, pp. 6-21.

Lester, Richard A. 1960. "Employment Effects of Minimum
Wages." Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 13, No. 2
(January), pp. 254-64.

Lester, Richard A. 1964. The Economics of Labor. 2nd Edition.
New York: Macmillan.

Machin, S. and Alan Manning. 1992. "Minimum Wages, Wage
Dispersion, and Employment: Evidence from the U.K. Wages
Councils." London School of Economics Unpublished Working
Paper.

Mincer, Jacob and Linda Leighton. 1981. "The Effects of
Minimum Wages on Human Capital Formation". In Simon
Rottenberg, editor. The Economics of Legal Minimum Wages.
Washington DC: The American Enterprise Institute.

Mortensen, Dale T. 1988. "Equilibrium Wage Distributions: A
Synthesis." Center for Mathematical Studies in Economics and
Management Science, Northwestern University, Discussion Paper
No. 811.

Ransom, Michael. 1993.      "Seniority and Monopsony in the
Academic Labor Market." American Economic Review, Vol. 83,
No. 1, pp. 221-233.

Stigler, George J. 1946. "The Economics of Minimum Wage
Legislation." American Economic Review. Vol. 36, June, pp.
358-365.
                            38

Sullivan, Daniel. 1989. "Monopsony Power in the Market for
Nurses.' Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 32, No. 2
(October, part 2), pp. S135-S178.

Wellington, Alison J. 1991. "Effects of the Minimum Wage on
the Employment Status of Youths: An Update." Journal of
Human Resources, Vol. 26, No. 1 (Winter), pp. 27-46.
                               39

1.See Brown, Cohen, and Gilroy (1982, 1983) for surveys of
this literature. A recent update (Wellington (1991)) concludes
that the employment effects of the minimum wage are negative
but small: a 10 percent increase in the minimum is estimated to
lower teenage employment rates by 0.06 percentage points.
2.See Bureau of National Affairs Daily Labor Report (May 5,
1990).

3.Total employment in franchised restaurants is reported in
International Franchising Association (1991). Total
employment in the fast food industry is reported in U.S.
Department of Labor Employment and Earnings (1990).

4.In a pilot survey Katz and Krueger (1992) obtained very low
response rates from McDonald's restaurants. For this reason,
McDonald's restaurants were excluded from Katz and
Krueger's and our sample frames.

5.The sample was derived from white pages telephone book
listings for New Jersey and Pennsylvania as of February 1992.

6.Response rates per call-back were almost identical in the two
states. Among New Jersey stores, 44.5 percent responded on
the first call and 72.0 percent responded after at most 2 call-
backs. Among Pennsylvania stores 42.2 percent responded on
the first call and 71.6 percent responded after at most 2 call-
backs.

7.By April 1993 the store closed because of road construction
and one of the stores closed for renovation had re-opened. The
store closed by fire was open when our telephone interviewer
called in November 1992 but refused the interview. By the
time of the follow-up personal interview a mall fire had closed
the store.
                               40
8.Full-time equivalent employment is defined as the number of
full-time workers (including managers) plus 0.5 times the
number of part-time workers. We discuss the sensitivity of our
results to alternative assumptions on the measurement of
employment below.
9.These programs reward current employees with a cash
"bounty" for any new employee who they recruit and who
stays on the job for a minimum period of time. Typical
bonuses are $50-75. We exclude programs that award an
"employee of the month" designation or other non-cash bonus
from our tabulation.
l0.These restaurants were interviewed twice because their
phone number appeared in more than one phone book, and
neither the interviewer nor the respondent noticed that the store
had been previously interviewed.

11 .The standard errors of these ratios are 0.19 and 0.02,
respectively. Similar reliability ratios for very similar
questions are reported by Katz and Krueger (1992).
12.A probit analysis of the probability of closure shows that
the initial size of the store is a significant predictor of closure.
The level of starting wages has a numerically small and
statistically insignificant coefficient in the probit model.

13.An alternative possibility is that seasonal factors produce
higher employment at fast food restaurants in February and
March than in November and December. An analysis of
national employment data for food preparation and service
workers, however, shows higher average employment in the
fourth quarter than the second quarter.
 14.To investigate the cyclicality of fast food restaurant sales we
 regressed the year-to-year change in U.S. sales of the
 McDonald's restaurant chain from 1976-91 on the
                                41

corresponding change in the average unemployment rate. The
regression results show that a one percentage point increase in
the unemployment rate reduces sales by $257 million, with a t-
statistic of 3.0.

15.A regression of the proportional wage change between
waves 1 and 2 on GAP1 has a coefficient of 1.03.

16.Stores that closed are assigned a wage rate in Wave 2 equal
to the average for their state.

17.In a regression model without other controls the expected
attenuation of the GAP coefficient due to measurement error is
the reliability ratio of GAP (yo), which we estimate at 0.70.
The expected attenuation factor when region dummies are
added to the model is      = (-y0-R2)/(1-R2), where R2 is the R-
squared of a regression of GAP on region effects (equal to
0.30). Thus, we expect the estimated GAP coefficient to fall
by a factor of -/y = 0.8 when region dummies are added to
a regression model.

18.We have divided the change in employment by average
employment in Waves 1 and 2. This results in very similar
coefficients but smaller standard errors than the alternative of
dividing by Wave 1 employment. For closed stores the
proportional change in employment is set to -1.

19.Analysis of the 1991 Current Population Survey reveals that
part-time workers in the restaurant industry work about 46% as
many hours as full-time workers. Katz and Krueger (1992)
report that the ratio of part-time workers' hours to full-time
workers' hours in the fast food industry is 0.57.

20.We also added dummies for the interview dates for the
Wave 1 survey, but these were insignificant and did not change
the estimated minimum wage effects.
                               42

21.The '070' 3-digit zip code area (around Newark) and the
'080' 3-digit zip code area (around Camden) have by far the
largest numbers of stores among 3-digit zip code areas in New
Jersey, and together account for 36 percent of New Jersey
stores in our sample.

22.In the other 19% of stores full-time workers are paid more,
typically 10 percent more.
23.Within New Jersey, the fraction of full-time employees
increased about as quickly at stores with higher and lower
wages in Wave 1.

24.In Wave 1, the average time to a first wage increase was
18.9 weeks, and the average amount of the first increase was
$0.21 per hour.

25.Katz and Krueger (1992) report that a significant fraction of
fast food stores in Texas responded to an increase in the
minimum wage by raising wages for workers who were
initially earning more than the new minimum rate. Our results
on the slope of the tenure profile are consistent with their
findings.
26.According to the McDona'd's 1991 Annual Report, payroll
and benefits are 31.3 percent of operating costs at company-
owned stores.

27.The effect is attributable to a 2.0 percent increase in prices
in New Jersey and a -1.0 percent decrease in prices in
Pennsylvania.
28.Direct inquiries to the chains in our sample revealed that
Wendy's opened 2 stores in New Jersey in 1992 and 1 store in
Pennsylvania. The other chains were unwilling to provide
information on new openings.
                              43

29.We used the 1986 Current Population Survey merged
monthly file to construct the minimum wage variables. State
minimum wage rates in 1990 were obtained from Bureau of
National Affairs (1990).

30.Sullivan (1989) and Ransom (1993) present empirical results
for nurses and university teachers that suggest monopsony-like
behavior of employers.
                  Percent of Stores                                                    Percent   of Stores
         —   PU   UI   •.   P    O             ID                                          -                 hi   (a   (a
             0    0    0    0    0    -0   0   0                   o        U.     0       U        C        (P   0    U
     0   0                                                         —         I              I                I     I




                                                              hi
                                                              (P
                                                              S
                                                              (a                                                                  0
                                                              UI
                                                                   •                                                              C
                                                                                                                                  —4-
                                                              U.
                                                              •                                                                   —.
                                                              S.        ______________________                                    0
                                                              -                                                             '1
                                                    o                                                                       CD    0
                                                                   •                                                        0
                                                    CD                                                                      -
                                                              "I                                                            C
 D                                                        0                                                                 0
                                                                                                                            -
ID                                                  CD
0
                                                              •1                                                            —
                                                    —                                                                              'CD
                                                                                                                                  —.4-
                                                                                                                            (ID   —.
0S
ID                                                              -
lb                                                        (D ___________________                                            CL)   : —
                                                    (0        o
                                                              Is _______________________________
                                                    N-)
                                                                        _
                                                              UI
                                                              hi                                                                  a
                                                              UI
                                                                    •
                                                              (Il                                                                 (0
                                                              V.                                                                  CD
                                                              U.
                                                              (p
                                                              I,.
                                                              U.
                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                  —4-.
                                                                                                                                  CD
                                                                                                                                  (1)
Table 1: Sample Design and Response Rates


                                                                     Stores in:

                                                 Alt            NJ            Pa


Wave 1:    F   ebruary 15-March 4 1992

1.   Numbe r of Stores in Sample Frame a!

2.   Numbe r of Refusals                          63            33            30

3.   Numbe r Interviewed                         410           331            79

4. Respo rise        Rate (X)



Wave 2: November 5 -December 31 1992

5.   Number of Stor es in Sample      F reme     410           331            79

6.   Number Closed                                 6

7.   Number Under Rennova t     ion                2             2                0

8.   Number Temporarily C I osed'"                 2             2                0

9.   Number     of   Refusals                                                     0

10. Number Interviewed c/                        399          321             78


Notes:         Stores with working phone numbers onLy.   29   stores in original
               sample frame had disconnected phone numbers.
          b/
               Includes one store closed because of highway   construction and
               one store closed because of a fire.
          Cl
               Includes 371 phone interviews and 28 persona I interviews of
               stores that refused an initial request for a phone Interview.
Table 2: Means of Key Variables

                                                      Stores in:             1-test
                                                                                  for
                                                                         .                       a!
                                  All      New Jersey       Pennsylvania     NJ    -
                                                                                            Pa


1. Distribution of Store types CX)
 a. Burger King             41.7             41.1              44.3               -0.5
 b. KFC                     19.5             20.5              15.2                1.2
 c. Roy Rogers              24.2             24.8              21.5                0.6
 d. Wendy's                 14.6             13.6              19.0               -1.1

 e. Company owned                34.4         34.1             35.4               -0.2

2. Means in Wave 1
 a- FIE EmpLoyment               21.0         20.4             23.3               -2.0
                                (0.49)       (0.51)           (1.35)
 b. Percent Full Time            33.3         32.6             35.0               -0.7
     EmpLoyees                   (1.2)        (1.3)            (2-7)

 c. Starting Wage                4.62         4.61             4.63               -0.4
                                (0.02)       (0.02)           (0.04)

 d. Wage=14.25 (U                31.0         30.5             32.9               -0.4
                                 (2.3)        (2.5)            (5.3)
 e. Price of Full Meal           3.29         3.35             3.04                4.0
                                (0.03)       (0.04)           (0.07)
 f. Hours Open (weekday)         14.4         14.4             14.5                0.3
                                 (0.1)        (0.2)            (0.3)
 g. Recruiting Bonus             24.6         23.6             29.1               -1.0
                                 (2.1)        (2.3)            (5.1)

3. Means in Wave 2
 a. FT 6 Employment              21 .1        21 .0            21 .2              -0.2
                                (0.46)       (0.52)           (0.94)
 b. Percent Full Time            34.8         35.9             30.4                LB
     Employees                   (1.2)        (1.4)            (2.8)

 c. Starting Wage                5.00         5.08             4.62               10.8
                                (0.01)       (0.01)           (0.04)
 d. WagetS4.25 CX)                4.9          0.0             25.3                     -
                                 (1.1)                         (4.9)
 e. Wage=S5.05 (X)               69.0         85.2                 1.3            36.1
                                 (2.3)        (2.0)            (1.3)

 f. Price of Full Meal           3.34         3.41             3.03                    5.0
                                (0.03)       (0.04)           (0.07)

 g. Hours Open (weekday)          14.5        14.4             14.7               -0.6
                                  (0.1)       (0.2)            (0.3)
 Ii. Recruiting Bonus            20.9         20.3             234                -0.6
                                  (2.1)       (2.3)           (4.9)

Notes:        See text for definitions. Standard errors in parentheses.
         at
              1-statistic
                    .
                            for test of equaLIty   of means in NJ and Pa.
Table 3: Average EnLoynent Per Store Before and After RISC in New Jersey Miniflun Wage


                                                                                                                         Di
                                                                                                                            fferenceg
                                                                                        Stores in New   Jersey            within  NJ /
                                           Stores By State:
                                                                            Diff:       Wages     Wage       Wage      Low      Midrange
                                  Alt        Pa           NJ                NJ-Pa       $425     4.26-4.99   5.00     -High      -High


1. FTE Enptoyment Before,       21.00     23.33        20.44            -2.89           19.56     20.08      22.25    -2.69      -2.17
   ALL Aaitabte Cbs.            (0.49)    (1.35)       (0.51)           (1.44)          (0.77)    (0.84)     (1.14)   (1.37)     (1.41)

2. FTE teptoymentAfter,         21.05     21.1?        21.03            -0.14           20.88     20.96      20.21     0.67       0.75
   AU Available Ob.             (0.46)     (0.94)      (0.52)           (1.07)          (1.01)    (0.76)     (1.03)   (1.44)     (1.27)

3. Change in Mean     FT         0.05     -2.16         0.59                2.76         1.32     0.87       -2.04     3.36       2.91
   EWloyment                    (0.50)    (1.25)       (0.54)           (1.36)          (0.95)    (0.84)     (1.14)   (1.48)     (1.41)


4. Change in Mean FTE           -0.07     -2.28         0.47                2.75         1.21     0.71       -2.16     3.36       2.7
   Ento)ment,                   (0.66)    (1.25)       (0.48)           (L34)           (0.82)   (0.69)      (1.01)   (1.30)     (1.22)
                BeLaried
   Sairple of StoresC

5. Change in Mean FTE           -0.26     -2.28         0.23             2.51            0.90     0.49       -2.39     3.29       2.88
   ErrployTrlent, Setting       (0.47)    (1.25)       (0.49)           (1.35)          (0.87)   (0.69)      (1.02)   (1.34)     (1.23)
   FIE at leirporarily
   Closed Stores to 0




Wotes:   Standard  errors in parentheses.   Sairple consists of all stores with non-missing data on eirployment. tIE (tuu-time
         equivalent eirptoyment) counts each part-time worker as 1/2 a fuLL-time worker. EurpLoymnt at 6 cLosed stores is
         set to zero.   Eirployment at 4 tee,orariLy closed stores is treated as missing.

         a/Stores in New Jersey classifiedby whether starting wage in Wave I equals $425 per hour (N101), is between
           $4.26 and 5.6.99 per hour (N140), or is $5.00 per hour or higher (NT3).

         b/Difference in e ,loyment between stores in Low (5.4-25 per hour) arid high ('SSOO
                                                                                              per hour) wage ranges;
           arid difference in eiploent between stores in midrange ($4264.99
                                                                                 per hour) and high wage ranges.

         C/Sset     of stores with non-missing                    in Wave   1   and Wave 2.
                                                  eirç,loy,nent

         d/10 this row Only, WSvt 2 eirptoyment at 4 teirporarily closed stores is set to 0.
                                                                                             Eirptoyment
            changes are based on subset of stores with non-missing eoploynmnt in Wave ¶ arid Wave 2.
Table 4: Reduced Form Models              for   Change In Employment


                                                                                  Dependent      Variable:

                                                     Change    in ElploYmenta/                                     Proportional Change   in   EITplOymentbI'

                                                     12)         (3)       (4)           (5)               (6)          (7)      (8)            (9)        (10)
                                       (1)



 1. New Jersey Oum,y                   2.33          2.30          --       -               "              0.05         0.05        --                         ..
                                      (1.19)        (1.20)                                                (0.05)       (0.05)

 2.   Initial   Wage    Gap'              --           --       15.65     14.92         11.91               --                   0.39           0.34       0.29
                                                                (6.08)    (6.21)        (7.39)                                  (0.26)         (0.26)     (0.31)

 3. Controls     for                      no         yes           no      yes           yes                no         yes          no          yes        yes
                        )ain
      and Ownership

 4. Controls for        Region            no          no           no       no           yes                no          no          no           no        yes


 5. Standard Error                     8.79          8.78        8.76      8.76          8.75              0.373       0.372     0.373          0.372      0.372
    of Regression
                                          --         0.34                  0.44    .     0.40               --         0.14         --          0.17       0.27
 6. Probability
       for   Controls
                       V,ue

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Sample consists of 357 stores with non-missing data on employment anti                                  starting wages
       in Wav.s 1 and 2. All models include an unrestricted constant (not reported).

       a/Depet..45.,t    variable    change in
                                     is                full-time
                                                          equivalent employment.                 The mean and standard deviation         of   the dependent
         variable       are -0.237 and 8.825, respectively.


       b/oep._nt         variable    is the change      in full-time equivalent employment, divided by average employment In Wave I and Wave 2.
         For closed stores proportional change                 •1.0. The mean and standard deviation of the dependent variable are -0.005 and 0.374,
         respectively.

                            increase      in                              to raise starting wage to new minim.mi rate.              For stores    in
       C/proportional                           starting wage necessary
         Peonsylvanlo the wage gap is 0.

                 variables     for    chain      type (3)   ar4 whether or not   the store      is   coepar,y-owned are Included.

                 variables for 2          regions    of New   Jersey and 2 regions     of Eastern Pemsylvania are included.

                                                                           all    control    variables.
       'Probability value of joint F-test for exclusion of
Table 5: Specification Tests of Reduced Form Employment Models

                                    Change in          Proportional Change     in
                                    Employment              Employment

                              NJ Dummy Gap Measure     NJ   Dummy Gap Measure
                                  (1)       (2)              (3)      (4)

1.   Base Specification           2.30     14.92             0.05     0.34
                                 (1.19)    (6.21)           (0.05)   (0.26)

2. Treat 4 Temporarily            2.20     14.42             0.04     0.34
     Closed Storas as            (1.21)    (6.31)           (0.05)   (0.27)
     Permanently Closad'

3. Exclude Managers in            2.34     14.69             0.05     0.28
                          /
     Employment Count            (1.17)    (6.05)           (0.07)   (0.34)

4. Weight Part-time               2.34     ¶5.23             0.06     0.30
    as 0.4Ful Ntimec /           (1.20)    (6.23)           (0.06)   (0.33)

S. weight Part-time              2.27      14.60             0.04     0.17
    as 0.6*FulHtime             (1.21)     (6.26)           (0.06)   (0.29)

6.   txclude Stores in           2.58      16.88             0.06     0.42
     NJ Shore AreaC!            (1.19)     t6.36)           (0.05)   (0.27)

7.   Add Controls for            2.27      15.79             0.05     0.40
     Wave? Interview            (1.20)     (6.24)           (0.05)   (0.26)
     Date

8.   Exclude Stores              2.41      14.08             0.05     0.31
     Cal led More than,         (1.28)     (7.11)           (0.05)   (0.29)
     Twice in Wave

9.   Weight by AnitiaL             --        --              0.13     0.81
     Employment                                             (0.05)   (0.26)

10. Stores in Town,                --     33.75               --      0.90
    around Newark'                        (16.75)                    (0.74)

11. Stores in Towns                 -
                                           10.91              -.      0.21
     around Cambden                        (14.09)                    (0.70)

12. Pennlvania Stores               -
                                           -0.30              --     -0.33
     Only                                 (22.00)                    (0.74)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Entries represent est mated
       coefficient of New Jersey dummy (columns 1 and 3) or initial
       wage gap (columns 2 and 4) in regres ion models for the change
       in employment or the percentage change in employment.   At I models
       also include chain dummies and an indicator for company-owned
        stores.
Notes for Table 5, continued

     a/wave 2 empLoyment at 4 temporariLy cLosed stores Is set to 0 (rather
       than missing).

     b/FULL time equivalent employment excludes managers and assistant
       managers.

     c/Full time equivl ant employment equals number of managers, assistant
       managers, and full-time non-management workers, pLus 0.4 times the
       number of part-time non-management workers.

       FuLL time equiviant empLoyment equaLs number of managers, assistant
       managers, and fulL-time non-management workers, pLus 0.6 times the
       number of part-time non-management workers.

     c/sample excludes 35 stores Located in towns along the New Jersey
       shore.


     Models IncLude 3 dummy variables identifying week of Wave 2
       interview in November-December 1992.

              excludes 70 stores (69 in NJ) that were contacted 3 or more
       times before obtaining Wave I interview.


     h/Regression model is estimated by weighted Least squares, using
       employment in wave I as a weight.

     'tsubsampLe of 51 stores in towns around Newark.

     "SubsampLe of 54 stores in towns around Camden.

     k/subsample of Pennsylvania stores only. wage gap is defined as
       percentage increase in starting wage necessary to raise starting
       wage to 55.05.
Table 6: Effects of Minimum Wage Increase on Other Outcomes

                                    Mean                     Regression of Chenge in
                              Change in Outcome:               Outcome Varab!e on:

                             NJ       Pa          NJ-Pa    NJ Dummy lage Gap' ua;e Ca
                            (I)      (2)           (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)


OUTCOME MEASURE:
 Store Characteristics
 1. Fraction Ful I-Time     2.64    -4.65          7.29      730      33.64      2028.
    Workers CX)            (1.71)   (3.80)        (4.17)   (3.96)    (20.95)    (24.34)

 7. Number of Hours        -0.00     0.11          0.11    -0.11      -0.24       0.04
    Open per weekday       (0.06)   (0.08)        (0.10)   (0.12)     (0.65)     (0.76)

 3. Number of Cash         -0.04     0.13         -0.17    -0.18      -0.31       0.20
    Registers              (0.04)   (0. 10)       (0.11)   (0.101     (0.53)     (0.67i

 4. Number of Cash         -0.03    -0.20          0.17     0.17       0.15      -0.47
    Registers Open         (0.05)   (0.08)        (0.10)   (0.12)     (0.621     (0. 74)
    at 1100 am

 Employee Meal Programs                       -




 5. Low-Price Meal         -4.67    -1.28         -3.39    -2.01     -30.31     -33.15
    Program CX)            (7.65)   (3.86)        (4.68)   (3.63)    129.00)    (35.04

 6. Free Meal               8.41     6.41          2.00     0.49      79.90      36.91
    Program   (X)          (2.17)   (333)         (3.97)   (4.50)    (23.75)    l27.0)
 7.Combination of low      -4.04    -5.13          1.09     1.20     -11.57     -19.19
    Price and Free         (1.98)   (3.11)        (3.69)   (4.321    (22-57)    (26.51
    Meals (X)

 Wgp Prof lIe
 8. time to First Raise     3.77     1.26          2.51     2.21       4.02      -5.17
    (weeks)                (0.89)   (1.97)        (2.16)   (2.03)    (10.81)   1 12.7L'

9. utual Amount of         -0.01    -0.02          0.01     0.01      0.03       7-01
   First Raise (cents)     (0.01)   (0.07)        (0.02)   (0.02)     (0.1))    (0.11)

10. Slope of Wage          -0.10    -0.11          0.01     0.J7)    -0.02      -0.7-?
    Profile (X per week)   (0.04)   (0.09)        (0.10)   (0. lOi   (0.56)     (0.57)
Notes: Entries in columns 1 and 2 represent mean changes in the outcome variable
       indicated by the row heading for stores with non-missing data on the outcome
       in Waves 1 and 2. Entries In columns 4-6 represent estimated regression
       coefficients of indicated variable (NJ dummy or initial wage gsp) in model for
       the change in the outcome variable. Regression modets include chain dummies and
       an Indicator for company-owned stores.

        Wage gap is proportional increase in starting wage necessary to raise wage to
        new minimum rate.  For stores in Pennsylvania, the wsge gap is zero.


        Models in column 6 include dummies for 2 regions of New Jersey and 2 regions
        of Eastern Pennsylvania.

      c/Fraction of part-time employees in total full-time eguivslent employment.
Table 7: Reduced Form Models for Change in the Price of Full Meat



                                Dependent Variable: Change Log Price of Full Meat

                                   (1)             (2)                (3)                         (4)                 (5)


1. Mew Jersey Dummy               0.033           0.037
                                 (0.014)         (0.014)

2.   nitial Wage oape/f                                             0.077                     0.146                 0.063


3. Controls for                     no             yes                 no                         yes                yes
                Cg,in
    and Ownership

4. Controls for    Region           no


S. Standard Error                 0.101           0.097             0.102                     0.098                 0.097
   of Regression


Motes : Standard errors i n parent h as   as .   En t   r   t as a r e e 5   t   is, a t it   d    r e g r e 5   5 i on
          coefficients for modeLs fit to change in log price of a full treat
          (entree, medium soda, small fries).   The sample contains 315 stores
          with valid data on prices, wages, and employment for Waves 1 and 2.
          The mean and standard deviation of the dependent variable are 0.0173
          and 0.1017, respectiveLy.
     a/
          ProportionaL increase in starting wage necessary to raise wage to new
          minimum rate.  For stores in Pennsylvania the wage gap is 0.

     b/Dummy variables for chain type (3) and whether or not store is
       company-owned are included.

     C/Dummy variables for 2 regions of New Jersey and 2                             regions of Easter"
       Pennsylvania are included.
Table 8: Estimated Effecs of Minimum Wages on Numbers of McDonald's Restaurants, 1956 to 1991




                                      Dependent Variable: Proportional     Oependen t Variable: Number Newly
                                        Increase in Number of Stores        Opened Stores / Number in 1956


                                       (1)       (2)      (3)     (4)       (5)      (6)      (7)        (8)



Minimum Wane Variabte:
1. Fraction of RetaiL Workers          0.33       •-      0.13     --       0.37      -.      0.16        --
   in Affected Wage Range 1986a,' (0.20)                 (0.19)            (0.22)            (0.21)


2. State Minimum Wage in 1991b          -   -    0.38      --     0.47       - -     0.47       -   -    0.56
                                  "
   /   Average Retail Wage 1986                 (0.22)            (0.22)            1023)               10.2')


Other Control Variables:
3. Proporsional Growth in               --        --      0.88     1.03      --        --     0.86       1.04
   Population, 1986 to 1991                              (0.23)   (0.23)                      (0.25)    (0.25)


4. change in Unemployment               -.        --     -1.78    -1.40      --        --     -1.85     -L40
   Rates, 1986 to 1991                                   (0.62)   (0.61)                      (0.68)    (0.65)


5. Standard Error of                   0.083     0.083    0.071    0.068    0.088    0.088    0.077      0.073
    Regress i on

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Sample contains SI state-level observations (including D.C.)
        on the number of McDonalds restaurants open in 1986 and 1991. Dependendent variable in columns
        (1)-(4) is proportional increase in the number of ressaurants open. Mean and standard deviation
        are .246 and .085, respectiveLy. Dependendent variable in columns (5)-IS) is ratio of the
        number of new stores opened between 1986 and 1991 to the number open in 1986. Mean and standard
        deviation are .293 and .091, respectively. All regressions are weighted by state population
          in 1986.


          Fraction of all workers in retail trade in the state in 1986 earning an hourly wage between
          $3.35 per hour and the "effective" state minimum wage in 1990 (i.e., the maximimum o' the
          Federal minimum wage in 1990 ($3.80) and the state minimum wage as of ApriL 1 1990).


          Maximum of state and Federal minimum wage as of April 1 1990 divided by average hourLy wage
          workers in retail trade in the state in 1986.
TabLe 9: EmpLoyment-Popu(aton Rates for Teenager-s and AdLts,
         ApriL-December of 1991 and 1992



                            EmpLoyment-PopuLation Rate:

                                                 Change:
                             1991     1992      1992-1991


  New Jersey
       Teenagers            37.7      37.0           -0.7
                             (1.8)    (1.8)          (2.2)

       Age 25 and OLder     64.1      61.5           -2.6
                            (0.5)     (0.5)          (0.6>


  PennsyLvania
       Teenagers            48.0      45.3           -2.7
                            (1.0>     (1.9>          (2.3)


       Age 25 and 0(der     58.8      59.1            0.3
                            (0.5)     (0.5)          (0.6)


  New York
       Teenagers            31.4      28.6 -
                            (1.3)     (1.3)          (1.6)



       Age 25 and 0(der     59.6      58.6           -1.0
                            (0.4)     (0.4)       (0.5)


  AU U.S.
       Teenagers            43.5      42.4        -1.1
                            (0.4)     (0.4)       (0.5>


       Age 25 and OLder     62.7     62.5         -0.2
                            (0.1)     (0.1)       (0.1>


  Notes: Estimated standard errors in parentheses.
         Estimated from monthLy Current Population Survey files for
         ApriL-December of 1991 and 1992.
