                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERiES




                               ThADE POLICY, EXCHANGE
                                 RATES AND GROWTH




                                      Sebastian Edwards




                                   Working Paper No. 4511




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October, 1993

This is a revised version of a paper presented at the National Bureau of Economic Research -
Interamerican Development Bank Conference on 'Macroeconomics Policies and Growth,"
Washington, D.C., December 17-18, 1992. I am grateful to my discussants at the Conference
for helpful comments, and to participants at a seminar in 1TAM, Mexico City for helpful
discussions. I thank Fernando Losada for excellent research assistance. This paper is part of
NBER's research programs in International Finance and Macroeconomics and International
Trade and Investment. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4511
                                                                               October 1993


                                TRADE POLICY, EXCHANGE
                                  RATES AND GROWTH


                                          ABSTRACT

       This paper analyzes the relationship between trade policy and economic performance. The

paper is divided in two fundamental parts. The first one uses a cross country data set to

investigate the relationship between trade policy and productivity growth. It is found that

countries that are more open to the rest of the world have experienced faster growth in total

factor productivity than countries with high trade barriers. In the second part the recent Latin

American experiences with trade liberalization reforms are investigated. It is shown that in the

last few years the Latin American countries have gone from having one of the most distorted

external sectors, to having very low degrees of protectionism. The extent of the liberalization

efforts is documented and the effect on productivity and exports is investigated.



Sebastian Edwards
Anderson Graduate School of Management
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90024
and NBER
I. Introduction
        After decades of protectionist policies, most of Latin America began to open up

to the rest of the world in the late 1980s. This process, pioneered by Chile, is perhaps

the most impressive achievement of the structural adjustment programs of the last

decade. It has effectively put an end to more than four decades of generalized import

substitution policies aimed at encouraging an industrial sector, that turned Out to be

largely inefficient.'

        The process leading to these trade reforms has not been easy. As recently as in

the mid-1980s the protectionist view was still dominant in many parts of Latin

America. In fact, the debt crisis of 1982 provided a new impetus to the protectionist

paradigm. Initially, many analysts interpreted the crisis as a failure of "the world

economic order", and argued that the only way for Latin America to avoid the

recurrence of this type of shocks was to further isolate itself from the rest of the

world, through selective protectionism and government intervention. This sentiment

was compounded by the fact that a number of observers considered the experiences of

the Southern Cone countries -- Argentina, Chile and Uruguay -- with liberalization

reforms during the 1970s as a failure. This view has been clearly synthesized by

Lance Taylor (1991, p. 119) who has argued that the "trade liberalization strategy is

intellectually moribund" and that there are "no great benefits (plus some costs) in

following open trade and capital market strategies" (p. 141). From here he goes on to

say that "development strategies oriented internally may be a wise choice towards the

century's end" (p. 141).
                                             2



        Immediately following the eruption of the debt crisis it seemed that increased

protectionism was indeed the path that Latin countries had chosen as a possible way

out of their problems. Even Chile, the strongest supporter of free trade, tripled its

import tariffs.2 As a result of this, in the mid-1980s Latin America had one of the

most distorted external sectors in the world with extremely high import tariffs and, in

some cases, quantitative restrictions that covered every single import item (see Table

1).

       However, by 1987-88 it became increasingly apparent that a permanent solution

to the region's economic problems would require a fundamental change in its

development strategy. In particular, policymakers began to realize that the long-stand-

ing protectionist trade policy was central to the region's problems. The poor

performance of the Latin American countries offered a dramatic contrast to the rapidly

growing East-Asian countries that had aggressively implemented outward-oriented

strategies. With the help of the multilateral institutions, a larger and larger number of

countries began to reduce their levels of protection during the late 1980s and early

l990s. This trade reform process has been supplemented with broad deregulation and

privatization, and is proceeding at an increasingly rapid pace. Tariffs have been

drastically slashed, in many cases import licenses and prohibitions have been

completely eliminated, and a number of countries are actively trying to sign free trade

agreements with the United States.

      Latin America's long tradition with protectionist policies molded the region's

economic structure in a fundamental way, creating a largely inefficient manufacturing
                                             3



sector.3 Tariffs and prohibitions also generated a severe anti-export bias that

discouraged both the growth and diversification of exports.4 This process took place

through two main channels: first, tariffs and other forms of protection increased the

cost of imported intermediate materials and capital goods used in the production of

exportable, reducing their effective rate of protection. Second, and perhaps more

important, the maze of protectionist policies resulted in massive real exchange rate

'overvaluation" that reduced the degree of competitiveness of exports.5 Paradoxically,

the policies which were supposed to reduce Latin America's dependency on the world-

wide business cycle, ended up creating a highly vulnerable economic structure where

the sources of foreign exchange were concentrated on a few products intensive in

natural resources (Fishlow, 1985).

       The trade liberalization programs implemented during the last decade have two

basic policy objectives: first, these reforms have sought to reduce the anti-export bias

of commercial policies. It is expected that once negative effective rates of protection

and overvalued exchange rates are eliminated exports will not only grow rapidly, but

will also become more diversified.

       The second fundamental objective of trade reforms is to transform international

trade into "the engine of growth'. The new literature on "endogenous" growth has

stressed the role of openness in explaining cross country growth differentials over the

long run.6 For example, Romer (1989) has argued that more open economies can take

advantage of larger markets, increasing their degree of efficiency and their rate of

growth. Other authors, including Grossman and Helpman (1990, 1991) and Edwards
                                              4




 (1992), have recently argued that openness affects the speed and efficiency with which

 small countries can absorb technological innovations developed in the industrial world.

 This idea, based on an insight first proposed by John Stuart Mill, implies that countries

 with a lower level of trade distortions will experience faster total factor productivity

growth and, thus, will grow faster than countries that inhibit international competition.7

        The purpose of this paper is to explore, from different perspectives, the

relationship between trade liberalization and growth. The analysis deals both with long

run and with transitional issues. I first concentrate (in Section II) on the long run

relation between trade regimes and productivity growth. I use a broad 54 countries

data set to investigate the way in which trade distortions have affected productivity

growth in the 1971-82 period. The results obtained support the view that more open

economies tend to have faster rates of productivity growth than countries that have

distorted international trade. In Sections m and IV, I discuss some of the most

important problems faced during the transition by countries engaged in trade

liberalization programs. While in Section ifi, I focus on general transitional issues at

an analytical level, in Section JV, I deal with the recent Latin American trade reforms.

I first document the extent of trade liberalization. Second, I investigate whether, as

predicted by some authors, these reforms have been associated with faster productivity

growth. In Section V, I discuss the recent behavior of real exchange rates in Latin

America, emphasizing the way in which they are likely to affect the sustainability of

the trade reforms. Finally, in Section VI, I present a summary of the paper and I

discuss some of the unresolved issues related to Latin American trade policy.
                                             5



II. Openness and Growth Cross Country Evidence
11.1 A Simple Model

       A number of researchers have found that factor accumulation explains between

one half and two thirds of long run growth (Fischer, 1988). The large unexplained

residual in growth accounting exercises has been attributed to "technological progress"

or "productivity gains". From a policy perspective a key question is what determines

these productivity improvements. In particular, it is important to understand whether

national domestic policies -- including financial and trade policies --   can   affect the pace

of productivity growth. If this is the case, policymakers will have additional degrees

of freedom to pursue those avenues that will enhance long run performance.

       The recent interest on "endogenous" growth models has generated a revival in

applied research on the determinants of growth. Some authors have emphasized the

role of openness in determining the pace at which countries can absorb technological

progress originating in the rest of the world. Edwards (1992), for example, has

recently assumed that there are two sources of total factor productivity (TFP) growth:

(1) a purely domestic source stemming from local technological improvements

(innovation); and (2) a foreign source related to the absorption of inventions

generated in other nations (imitation). More specifically, assume that the country's

ability to appropriate world technical innovations (or to imitate) depends on two

factors: positively on the degree of openness of the economy, and also positively, on

the gap between the country's level of TFP and "the World's" stock of TFP. The first

channel is the "openness effect" discussed by Lewis (1955): more open countries have
                                            6



an   advantage in absorbing new ideas generated in the rest of the world. In this context

"more open" should be interpreted as referring to a less distorted foreign trade sector.

The second channel is a "catch up" effect, common to growth models based on

"convergence" notions.

        If the aggregate production function is defined as y1 = Af(K,L.), then total

factor productivity is A =   yjf('), and total productivity growth is (A/A). The role
of the two sources of technical progress discussed above -- innovation and imitation —

can be captured by the following simple expression:


                                                                                        (1)

where       and y are positive parameters, A* is the level of world's (appropriable)

TFP, and c, is the rate of growth of world's TFP (that is A = Ae''). $ is a

parameter between zero and one that measures the country's ability to absorb

productivity improvements originating from the rest of the world, and is assumed to be

a negative function of the level of trade distortions in the economy ().

              = $(ô);   $' < 0,                                                        (2)

where ô is an index of trade distortions that takes a higher value when international

trade, both in imports and/or exports, becomes more distorted.

        Parameter c is the basic rate of domestic productivity growth or innovation,

which for simplicity is assumed to be exogenous. On the other hand, (y(A*A)IA) is

the "catch-up" term that says that domestic productivity growth wifi be faster in nations
                                             7




 whose stock of knowledge lags further behind the world's accumulated stock of

 appropriable knowledge.9

         In this setting the path through time of domestic TFP will be given by:'°



  A, =       -(              -         --)t + ( + ( i) - ) e .                          (3)


It follows from equation (3) that the long run rate of growth of domestic TFP will

depend on whether ('y-a-flc,)     0. If (y-a-/3) > 0, in the steady-state TFP will
grow at the rate of world's productivity . This means that the level of domestic TFP

(and of GDP) will be a function of the degree of trade intervention, with higher trade

distortions resulting in a lower level of real income. A key implication of this result is

that countries that engage in trade liberalization programs will be characterized, during

the transition between two steady states, by higher rates of productivity growth and

thus, by faster rates of GDP growth.

         A second case appears when (y--/3c) < 0. Long run TFP growth (A/A)
will depend on how large the world's rate of growth of TFP (w) is relative to the

domestic rate of productivity improvement. If o > (a-)/(l -j3), domestic TFP will

grow in the steady state at the world rate . If, however, w < (a-'y)/(l-), and ('y-

c-$w) < 0, the long run equilibrium rate of TFP growth will be equal to (a+/3w-

ô)," and will depend negatively on ô, the country's level of trade distortions. That

is, in this case more open countries (those with low 5) will grow faster during steady

state equilibrium. This is because in this case the domestic source of technological
                                             8




inventions is strong enough s to drive, even in the steady state, the aggregate rate of

technological innovations)2

          The model developed above suggests that TFP growth will depend on the

degree of trade distortions in the economy, and on a catch-up term that measures the

gap between the country's and "the world's' level of productivity. I constructed a

cross country data set to test these implications of the model. More specifically, I

estimated equations of the following type:

             p = b0 + b1â + b2g + Ea x, + ,                                              (4)

where p is the average rate of growth of TFP in country n; &, is, as before, an

index of trade distortions; g,, is the catch-up term; the xi's are other possible

determinants of TFP growth; and        is an error term.

          Recently, Barro (1991), Edwards (1992), and Roubim and Sala-i-Martin (1992),

among others, have suggested that in addition to the degree of openness, productivity

growth will also be affected by the following factors: (a) human capital, usually

measured by schooling attainment; (b) the importance of government in the economy

measured by the ratio of government expenditure to GDP; (c) the degree of political

instability; and (d) the inflation rate.'3 In the estimations of equation (4) reported

below, I have incorporated these variables as possible determinants of productivity

growth.
                                             9



11.1 Data Definitions and Sources

       TFP Growth: A problem faced in the estimation of equations of the type of (4)

refers to the measurement of TFP growth. In particular, it is difficult to obtain long

time series of capital stocks for a large number of countries. In this paper I deal with

this problem by constructing three measures of TFP growth from the residuals of

country-specific GDP growth regressions. These indices are denoted TFP1, TFP2

and TFP3. The specific methodology used in constructing each of these indices is

presented in the Appendix.14

       Trade Distortions: Traditionally, studies that have investigated the relationship

between trade policy and economic performance have had difficulties measuring the

extent of trade distortions. In this paper I tackle this problem by using two variables:

first, in most of the basic estimates I use the ratio of total revenue from taxes on

foreign trade -- import tariffs plus export taxes -- over total trade as a proxy for trade

distortions. This variable is measured as an average for 1971-82. Since this variable,

denoted TRADETAX, measures the 'true" extent of trade distortions with error, in the

estimation of the TFP growth equation I also use an instrumental variable technique

that tries to correct for measurement error. The second proxy I use is the 1971-82

average trade dependency ratio -- imports plus exports as a percentage of GDP. These

two indices of trade distortions were constructed with raw data obtained from the IMF.

       Catch-Up Term: Following the recent literature on endogenous growth (Barro

1991; Edwards 1992), I use initial GDP per capita -- for year 1971 in this case --     as   a
measure of the gap between a particular country's level of productivity and that of the
                                              10



world. This variable is denoted as GDP71; the data were obtained from Summers and

Heston (1989). The coefficient of this variable is expected to be negative, indicating

that countries with a lower initial per capita GDP have more "catching up" to do and,

thus, will grow faster.

        Human Capital: I used two indices. The first one is the attainment of

secondary education in 1981. The second one is the increase in secondary education

coverage between 1961 and 1981. When alternative indices, such as secondary and

higher education were used, the results obtained were not altered. The data were

obtained from the World Bank's World Development Report. The coefficient of this

variable is expected to be positive.

       Role of Government: This index is defined as the share of government over

GDP, and is taken from Summers and Heston (1989). Barro (1991) has argued that

this coefficient should be negative, capturing the effect that greater government

activities tend, in general, to crowd-out the private sector.

       Political Instability: This variable was defined as the average perceived

probability of government change, and was obtained from Cukierman, Edwards and

Tabellini (1992).15 Its coefficient in the TFP growth equations is expected to be

negative, reflecting the fact that in politically unstable situations economic agents do

not devote their full energies to pursue economic objectives.

       Inflation Tax: This variable was defmed as the average collection of inflation

tax for 1971-82 and was computed as m, where 7 is the rate of inflation and m
                                             11




is the ratio of Ml to GDP. -The coefficient of this variable is expected to be negative,

reflecting the effects of higher inflation on uncertainty and economic activity.

11.2 Econometric Results

        Tables 2 and 3 summarize the results obtained from the estimation of several

versions of equation (4). While Table 2 contains weighted least squares estimates —

with population in 1971 as weight -- for all three measures of TFP growth;16 Table 3

presents instrumental variables regressions for the TFP1 definition of productivity

growth. (When the other two indices were used, the results were not altered

significantly.)

       As can be seen from these tables, the results are highly satisfactory. Almost

every coefficient has the expected sign and is significant at conventional levels.

Particularly important for the discussion pursued in this paper is the fact that in every

regression the proxies for trade distortions and openness are highly significant.

Moreover, the computation of standardized beta coefficients indicate that trade

impediments are the second most important explanatory variable of TFP growth, after

the "catch-up" term.'7

       As pointed out above both the TAXTRADE coefficient and the trade

dependency ratio are imperfect proxies of trade distortions. In particular, they do not

capture directly the role of quantitative restrictions on trade. In order to deal with this

measurement error problem I estimated instrumental variables versions of some of

these equations. In re-estimating equations (4.1) and (4.2) I used the trade penetration

ratio of imports to GDP as instruments for TAXTRADE.'1 The results obtained are
                                             12



 presented in Table 3. As can be seen they confirm those discussed previously, and

 provide additional support to the view that, after controlling for other factors, countries

 with more open and less distorted foreign trade sectors have tended to exhibit a faster

 rate of growth of total factor productivity, over the lon2 run, than those nations with a

 more distorted external sector. The results presented in Tables 2 and 3, however,

 provide no information on the transition from a closed economy to one that is more•

 open and integrated to the rest of the world. I turn to those issues in the next three
 sections.



ifi. Policy Issues During a Trade Liberalization Transition

        The analysis presented in the preceding section provides support for the

hypothesis that in the long run more open economies have experienced faster

productivity growth than countries that distort international trade. However, as the

former communist countries have recently found out, designing a strategy for moving

from a controlled to a liberalized economy is not an easy task.

       Two fund4rnental problems have to be addressed in the transition towards freer

trade: first, it is important to determine what is the adequate speed of reform. For a

long time analysts argued for gradual liberalization programs (Little et al. 1971,

Michaely, 1985). The reason for this is that, according to these authors, gradual

reforms would give finns time for restructuring their productive processes and, thus,

would result in low dislocation costs in the form of unemployment and bankruptcies.

These reduced adjustment costs would, in turn, provide the needed political support for
                                            13




the liberalization program. -Recently, however, the gradualist position has been under

attack. There is an increasing agreement that slower reforms tend to lack credibility,

inhibiting firms from actually engaging in serious restructuring. Moreover, the

experience of Argentina in the 1970s has shown that a gradual (and preannounced)

reform allows those firms negatively affected by it to (successfully) lobby against the

reduction in tariffs. According to this line of reasoning, faster reforms are more

credible, and thus tend to be sustained through time (Stockman, 1982).

       The thinking on the speed of reform has also been influenced by recent

empirical work on the short run unemployment consequences of trade liberalization.

Contrary to the traditional conventional wisdom, a study directed by Michaely et al.

(1991) on liberalization episodes in 19 countries strongly suggests that, even in the

short run, the costs of reform can be small. Although contracting industries will

release workers, those expanding sectors positively affected by the reform process will

tend to create a large number of employment positions. The Michaely et al. (1991)

study shows that in sustainable and successful reforms the      effect -- that is the effect

that nets out contracting and expanding sectors -- on short run employment has been

negligible. A key question, then, is what determines a successful reform? Most

historical studies on the subject have shown that maintaining a "competitive' real

exchange rate during the transition is one of, if not the most, important determinant of

successful trade reforms. A competitive, that is depreciated, real exchange rate

encourages exports, and helps maintain external equilibrium at the time the reduction

in tariffs has made imports cheaper.
                                              14



         The second problem -that has to be addressed when designing a liberalization

 strategy refers to the sequencing of reform (Edwards, 1984). This issue was first

 addressed in the 1980s in discussions dealing with the Southern Cone experiences, and

 emphasized the macroeconomic consequences of alternative sequences. It was

 generally agreed that resolving the fiscal imbalance and attaining some degree of

 macroeconomic reform should constitute the first stage of a structural reform. On

 subsequent steps, most agreed that the trade liberalization reform should precede the

liberalization of the capital account, and that financial reform should be implemented

 simultaneously with trade reform.

        The behavior of the real exchange rate is at the heart of this policy prescription.

The central issue is that liberalizing the capital account would, under most conditions,

result in large capital inflows and in an appreciation of the real exchange rate

(McKinnon, 1982; Edwards, 1984; Harberger, 1985). The problem with this is that an

appreciation of the real exchange rate will send the "wrong' signal to the real sector,

frustrating the reallocation of resources called for by the trade reform. The effects of

this real exchange rate appreciation will be particularly serious if, as argued by

Edwards (1984), the transitional period will be characterized by 'abnormally" high

capital inflows, and the economy is characterized by high adjustment costs. If,

however, the opening of the capital account is postponed, the real sector will be able to

adjust and the new allocation of resources will be consolidated. According to this

view, only at this time should the capital account be liberalized.
                                             15




        More recent discussions on the sequencing of reform have expanded the

analysis, and have included other markets. An increasing number of authors has

argued that the reform of the labor market -- and in particular the removal of

distortions that discourage labor mobility -- should precede the trade reform, as well as

the relaxation of capital controls. It is even possible that the liberalization of trade in

the presence of highly distorted labor markets will be counterproductive, generating

overall welfare losses in the country in question (Edwards, 1992).

       As the preceding discussion has suggested, there is little doubt that the behavior

of the real exchange rate is a key element during a trade liberalization transition.

According to traditional manuals on "how to liberalize", a large devaluation should

constitute the first step in a trade reform process. Bhagwati (1978) and Krueger

(1978) have pointed out that in the presence of quotas and import licenses a (real)

exchange rate depreciation will reduce the rents received by importers, shifting relative

prices in favor of export-oriented activities and, thus, reducing the extent of the anti-

export bias.'9

       Maintaining a depreciated and competitive real exchange rate during a trade

liberalization process is also important in order to avoid an explosion in imports

growth and a balance of payments crisis. Under most circumstances a reduction in the

extent of protection will tend to generate a rapid and immediate surge in imports. On

the other hand, the expansion of exports usually takes some time. Consequently, there

is a danger that a trade liberalization reform will generate a large trade balance

disequilibrium in the short run. This, however, will not happen if there is a
                                             16



 depreciated real exchange rate that encourages exports and helps maintain imports in

 check. However, many countries have historically failed to sustain a depreciated real

 exchange rate during the transition. This has mainly been the result of expansionary

 macroeconomic policies, and has resulted in speculation, international reserves losses

 and, in many cases, in the reversal of the reform effort. In the conclusions to the

 massive World Bank project on trade reform Michaely et al. (1991) succinctly

summarizes the key role of the real exchange rate in determining the success of

liberalization programs: "The long term performance of the real exchange rate clearly

differentiates "liberalizers' from "non-liberalizers' (p. 119). Edwards (1989) used

data on 39 exchange rate crises and found that in almost every case real exchange rate

overvaluation ended up drastic increases in the degree of protectionism.

       In the next section I address in some detail the recent liberalization experiences

in Latin America, I document the extent and depth of the reforms and I investigate

their impact on productivity growth and exports behavior. In Section VI, I deal with

the recent evolution of real exchange rates in Latin America.



IV. Recent Trade Liberalization Reforms in Latin America

       During the last few years trade liberalization reforms have swept through Latin

America; every country in the region has today a significantly more open trade sector

than in the early and mid-1980s. The pioneer in the liberalization process was Chile,

which between 1975 and 1979 unilaterally eliminated QRs and reduced import tariffs to

a uniform level of 10%. After a brief interlude with higher tariffs (at the uniform
                                              17



 level of 30%) Chile currently has a uniform tariff of 11% and no licenses or other

 forms of quantitative controls. Uruguay implemented a reform in 1978, and after a

 brief reversal, push forward once again in 1986. Bolivia and Mexico embarked on

 their reforms in 1985-86, followed by a series of countries in the late 1980s. At the

 current time a number of countries, including Brazil, are proceeding steadily with

 scheduled rounds of tariff reduction and the dismantling of quantitative restrictions.

However, it is still unclear whether all these reforms will be sustained, becoming a

permanent feature of the Latin economies, or whether some of them will be reversed.

Recent (October 1992) developments in Argentina indeed suggest that in some

countries higher tariffs may be implemented, once again, in the near future.

        The Latin American trade reforms have been characterized by four basic

elements: (1) The reduction of the coverage of non-tariff bathers, including quotas

and prohibitions; (2) The reduction of the average level of import tariffs; (3) The

reduction of the degree of dispersion of the tariff structure; (4) The reduction or

elimination of export taxes. In this section I document the extent of the recent

liberalization programs, and I provide a preliminary evaluation of the effects of these

reforms on productivity growth and exports expansion.

IV. 1 The Policies

       IV. 1.1 Non-Tariff Barriers

       A fundamental component of the trade reform programs has been the

elimination, or at least the severe reduction, of non-tariff barriers coverage. During

the early and mid-1980s in some countries, such as Colombia and Peru, more than
                                             18



50% of import positions were subject to licenses or outright prohibitions. In Mexico

NTBs coverage reached almost 100% of import categories in 1984, as was the case in

most of Central America in 1984 (Fable 1).

          Table 4 contains data on protectionism in 1985-87 and 1991-92, and shows that

in almost every country the coverage of NTBs has been dramatically reduced.2° In

fact, in a number of cases NTBs have been fully eliminated. The process through

which NTBs have been eased has varied from country to country. In some cases, such

as Honduras, they were initially replaced by (quasi) equivalent import tariffs, and then

slowly phased out. In other countries, like Chile, NTBs were rapidly eliminated

without a compensating hike in tariffs.

       As Table 4 shows, in spite of the progress experienced in the last few years,

significant NTB coverage remains in a number of countries. In most cases these non-

tariff barriers correspond to agricultural products. For example, in Mexico

approximately 60% of the agriculture's sector tariff positions are still subject to import

licenses in mid-1992. In fact, an important feature of the region's liberalization

programs is that they have proceeded much slower in agriculture than in industry.

This has largely been the result of the authorities desire to isolate agriculture from

fluctuations in world prices, and unfair trade practices by foreign countries.2'

However, as a recent study by Valdes has shown (1992) this approach based on NTBs

entails serious efficiency costs. Slowly, however, more and more countries are

addressing these concerns by replacing these quantitative restrictions by variable

levies.
                                             19



       IV.1.2 Tariff Dispersion

       The import substitution development strategy pursued for decades in Latin

America created highly dispersed protective structures. According to the World Bank

(1987), Brazil, Chile and Colombia had some of the broadest ranges of effective rates

of protection in the world during the 1960s. Also, Heitger (1987) shows that during

the 1960s Chile had the highest rate of tariff dispersion in the World -- with a standard

deviation of 634% — closely followed by Colombia and Uruguay. Cardoso and Hel-

wege (1991) have pointed out that highly dispersed protective structures generate high

welfare costs, by increasing uncertainty and negatively affecting the investment

process. These highly dispersed tariffs and NTBs were the result of decades of

lobbying by different sectors to obtain preferential treatment. As the relative power of

the different lobbies changed, so did their tariff concessions and the protective

landscape.

       An important goal of the Latin trade reforms has been the reduction of the

degree of dispersion of import tariffs. Table 4 contains data on the tariff range for a

group of countries for two points in time -- mid-l980s (1985-87) and 199 1-92 -- and

clearly document the fact that the reforms have indeed reduced the degree of tariff

dispersion.

       In many cases reducing tariff dispersion has meant increasing tariffs on goods

that were originally exempted from import duties. In fact, Table 4 shows that in the

many countries the minimum tariff was zero percent in the mid-1980s. Generally,

zero tariffs have been applied to intermediate inputs used in the manufacturing pro-
                                            20



 cess.n From a political economy perspective the process of raising some tariffs, while

 maintaining a pro-liberalization rhetoric, has not always been easy. Those sectors that

had traditional benefitted from the exemptions, suddenly saw their privileged situation

come to an end and tried to oppose them strongly.

        An important question addressed by policymakers throughout the region, is by

how much should tariff dispersion be reduced? Should the reforms implement a

uniform tariff, or is some (small) degree dispersion desirable? From a strict welfare

perspective uniform tariffs are only a advisable under very special cases. However,

they have a political-economy appeal. More specifically, a uniform tariff system is

very transparent, making it difficult for the authorities to grant special treatments to

particular firms or sectors (Harberger, 1990).

       IV.l.3 Avera2e Tariffs

       Reducing the average degree of protection is, perhaps, the fundamental policy

goal of trade liberalization reforms. Traditional policy manuals on the subject suggest

that once the exchange rate has been devalued and quantitative restrictions have been

reduced or eliminated, tariffs should be slashed in a way such that both their range and

average is reduced. Table 4 contains data on average total tariffs (tariffs plus

paratariffs) in 1985 and 199 1-92. As can be seen, the extent of tariff reduction has

been significant in almost every country. Even those nations that have acted somewhat

cautiously in the reform front, such as Brazil and Ecuador, have experienced important

cuts in import tariffs, allowing a more competitive environment, and reducing the

degree of and-export bias of the trade regime.
                                             21



        Countries that have embarked on trade liberalization in recent years have moved

 at a much faster speed than those nations that decided to open up earlier. There has,

 in fact, been a clear change in what is perceived to be our abrupt and pj removal of

imports impediments. What only 15 years ago were seen as brutally fast reforms, are

now looked at as mild and gradual liberalizations. When Chile initiated the trade

reform in 1975 most analysts thought that the announced tariff reduction from an

average of 52% to 10% in four and a half years was an extremely aggressive move

that would cause major dislocations, including large increases in unemployment. The

view on the speed of reform has become very different in the early 1990s, when an

increasing number of countries have been opening up their external sectors very

rapidly. For instance, Colombia slashed (total) import tariffs by 65% in one year,

reducing them from 34% in 1990 to 12% in 1991. This fast approach to liberalization

has also been followed by Argentina and Nicaragua who eliminated quantitative

restrictions in one bold move and slashed import tariffs from an average of 110% in

1990 to 15% in March of 1992. As suggested previously, the speed of trade reforms

has been directly related to the belief that faster reforms are more credible and, thus,

more likely to be sustained through time.

       IV.1.4 Exchange Rate Policy

       In the vast majority of the countries the first step in the trade reform process

was the implementation of large (nominal) devaluations. In many cases this measure

represented a unification of the exchange rate market. Most countries implemented

large exchange rate adjustments as early as 1982 in order to face the urgencies of the
                                             22



 adjustment process. The purpose of these policies was to generate x       exchange rate

 devaluations, as a way to reduce the degree of anti-export bias of incentives systems.

        Many countries adopted crawling peg regimes to protect the real exchange rate

from the effects of inflation. Although these systems helped avoid the erosion of

competitiveness, they also added fuel to the inflationary process. They introduced a

certain degree of inflationary inertia, and have contributed in many countries to the

slow reduction of the rate of inflation. More recently, a number of countries has

begun to use the exchange rate as an anchor in order to bring down inflation. This has

resulted in the slowing down of the rate of crawl below inflation differentials or, in

some cases, in the fixing of the exchange rate as in Argentina.

       Table 5 contains data on real exchange rates for a group of LAC countries for

1980, 1987 and 1991. As is customary in Latin America, an increase in the index

represents a real exchange rate depreciation and thus an improvement in the degree of

competitiveness. As can be seen between 1980 and 1987 almost every country in the

sample experienced very large real depreciations. In many cases, however, these have

been partially reversed in the last few years. This has been the consequence of a

combination of factors, including the inflow of large volumes of foreign capital into

these countries since 1990, and the use of the exchanger rate as the cornerstone of the

disinflation policies. This issue is addressed in greater detail in Section V.

IV.2 Adjustment and Productivity

       The relaxation of trade impediments has had a fundamental impact on the

region's economies. Suddenly, Latin America's industry which, to a large extent had
                                                 23



•   developed and grown behind protective walls, was forced to compete. Many firms

    have not been able to survive this shock, and have become bankrupt. Others,

    however, have faced the challenge of lower protection by embarking on major

    restructuring, and increasing their level of productivity.

           The ability (and willingness) of firms to implement significant adjustment

    depend on two main factors: the degree of credibility of the reform, and the level of

    distortions in the labor market. If entrepreneurs believe that the reform will not persist

    through time, there will be no incentives to incur in the costs of adjusting the product

    mix and of increasing the degree of productive efficiency. In fact, if the reform is

    perceived as temporary the optimal behavior is not to adjust; instead it is profitable to

    speculate through the accumulation of imported durable goods. This was, as

    Rodriguez (1982) has documented, the case in Argentina during the failed Martinez de

    Hoz's reforms.
           Labor market conditions affect the adjustment process in several ways. First,

    in order to survive, firms facing stiffer foreign competition have to increase labor

    productivity, which in many cases means reducing the number of workers. This

    reduction in employment will tend to be offset by new hires in expanding firms in the

    sectors with comparative advantage. Many times, however, existing labor market

    regulations are extremely cumbersome, inhibiting the adjustment process, and forcing

    out of business firms that are structurally viable in the long run. Additionally, labor

    market distortions negatively affect the investment process, including direct foreign

    investments.26
                                             24



        In their studies on the interaction between labor markets and structural reforms

Krueger (1980) and Michaely et al. (1991) found that most successful trade reforms

have indeed resulted in major increases in labor productivity. This has been the case

in some of the early Latin American reformers for which there are data. For example,

according to Edwards and Edwards (1991) labor productivity in the Chilean

manufacturing sector increased at an average annual rate of 13.4% between 1978 and

1981. On the other hand, the available evidence suggests that the increases in labor

productivity in the Mexican manufacturing sector in the post reform period has been

moderate. According to World Bank (1992) data, labor productivity in Mexico barely

increased between 1988 and 1981 -- the index went from 92.7 to 105.1. In a recent

study Ibarra (1992) has calculated that labor productivity in the Mexican manufacturing

sector -- excluding the maguiladora sector --   has increased   at an average rate of 2.3%

per annum.

       As discussed in Section II, recent models of growth have suggested that

countries that are more open to the rest of the world will exhibit a faster rate of

technological improvement. From an empirical point of view this means that countries

that open up their external sectors, and engage in trade liberalization reforms, will

experience an increase in total factor productivity growth relative to the pre-reform

period. Table 6 contains data on the change in total factor productivity growth in the

period following the implementation of trade liberalization reform in six Latin

Countries.v As can be seen, Chile and Costa Rica, two of the earlier reformers,

experienced very large increases in TFP growth in the post reform period. The results
                                             25



for Chile coincide with those obtained by Edwards (1985), who found that in the late

1970s, after the trade reforms had been completed, TFP growth was approximately

three times higher than the historical average.28 Although the outcome has been less

spectacular, Argentina and Uruguay still exhibit substantial improvements in

productivity growth in the period following the opening up. Bolivia, on the other

hand, presents a flat profile of TFP growth. Sturzenegger (1992) argues that the very

slow improvement in Bolivian productivity growth has been, to a large extent, the

result of negative terms of trade shocks and, in particular of the collapse of the tin

market.

       Perhaps the most interesting and puzzling result in Table 6 is the slight decline

in aggregate TFP growth in Mexico after the reforms. Martin (1992) shows that this

finding is robust to alternative methods of measuring TFP growth, including different

procedures for correcting for capacity utilization. Also, Harberger (1992) finds a

slowing down of TFP growth in Mexico in 1986-90 relative to 1975-82. However, the

aggregate nature of the TFP growth data in Table 6 tends to obscure the actual sectoral

response to the trade reform. According to new theories on endogenous growth, faster

productivity wifi be observed in those sectors where protectionism has been reduced,

and not in those still subject to trade bathers or other forms of regulations.

       A distinctive characteristic of the Mexican reform is that, contrary to the

Chilean case, it has been uneven. In particular, while most of the manufacturing

sector -- with the exception of automobiles -- has experienced a significant reduction in

protection, agriculture continues to be subject to relatively high tariffs and substantial
                                              26



 nontariff barriers. Moreover, until very recently the Mexican land tenure system was

 subject to substantial distortions that, among other things, severely restricted the

 market for land -- the fJjo system. Additionally, during much of the post-debt crisis

 period large fragments of services sector -- including telecommunications and financial

 services -- were under direct government control and subject to distortions.

        Table 7 contains data on TFP growth in Mexico's manufacturing sector for

 194089.29 Interestingly enough, these figures indicate that in the post-trade reform

period the rate of productivity growth in the Mexican manufacturing sector has

exceeded every subperiod since 1940, for which there are data. This provides some

evidence in favor of the view that, once the sectors actually subject to increased

competition are considered, Mexican productivity growth has indeed improved after the

trade reform. It should be noted, however, that recent TFP growth in manufacturing

in Mexico (see Table 8 for disaggregated data) has not been as large as in Chile's post-

reform period, where some sectors experienced growth in TFP of the order of 15% in

1978-82.'° There are a number of possible explanations for this marked difference in

behavior, including the uncertainties about NAFTA's approval resulted in the

postponement of investment in some of the key manufacturing sectors subject to

increased foreign exposure.

       By and large, however, the data analyzed in this subsection provides broad

support to the position that total factor productivity growth has tended to increase in

the period following major trade reforms in Latin America.
                                             27


 IV.3 Trade Reforms and Exports

        An important goal of the reforms has been to reduce the traditional degree of

 anti-export bias of Latin American trade regimes, and to generate a surge in exports.

 This reduction of the bias is expected to take place through three channels: a more

 competitive -- that is more devalued -- real exchange rate; a reduction in the cost of

importeo capital goods and intermediate inputs used in the production of exportable;

and a direct shift in relative prices in favor of exports.

        The volume of international trade in Latin America, and in particular of

exports, increased significantly after the reforms were initiated.3' For example, while

for the region as a whole the volume of exports grew at an annual rate of only 2.0%

between 1970 and 1980, it grew at a rate of 5.5% between 1980 and 1985, and at an

annual average of 6.7% between 1986 and 1990.32 Although, strictly spealdng, it is

not possible to fully attribute this export surge to the opening up reforms, there is

significant country-specific evidence suggesting that a more open economy, and in

particular a more depreciated real exchange rate, has positively affected exports

growth.33 Some countries, especially Costa Rica, have accompanied the opening up

process with the implementation of a battery of export promotion schemes, including

tax credits -- through the "Certificado de Abono Tributario" -- duty free imports, and

income tax exemptions. However, some authors, including Nogues and Gulati (1992),

have argued that these systems have not been an effective way of encouraging exports.

       Table 9 presents detailed country level data on the rate of growth of the total

value of exports (in constant dollars) for three different periods. Table 10, on the
                                            28



 other hand, contains information on the evolution of exports volume throughout the

period. A number of facts emerge from these tables. First, while there has been a

rapid growth in exports for the region as a whole, there are nontrivial variations across

countries; in some cases there has even been a decline in the real value of exports --

this is the case, for example, of Peru. Second, exports performance during the two

sub-periods (1982-87 and 1987-90) has not been homogeneous. In the majority of the

countries exports performed significantly better during 1987-90, than in the previous

five years reflecting, among other things, the fact that it takes some time for exports to

actually respond to greater incentives.

       An interesting fact that emerges from these tables is that in the country that has

lagged behind in terms of trade reform -- Ecuador -- the performance of exports

volume has been, in the recent years, below the 1970-80 historical average. On the

other hand, in two of the early reformers -- Bolivia and Chile -- exports have had a

very strong behavior in the 1987-90 subperiod.

       The case of Chile is particularly interesting. Since most of its liberalization

effort was undertaken prior to 1980, there are enough data points as to provide a more

detailed evaluation of export response to the new regime. Between 1975 and 1980 --

when tariffs were reduced to a uniform 10% and NTBs were completely eliminated --

the behavior of Chilean exports was spectacular, growing (in volume terms) at an

average of 12% per year -- many times higher than the historical average of 1960-70

of only 2.6% per annum. What is particularly impressive is that most of the exports
                                            29



surge has taken place in the-nontraditional sector, including manufacturing, agriculture

and fishing products (CEPAL, 1991).

       Among the early reformers, Mexico exhibits a rather slow rate of growth of

total exports in the post reform period than during 1970-80. This, however, is largely

an illusion stemming from the fact that during the l970s Mexico's oil production

increased substantially — at a rate exceeding 18% per year. When nontraditional

exports are considered the post-reform performance is remarkable with an annual

average rate of growth for 1985-91 exceeding 25%.

       A stated objective of trade reforms has been to increase the degree of

diversification of exports. Tables 11 and 12 contain data on the share of nontraditional

exports and manufacturing exports for a large number of countries, and show that in

the period following the trade reforms their importance has increased steadily. Also,

in the majority of the countries the share of the ten more important export goods in

total exports has declined significantly in the last few years (CEPAL, 1991).

       A critical question is whether the rapid growth and diversification of exports in

Latin America will be sustained, or whether it will be a temporary phenomenon. To a

large extent this will depend on the policies undertaken, and on the behavior of

variables such as the real exchange rate. This is the subject of the next section.



V. Recent Real Exchanee Rate Behavior In Latin America
       In the last years, competitive real exchange rates have been at the center of the

vigorous performance of most of Latin America's external sectors. Recently,
                                              30



 however, in most Latin countries real exchange rates have experienced rapid real

appreciations (Figure 1). These developments have generated considerable concern

among poicymakers and political leaders. A number of observers have, in fact,

argued that the reduction in exports competitiveness are negatively affecting the most

dynamic sectors in these economies, reducing growth and employment expansion.35

        These real appreciations have been the result of two basic factors: first, the

use, in many countries of the exchange rate policy as an anti-inflationary tool and,

second, massive capital inflows into Latin America that have made foreign exchange

 'overabundant".

        In the late 1980s some analysts, including the staff of the IMF, argued that the

crawling peg regimes adopted by most of Latin America after the debt crisis had

become excessively inflationary. In particular, it was argued that crawling pegs

introduce substantial inflation inertia. According to this view exchange rate policy in

the developing countries should move towards greater rigidity -- and even complete

fixity -- as a way to introduce financial discipline, provide a nominal anchor, and

reduce inflation.36

       A number of Latin countries have, in fact, decided to use an exchange rate

anchor as a way to reduce inflation. In practice they have done this by either slowing

down the rate of the crawl —   as   in Mexico and Chile, to some extent -- or by adopting

a completely fixed nominal exchange rate -- as in Argentina and Nicaragua. Much of

the recent enthusiasm for fixed nominal exchange rates is intellectually rooted on the

modern credibility and time consistency literature.37 According to this approach,
                                              31



which was pioneered by Calvo (1978), and Kydland and Prescott (1977), governments

that have the discretion to alter the nominal exchange rate -- as in the crawling peg

system -- will tend to abuse their power, introducing an inflationary bias into the

economy. The reason for this is that under a set of plausible conditions, such as the

existence of labor market rigidities that preclude the economy from reaching full

employment, it will be optimal for the government to "surprise" the private sector

through unexpected devaluations.3S

        By engineering (unexpected) devaluations the government hopes to induce a

reduction in real wages and, thus, an increase in employment and a boost in output.

Naturally, in equilibrium the public will be aware of this incentive faced by the

authorities, and will react to it by anticipating the devaluation surprises and, hence,

rendering them ineffective. As a consequence of this strategic interaction between the

government and the private sector, the economy will reach a high inflation plateau.

What is particularly interesting about this result is that this inflationary bias will be

present even if it is explicitly assumed that the government has an aversion for

inflation. This is because the government perceives that the marginal benefits of

higher inflation -- associated with the increase in employment once nominal wages

have been set -- outweigh its marginal costs.3°

       An important feature of the credibility literature is that under most

circumstances policy commitment is welfare-superior to discretionary policy. If the

government can credibly commit itself to low (or no) inflation, society will be better

off: employment will be the same as in the discretionary policy case, but inflation will
                                             32



be lower. The problem, however, is that-governments have a hard time making

credible commitments. In the absence of effective constraints that will tie the

government's hands, any promise of low inflationary policy will not be credible and,

thus, will be self-defeating.

        A key policy implication of this literature is that defining (and implementing)

constraints that will make government pre-commitments credible, will result in an

improvement in society's welfare. It is here where fixed (or predetermined) exchange

rates come into the picture. It has been argued that the adoption of a fixed exchange

rate will constrain governments ability to surprise the private sector through

unexpected devaluations. Promises of fiscal discipline will become credible and

private sector actions will not elicit successive rounds of inflationary actions.4° In

particular, it has been argued that fixed exchange rates provide a renutatignal

constraint on government behavior. The authorities know that if they undertake overly

expansive credit policy they wifi be forced to abandon the parity and devalue. As the

recent (mid-1992) crisis of the ERM has shown, exchange rate crises can indeed

shatter the reputation of politicians.

       In spite of its elegant appeal, this view has, in its simplest incarnation, some

serious problems. First, in these simple settings exchange rate policy has a very

limited role. In fact, in most of these models its only effect is to alter the domestic

rate of inflation and, through it, the government perceives it as altering real wages.

However, in most modern exchange rate models, nominal devaluations can also help

accommodate shocks to real exchange rate fundamentals -- including shocks to the
                                             33



terms of trade -- helping to avoid RER misalignment.41 Second, in economies with

stochastic shocks, contingent exchange rate rules can, at least in principle, be superior

to fixed rates (Flood and Isard 1988). Third, it is not clear why a country that can

credibly commit itself to unilaterally fixing the exchange rate, cannot commit itself to

providing a monetary anchor.

       However, one of the most serious limitations of the nominal exchange rate

anchor policy is that, under almost every circumstance, once the exchange rate is

fixed, other prices -- including wages -- will continue to increase, generating a change

in relative prices in favor of nontradables. This has indeed been the case in both

Argentina and Nicaragua, the two countries in Latin America that in the early 1990s

adopted sthctly fixed exchange rates as a way to drastically reduce inflation. In both

cases the stabilization programs were based on a severe fiscal correction that virtually

eliminated the fiscal deficit, in restrictive credit, and in a nominal exchange rate

anchor. Although this policy succeeded in both countries in greatly reducing inflation,

it has resulted in serious relative price misalignment. In Argentina this has been

reflected in the fact that wholesale price inflation, which is heavily influenced by

tradables, is only 3% per year, while consumer price inflation -- highly dependent on

nontradables -- exceeds 18% per year. In Nicaragua tradable-related inflation rates

have been very low (in the order of 2-3 percent) while nontradable inflation has

exceeded 30% in the last 12 months.

       Mexico followed a variant of the exchange rate anchor policy, announcing a

predetermined rate of devaluation at a pace deliberately below ongoing inflation. The
                                                  34



 purpose of this policy has been to both anchor tradables prices and reduce

 expectations. However, since domestic inflation has systematically exceeded the pre-

 determined rate of devaluation, Mexico has experienced a sizable real appreciation

 which has exceeded 35% between 1985 and mid-1992.

        The second cause behind the generalized real appreciations in Latin America

 has been the large increase in capital inflows into the region in the last two years. As

 Table 13 shows, after eight years of negative resource transfers, there has been a

 significant turnaround in 1991-92 (see Table 14 for more disaggregated data). This

increased availability of foreign funds has affected the real exchange rate through

increased aggregate expenditure. A proportion of the newly available resources has

been spent on nontradables -- including in the real estate sector -- putting pressure on

their relative prices and on domestic inflation. An interesting feature of the recent

capital movements is that a large proportion corresponds to portfolio investment and,

relatively little is direct foreign investment.

        Real exchange rate appreciations generated by increased capital inflows is not a

completely new phenomenon in Latin America. In the late 1970s most countries in the

region, but especially the Southern Cone nations, were flooded with foreign resources

that led to large real appreciations. The fact that this previous episode ended in the

debt crisis has added dramaticism to the current concern on the possible negative

effects of these capital flows.

       Whether these capital movements are temporary -- and thus subject to sudden

reversals as in 1982 -- is particularly important in evaluating their possible
                                             35



consequences. In a recent study Calvo, Leiderman and Reinhart (1992) argue that the

most important causes behind the generalized inflow of resources are external. In

particular, their empirical analysis suggests that the recession in the industrialized

world and the reduction in U.S. interest rates are the two main reasons that have

triggered these capital movements. These authors suggest that once these world

economic conditions change, the volume capital of capital flowing to Latin America

will be reduced. This means that at that point the pressure over the real exchange rate

will subside and a real exchange rate depreciation will be required.

       The countries in the region have tried to cope with the real appreciation

pressures in several ways. Colombia, for instance, tried to sterilize the accumulation

of reserves by placing domestic bonds (OMAs) in the local market in 1991 •42

However, in order to place these bonds the local interest rate had to increase, making

them relatively more attractive. This generated a widening interest rate differential in

favor of Colombia, which attracted new capital flows that, in order to be sterilized,

required new bond placements. This process generated a vicious cycle that contributed

to a very large accumulation of domestic debt, without significantly affecting the real

exchange rate. This experience shows vividly the difficulties faced by the authorities

wishing to handle real exchange rate movements. In particular, this case indicates that

real shocks -- such as an increase in foreign capital inflows -- cannot be tackled

successfully using exclusively monetary policy instruments.

       Argentina has recently tried to deal with the real appreciation by engineering a

'pseudo" devaluation through a simultaneous increase in import tariffs and export
                                            36



 subsidies. Although it is too early to know how this measure will affect the degree of

 competitiveness in the country, preliminary computations suggest that the magnitude of

 the adjustment obtained via tariffs-cum-subsidies package may be rather small. Mexico

has followed a different route, and has decided to postpone the adoption of a

completely fixed exchange rate. In October of 1992 the pace of the daily nominal

exchange rate adjustment was doubled to 40 cents. As in the case of Argentina, it is

too early to evaluate how effective these measures have been in dealing with the real

appreciation trend.

        Chile has tackled the real appreciation by implementing a broad set of

measures, including conducting exchange rate policy relative to a three currencies

basket, imposing reserve requirements on capital inflows and undertaking limited

sterilization operations. In spite of this multi-front approach, Chile has not avoided

real exchange rate pressures. Between December of 1991 and July 1992 the Chilean

bilateral real exchange rate appreciated almost 10%. As a result of this, exporters

and agriculture producers have been mounting increasing pressure on the government

for special treatment, arguing that by allowing the real exchange rate to appreciate an

implicit contract has been broken. This type of political reaction is, in fact, becoming

more and more generalized throughout the region, adding a difficult social dimension

to the real exchange rate issue.

       Although there is no easy way to handle the real appreciation pressures,

historical experience shows that there are, at least, two possible avenues that the

authorities can follow. First, in those countries where the dominant force behind real
                                             37



 exchange rate movements is price inertia in the presence of nominal exchange rate

 anchor policies, the adoption of a pragmatic crawling peg system will usually help.

 This means that, to some extent, the inflationary targets will have to be less ambitious

 as a periodic exchange rate adjustment will result in some inflation.43 However, to the

 extent that this policy is supplemented by tight overall fiscal policy there should be no

 concern regarding inflationary explosions. Second, the discrimination between short

 term (speculative) capital and longer term capital should go a long way in helping

resolve the preoccupations regarding the effects of capital movements on real exchange

rates. To the extent that capital inflows are genuinely long term, and especially if they

help finance investment projects in the tradables sector, the change in the RER will be

a "true equilibrium" phenomenon, and should be recognized by such by implementing

the required adjustment resource allocation.



VI. Concludin2 Remarks
       In this paper I have dealt with trade policy and growth. The analysis has

focused on the long run relationship between trade orientation and productivity

improvements, as well as on some of the most important transitional issues. With

regard to the latter, the analysis has focused on the recent Latin American experiences.

       In Section II, I argued that more open economies will experience faster rates of

productivity growth than countries that distort their external sectors. A regression

analysis based on a broad cross country data set provided support for this view. The

analysis of the recent Latin reforms presented in Section IV also supports the
                                           38



hypothesis that those countries that have embarked in trade liberalizations programs

have experienced an acceleration in the rate of productivity growth. However, the data

on Mexico indicates that in order for productivity increases to be widespread it is

necessary to implement broad reforms and deregulation programs that affect a wide

range of sectors. In Section VI, I discuss the evolution of real exchange rates in the

region, and I point out that the recently observed generalized real appreciations have

become a cause of concern among policymakers. A key element in determining the

effects of these flows, and in designing policy response packages, refers to whether

these movements are temporary or permanent. If the latter it is difficult to justify an

activist stance in economic policy.
                                            39




                                         ENDNOTES

 1. Even though the experiences of the individual Latin countries varied during the

 1950-80 period, in the majority of them some variant of inward-looking development

 was the dominant policy. Since the early 1960s a number of trade liberalization

 attempts took place in the region. Almost every one of them ended up in frustration.

In fact, until the late 1970-80s very little progress was made in this area.

2. However, as I argued in Edwards (1988) in many countries this increase in

protectionism was dictated by necessity.

3. There is a long literature documenting the consequences of protectionism in the

Latin American economies. For recent studies, see the Latin American cases covered

in the Michaely et al. (1991) project.

4. In the 1960s some countries decided to implement export promotion schemes based

on government support and adjustable exchange rates. To some extent this was

partially successful in Brazil. However, as Fishlow (1991) has pointed Out this

development did little to reduce Brazil's vulnerability to foreign shocks.

5. Krueger (1978) documents these developments for a large number of countries.

Diaz-Alejandro (1975, 1978) argued that real exchange overvaluation was one of the

most negative economic developments in Argentina. For an analysis of a large number

of Latin countries see Bianchi (1988). For an early discussion on the Chilean case, see

Behrman (1972). Since 1967 Colombia pursued a crawling peg exchange rate policy

explicitly aimed at avoiding overvaluation. The overall degree of protection, however,

remained high (Garcia-Garcia, 1991).
                                             40



6. Traditional neoclassical growth models concentrated on the effect of national

economic policies on the level of income per capita. The new generation of

endogenous growth models have shifted the attention to relationship between different

policies and the rate of growth of the economy. See Lucas (1988).

7. In Chapter 17 of his Principles of Political Economy (1848) Miii said that "a

country that produces for a larger market than its own can introduce a more extended

division of labor, can make greater use of machinery, and is more likely to make

inventions and improvements in the process of production". Arthur Lewis makes a

similar proposition in his 1955 classical book on economic growth. See Tybout (1992)

for a survey on the early empirical work in this area.

8. Grossman and Helpman (1992) provide a series of elegant models along these lines.

9. I assume that not all inventions generated in the world can be freely appropriated.

In that sense, A* could be interpreted as the accumulated stock of innovations in the

more advanced countries that have spilled over to the rest of the world.

10. This, of course, is the solution to differential equation (1).

11. Of course, in this case, (c+,-) >       w.

12.   In Grossman and Helpman's (1990) micro model of technological progress it is

also possible that, under some circumstances, more open economies will exhibit higher

long-run growth.

13. See, for example, Barro (1990).
                                             41




 14. Naturally, these indices are at best proxies for TFP growth. Formally, we can

 think that they measure TFP growth with error. To the extent that this measurement

error term is additive, it can be collapsed into disturbance i in equation (4).

 15. These authors computed this index from a probit analysis on government change

using pooled data for 1948-81.

 16. In simple OLS estimates heteroskedasticity was detected. Barro (1991) and

Edwards (1992), among others, also use weighted least squares in equations of this

type.

17. In equation (4.1) the standardized beta coefficient of TAXTRADE is -0.75; that of

GDP71 is -0.78.

18. The instruments themselves don't have to be measured free of error. Of course,

the use of instrumental variables is not the only way of dealing with measurement

error. In Edwards (1992) I use reversed regressions to construct intervals for a

different proxy of openness in standard growth equations for a group of 30 countries.

19. See Krueger (1978, 1981) and Michaely et al. (1991).

20. These are unweiehted averages, and thus are not comparable to those presented on

Table 5.1. There has been a long discussion in applied international trade theory on

whether tariffs and NTBs should be measured as weighted or unweighted averages.

Both views have some merits and some limitations. An obvious problem of the

weighted average approach (where the weights are the import shares) is that more

restrictive distortions will tend to have a very small weight. In the extreme case,

prohibitive tariffs that effectively ban the importation of a particular item will have a
                                            42



zero weight! Corden (196?) provides an early, and still highly relevant discussion on

these issues.

21. The issue of protecting local producers from "dumping" is an important one in the

design of the new liberalized trade regimes. The crucial problem is to enact legislation

that is able to distinguish true cases of unfair trade practices from simple cases of

increased foreign competition stemming from more efficient productive processes. At

this time the approval of a dynamic and flexible anti-dumping legislation should be

high in the region's agenda for legal and institutional reform.

22. See Valdes (1992).

23. This system with very low (or zero) tariffs on intermediate inputs and high tariffs

on final goods generated very high rates of effective protection or protection to

domestic value added. In recent years a number of authors have argued that the use of

effective protection is misleading. The reason for this is that ERPs are unable to

provide much information on the general equilibrium consequences of tariff changes

(Dint, 1986). In spite of this, ERP measures are still useful, since they provide an

indication on the degree of 'inefficiency" a country is wilLing to accept for a particular

sector.

24. However, "tariffs' is sometimes a misleading term, since many countries have

traditionally relied on both import duties (that is tariffs proper) and import duty

surcharges or paratariffs.

25. See Corbo et. al. (1985) for a detailed microeconomic account of the process of

adjustment in a large group of Chilean manufacturing firms.
                                             43



 26. See Cox Edwards (1992).

 27. The original TFP growth data comes from Martin's (1992) study on sources of

 growth in Latin America. The countries in Table 6 are those that initiated the reform

 before 1988. In order to compute series on total factor productivity (TFP) growth

 Martin (1992) analyzed the contributions of capital and labor, and explicitly

 incorporated the role of changes in the degree of capital utilization. The countries

 considered in this study are: Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,

 Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama,

Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela. Harberger (1992) presents data on TFP growth before

and after a series of historical trade reform episodes. He finds that in the majority of

the cases productivity growth increased after the liberalization process.

28. It may be argued, however, that the major increase in TFP growth in Chile has

been the result of the complete structural reform package implemented in that country.

29. Since these figures come from two different sources they may not be fully

comparable and, thus, should be interpreted with care.

30. Fuentes (1992).

31. Trade liberalization aims at increasing a country's total volume of trade. Under

textbook conditions it is expected that at the end of the reform trade will be balanced.

However, there are a number of circumstances, including the need to pay the country's

foreign debt, under which trade will not grow in a balanced way after a reform. This

has been the case in the majority of the Latin American countries.
                                            44



32. The real yj of exports, however, has evolved at a somewhat slower pace. The

reason for this is that terms of trade have experienced, in every subgroup of countries,

a significant deterioration during 1980-9 1 (see CEPAL 1992). These data are from

ECLAC (1991).

33. See, for example, Nogues and Gulati (1992).

34. A large percentage of this growth, however, has been in the maquiladora or in-

bond sector.

35. See Caivo, et al. (1992).

36. For a flavor of the discussion within the IMF see, for example, Burton and

Gillman (1991), Aghevli et al. (1991), Flood and Marion (1991) and Aghevli and

Montiel (1991). In Edwards (1992b) I deal with some of these issues.

37. The new impetus for fixed rates has strongly emerged in the International

Monetary Fund. See Aghevil et al. (1991).

38. This assumes that wages are set before the government implements the exchange

rate policy, but after it has been announced.

39. See Persson and Tabellini (1990).

40. Aghevli et al (1991).

41. See, for example, Edwards (1988).

42. An important peculiarity of the Colombian case is that the original inflow of

foreing exchange came through the trade account.

43. More specifically, with this option the one digit inflationary goal will be

postponed.
                                    REFERENCES



Aghevli, P., M. Khan and P. Montiel 1991. "Exchange Rate Policy in Developing

    Countries: Some Analytical Issues," IMF Occasional Paper 78.

Barro, R. 1991. "Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries," Ouarterly

    Journal of Economics 106(2), May, pp. 407-43.

________ and X. Sala-i-Martin 1991. 'Convergence Across States and Regions,"

    Brookins-Papers-on-Economic-Activity 0(1), PP. 107-58.

Behrman, J.R. 1976. Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development: Chile, New

    York and London: Columbia University press for NBER.

Bhagwati, J. 1978. Anatomy and Consectuences of Exchane Control Regimes,

    Cambridge MA: Ballinger Publishing Co. for NBER.

Bianchi, A., et al. 1987. "The Adjustment Process in Latin America, 1981-86," in V.

    Corbo, M. Goldstein and M. Khan (eds.) Growth-Oriented Adjustment Programs,

    Washington DC: IMF and the World Bank.

__________ 1988. "Latin America 1981-1984: Crisis, Adjustment, and Recovery," in

    M. Urrutia (ed.), Financial Liberalization and the Internal Structure of Capital

    Markets in Asia and Latin America, Tokyo: United Nations University, 1988, pp.

    17-42.

Burton, D. and M.G. Guiilman 1991. "Exchange Rate Policy and the IMF,' Finance

   and Development 28(3), Sept., pp. 18-21.
Calvo, G. 1978. 'On the Time Consistency of Optimal Policy in a Monetary

    Economy," Econometrica 46(6), Nov., pp. 1411-28.

______ L. Leiderman and C. Reinhart 1992. "Capital Inflows and Real Exchange
    Rate Appreciation," IMP Working Paper 92/62, Aug.

Cardoso, E. and A. Heiwege 1992. Latin America's Economy: Diversity Trends and

    Conflicts Cambridge MA: MIT Press.

CEPAL 1991. Equidad y Transformacion Productiva: Un Enfooue Integrado, Santiago,

    Chile.

Corbo, V. 1985. "Reforms and Macroeconomic Adjustments in Chile During

    1974-84," World Development 13(8), Aug., pp. 893-916.

Corbo, V., T. Condon and J. de Melo 1985. "Productivity Growth, External Shocks,

    and Capital Inflows in Chile: A General Equilibrium Analysis," Journal of Policy

    Mode1in 7(3), Fall, pp. 379-405.

Corbo, V., and J. de Melo 1985. "Liberalization with Stabilization in the Southern

    Cone of Latin America: Overview and Summary," World Development 13(8),

    Aug., pp. 863-66.

Corden, W.M. 1969. "Effective Protective Rates in the General Equilibrium Model: A

    Geometric Note," Oxford Economic Papers, N.S., July, pp. 135-41.

Cox-Edwards, A. 1992. "Labor Markets and Structural Adjustment," working paper.

Cukierman, A., S. Edwards and G. Tabellini 1992. "Seigniorage and Political

    Instability," American Economic Review, forthcoming.
 Diaz-Alejandro, C. 1975. Essays on the Economic History of the Argentine Republic,

     New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

 _________ 1978. Foreign Trade Regimes arid Economic Development: Colombia, New

     York and London: Columbia University Press for NBER.

Dixit, A. 1985. "Tax Policy in Open Economies," in A. Auerbach and M. Feldstein

     (eds.), Handbook of Public Economics, New York and Oxford: North-Holland,

     3 13-374.

________ 1986. "Trade Policy: An Agenda for Research," in P. Krugman (ed.)

     Strategic Trade Policy and the New International Economics. Cambridge, MA,

    and London: MIT Press, pp. 283-304.

Edwards, S. 1992a. "Trade Orientation, Distortions and Growth in Developing

    Countries," Journal of Development Economics 39 (1), July, 3 1-58.

__________ 1992b. "Exchange Rates as Nominal Anchors," NBER Working Paper.

___________ 1989. Real Excha!we Rates. Devaluation, and Adjustment: Exchange

    Rate Policy in Developing Countries, Cambridge, MA and London: MIT Press.

________         1988. "Real and Monetary Determinants of Real Exchange Rate

    Behavior: Theory and Evidence from Developing Countries," Journal of

    Development Economics 29(3), Nov., pp. 311-41.

__________ 1988. "Structural Adjustment Policies in Highly Indebted Countries," in

    J. Sachs (ed.) The Develooing Country Debt Crisis, Chicago IL: Chicago

    University Press.
__________ 1987. 'Sequencing Economic Liberalization in Developing Countries,'

    Finance and Development 24(1), Mar., pp. 26-29.

__________• 1985. "Stabilization with Liberalization: An Evaluation of Ten Years of

    Chile's Experiment with Free-Market Policies, 1973-1983," Economic

    Development and Cultural Change 33(2), Jan., pp. 223-54.

___________• 1984. The Order of Liberalization of the External Sector in Developinc

    Countries, Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, Essays in International

    Finance 156.

Edwards, S., and A. Cox-Edwards 1991. Monetarism and Liberalization: The Chilean

    Experiment, Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.

Elias, V. 1992. Sources of Growth in Latin America," San Francisco: ICS Press.

Fischer, S. 1987. "Economic Growth and Economic Policy," in V. Corbo, M.

    Goldstein, M. Kahn (eds.) Growth Oriented Adjustment Proerams, Washington

    DC: IMF and the World Bank.

__________ 1988. "Symposium on the Slowdown in Productivity Growth," Journal of

    Economic Perspectives 2(4), Fall, pp. 3-7.

Fishlow, A. 1985. "Revisiting the Great Debt Crisis of 1982," in Kim, Kwan S., ed.;

    Ruccio, David F. (eds.) Debt and Development in Latin America. Notre Dame,

    IN: University of Notre Dame Press, pp. 99-132.

_________    1991.   'Liberalization in Latin America," in T. Banuri (ed.) Economic

    Liberalization: No Panacea, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
•    Flood, R.P., and P. Isard 1989. "Monetary Policy Strategies," International Monetary

         Fund Staff Papers 36(3), Sept., pp. 612-32.

     Fuentes, J.R. 1992. "Economic Policies, Human Capital and Their Importance in the

         Process of Growth: Theoretical and Empirical Implications," UCLA Ph D.

         Dissertation.

    Garcia-Garcia, J. 1991. "Liberalizing Foreign Trade: Colombia,' in Michaely el al.

         1991. Liberalizine Foreign Trade, Volume 4.

    Grossman, G., and E. Helpman 1991. Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy,

         Cambridge, MA and London: Ml' Press.

    __________________________ 1991. "Trade, Knowledge Spillovers, and Growth,"

        European Economic Review 35(2-3), Apr., pp. 517-26

    Harberger, A. 1985. "Observations on the Chilean Economy, 1973-1983," Economic

        Development and Cultural Change 33(3), Apr., pp. 451-62.

    ___________     1990.   "Towards a Uniform Tariff Structure," Univ, of Chicago,

        mimeo.

    ____________ 1992. "The Sources of Economic Growth and Economic

        Liberalization: With Application to Mexico for the 1990s," UCLA Mimeo, Nove.

    Heitger, B. 1987. "Import Protection and Export Performance -- Their Impact on

        Economic Growth," Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 123(2), pp. 249-61.

    Tharra, L. 1992. "Credibility and Trade Reform in Mexico," Ph.D. Dissertation,

        UCLA.
 Jaspersen, F. 1992. "External Resource Flows to Latin America: Recent Developments

     and Prospects," 1DB Working Paper.

Krueger, A. 1978. "Alternative Trade Strategies and Employment in LDCs," American

     Economic Review 68(2), May, pp. 270-74.

__________ 1980. "Trade Policy as an Input to Development," American Economic

     Review 70(2), May, pp. 288-92.

Kydland, F., and E. Prescott 1977. "Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency

    of Optimal Plans," Journal of Political Economy 85(3), June, pp. 473-91.

Lewis, A.W. 1955. The Theory of Economic Growth, London: Allen and Unwin.

Little, I., T. Scitovsky and M. Scott 1970. Industry and Trade in Some Developing

    Countries, London, NY: Oxford University Press for OECD.

Lucas, R. 1988. "On the Mechanics of Economic Development," Journal of Monetary

    Economics 22(1), July, pp. 3-42.

Martin, R. 1992. "Sources of Growth in latin America," World Bank mimeo.

McKinnon, R. 1982. "The Order of Economic Liberalization: Lessons from Chile and

    Argentina," Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 17, Autumn,

    pp. 159-86.

Michaely, M. 1982. "The Sequencing of Liberalization Policies: A Preliminary

    Statement of The Issues," unpublished ms.

____________ 1988. "Liberalizing Foreign Trade: Lessons from Experience,'

    unpublished ms.
____________, A. Choski and D. Papageorgiou (eds.) 1991. Liberalizing Foreign

     Iia, Cambridge, MA. and Oxford: Blackwell.
Mill, J.S. 1884. Principles of Political Economy, New York: D. Appleton and Co.

Nogues, 1. 1991. "Liberalizing Foreign Trade: Peru," in Michaely et al. Liberalizing
    Forei2n Trade, Volume 4.

Persson, T., and G. Tabellini 1990. Macroeconomic Policy. Credibility and Politics,

    Fundamentals of Pure and Applied Economics, vol. 38. Macroeconomic Theory

    section. Chur, Switzerland; London; New York and Melbourne: Harwood

    Academic.

Rodriguez, C. 1982. "The Argentine Stabilization Plan of December 20th," yQjJ

    Develooment 10(9), Sept., pp. 801-11.

Romer, P. 1989. Capital Accumulation in the Theory of Long-Run Growth," in R.

    Barro (ed.) Modern Business Cycle Theory. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University

    Press, pp. 5 1-127.

Roubini, N, and X. Sala-i-Martin 1991. "Financial Development, Trade Regime and

    Economic Growth," New haven, CT: Economic Growth Center, Yale University,

    Center Discussion Paper 646.

______________________________ 1992. "A Growth Model of Inflation, Tax

   Evasion and Financial Repression," New Haven, CT: Economic Growth Center,

   Yale University, Center Discussion Paper 658.

Sturzenegger, F. 1992. "Bolivia: Stabilization and Growth," UCLA mimeo, Oct.
Summers, R. and A; Heston 1988. 'A New Set of International Comparisons of Real

    Product and Price Levels Estimates for 130 Countries, 1950-1985," Review of

    Income and Wealth 34(1), Mar., pp. 1-25.

Taylor, L. 1991. Varieties of Stabilization Experience: Towards Sensible

    Macroeconomics in the Third World, World Institute for Development Economics

    Research, Studies in Development Economics. Oxford; NY; Toronto and

    Melbourne: Oxford University Press, Clarendon Press.

Tybout, 1. 1992. "The Link Between Productivity and Trade Regimes," World Bank

    Research Review, Mar., pp. 1-32.

Valdes, A. 1992. "The Performance of the agricultural Sector in Latin America,"

    World Bank mimeo.
                                       APPENDIX

                              A. TFP Growth Computations


       One of the difficulties in computing TFP growth series for a large number of

countries is that capital stock series are rarely available. One way to deal with this

problem is to use data on investment-GDP ratios (Harberger 1992). The problem with

this approach, however, is that it requires data on the capital-output ratio. Although

these are not generally available, they can be obtained using alternative procedures.

      TFP growth (p) is defined in the following way:
                  .            S                   •
           p = (y/y) — a(k/k)         —
                                          (1—a)   (L/L)                              (Al)
where z is real GDP, k is the stock of capital, L is employment, and a is the

share of capital in GDP. Since (k/k) is equal to gross investment (I), equation
(A. I) can be rewritten as follows:

           p   = (/Y) - [a(y/k) (I/y) +            (1-a) (L/L),                      (A.2)

(I/y) is the gross investment to GDP ratio, and is readily available. (y/k) on the

other hand is the inverse of the capital output ratio and has to be estimated.

      In order to obtain data on p, in this paper I have used the following procedure:

first, I used specific country time series data for 1950-88 to estimate GDP growth

equations with (lJy) and rate of growth of population (a proxy L/L) as regressors.

From these regressions I obtained estimated values for parameters [a(ylk)] and [1-a]

in equation (A.2). In the second stage, I used these coefficients to construct TFP data

using equation (A.2). In the third stage I averaged the estimated TFPs for 1971-82 for
each country. This average corresponds to variable TFP1 used in the regression

analysis in Section II.

      A limitation of the procedure described above is that it assumes a constant

capital-output ratio (K/y) in computing [cx(ylk)] in (A.2). However, it is likely that
this ratio will change through time. In particular, we can assume that (y/k) = (yfk)0

+ time. In this case (A.2) can be rewritten as:

           p   = ('/y) - [c(yIk)(IJy) + {cry](JIy) X time + (1-a)(L/L)              (A.3)


This equation was estimated for each of the 54 countries to compute the TFP2 variable

in Section II.

      Finally, TFP3 was constructed using cross-country estimates of [n(I/y)] in

equation (A.2). A shortcoming of this approach is that it assumes the same coefficient

across countries. In that regard, TFP3 can be considered as a less desirable measure

of TFP growth.
   APENDDC B

Countries In Sample



     United States

     United Kingdom

     Austria

     Denmark

     France

     Germany

     Italy

     Netherlands

     Norway

     Sweden

     Canada

     Finland

     Greece

     Ireland

     Porn.igal

     Spain

     Turkey

    Australia

    Brazil
Dominican Republic

Honduras

Mexico

Nicaragua

Paraguay

Venezuela

Jamaica

Trinidad and Tobago

Iran

Kuwait

Oman

Burma

Sn Lanka

India

Malaysia

Pakistan

Singapore

Thailand

Burundi

Cameroon

Central African Republic

Chad
Congopeo

Zaire

Ethiopia

Cote d'Ivoir

Lesotho

Mauritan

Morocco

Nigeria

Zimbabwe

Rwanda

Tanzania

Togo

Tunisia
                                               TABLE 1

                                     IMPORT PROTECTION
                              IN THE DEVELOPING WORLD: 1985

                                               (Percent)
                         TOTAL TARIFF                      NON-TARIFF BARRIERS
                         PROTECTION (a)                         COVERAGE (b)

South America                   51                               60

Central America                 66                             100

Caribbean                       17                              23

North Africa                    39                              85

Other Africa                    36                               86

West Asia                        5                               11


Other Asia                      25                              21



(a) Includes tariffs and para-tariffs
(b) Measures as a percentage of import lines covered by non-tariff barriers. The data
     on both tariffs and NIBs reported here are weighted averages


Source: Erzan et al. (1989)
                                                 TABLE 2
                         TFP GROWTH REGRESSIONS:
                          CROSS COUNTRY RESULTS
                                        (Weighted Least Squares)

                            Eq. 4.1       Eq. 4.2      Eq. 4.3       Eq. 4.4       Eq. 4.5       Eq. 4.6
Definition of
TFP growth (a)                TFP1          TFP1           TFP2        TFP2         TFP3           TFP3


Constant                     -0.013        -0.012       -0.018        -0.005        0.074         0.030
                           (-1.041)      (-1.326)      (1.418)      (-0.439)       (6.163)       (1.772)

GDP71                      -1.9E-06      •7.3E-07     -1.8E-06      -1.1E-06     -3.7E-06      -1.5E-06
                           (.3433)        (1.929)     (.2.960)       (2.451)      (-3.673)      (-2.187)

TRADETAX                     -0.076          -          -0.074          -          -0.199           -
                           (-3.033)                   (-2.620)                    (-4.902)

TRADE                                      0.017           -          0.025           -           0.025
DEPENDENCY                                (3.147)                    (3.910)                    (2.480)

GOVERNMENT                -6.1E-04      -4.2E-04      -6.5E-04      -4.1E-04     -2.OE-03      -2.OE-03
                           (-2.429)      (-1.708)     (-2.292)      (-1.433)      (-5.157)      (-4.827)

EDUCATiON                 1.19E-04 1.56E-07 5.90E-05 1.30E-04                         -        1.20E-04
                            (1.536)       (2.130)      (0.675)       (1.560)                    (0.895)

    EDUCATION                  -             -             -            -        1 .60E-04         -
                                                                                  (1.453)

POLmCAL                     -0.017        -0.017       .0.026        -0.043        -0.014        -0.023
INSTABILiTY                (-2.117)      (-2.480)     (.2.846)      (-5.253)     (-1.607)      (-1.802)

INFLATiON                     -          8.3E-05           -        8.8E-05          -         -2.7E-05
 TAX                                     (0.540)                    (0.487)                     (0.921)

R2                           0.400         0.351        0.492         0.487         0.598        0.416

N                                  54            52            54           52            52            52



(a) For exact explanations on how TFPI, TFP2, and TFP3 were constructed, see the Appendix.

* t-statistics in parenthesis. N is the number of observations; R2 is the coefficient of
   determination. See the Appendix for a list of the countries considered in this regression.
                                              TABLE 3
                       TFP GROWTH REGRESSIONS:
                        INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES
                                  (Dependent Variable TFP1)

                                    Eq.4.7      Eq.4.8

Constant                             0.036       0.050
                                    (1.689)     (2.037)

GDP71                              -3.4E-06 -3.7E-06
                                   (-2.766)    (-2.677)

TRADETAX                             -0.171      -0.185
                                   (-2.432)    (-2.314)

GOVERNMENT                         -4.9E-04 -5.5E-04
                                   (-1.708)    (-2.292)

EDUCATION                         3.OOE-05 4.80E-05
                                    (2.130)     (0.675)

POLITICAL                            -0.029     -0.040
INSTABILITY                        (-2.333)    (-2.823)

INFLATION                         -8.1 E-05 -2.5E-05
TAX                                 (0.776)    (-0.939)

R2                                   0.248       0.392

N                                       52          52




* t-statistics in parenthesis. N is the number of observations; R2 is the coefficient of
   determination. The following instruments were used: a constant, GDP71 Governmen
   Education, Trade Dependency, Imports/GDP ratio, Political Instability, and
   Inflation tax. These equations were weighted by population in 1971.
                                                          TABLE 4

                 THE OPENING OF LATIN AMERICA - SELECTED COUNTRIES


                  TARIFF PROTEC11ON               COVERAGE OF                                  RANGE OF
                  (tariffs plus paratarlffs,   NON-TARIFF BARRIERS                           IMPORT TARIFFS
                   unweighted averages)        (unweighted averages)                1980'S                    Current

COUNTRY            1985         1991-92         1985-87         1991-92      Year     Mm      Max      Year     Mm      Max

Argentina          28.0             15.0           31.9              8.0     1987     0.0     55.0    1991      0.0     22.0
Bolivia            20.0              8.0           25.0              0.0     1985     0.0     20.0    1991      5.0     10.0
Brazil             so.o             21.1           35.3             10.0     1987     0.0    105.0    1992      0.0     65.0
Chile              36.0             11.0           10.1              0.0     1987     0.0     20.0    1992     11.0     11.0
ColombIa           83.0              6.7           73.2              1.0     1986     0.0    200.0    1991      0.0     15.0
Costa Rica         92.0             16.0            0.8              0.0     1986     1.0    100.0    1992      5.0     20.0
Ecuador            50.0             18.0           59.3              na      1986     0.0    290.0    1991      2.0     40.0
Guatemala          50.0             19.0            7.4                6.0   1986     1.0    100.0    1992      5.0     20.0
Mexico             34.0             4.0            12.7             20.0     1985     0.0    100.0    1992      0.0     20.0
Nicaragua          54.0             na             27.8                na    1986     1.0    100.0    1990      0.0     10.0
Paraguay           71.7            16.0             9.9                0.0   1984     0.0     44.0    1991      3.0     86.0
Peru               64.0            15.0            53.4                0.0   1987     0.0    120.0    1992      5.0     15.0
Uruguay            32.0            12.0            14.1                0.0   1986    10.0     45.0    1992     10.0     30.0
Venezuela          30.0            17.0            44.1                5.0   1987     0.0    135.0    1991      0.0     50.0



Source: World Bank, UNCTAD,and Erzan etal. (1969)
                                             TABLE 5
                    REAL EXCHANGE RATES IN
               SELECTED LATIN AMERICAN COUNTRIES
                                      1985=100

COUNTRY                       1970        1980     1987   1991

Argentina                      78.7        35.8    80.7    44.0
Bolivia                        98.3        88.1   107.9   112.1
Brazil                         51.9        70.7    78.0    51.4
Chile                          29.4        55.3    94.8    83.0
Colombia                       86.1        79.2   115.9   126.3
Costa Rica                     58.4        65.8    94.9    97.2
Ecuador                       118.6       105.6   153.3   173.7
Mexico                         86.1        83.3   123.9    77.0
Paraguay                      104.6        74.4   111.4   114.3
Peru                           59.3       77.1     46.1   23.1
Uruguay                        73.0       49.7     77.2   62.0
Venezuela                      80.3       84.2    134.8   132.8



Source: International Financial Statistics, IMF
                                  TABLE 6
                              CHANGES IN
             TOTAL FACTOR PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH
                                  (percent)

Argentina                             1.91

Bolivia                               o.i 1

Chile                                 4.96

Costa Rica                            3.25

Mexico                               -0.32

Uruguay                              2.02


For all countries but Chile, computed as the difference of TFP growth for 1987-91
and 1978-82. For Chile the pre-reform period is 1972-78.


Source: Martin (1992)
                              TABLE 7
 TOTAL FACTOR PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH
IN MANUFACTURING IN MEXICO: 1940-1 990

                                 Manufacturing
                                  TFP Growth
                                 (percentage)

           1940-50                    0.46

           1950-60                    0.53

           1960-70                    3.00

           1970-80                    n.a.

           1985-89                    3.40



Sources: The data for 1940-80 are from Elias (1992). The figure
            for 1985-89 is from Ibarra (1992).
                                        TABLE 8
            DISAGGREGATED PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH
              IN MEXICO'S MANUFACTURING SECTOR
                                      (1985-1990)

                                         (percentage)
                                  LABOR            TOTAL FACTOR
 DIVISJON                         PRODUCTIVflY     PRODUCTIVI1Y

Food, Beverages, and Tobacco          1.7              3.4

Textiles and Apparel                  0.7              0.4

Wood Products                         0.2              3.4

Paper and Printing                    2.3              4.8

Chemicals, Rubber, and Plastics       2.3              2.3

Non-metallic Products                 i.i             3.5

Metal Products                        7.5             3.5

Machinery                            4.4              4.7

Other Manufacturing                  -4.8             n.a.

Total Manufacturing                  2.3              3.4



Source: ibarra (1992)
                                         TABLE 9
                      VALUE OF EXPORTS OF GOODS
                       AND NON-FACTOR SERVICES
                                  ANNUAL GROWTH RATES

                             CONSTANT 1990 PRICES, US$
COUNTRY
                             1972-80 1982-87 1987-91

Argentina                          7.1       2.6       10.3
Bolivia                           -1.8       0.6       11.4
Brazil                             8.8       9.7        3.4
Chile                             15.2       6.5       10.5
Colombia                           4.9      10.2        6.6
Costa Rica                         4.3       3.8 (*)    9.1
Ecuador                            6.7       3.3        9.2
Mexico                             7.9       6.0        5.1
Paraguay                           6.7       4.8       20.2
Peru                               2.6       -3.7       0.9
Uruguay                           10.0       4.2        7.1
Venezuela                         -7.3       3.6        5.6

(*) Changes over period 1981-87


Source: World Bank, ECLAC
                                   TABLE 10
                      VOLUME OF EXPORTS
                            ANNUAL GROWTH RATES


 COUNTRY               1972-80 1982-87 1987-91

Argentina                   2.1        0.8      15.2
Bolivia                    -1.7       -5.2      16.5
Brazil                      8.2       8.0        2.4
ChIle                      7.4        7.6        7.5
Colombia                   3.6       14.8        6.3
Costa Rica                 3.8        6.2 (*)    8.6
Ecuador                   14.6        6.8        7.o
Mexico                    10.2        6.1        5.2
Paraguay                   7.3        9.2       27.1
Peru                       2.3       -4.0        1.3
Uruguay                    5.4       -0.5        8.1
Venezuela                 -5.8        2.1       8.3

(*) Changes over period 1981 -87


Source: World Bank, ECLAC
                                          TABLE 11
                COMPOSITION OF EXPORTS OF GOODS
                            NON-TRADmONAL EXPORTS / TOTAL




COUNTRY             1980       1982      1985        1987     1990

Argentina            0.27      0.31       0.28       0.31         0.39
Bolivia              0.15      0.09       0.05       0.19         0.47
Brazil               0.57      0.59       0.66       0.69         0.70
Chile                0.38      0.22•      0.35       0.39           na
Colombia             0.41      0.42       0.41       0.55         0.64
Costa Rica           0.36      0.38       0.37       0.42         0.54
Ecuador              0.24      0.09       0.12       0.14         0.10
Mexico               0.13      0.20       0.18       0.38         0.43
Paraguay             0.58      0.71       0.82       0.68         0.65
Peru                 0.21      0.23       0.24       0.27         0.29
Uruguay              0.61      0.58       0.66       0.67         0.63
Venezuela            0.04      0.07       0.09       0.13         0.19


Source: ECLAC, Economic Survey of Latin America, several issues
                                              TABLE 12
                  COMPOSITION OF EXPORTS OF GOODS
                             EXPORTS OF MANUFACTURES I TOTAL EXPORTS




COUNTRY               1970       1980       1982       1985       1987   1990

Argentina             0.14       0.23       0.24       0.21       0.31   0.29
Bolivia               0.03       0.02       0.03       0.01       0.03   0.05
Brazil                0.15       0.37       0.38       0.44       0.50   0.52
Chile                 0.04       0.09       0.07       0.11       0.09   0.10
Colombia              0.11       0.20       0.24       0.17       0.19   0.25
Costa Rica            0.19       0.28       0.25       0.22       0.24     na
Ecuador               0.02       0.03       0.03       0.01       0.02   0.02
Mexico                0.33       0.11       0.10       0.21       0.38   0.43
Paraguay              0.08       0.04       0.09       0.06       0.10   0.10
Peru                  0.01       0.17       0.16       0.13       0.17    na
Uruguay               0.15       0.38       0.32       0.35       0.55   0.50
Venezuela             0.01       0.02       0.02       0.10       0.06   0.15


Source: ECLAC. Statistical Yearbook for Latin America, several issues
                                   TABLE 13
CAPITAL INFLOWS AND NET RESOURCE TRANSFERS
            LATIN AMERICA 1981 -1 992

                     NET CAPITAL     INTEREST AND    NET RESOURCE
                     INFLOWS         PROFIT INCOME   TRANSFERS

 1982-85                   55.3        -111.7           -56.4

 1986-89                   33.5        -138.7          -105.2

    1990                   17.0         -35.7          -18.7

    1991                   36.3         -31.1            5.2

    1992 (a)               42.8         -21.2           21.6


(a) Projection



Source: Jaspersen (1992)
                               TABLE 14
NET CAPITAL INFLOWS AS PERCENTAGE OF GDP
  IN SELECTED LATIN AMERICAN COUNTRIES

COUNTRY           1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991

Argentina          2.4 0.5 3.0 2.9 1.8 2.6              3.9   0.2   1.0 6.3
Brazil             4.2   2.1    1.8   0.1   0.6   1.3 -0.5 0.4      1.3   0.2

Chile              4.4 2.3 8.3 5.0 3.0            3.7   3.7 4.3     7.8   2.5

Colombia           6.5 4.1     2.6    5.9   2.9   0.0   2.1   1.0   0.0   2.8

Mexico             5.6 -1.5 -0.6 -1.2       0.7 -0.7 -0.8     0.8   5.0 10.6

Peru               5.7 2.4     3.4    1.1   2.1   2.3 3.5 1.5 2.4         9.5

Venezuela         -2.5 -6.6 -3.6 -1.8 -1.9 0.8 -1.5 -5.7 -4.1             4.9




Source: Economic and Social Progress in Latin America, 1DB, 1992.
                             FIGURE 1
          REAL EXCHANGE RATES IN LATIN AMERICA
                         1985 = 100




         ARGEN11NA                         BRAZIL




           CHILE                          COLOMBIA




g7g 11             17 1 11              ,1 I   I    17 I II
                                          FIGURE 1

            REAL EXCHANGE RATES IN LATIN AMERICA
                                          1985 100




            MDCO                                                  PERU




 1879   1981 1   1985   1987   1   1981




          URUGUAY                                              VENEZUELA




1979    I 981 1 1 7 1 1981                           1979   1981 19 1885   1987   1988   1981
