                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    SHORT-RUN INDEPENDENCE OF MONETARY
                    POLICY UNDER PEGGED EXCHANGE RATES
                     AND EFFECTS OF MONEY ON EXCHANGE
                          RATES AND INTEREST RATES




                                    Alan C. Stockman
                                     Lee E. Ohanian




                                 Working Paper No. 4517




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 November, 1993



This paper is part of NBER's research program in International Finance and Macroeconomics.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                                    NBER Working Paper #4517
                                                                              November 1993


                      SHORT-RUN INDEPENDENCE OF MONETARY
                      POLICY UNDER PEGGED EXCHANGE RATES
                       AND EFFECTS OF MONEY ON EXCHANGE
                            RATES AND INTEREST RATES


                                          ABSTRACT


       Economists generally assert that countries sacrifice monetary independence when they peg

their exchange rates. At the same time, central bankers frequently assert that pegging an

exchange rate does not eliminate the independence of monetary policy. This paper examines the

effects of money-supply changes on exchange rates, interest rates, and production in an

optimizing two-country model in which some sectors of the economy have predetermined

nominal prices in the short run and other sectors have flexible prices. Money-supply shocks have

liquidity effects both within and across countries and induce a cross-country real-interest

differential. The model predicts that liquidity effects are highly non-linear and are not likely to

be captured well empirically by linear models, particularly those involving only a single country.

The most striking implication of the model is that countries have a degree of short-run

independence of monetary policy even under pegged exchange rates.




Alan C. Stockman                                             Lee E. Ohanian
Department of Economics                                      Department of Economics
University of Rochester                                      University of Pennsylvania
Rochester, NY 14627                                          Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
1 Introduction
This paper examines the effects of money-supply changes in a two-country world in which

some sectors of the economy have nominal prices that are sticky in the short run and other

sectors have flexible prices. We examine the short-run effects of changes in the money supply

on the exchange rate, home and foreign real and nominal interest rates, and production in

each sector and in each country. We show that money-supply changes have liquidity effects

(a fall in the money supply raises the real and nominal interest rate) both within and

across countries, and introduce a cross-country real-interest differential. We also show how

a country can exercise independent monetary policy, in the short run, while it pegs its

exchange rate to another country. Similarly, the model shows why a credible target zone

for the exchange-rate provides much less of a short-run constraint on monetary policy than

is commonly believed.

    Our dosed-economy paper examined the questions of how a change in the money supply

affects nominal prices in the flexible-price sectors. It discussed the conditions under which

those nominal prices overshoot their long-run equilibrium levels in the short run, and when

they undershoot those levels. It also showed that a only a small sector of the economy need

be subject to sluggish nominal-price adjustment for a money-supply change to generate

a liquidity effect of the size found in most estimates. It provided an alternative model

of liquidity effects to the mode] developed in Feurst [8], Lucas [12], and Christiano and

Eichenbaum [4] (following earlier related work by Grossman and Weiss [1O]and R.otemberg

[18]).

    Economists currently lack an empirically satisfactory model of exchange rates. Many



                                              1
theoretical models assign a large role to monetary disturbances, operating through mecha-

nisms closely related to that expounded in the classic contribution of Dornbusch [6]. Other

theoretical models (e.g. [23] and [13]) assign a larger role to real disturbances that affect

equilibrium relative prices and induce exchange-rate changes to create them. Recent empir-

ical evidence suggests that exchange rates may contain a mean-reverting component with a

half-life of approximately three years (e.g. [11], [5), and [14]). Yet current theoretical models

that connect changes in money, interest rates and international interest-differentials, and

exchange rates have not successfully explained these short-term changes in exchange rates.

Similarly, equilibrium models of exchange rates have not been successful in explaining the

observed differences in relative-price behavior across alternative exchange-rate systems (see

[22], [15), and [1)). Moreover, none of the current theoretical models can explain the ap-

parent short-run independence of monetary policy that countries can exercise under pegged

exchange rates, or under systems of limited exchange-rate flexibility such as the EMS.

    This paper develops an alternative theoretical framework in which monetary distur-

bances may play an important role in affecting interest rates and exchange rates. Unlike

most previous research on the real effects of monetary shocks that has focused on a one-

sector macroeconomic model (such as [6] and [16]), we examine a two-sector model and

allow the two sectors to have different degrees of price flexibility. (We examine the simple

case in which one sector's price is completely sticky in the short run and the other sector's

price s completely flexible.)

   Our interest in this two-sector model follows from the empirical finding that nominal

price flexibility varies considerably across different goods. For example, there appear to be

certain goods with prices that change very infrequently, as documented by Blinder, Canton,

                                               2
Cechetti, Kashyap,and Kindahi and Stigler. Alternatively, there are goods with prices

that change often, such as relatively homogen&nis goods sold on near-auction markets,

food, gasoline, automobiles (transaction prices), and computers. The two-sector model

presented in this paper generates substantially different predictions than one-sector models

about the connections between changes in money, interest rates, international interest-rate

differentials, and exchange rates. In addition, the model predicts that credible limits on

exchange-rate changes create less stringent constraints on short-run monetary policy than

is implied by previous models. The model suggests a re-assessment of the questions of

whether exchange-rate changes are caused mainly by monetary or real disturbances and

how exchange rates are connected with changes in interest rates or international interest-

rate differentials, the balance of trade, output, and employment. The model can be used

for positive analysis as well as welfare analysis of alternative exchange rate systems and of

alternative monetary policies within each system. The model suggests new channels through

which monetary policy is transmitted internationally and the differences in international

transmission under different exchange-rate systems.

   There has been much discussion of sterilization of international reserve flows under

pegged exchange rates or systems of limited exchange-rate flexibility. But there has been

little analysis of the process through which sterilization occurs or its implications for other

economic variables. Similarly, despite a large literature on the economics of target zones

for exchange rates, there has been little analysis of the short-run effects of monetary policy

under a target-zone system. These issues are connected because the same forces that give

countries the ability to conduct independent monetary policies in the short run under pegged

exchange rates allows them to do so under a system of target zones, even when the exchange


                                              3
rate is at the edge of that zone. Stockman [19] finds empirical evidence that countries were

able to conduct independent monetary policies under the Bretton-Woods System of pegged

exchange rates — policies that had liquidity effects on home nominal and real interest rates,

that created international real-interest differentials, and that had temporary effects on the

home rate of inflation (and so resulted in short-run differences in inflation across countries

under pegged exchange rates). Svensson [25] similarly finds evidence of short-term monetary

independence within the EMS.

    While neither existing sticky price nor equilibrium exchange rate models are consistent

with this evidence, the current paper presents a model in which a country can use monetary

policy to create short-run changes in its real and nominal interest rates (creating an interna-

tional real-interest differential) and short-run changes in its infiation rate at the same time

it pegs its exchange rate. We show that countries, at times, have an entire set of monetary

policies from which to choose, and that each choice has different implications for other real

and nominal economic variables. The set consists of an interval of money-supply changes:

as long as the money-supply change is within the interval, the exchange rate remains pegged

    As in [17], we treat price stickiness in these sectors as a black box because there is no

well-established theory to explain the evidence that many nominal prices adjust slowly. In

this paper we concentrate on the effects of negative monetary shocks.1 Positive monetary

shocks would have the opposite effects, assuming that output is determined by the quantity

demanded (as it would be if we begin from a situation of excess supply, as in a model with

monopolistic competition such as [3]).
   'We do this to avoid taking a utand on whether output i determined by the quantity supplied or the

quantity demanded when there is excess dem,.d. Our closed-economy paper discusses this issue further.



                                                    4
   This paper does not attempt to match the implications of the model with actual data.

Nor do we deal with dynamics or with uncertainty and risk, or with the issues of indus-

trial organization and imperfect competition that have played major roles in recent closed-

economy models of the effects of money and the effects of pricesluggishness. Instead, we

keep the model as simple as possible to examine the new channels of economic interaction

that can occur in a two-country, two-sector model.



2 The Model.
2.1 A Closed Economy

We outline here the closed-economy model from [17]. Consider a closed economy with two

goods, X and Y, money introduced through cash-in-advance constraints, and complete asset

markets. A representative household maximizes discounted expected utility:

                                                               )(1p) — v(L* + Ly*))
                         (ox        + (1 —   )                                           (1)
       maxI3f[(1
subject to the sequence of constraints


       Px,_ikx,_iL_1 +                               + vg(q + d) + r —     —M =0         (2)


and

                                 MPxX1—PyYg0,                                            (3)

where (2) is a budget constraint for period-i asset markets and (3) is the cash-in-advance

constraint which applies to period-i product markets (which immediately follow period-i

asset markets as in [13]).



                                                 5
      The terms z and y refer to consumption of goods X and Y, L and Ly refer to labor

hours producing goods X and Y, F and Fy are nominal prices, kx and ky are exogenous

productivity parameters, 0        6 1 is a parameter of the production function, j' is a
vector of assets the household owns at the beginning of period with dividend vector d1

and ex-dividend price-vector qj, T1 is a lump-sum transfer of money to the household from

the government at the beginning of period , and M1 is the nominal money the household

has as it leaves period-i asset markets and enters period-i product markets. We assume

that momentary utilit is of the CES form, with c = the elasticity of substitution between

the two goods, z and y, and p = the coefficient of relative risk aversion. For the special

case = p = 1, we obtain log utility: U = alog(z)+(1 — cs)log(y).
      Assume that the cash-in-advance constraint (3) binds as an equality, that k ky 1,
and that r     0 for all t. It is easy to see that the flerible-price perfect foresight equilibrium

for this simple production economy satisfies


                                        = FxL + .PyiL5,                                         (4)




                        = ((d1)/c + (1 —                                                        (5)




             Fy5.A1 =   (csx'"' + (1 — a)y 1)'0)0)/(01)(1 — a)kygLc0,                           (6)



                                    v = I3Px6kxtL6jAt+i,                                        (7)

and


                                                6
                                  v = fiPy6kygL1Ag2,                                     (8)

where M' is the (exogenous and constant, because r = 0) money supply at the end of

period-t asset markets and A is the current-value Lagrange multiplier on constraint (3).

(Note that A = y, the multiplier on (2), because of the first-order condition for the choice

of Me.) Moreover, we can solve for the nominal interest rate on a one-period nominal asset

using the pricing formula:

                                                                                         (9)


2.1.1 Closed.Economy Equilibrium when Some Prices are Sticky

Suppose there are high costs of changing the nominal price Px except at the end of each

period, so sellers choose Px at the end of period i —   1.   The nominal price Fy , however,

is perfectly flexible. Begin with a nonstochastic steady-state equilibrium with a constant

money supply, and consider a small unanticipated, permanent change in M at the beginning

of period t. Real variables dated at + 1 and later are unaffected by this change in the

money supply, but real variables at date change because            is predetermined.

   A permanent fail in money creates excess-supply for good X in the short run because

     is above its new equilibrium level, and as a result, output of X is demand-determined.

So equation (7) (describing the supply of X) does not hold in the short run. Instead,

we have equations (4)-(6) and (8) in the four variables                    and A, (with A+1

taking its new steady state value). Because a change in the money supply has no steady-

state effect on x,y, or Lx, equation (5) implies it also leaves Px,1A1unchanged. Since

the percentage fail in money lowers Px,i+iby the same percentage, it also must raise A+1

                                             7
by that percentage.

   In [17] we also discuss the excess-demand case after the money supply rises, starting

from an equilibrium. In the excess-demand case, output of the sticky-price good X is

supply-determined. In this paper we will concentrate on excess-supply situations, following

a fall in the money supply from equilibrium. The results can be re-interpreted to give

the effects of an increase in the money supply, ataring from a posiiion of excess supply.

We show in our other paper that the sign of the cross-derivative in utility takes the sign

of (1 — po),that a fall in the money supply causes a smaller percentage fall in Py if the

elasticity of substitution in consumption, a, exceeds one, and a larger fall in Py if a < 1,

and that a fall in the money supply raises the one-period interest rate if and only if the

degree of relative risk aversion, p, exceeds one. Numerical results in that paper showed that

fairly large liquidity effects occur even if only a small fraction of GDP has sticky nominal

prices. A fall in money raises nominal and real interest rates, reduces aggregate GDP, and

has different effects on output in the sticky- and flexible-price sectors.


2.2 A Two-Nation World Economy

Now consider a two-country version of the model. Each country is identical to the dosed

economy described above. Each produces and consumes two internationally-tradable goods,

X and Y, using only labor as an input. Now there are two moneys introduced through cash-

in-advance constraints with the usual convention in which the money used is that of the

seller's country (see e.g. [13]). Because the two countries are identical er ante, we describe

only the domestic country. As before, a representative household in the home country




                                               8
ma,dmizes


                                  + (1 —                          — v(Lxg   + Lyg)].     (10)
                    )(OX

   Now, however, the household is subject to the sequence of budget constraints


                     +       _1ky,g.iL,_1 + vg(qt + d) + rt —          — M — eN =      0 (11)



and sequences of the two cash-in-advance constraints,


                           M — min{t,zt}Pxt — min{V,yt}Pyt      = 0,                     (12)


and



                   N — max{xj —,0)P           — max{yg — V,0)P = 0,                      (13)

where (11) is a budget constraint for period-i asset markets and (12) and (13) are the

cash-in-advance constraints that apply to period-i product markets.

   The terms z and y now refer to total home consumption of goods X and Y, regardless

of where the goods were purchased,         and j refer to home production of the two goods,

M is the home household's stock of home money at the beginning of the product market,

and .N is its stock of foreign money, used for purchasing imports (if imports are positive).

   We now abandon the complete-markets assumption. We assume assets cannot be traded

conditional on monetary transfers or taxes (positive or negative r). So any decrease in the

home money supply is financed by lump-sum taxes (negative r) on households in the home

country only, and analogously any decrease in the foreign money supply directly afects

foreign households only.


                                               9
   Assume as before that r E          0, where r is the tran6fer or tax in the foreign country,

and kx, =          = ky, =    k5..,   =   I for all t. It is easy to see that one flexible-price
equilibrium is the same as in the dosed economy, with no international trade or foreign-

money holding (by the home country). (The other equilibria involve higher levels of wealth

in one country than in the other.) In the equal wealth equilibrium that we will focus on,

relative prices and allocations are identical in each country.


2.3 World Equilibrium When Some Prices Are Sticky

Now consider the world equilibrium when F and Pk (the foreign-currency nominal price of

X produced and sold in that country) are chosen one period in advance. The nominal prices

Py and P, are completely flexible. We initially consider a situation of flexible exchange

rates, and hold constant the foreign money supply I'I as we vary the home money supply

M5 unexpectedly. As in the closed-economy model, we begin at a nonstochastic steady-state

equilibrium with constant money supplies, and consider a small unanticipated, permanent

fail in M.
   Since we no longer have a representative household (the absence of markets to share

the risk of taxes and transfers to change the money supply can lead such transfers or taxes

to redistribute wealth internationally), we need to spedfy a rationing rule stating which

buyers (foreign or domestic) are able to buy what number of goods when there is excess

demand in a market, and from which sellers they buy if there is excess supply. (In each

case, we treat all buyers from a single country as identical — they all buy the same amount,

and we treat all sellers from a single country as identical — they all sell the same amount.

In that sense we ignore results in the literature which show that in situations like this, a


                                                10
distribution of prices and sales can arise ex post even if sellers are identical er ante.) We

assume that if there is excess supply, buyers always purchase goods from the sellers in the

country with the lowest price (after adjusting for the current exchange rate), and that if the

price is the same in both countries, they buy first from sellers in their own country. (They

also may buy some of the product from sellers in the other country; we will see later that

this is what can make the price the same across countries.) We assume that in situations of

excess demand for a good in country A, buyers who live in country A are first in line, and

buyers from the other country are last in line to buy the good. Places in line may not be

traded. There is also no cost of waiting in line (no transactions costs of rationing).

   Despite the simplicity of our model economy, there are a number of possible cases that

can arise in this two-country world. We now consider these cases in turn.


2.3.1 Case 1: Excess Supply in the Home Country and Excess Demand in the

        Foreign Country

First consider situations in which there is excess supply of X in the home country and

excess demand for X in the foreign country. Since we begin from a nonstochastic steady-

state equilibrium (in which the law of one price holds for each good), this situation arises

if the domestic money appreciates, raising the relative price of X-in-tbe-home-country in

terms of X-in-the-(oreign country. Denoting by e the exchange rate (in units of home money

per unit of foreign money), we have P > eP;. There are three possible sub-cases within

this situation (and in which good X continues to be produced in the home country). First,

foreigners may buy all the good X offered for sale in their country, and may be unwilling to

buy any good X from the home country at the higher price there). Residents of the home


                                             11
country, being unable to import good X by definition of the rationing rule, must purchase

the good from sellers in their own country. There is no trade in good X in this case. All

the necessary conditions(5), (6), (7), (8), and their foreign counterparts hold, except the

corners in this situation imply


               PA7 < (ax" + (1 —                                                        (14)

which says that foreign marginal utility of consumption of X exceeds the foreign price times

the marginal utility of foreign wealth (meaning that foreigner buyers are rationed in buying

X),
             (Pxt/e)A > (ax0)b0 + (1 —                                                  (15)

which says that foreign buyers choose not to buy any X from the home country, because

the price there is too high (after adjusting for the exchange rate), and


                                  v<                                                    (16)

which says that there is excess supply of X at home, so home sellers are rationed (they

cannot sell all they would like to produce at the existing price).

   In the second possible sub-case, foreigners may buy all the good X offered for sale in

their country, and may also be willing to buy some good X from the home country, even

at the higher price there. Residents of the home country, being last in line in the foreign

country and so nnable to import good X, buy it from sellers in their own country. Again

P > eP and all the necessary conditions(S), (6), (7), (8), and their foreign counterparts

hold except that the corners now imply (14), (??) and


                         = (ax'1"° + (1 — a)yfr_1)I)(1_Po)/(a_1)aL•_o/a                 (17)

                                              12
which says that foreign buyers choose an internal optimum (rather than a corner solution)

for buying X from the home country. Notice that in contrast to the first sub-case, there is

international trade: the home country exports good X.

     In the third sub-case, foreigners may be unconstrained in buying good X in their own

country. Then home residents, who are last in line there, are able to purchase some good

X from the foreign country, where it is cheaper because P > eP , and buy the rest from

sellers in their own country. Again all the necessary conditions(5), (6), (7), (8), and their

foreign counterparts hold, in addition to (17) and


               ePA, < (ax'" + (1 —                                                          (18)


which says that home residents are constrained from buying more good X at the lower

foreign price. Notice that in this case the home country imports good X.

     In each of these three sub-cases, we also have (9) and an analogous equation for a foreign.

currency one-period nominal interest rate. We also have the law of one price for good Y

Py = eP     , and interest-parity (covered and uncovered interest parity are the same in this

nonstochastic model):

                                         =                                                  (19)


where .X is the multiplier on the foreign representative household's current-period budget

constraint. Equation (19) follows directly from the usual expression of interest parity (e'/e =

(1   + i)/(1 + is)) and (9) and its foreign counterpart. In addition, we need the separate

budget constraints for home and foreign households. The home household can buy (or sell)

one-period nominal bonds B at the price 1/(1 + i).

     In this ex-ante equal wealth world, we assume that initially there is no international

                                                13
 indebtedness. But alter the change in the money supply in one of the countries (or both), B

can become non-zero, in which case it turns out to remain non-zero in the new steady state.

If B is positive in the new steady state, (which corresponds to the second sub-case with

the home country exporting x in the short run), the home country consumes the interest

iB/(1 + i) each period in that new steady state. So during the period (t) in which the

money supply first changes, the budget constraint for the home household states that total

spending on the two goods (which will occur at two different prices if Px eP), plus

spending on bonds equals total nominal labor income (from the prior period's production

and sales of goods) minus the decrease (or plus the increase) in the home money supply, M?

at date i. For example, in the third sub-case discussed above, the home household spends

                              Py,tyg   + Fx7 + eP(z —
on goods because it buys some X from home sellers and the rest from the (lower-price)

foreign sellers. This spending, plus spending on bonds B1/(1 + ii), must be financed by

labor income Px,i_ikx,t_iL,_1 + Fy,_1ky,_iL_1 minus the fall (or plus the increase)

in the home money supply. The household's budget constraint for subsequent periods i +j,

j 1   (in the new steady state) allows it to spend on goods i+1B/(1 + if +) more than its

labor income each period. (The household can also buy or sell more bonds in the future,

but does not do so ih equilibrium.)


2.3.2 Case 2: Excess Demand in the Home Country and Excess Demand in
        the Foreign Country

We have discussed situations in which there is excess supply for X in the home country and

excess demand in the foreign country. We now turn to the other possible situations. There

                                             14
may be excess demand for X in the home country and excess supply in the foreign country;

this situation is symmetric to the situation already discussed, and so can arise in the three

sub-cases that are described above. Another possible case involves excess demand for X in

both countries. This can also arise in three possible sub-cases.

    In the first sub-case, the home household may be at a corner solution in buying X at

home, so that


                 Px)t <              + (1 —


and an analogous condition may hold for the foreign household in buying X in the foreign

country. In that case, there is no international trade (because domestic residents in each

country are first in the rationing lines). In the second sub-case, the home household may

be at an interior solution for buying X from home sellers, but the foreign household may

be at a corner in buying from foreign sellers,


                hA    < (ax1)'c + (1 —

and also at a corner in buying from home sellers (see equation 17). In this case, the home

country exports good X . The third possible sub-case is symmetric to the second sub-case:

the foreign household is at an interior optimum for buying X from foreign sellers, but there

is excess demand for X in both countries because the home household is at a corner solution

in buying from both home and foreign sellers.




                                              15
         Foreign Country

 The final disequilibrium situation that is possible consists of excess supply for good X in

 both countries. This requires P = eP, otherwise buyers would raise the quantity de-

 manded in the lower-price market. This situation can occur if, for example, the money

 supply falls unexpectedly by the same percentage in each country; the equilibrium would

then be identical to the dosed-economy case, with no international trade. But this situa-

tion can also arise in a much more interesting case: if the money supply falls by a larger

percentage in the home country than in the foreign country, one might expect the domestic

money to appreciate and for both countries to have excess supply of good X, which is sub-

ject to the short-run nominal-price sluggishness. But that would make X cheaper in the

foreign country than in the home country, and would lead buyers to substitute out of home

purchases of X toward foreign purchases. At the same time, buyers can substitute out of

foreign purchases of Y toward home purchases of Y. This occurs until the extra demand

for X in the foreign country raises its price relative to home X. Since the foreign-money

price of X in the foreign country is sticky in the short run, as is the home-money price of X

at home, this relative price change alters the exchange rate. (The mechanism is analogous

to the effects of real shocks on the real and nominal exchange rate in equilibrium models

of exchange rates, such as [23] and [13]— see Stockman [21].) The striking aspect of this

disequilibrium situation is that (because F and Pk do not change in the short run), it
results in a fired exchange rate in the short run. We will use this fact to show how countries

can have short-run independence of monetary policy — affecting real and nominal variables



                                             16
— even   under pegged exchange rates.



3 Short-Run Effects of a Fall in Home Money

We now turn to the implications of the two-country model, which we obtain from numerical

calculations (using a non-linear equation solver). This is necessary because we generally

cannot obtain analytic solutions to the model with the CES utility function. Our previous

paper on the dosed-economy case ([17]) showed that a one-time unexpected fall in the

money supply raises real and nominal interest rates in the short run (if the coefficient of

relative risk aversion exceeds one), reduces output of goods in the sticky-price sector, and

reduces Py in percentage terms by more or less than the money-supply fall depending on

whether the elasticity of substitution in consumption is less than or greater than one.

   Consider a permanent, unexpected 2% fall in the home country's money supply (from

10 to 9.8), starting from a steady-state equilibrium with a constant money supply and price

level. We hold fixed the foreign money supply in this initial exercise. Table 1 shows the

results when (in each country) a = .5, a = 0.5, S = .9, v = 1, 13 = .99, p = 2, and each

money supply is initially 10. This means half of GDP in each country consists of output of

good Y, the relative price of Y in terms of X is initially unity, the exchange rate is initially

one, and the real (and nominal) interest rate is 1//3 —    1.   Since a < 1, the two goods are

relatively poor substitutes. We also assume there is no initial international indebtedness,

so initially the countries are identical and there is no international trade. The first column

of Table 1 shows the endogenous variables: the nominal price of Y in the home and foreign

countries (py and pyf), the nominal interest rate (in percent) in the home and foreign



                                               17
countries (1 and if), the exchange rate (e), the real exchange rate (ep/p) labor inputs

in the x industry in the home and foreign countries (lx and lxf), labor inputs in the v

industries in the home and foreign countries (ly andlyf), GNP in the home and foreign

countries evaluated at the equilibrium prices and production shares (GNF and GNPJ)

and total labor supply in the home and foreign countries (n and nf). The second column,

"Old SS," shows the old steady-state levels of the variables (before the change in money)

from which the analysis begins. The "SR" column shows the short-run effects of the fall

in money (while the nominal price of X is fixed at its previous level for one period). The

"New SS"column shows the new steady state, and the column labeled "percent" shows

the percentage by which a variable falls short of or exceeds its new steady state level. For

the interest rate, this column presents the difference between interest rates in the short-run

and in the new steady state.

   The 2% fall in money leads, in the long run ("New SS" column) to a 2% fall in the

nominal prices of goods X and Y, from 7.333 to 7.187. (The new steady state relative price

of Y in terms of X is one, so the new price of X is also 7.187.) The interest rate is unaffected

in the long run by the one-time change in the level of money, and the exchange rate falls

2% from 1.00 to 0.98 in the long run. Long-run levels of employment in each industry

in the home country (lx and ly) are unaffected, as are foreign employment levels in each

industry (lzf and lyf) and long-run levels of output in each industry and in each country

(prod — x, prod — y, prod — xf, and prod — yf). The negative level of bonds indicates that the

home country borrows in the short run and becomes a net debtor in the new steady state,

though the level of the interest on this debt is sufficiently small that (to a four-decimal-point

approximation) consumption in each country is the same as its domestic production in the

                                               18
long run.

    While the unexpected change in money is almost neutral in the long run ("almost"

because it redistributes wealth and so has permanent effects), it is not neutral in the short-

run. The impact effect of the unexpected fall in home money is to raise the home-country

nominal interest rate by 53 basis points. If one interprets this as a quarterly model (since

the discount parameter is .99 per period), with one-quarter nominal price stickiness in the

X industry, then the steady state interest rate is 1.01% per quarter, or 4.04% per year.

Then the 2% fall in home money raises the annualized home nominal interest rate by 211

basis points, to 6.15% per year. The foreign nominal interest rate also rises, by 47 basis

points on a per-period basis, which is 188 basis points on an annualized basis with this

interpretation. The home nominal interest rate is then 20 basis points above the foreign

rate on an annualized basis. This is reflected also in a slight overshooting of the exchange

rate in the short run (it falls five one-hundredths of a percent below .98) followed by a

small expected (and actual) appreciation of home currency. Output and employment in the

home country fail in both industries, but production falls significantly in the X industry

with sticky prices. Overall output is unchanged in the foreign country, though there is a

small sectoral reallocation of production from the X industry to the Y industry. As noted

previously, the home country borrows in the short run from the foreign country, and it

imports both goods on net, running a balance of trade deficit to smooth consumption, which

falls less than output in each industry. Table 1 also shows a slight rise in momentary utility,

or felicity, in the home country: this occurs because households in the home country get

more current utility from the increased leisure they have than from the fall in consumption

(because international borrowing allows them to decrease current consumption by less than

                                              19
output falls), though there is a slight fall in present-value utility (which appears unchanged

at the accuracy shown in the table) as the home country exports goods in the new steady

state and its future consumption is slightly smaller than it would otherwise have been.

   Notice that, in the short run, the appreciation of home currency combined with the

stickiness of both the home-money price of X sold at home and the foreign-money price of

X sold abroad implies that X is cheaper in the foreign country than in the home country.

There is, in the short run, excess demand for X in the foreign country and excess supply

in the home country. Foreigners are unconstrained in buying good X in their own country

and home residents, who are last in line there, import X and buy the rest from sellers in

their own country. (This is the third sub-case discussed in section 2.3.1 that can result

in excess supply in the home country and excess demand in the foreign country, with the

corner solution represented by equation (18).)

    The intuition behind the results in Table 1 is easier to understand by first considering

the case in which both countries reduce their money supplies by the same percentage. The

result is the same in each country as in a closed economy, and there is no international

trade in either the short run or in the new steady state. Table 2 shows the effects of an

unexpected, permanent 2% fail in money in both countries. This has identical effects in

the two countries, so we can discuss only the borne country. The fall in money reduces

aggregate nominal spending, which reduces the nominal price of good Y. Because Px is

fixed in the short run, this increases the relative price of X, so consumers substitute good

1' for good X, which further reduces output of X and works against the fall in spending

on Y. If the elasticity of substitution in consumption, a, were one, output in the Y sector

would remain unchanged, and the nominal price of Y would fall by 2%. With a <             1   (as

                                              20
 Tables 1 and 2 assume), output of Y falls along with output of X and Py overshoots its

 long-run fall. (If u >   1,   output of Y rises and its nominal price undershoots its long-

 run fall.) Table 2 shows that the marginal utility of income measured in nominalterms

 ("lambda") rises by about 3% in the short run, though it8 long-run increase is naturally

 only 2%. This occurs because households would like to smooth consumption over time —

 to borrow from the (higher) steady-state level of consumption to offset partly the fall in

 current consumption. The marginal utility of one "dollar" is higher currently than it will

 be in the future. The attempts to borrow raise the nominal interest rate in the short run.

(Notice the dosed-economy liquidity effect is about twice the size of the liquidity effect in

Table 1.) Of course, since the nominal price of X is expected to fall next period (to its new

long-run equilibrium level), and the nominal price of Y is not expected to change much,

there is overall expected deflation, which means the overall real interest rate rises even more

than the nominal rate. Our closed-economy paper discusses these issues in further detail.

    Now return to the results in Table 1, where only the home money supply falls. If these

were two dosed economies, the results for the home country would be identical to those in

Table 2, and no   changes would    occur in the foreign country. One can imagine a "shadow

exchange rate" for that case: since the law of one price for good Y applies, the fall in Fy

and the constancy of P) imply that the home currency would appreciate. This would make

good X cheaper in the foreign country than in the home country and lead consumers in

the home country to try to import good X (further increasing the excess supply for X in

the home country). Home consumers are last in line for foreign output when it is in excess

demand, but this creates excess demand for X in the foreign country. Consumers in the

home country want to borrow to buy both X and Y, so the real interest rate measured in

                                              21
terms of each good rises. Since the expected change in the nominal price of either good in

the foreign country is negligible, this rise in the real rate occurs through a rise in the nominal

rate of interest in the foreign country. The law of one price for good Y and the facts that P)

does not change much, and Py falls roughly 2% (see Table 2) guarantee that the exchange

rate falls about 2%. This means that the expected change in the exchange rate is very small

(there is not much overshooting), so interest-parity implies that the home nominal interest

rate rises about as much as the foreign rate. Home consumers face a higher relative price for

good X than do foreign consumers, so home consumption of X drops by more than foreign

consumption of X, while the home and foreign countries both reduce consumption of Y by

about the same amount (home consumption falls slightly more because of complementarity

of X and Y in home utility).

   Table 3 shows the effects of a 2% fall in the home money supply when = 2. The

other parameters are the same as in Table 1, and again the fall in money is unexpected

and permanent. The results are similar to those in Table 1, but a few important differences

emerge when the elasticity of substitution between z and y exceeds one. First, the nominal

price of Y undershoots its new long-run equilibrium level. This occurs because the larger

is c, the greater the extent to which consumers try to substitute out of consumption of X

and into consumption of the relatively cheaper good Y. This leads to a higher demand for

Y and raises its priee (as compared to Table 1). Given that the price of z is fixed, and

that the price of y undershoots, it appears that the overall price level is "sticky" in this

economy. The exchange rate also undershoot its new long-run equilibrium level. (To see

why, consider what would happen to the shadow exchange rate if the two economies were

closed: it would fall by the same proportion as F".) The undershooting of the exchange

                                               22
rate, combined with interest parity, implies that the foreign nominal interest rate rises more

than the home nominal interest rate. The other main difference when o> 1 is that home

output in the Y sector rises somewhat; this is caused by the greater degree of substitution

by consumers away from X when Py falls. Table 4 shows the effects of changing the utility

parameter a: it sets a = .6 rather than .5 as before. This raises the fraction of overall

employment in the sticky-price sector from 1/2 as before to about 2/3. A 2% fall in home

money has quantitatively larger real effects than when the share of the sticky-price sector

was smaller; the table provides an idea of the size of those effects. Similarly, Table 5 shows

the effects of the fall in money when a = .4, which implies the share of total labor working

in the sticky-price sector is about 1/3.



4 Pegged Exchange Rates and Short-Run Monetary Inde-
     pendence

We have already discussed the effects of permanent changes in the money supply in one

country. We now consider the effects of changes in the money supplies of both countries,

and we focus on monetary policies in the foreign country that peg the exchange rate, or

that lead to sufficiently small changes in the exchange rate that for all practical purposes it

is pegged. One way for the foreign country to peg its exchange rate (in the absence of any

other shocks) is to change is money supply in proportion to the change in the home money

supply; call this the baseline path of foreign money. We will see that lempornry changes in

the foreign money supply around this baseline path can also result in a pegged exchange

rate, but cause changes (relative to the baseline path) in output, real and nominal interest


                                              23
rates, relative prices, and international trade.

   Suppose the home country's money supply falls by 2% as in Tables 1 and 2, and suppose

the foreign country pegs its exchange rate (at unity). Suppose also that the foreign govern-

ment can credibly commit to a future path for the money supply. Because nominal prices

are set one period in advance, for only one period, anticipated future changes in money can

be fully incorporated into price-setting behavior.

    One way for the foreign government to peg the exchange rate is to follow the baseline

path for money, with results as in Table 2. But Tables 6a-6d show that there are also other

ways to peg the exchange rate. Table 6o shows the results of a foreign monetary policy

that reduces the foreign money supply 3%, from M5 =           10 to    M5 = 9.7 in the short run
(while the home money supply falls from 10 to 9.8), and then changes M5 to 9.80098 in

the long run, assuming that a =     .5,   u = 0.5, =   .9,   v=   1,   fi = .99, p = 2, as in Table
1. The exchange rate remains at exactly one, the rise in world interest rates of 203 basis

points exceeds the 100-basis-point rise that occurs along the baseline path, there is a greater

fall in output of the Y-sector in both countries (a 0.93% fall rather than a 0.47% fall), a

larger fall in output in the X-sector in the foreign country (2.98% rather than 1.49%), a

smaller fall in output in the X-sector in the home country (0.97% rather than 1.49%), a

slightly smaller fall in labor in the home country (1.06% rather than 1.09%), and a much

greater fall in labor in the foreign country (2.18% rather than 1.09%). In contrast to the

baseline case, the foreign country imports good X, importing about 1% of its consumption

of X, and financing these imports mainly by borrowing (and only to a very small extent

by exporting good Y). The foreign trade deficit in the short run creates a (small) long-run

trade surplus, as the country pays interest on its debt each period in the long run.

                                               24
    If the 3% fall in the foreign money supply were permanent, the foreign currency would

appreciate. Rowever, the temporary nature of the fall, followed by a return to something

clo8e to the baseline path, implies that the exchange rate will remain fixed. To see why,

consider what would happen were the foreign currency to appreciate. Because nominal

prices in the X industry are predetermined, good X would be cheaper in the home country

than in the foreign country. Foreign consumers would try to import good X rather than

buying it in their own country. Originally, there was excess supply of X in each country;

now there is smaller excess supply of X in the home country and greater excess supply in

the foreign country. The increased demand for X cannot raise Px, which is predetermined.

But it raises the value of home currency on the foreign exchange market — until the relative

price of good X across countries is again unity. (If the fall in the foreign money supply is

large enough, excess demand is created in the home country and the relative price never

reaches unity; this happens, for example, if the foreign money supply falls to 9.6 in this

example.) Foreign consumers import just enough X to assure that the price is unity: if they

imported less, it would be cheaper to buy X in the home country and imports would rise;

if they imported more, it would be cheaper to buy X in the foreign country, and imports

would fall.

    The exchange rate adjusts to assure the "right" relative price of goods just as in equilib-

rium models of exchange rates (see Stockman, 1980, 1988). In this case, the exchange rate

adjusts to get the "right" relative price of X across countries, and international trade in

that good adjusts accordingly. Because the foreign country runs a current-account deficit

in the short run, there is a permanent effect on the distribution of wealth across countries,

and given that long run monetary policy is chosen to keep the exchange rate unchanged,

                                              25
the money supply does not return exactly to the baseline path in the new steady state.

   Table 6b shows the results when the foreign money supply falls less than the baseline

case: it falls from 10 to 9.85 for one period and then permanently goes to 9.79952 (while

home money falls to 9.8). We continue to consider the case in which a = .5, a     = 0.5, 5 = .9,
v=     1, /3 = .99,   and p = 2. If the fall to 9.85 were permanent, foreign currency would
depreciate and X would be cheaper in the foreign country. This would add to excess supply

for X in the home country and reduce excess supply of X in the foreign country; this occurs

up to the point at which the relative price is unity, i.e. at an unchanged exchange rate.

In this case the rise in world interest rates is smaller (49 basis points) than in the baseline

case, the foreign country erports X, home output of X falls more and foreign output of X

fails less than in the baseline case,while output of Y falls less in both countries.

   Table 6c shows the results when the foreign money supply falls even less in the short

run — from 10 to 9.9, before permanently going to 9.79904. In this case the exchange rate

continues to be pegged, but there is no liquidity effect on the world nominal interest rate.

The foreign country runs a trade surplus by exporting X as in Table 6b, and it is larger

than in that table, but now the only good whose output is affected (much) is X in the home

country. The fall in foreign money has virtually no effect on foreign output in the short

run.

   Table 6d shows the results when the foreign money supply falls even less — from 10 to

9.95, before permanently going to 9.79857. In this case the exchange rate remains constant,

and nominal interest rates in each country fall rather than rise, despite the fall in money

supplies in each country. As in Tables 6a.6c, there is excess supply for X in both countries.

As in Tables 6b-6c, the foreign country has a trade surplus mainly connected with exports

                                               26
of X. In contrast to these other tables, while output of X in the home country falls, output

of X in the foreign country rises, and output of Y rises slightly in both countries.

   These tables illustrate three important points. First, there is an entire range of money

supplies from which the foreign country can choose in the short run even as it maintains

a pegged exchange rate. In contrast to existing theoretical models of exchange rate de-

termination, pegging the exchange rate does not prevent the government from exercising

monetary independence in the short run.

    Second, each choice from this range has different consequences for real and nominal

variables. Production, consumption, the pattern of international trade and borrowing on

international financial markets, and real and nominal interest rates differ depending on the

choice. Moreover, the direction of changes in many of these variables, not just the magnitude

of the changes, depends on the choice of the money supply in the short run.

   Third, one should not expect the relation between changes in the money supply and

(say) nominal interest rates to depend solely on domestic monetary policy. The short-run

responses of variables such as nominal interest rates depend heavily on foreign as well as

home money-supply shocks. And the 8i9fl of the effect (as well as its size) depends partly on

how similar or dissimilar are the money-supply changes across countries. The high degree

of non-linearity in the response of nominal interest rates to changes in the money supply,

illustrated by these tables, suggests that linear vector-autoregressions are likely to miss key

features of the relations between money and interest rates.

   The results in the previous tables do not imply that the ability of a country to peg its

currency in the short run depends on its choosing the "right' level of the money supply

in the long run. That long-run choice of money is essential only for permanent pegging of

                                              27
the exchange rate. Table 7 illustrates this point. It shows the effects of a permaneni1%

fall in the foreign money supply when the home money supply fails by 2%. The failure of

the foreign country to adjust its new steady-state money supply appropriately prevents the

exchange rate from remaining pegged in the long run. But the exchange rate nevertheless

remains pegged in the short run. Notice also that although the foreign money supply falls

permanently by leBs than the home money supply, in the short-run its interest rate rises

more.

   The ability of the foreign country to choose its money supply independently while peg-

ging the exchange rate does, however, depend on the behavior of the home money supply.

In the absence of excess supply for X in the home country, the foreign country's indepen-

dence vanishes. Table 8 illustrates this fact. Here, the home money supply remains Iixed at

10 while the foreign money supply fails permanently to 9.9. This creates foreign-currency

appreciation in the short run as well as the long run. Similarly, Table 9 shows the effects

of a temporw,J fail in foreign money to 9.9 while it chooses long-run money to peg the

long-term exchange rate at unity. Despite the long-run pegging, the short-run fall in the

money supply is not consistent with a short-run exchange-rate peg because there is not

excess supply in the home country.

   Our experiments with altering relative country size indicate that the main difference in

the results when one uoixntry is much larger than the other concern the size of the liquidity

effect of a change in money in the small country. While the small country maintains a high

degree of short-run monetary independence under pegged exchange rates, it can have only

a small effect on its own (and the world) nominal interest rate.




                                             28
5 Extensions
The goods produced in each country are pe,feci aubsiituiesin the model discussed above. We

generaiised the model to study the robustness of our results with respect to this assumption.

First, we replaced the assumption that good X produced in the home country is a perfect

substitute for good X produced in the foreign country. We now treat X as a composite of

two goods, r and q, produced in the home and foreign countries, where



                        Xg =   (Aq/tb + (1 —
is a CES aggregator of goods q and r, the sticky-price goods produced in the home and

foreign countries. By varying the elasticity of substitution between these goods, ',we

can study the consequences of less-than.perfect substitutability between home and foregin

goods.

   The results, in Tables lOa-lOc, are striking. We assume the share paramenter A equals

one-half and the elasticity of substitution ' equals 2. Table lOa shows the results when

the money supply falls 2 percent in each country, as in Table 2. Tables lOb and lOc show

the results when the foreign country reduces money permantly by 2 percent, as does the

home country in the long run, but when the home country holds money fixed in the short

run or reduces money by 4 percent in the short run. The exchange rate is no longer exactly

fixed at unity, but when the home country keeps its money suply fixed in the short run

the exchange rate rises (home currency depreciates) less than three-tenths of one percent in

the short run. Similarly, when the home country reduces its money supply by four percent

in the short run (and two percent in the long run), its currency appreciates by less than


                                             29
three-tenths of one percent. Although the exchange rate is not exactly fixed, it changes

very little in the short run. Since countries with pegged exchange rates always permit

the exchange rate to change over a small band, this result indicates that the assumption

of perfect substitutability between foreign and domestic goods is not required to obtain a

degree of short-run monetary independence under pegged exchange rates.

   Second, we generalized this model by adding another good, z, which has a small ex-

penditure share, is produced in both countries, has a sticky price in the short run (as q

and r do), and for which z produced in either country is a perfect substitute. This good

is intended to capture the fairly standardized goods produced around the world for which

there is evidence of sticky nominal prices. We modified the utility function and added the

utility of this good, flzO)/(l — , to the utility function above. We then equated and p

and varied Cl to vary the expenditure share on good z. The results are even more striking.

Regardless of how small is the share of expenditure on good z, we reproduce the qualitative

results of the previous section: there is a range of money supplies for one of the countries

(holding fixed the money supply in the other coutnry) that results in an exactly pegged

exchange rate. The smaller Cl, the smaller the expenditure share of good z, and the smaller

the band of money supplies (the smaller the range of short-term monetary independence).

Suppose the foregin country reduces its money supply permanently by 2 percent, from 10 to

9.8. If the expenditure share on z is one percent, the home money supply can fall anywhere

between 9.74 and 9.86 in the short run while maintaining an exactly-pegged exchange rate.

If the expenditure share on z is two percent, the range is 9.7 to 9.9; if the epxenditure share

on z is ten percent, the range widens to 9.35 to 10.22. (The home country can even raise

its money supply in the short run and maintain an exactly-pegged exchange rate.) In our

                                              30
experiments, the size of the band in percentage points is about ten times the size of the

expenditure share on good a. These generalizations of our model indicate that our results

regarding short-term independence of monetary policy are robust to several assumptions of

the model.



6 Conclusions

One of the oldest debates in international monetary economics concerns the ability of coun-

tries to sterilize international reserve flows under regimes of pegged exchange rates or sys-

tems of limited exchange rate variability, such as the EMS. While central bankers typically

assert that they have this flexibility, and empirical evidence is supportive of this daim, ex-

isting theoretical models of exchange rate determination, including sticky price models (e.g.

Dornbusch), and equilibrium models (e.g. Stockman, Lucas), are silent on this issue. This

paper developed an optimizing two-country, two good model in which the degree of price

flexibility varies across different sectors of the economy, and uses the model to investigate

the effects of money supply changes on the exchange rate, home and foreign nominal and

real interest rates, sectoral production in each country, and the pattern of international

trade. We demonstrated how monetary shocks can have liquidity effects on interest rates

both within and across countries, and can introduce a cross-country interest differential.

Unexpected changes in money affect sectoral production as well as overall GD?. An impor-

tant new result of our two-sector model is that a country can peg its exchange rate while

maintaining a high degree of short-term independence of monetary policy.




                                             31
References

[1] Marianne Baxter and Alan Stockman (1989), "Business Cycles and the Exchange-Rate

   Regime: Some International Evidence," Journal of Monetary Economics 23, no. 3, May

   1989, 377-400.


[2] Ben Bernanke and Alan Blinder (1992), "The Federal Funds Rate and the Channels

   of Monetary Transmission," American Economic Review


[3] Olivier Blanchard and Nobu Kiyotaki (1987), "Monopolistic Competition and the Ef-

   fects of Aggregate Demand," American Economic Review 77 no. 4, 647-666


[4] Larry Christiano and Martin Eichenbaum (1992), "Liquidity Effects, Monetary Policy,

   and the Business Cycle," Northwestern University working paper

 [5] Robert E. Cumby and John Huizinga, "The Predictability of Real Exchange Rate

    Changes in the Short Run and Long Run," NBER working paper 3468, 1990.


 [6] Rudiger Dornbusch, "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of Political

    Economy 84 (1976), 1161-76.


 [7] Charles Engel (1991), "Is Real Exchange Rate Variability Caused by Relative Price

    Changes? An Empirical Investigation," University of Washington working paper


 [8] Tim Feurst (1992), "Liquidity, Loanable Funds, and Real Activity," Journal of Mone-

    tary Economics

 [9] Stanley Fischer (1977), "Long-Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the Opti-

    mal Money-Supply Rule," Journal of Political Economy

                                          32
[10] Sanford Grossman and Laurence Weiss (1983), "A Transactions-Based Model of the

     Monetary Transmission Mechanism," American Economic Review


[11] John Huizinga (1987), "An Empirical Investigation of the Long-Run Behavior of Real

     Exchange Rates," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series 27, 149-214.


[12] Robert E. Lucas, Jr. (1990), "Liquidity and Interest Rates," Journal of Economic

    Theory

[13] Robert E. Lucas, Jr. (1982), "Interest Rates and Currency Prices in a Two-Country

    World," Journal of Monetary Economics


[14] Nelson Mark (1992), "Exchange Rates and Fundamentals: Evidence on Long-Horizon

    Predictability and Overshooting," Ohio State University working paper

[15] Michael Mussa (1986), "Nominal Exchange Rate Regimes and the Behavior of Real

    Exchange Rates," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 25, 1986,

    117-214


[16] Michael Mussa (1982), "A Model of Exchange-Rate Dynamics," Journal of Political

    Economy 90 (1982), 74-104.


[17] Lee Ohanian and Alan C. Stockman (1993), "Real Effects of Money when Some Prices

    Are Sticky" unpublished, University of Rochester


[18] Julio Rotemberg (1984), "A Monetary Equilibrium Model with Transactions Costs,"

    Journal of Political Economy 92, 40-48




                                             33
[19] Alan C. Stockman (1992), "International Transmission under Bretton Woods," in

    Michael Bordo and Barry Eichengreen (eds.), A Refrospecüve on Bretlon Woods, Uni-

    versity of Chicago Press.


[20] Alan Stockman (1988), "Real Exchange Rate Variability under Pegged and Floating

    Nominal Exchange Rate Systems: An Equilibrium Theory," in K. Brunner and A.H.

    Meltzer (eds.), Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 29, Spring, 1988,

    259-94.


[21] Alan C. Stockman, "The Equilibrium Approach to Exchange Rates," Economic Re-

    view, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, March-April, 1987, 12-3 1.


[22] Alan Stockman (1983), "Real Exchange Rates under Alternative Nominal Exchange

    Rate Systems," Journal of International Money and Finance 2 (August, 1983), 147-66.


[23] Alan C. Stockman, "A Theory of Exchange Rate Determination," Journal of Political

    Economy 88 (1980), 673-98.


[24] Lars E.O. Svensson (1986), "Sticky Goods Prices, Flexible Asset Prices, Monopolistic

    Competition, and Monetary Policy," Review of Economic Studies 3 no. 174, 385-405.


[25] Lars E.O. Svensson (1992), "Why Exchange Rate Bands? Monetary independence in

    Spite of Fixed Exchange Rates" hER, October 1992.

[26] Lars E.O. Svensson and Sweder van Wijnbergen (1989), "Excess Capacity, Monopolistic

    competition, and International Transmission of Monetary Disturbances, The Economic

    Journal 99 September, 785-805.



                                           34
