                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         BEAUTY AND THE LABOUR MARKET




                                   Daniel S. Hamermesh
                                      Jeff E. Biddle




                                  Working Paper No. 4518




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambiidge, MA 02138
                                  November, 1993



We thank David Blanchflower, George Bo!jas, Russell Cooper, Ronald Ehrenberg, Gerald
Oettinger and John Strauss for helpful suggestions, and participants at seminars at the NBER
and a number of universities for their comments. The onler of the authors' names is
inversely related to their looks. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Labor
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4518
                                                                             November 1993


                          BEAUTY AND THE LABOUR MARKET


                                         ABSTRACT



       We develop a theory of sorting across occupations based on looks and derive its

implications for testing for the source of earnings differentials related to looks. These

differentials are examined using the 1977 Quality of Employment, the 1971 Quality of

American Life, and the 1981 Canadian Quality of Life surveys, all of which contain

interviewers' ratings of the respondents' physical appearance. Holding constant demographic

and labor-market characteristics, plain people earn less than people of average looks, who

earn less than the good-looking. The penalty for plainness is 5 to 10 percent, slightly larger

than the premium for beauty. The effects are slightly larger for men than women; but

unattractive women are less likely than others to participate in the labor force and are more

likely to be married to men with unexpectedly low human capital. Better-looking people sort

into occupations where beauty is likely to be more productive; but the impact of individuals'

looks on their earnings is mostly independent of occupation.




Daniel S. Hamermesh                                         Jeff E. Biddle
Department of Economics                                     Department of Economics
University of Texas                                         Michigan State University
Austin, TX 78712                                            East Lansing, MI 48824
and NBER
        He [Aristotle] used to say that personal beauty was a better
        introduction than any letter. Diogenes Laertius, The Lives
        and Opinions of the Eminent Philosophers (Ca. 200 A.D.)
I. Introduction
        Discrimination in the labor market has generated immense amounts
of research by economists. Many alternative theoretical analyses of the nature
of discrimination and a vast empirical literature have been produced. (See,
e.g., Cain's, 1986, review.) In the U.S. alone careful empirical studies of
possibly discriminatory outcomes involving blacks, Hispanics, women,
linguistic minorities, physically handicapped workers and no doubt others have
been produced.' Our purpose here is to offer the first study of the economics
of discrimination in the labor market against yet another group —— — the ugly
— — — and   its obverse, possible favoritism for the beautiful. We examine
whether there is a reduced — form combination of attitudes toward beauty and
a distribution of workers among jobs that generates apparently discriminatory
labor —market outcomes.
         This analysis is interesting in its own right. Every worker brings
some physical attractiveness to the labor market along with other attributes,
and most are concerned, perhaps inordinately so (Wolf, 1991), with this aspect
of their labor—market characteristics.         Interest in "lookism, ...      the

construction of a standard of beauty/attractiveness," is an expression of a belief
that people failing to meet that standard are mistreated. Antidiscrimination
legislation has been proposed elsewhere to prevent denying employment on the
basis of "facial features, build and height;" and in the U.S. a case law in this
area is developing and likely to burgeon under the Americans with Disabilities
Act of 1990.2
         Studying possible discrimination on the basis of looks should also be
of broader interest. It is very difficult to construct a research design that
allows one to distinguish labor — market outcomes arising from discrimination


                                        1
against a group from those produced by intergroup differences in unobserved
(by the researcher) productivity. In the case of looks we may have a better
chance of doing so, for we can identi1' activities in which looks are likely to
be more important, and thus where the payoff to beauty (or penalty for
homeliness) reflects differences in productivity.       In the literature on
discrimination this provides a rare example of going measurement of the extent
of discrimination to examining its sources (but see also Dillingham et al,
1994).
         In Section II we examine some relevant results of social —
psychological   studies of beauty and human behavior, aiming toward
considering whether it is possible to use measures of beauty as if they were
objective descriptions. Section III presents a model in which beauty is
rewarded in the labor market and affects workers' choice of occupations.
Section IV describes the three sets of microeconomic data that we use to
analyze the role of looks. Section V tests for the presence of earnings
differentials based on looks; Section VI examines possible causes for male—
female differences in the effects of beauty; and Section VII conducts tests
aimed at distinguishing the sources of wage differences by looks.
II. Background
         If there is no common agreement on what constitutes beauty, it makes
no sense to consider the role of looks in the labor market. Fortunately, a huge
literature exists on this subject, including research by anthropologists,
sociologists and social psychologists, that has recently been ably summarized
(Hatfield and Sprecher, 1986).      It seems quite clear that there are few
consistent standards of beauty across cultures. Hugely distended lower lips are
considered attractive by Ubangi men; women's bound feet by Manchu dynasty
men; and other less extreme examples of differences in standards of beauty
across cultures could easily be cited.



                                         2
        What is perhaps a bit less obvious is that standards of beauty change
over time within the same culture, changes that go beyond preferences and
fads in clothing to the question of body type. The Rubens ideal looks much
different from her Northern European counterpart walking down the runway
at a modern Paris salon. Today's ideal lean Western male would have been
viewed as potentially or actually consumptive and a bad match in both
marriage and labor markets in nineteenth —centuiy America. The crucial issue
for our purposes is whether standards of attractiveness change slowly enough
to allow labor—market decisions related to beauty to be planned for a horizon
as long as a person's expected working life.
        The evidence seems quite clear on this issue: Within a culture at a
point in time there is tremendous agreement on standards of beauty, and these
standards change quite slowly. For example, respondents ranging in age from
seven to fifty who were asked to rank the appearance of people depicted in
photographs showed very high correlations in their rankings. Moreover, the
ratings of the appearances of a group of individuals photographed at different
stages of their adult lives were highly autocorrelated (Hatfield and Sprecher,
1986, pp. 282—3).
         Some explicit evidence on this is provided by the tabulations in Table
1.   This Canadian survey was conducted in 1977, 1979 and 1981, with
different interviewers in each year asked to "categorize the respondent's
physical appearance" into one of the five rubrics: Strikingly handsome or
beautiful; above average for age (good looking); average for age; below
average for age (quite plain); and homely. The data have some aspects of a
panel, so that many of the respondents were interviewed in two adjacent years,
and some appear in all three years.
         The two —year transition matrices in the upper part of Table 1 are
highly nonrandom, as shown by the X2—statistics based on the contingency
tables implicit in them. In each there is much more clustering along the prime

                                      3
diagonal than would arise randomly. The lower part of Table 1 provides
information on the constancy of the interviewers' ratings over three biennia.
Nearly 93 percent of the respondents are rated identically in at least two years
and only one rating level different in the third year.3 These data suggest that
there is substantial positive correlation in how people rate others' looks.
         There has been some examination by non—economists of some of the
empirical labor—market correlates of beauty. The best of these is probably
Quinn (1978), who generated simple correlations of interviewers' ratings of
the looks of respondents who were full —time employees with their incomes
using one of the data sets we employ. Incomes were higher among both men
and women the higher was the assessment of the respondent's looks, based on
a three —point rating of beauty. The results held for both genders, and there
was no evidence of asymmetry in the effect on incomeof departures from the
middle category. A similar study (Roszell         1989) used the Canadian data
underlying Table 1 to regress 1981 income on 1979 income and a variable
 rating the respondent's looks, with results implying faster income growth
 among better—looking respondents.
         Several studies have examined correlations of earnings with the
 appearance of workers in a narrow age and/or occupational cohort. A recent
 good example is Frieze et al (1991), who studied earnings of MBAs over the
 first ten post —degree years. Ratings of beauty based on photographs of the
 students while in school were correlated positively with both starting and
 subsequent salaries for males. Among females there was no correlation with
 starting salary, but more attractive women experienced more rapid salary
 growth.4
          A related larger literature has offered hypothetical résumés of
 potential workers along with photographs and asked experimental subjects to
 choose among these workers for various jobs (Hatfield and Sprecher, 1986).
 Among men beauty enhanced the worker's likelihood of being chosen for both

                                        4
clerical and professional/managerial jobs. Beauty helped the women's chances
of being selected only for the higher—level clerical jobs.
         We can be fairly sure that within modem Western society standards
of beauty are both commonly agreed upon and stable over one's working life.
The evidence also suggests that women's and men's beauty/ugliness might be
treated differently in the labor market, so that any empirical study must
analyze men and women separately. Most important, an examination of the
literature makes it clear that there has been little systematic thought about the
role of beauty in the labor market, and that the empirical analysis of this issue
has been limited to tabulations and regressions holding at most one or two
variables (usually age) constant.
ILL. A Model of Looks and Occupational Choice
         Our approach to modeling the existence of looks —based differences
in labor — market outcomes assumes that in some occupations attractive
workers may be more productive than unattractive workers.                   This
"productivity" advantage could arise from customer discrimination, with
consumers preferring to be served by better—looking individuals; or there may
be occupations where physical attractiveness enhances the worker's ability to
engage in productive interactions with coworkers. Prima facie evidence
supporting this assumption is provided by a recent survey of employers
 (Holzer, 1993), who were asked "How important or unimportant is attractive
 physical appearance [for the job most recently filled]?"        Eleven percent
 responded that appearance was very important, while 39 percent felt that it was
 somewhat important.
          We begin by assuming an economy with two occupations, one in
 which beauty enhances productivity, one in which it does not. There is also
 one other factor that affects productivity in both occupations, but which may
 be more important in one sector than another. Wages in the two occupations
 are given by:

                                        5
         w11 =   a1;;
         w21 =   a2x1 +    b1,
where i refers to an individual and a1, a2> 0. Attractiveness is measured by
b, which takes the value 1 for half the population (attractive workers) and —1
for the other half (unattractive workers). The other productivity —enhancing
characteristic x takes the value of 1 for half the population and 0 for the other
half. Assume finally that x and b are independently distributed, so that there
are four equal—sized groups of workers.
         Since workers seek to maximize income, they choose Occupation 1
if w1 — w1 > 0, or [a1 — a2]x1 > b1, and Occupation 2 otherwise. If
  a — a2 < 1, there is no mixing; all attractive workers choose Occupation
2 and all unattractive workers choose Occupation 1. The average wage for
attractive workers is .5a2 + 1, while the average wage for the unattractive is
.5a1. There is a measured looks differential in this economy whether or not
one controls for x; but that differential is identical to the wage premium for
working in Occupation 2.
         If a2 —   a1   > 1, some unattractive workers (those with x= 1, b= —1)
choose Occupation 2, as do all attractive workers. The rest of the unattractive
population chooses Occupation 1. In this situation the average wage for
attractive workers is still higher than the average wage for unattractive
workers: E[wlb= 1] = .5a2 + 1, while E[wlb= —1] = .5a2 — .5. There
is also a differential within Occupation 2 between the attractive and the
unattractive: The average wage of attractive workers in Occupation 2 is
.5a2 + 1, while the average wage for unattractive workers there is a2 — 1.
If one does not condition on x, there will appear to be a premium for
unattractive workers who have jobs in the "beautiful" occupation, and if
a2 > 4, unattractive workers in Occupation 2 will earn more than the average
wage for attractive workers. If one does condition on x, the looks differential



                                         6
within Occupation 2 will be the same as the looks differential for the economy
as a whole.
        If a2 —     a1   >    1,   the occupation that rewards beauty also gives a
relatively high reward for the productivity —enhancing factor, leading
unattractive workers with large endowments of that factor to accept the looks
penalty to get the higher return for the factor. This positive selection may
make it seem as though there is a pay premium for unattractive workers in the
occupation dominated by their better—looking counterparts.
         When a2 —       a1   <    —1, all   unattractive workers choose Occupation 1,
as do all attractive workers with x =             1.   The average wage for attractive
workers remains above the average wage for unattractive workers, with
E[wlb=l1 = .5a1 + .5, andE[wlb=—1] = .5a1. Ifonedoesnotcondition
on x, there appears to be a gain to the attractive workers from mixing with the
unattractive, as the wage for attractive workers in Occupation 1 is a1 , greater
than the wage of 1 earned by the attractive workers in Occupation 2. The
looks differential in Occupation 1 will be greater than the overall looks
differential only if a1 > 2.
          In this simple model there is no case in which both occupations will
 be integrated; but adding a second x to the model generates cases with mixing
 in both occupations. In general, a model with many x's and many occupations
 would have unattractive workers locating where beauty is rewarded whenever
 those occupations also give a high relative reward to some other characteristic
 with which the unattractive worker is abundantly endowed. Obversely, an
 attractive worker would choose an occupation which did not reward beauty if
 it provided a high relative reward for that worker's particular bundleof other
 characteristics.
          The discussion has assumed no correlation between b and x. The
 mixing and the differences in differentials arise from features of technology —
  — — is there   an occupation that rewards attractiveness and also happens to give

                                                 7
a relatively high reward to some other factor? Introducing a correlation
between x and b into the simple model does not change the conclusions about
the values of the a's for which mixing will or will not occur. It does, though,
affect pay differentials in obvious ways. For example, if x and b are
positively correlated and there is sorting of some unattractive workers into
occupation 2, the overall looks differential will remain larger than the
differential within occupation 2, but both will grow in absolute value.
         An obvious alternative to a model with productivity or consumer
discrimination generating looks —based differences in labor —market outcomes
has them resulting from employer discrimination against the unattractive. A
Becker — type   model with employers' distaste for unattractive employees
produces a looks differential in earnings, but no systematic sorting of workers
into occupations on the basis of appearance. Alternatively, a model with
employers discriminating against the less attractive only when filling certain
positions leads to a looks differential resulting from occupational crowding.
Such a model also implies sorting into occupations on the basis of
attractiveness, although it does not indicate a priori which occupations should
exhibit concentrations of attractive or unattractive people. However, in the
occupational —crowding model the unattractive worker who obtains a job in
one of the occupations ordinarily reserved for the attractive suffers no earnings
penalty — — — the looks differential is linked to occupations, not individuals.
 •
         Is it possible to distinguish empirically between the model we have
presented and an employer — discrimination or occupational — crowding model?
In theory the answer is yes, but in practice it may be quite difficult. Consider
the simple model with two occupations and two x's. If we could control for
both x's, we would fmd unattractive workers earning less than attractive
workers only in certain occupations (contrary to the Becker model). The
unattractive worker could not achieve a wage gain by moving into an
occupation dominated by attractive workers (as he or she could in an

                                        8
occupational —crowding model). In a wage regression that included the x's,
attractiveness and occupational dummy variables and interactions between
them, the Becker model should produce a non — zero coefficient only on the
attractiveness dummy; the crowding model only on the occupational dummy;
and the productivity model only on the interaction term.
        The reliability of such a test would be compromised, however, if one
of the x's was not observed. For example, if the unobserved x received a
relatively large reward in the occupation that also rewarded attractiveness, the
regression described above could produce non —zero coefficients on the
occupational and attractiveness dummies as well as on the interaction term.5
This could also occur if looks differentials in the labor market were the result
both of employer discrimination against the unattractive and productivity
advantages to the attractive in some occupations.
         Beyond problems related to unobserved variables are those associated
with identifying occupations where employer discrimination against the
unattractive might exist, or alternatively, those where attractiveness might lead
to greater productivity. To the extent that the latter occupations are
identifiable, finding that more attractive workers were more heavily
concentrated in such occupations would support the productivity model.
         Our empirical strategy is guided by the productivity model. We first
determine whether standard earnings equations yield a looks differential, and
then whether that differential differs across occupations in ways the model
suggests. In addition, we look for evidence of the sorting implied by the
productivity model, checking whether more attractive workers tend to be
concentrated in those occupations where one might suspect that attractive
people have a productivity advantage. We present the productivity model to
illustrate that the existence of looks differentials does not necessarily result
from employer discrimination against the unattractive. Discovering evidence



                                       9
in favor of this model does not, though, disprove the existence of such
discrimination.
IV. Data
        Two broad household surveys for the U.S. and one for Canada
provide data on the respondents' looks as well as on the usual labor — market
and demographic variables of interest to economists. The 1977 Quality of
Employment Survey (QES) contains information on 1515 workers. This
Survey has the advantage of including great detail about labor—market
behavior, but the disadvantage of including only labor—force participants.
The second American data set is the Quality of American Life survey (QAL)
in 1971, which contains interviews of 2164 respondents. For our purposes
this study has the advantage of having substantial background information on
the respondents, but the disadvantage of containing relatively fewer variables
describing the worker's job than does the QES. The Canadian Quality of Life
study (QOL) contains 3415 observations in 1981. This study has none of the
disadvantages of the two American data sets and the additional attraction of
providing (for a much smaller subsample that constitutes a three—year panel)
three observations on each respondent's looks.
         All three surveys asked the interviewer to "rate [or categorize] the
 respondent's physical appearance" on the five—point scale shown in Table 1,
 along which looks range from strikingly handsome or beautiful to homely.6
 The distributions of the ratings in the three surveys are shown in Table 2.
 (For the Canadian data we present averages based on all the respondents
 included in the three—year study.) Among both men and women roughly half
 are rated as average; and many more are rated above—average than are viewed
 as below —average. Either Canadians are better —looking than Americans; or
 Canadian interviewers (perhaps the populace generally) are less willing to
 describe someone as having below —average looks. What is most interesting
 is that the ratings of women are more dispersed around the middle category.

                                      10
This is a common finding in the social —psychological literature: Women's
appearances evoke stronger reactions, both positive and negative, than do
men's (Hatfield and Sprecher, 1986).
         Very few people are rated as strikingly beautiful (handsome) or as
homely. Thus while we make some use of the full five—point scale, in most
of the work we use the three—fold distinction above—average, average and
below—average. Even this means that the cell sizes for some of the
categories, e.g., below —average looking people in the QAL, are not very
large.
         All three surveys offer a variety of measures of earnings. In all of
them we chose to calculate hourly earnings as annual earnings divided by 52
times weekly hours.7      In the analyses involving hourly earnings all
respondents who worked less than 20 hours per week and who earned less than
$ .75 perhour in the QAL ($1 per hour in the QES and the QOL) are
excluded, as are the self—employed and all those for whom data on the
various control variables are unavailable.8 The empirical work people
includes only workers ages 18—64.
         Other variables defined for the analyses of hourly earnings and
included in all three data sets are: marital status (which we measure as a
zero —one dummy variable, married or not); education, defined as a vector of
dummy variables measuring high—school completion, some college, or a
college degree or more; and one—digit industry. Self—reported health status
is included in all the regressions. Most important, anyone whose health status
in the QES is listed as "totally and permanently disabled" or the next most
severe category on a seven—point subjective scale is excluded from all the
empirical work. In the QAL a respondent is excluded if health "prevents
him/her from doing lots of things," while in the QOL anyone whose self—
 reported health status is not at least rated as "fair" is excluded.9 These
 exclusions minimize any spurious results stemming from a possible correlation

                                       11
between physical appearance and major physical disabilities that reduce
productivity.
         Since the purpose is to control for as many other causes of variation
in earnings as possible, we define the set of regressors quite broadly. In the
QES and QOL the data allow the construction of actual labor—market
experience, years of tenure with the firm, and an indicator of union status. In
the former establishment size is included, while the latter includes firm size.
                                                           —   6. In estimates
In the QAL experience is measured as age — schooling
based on the two American data sets we include dummy variables for race and
for location in the South, while in the QOL we include a vector of variables
for Canada's regions and an indicator of whether the person does not speak
English at home. Finally, the QAL allows us to include measures of the
respondents' fathers' occupations, of their early childhood background and of
their immigrant status and that of their parents and grandparents.
V. Looks and Earnings
         The most interesting economic question involving beauty is probably
its relation to an individual's economic success. In Section III we suggested
three possible reasons for a premium for beauty or a penalty for ugliness in the
labor market:            Pure employer discrimination, customer
 discriminationfproductivity, and occupational crowding. In order to examine
 these we need to know first whether earnings differentials based on beauty
 even exist.
          We make no claim to be able to estimate a structural model of a
 hedonic market for looks. Rather, in the first part of this Section we present
 estimates of standard earnings equations that allow for the possibility of
 differences in earnings related to looks. In the final part we synthesize the
 findings to infer what we have learned from this approach about the existence
 of such earnings differentials.



                                       12
A. Estimates of the Relationship of Looks and Earnings
        Columns (1) and (4) of Table 3 present estimates of earnings
equations based on the data from the QES and on a three —point rating of
beauty. Columns (1) and (5) of Table 4 do the same using data from the
QAL, as do columns (1) and (5) of Table 5 for the QOL. In these and
subsequent tables we present the probabilities (p) related to the F— statistic
testing the joint significance of the variables reflecting individuals' beauty.
         Of the six equations we find that the pair of beauty variables is jointly
significantly nonzero at some conventional level in four cases. Moreover, in
all six groups people with above—average looks receive a pay premium,
ranging from as little as 1 percent to a high estimate of 13 percent (for women
in the QAL). In five groups (excluding only women in the QAL) workers
with below—average looks receive a pay penalty, ranging from 1 percent to
as large as 15 percent. Not all of these individual coefficients are significantly
different from zero. Many are, though; and the consistency of the pattern
across three independent samples suggests that the finding of pay premia and
penalties for looks is robust.
         The estimates based on the QES indicate that more attractive people
are paid more. However, the premia for good looks are considerably smaller
than the penalties for bad looks and are not statistically significant. The
results for men are corroborated by the QAL results in Table 4, with positive
estimated coefficients for above—average looks categories and (larger) negative
wage penalties for those in below—average looks categories. They are,
 though, contradicted by the estimates from the QOL in Table 5. In that
 sample there is a significant premium for good — looking men, but a tiny and
 insignificant penalty for men of below —average looks. A similar disagreement
 exists in the estimates for women. The large penalties for ugliness in the QES
 are replicated in the Canadian QOL, but are contradicted by a positive
 coefficient for below —average looking women in the QAL. The small premia

                                        13
for above—average looking women in those two samples are also contradicted
by the statistically significant and large premium for attractiveness in the QAL.
         The similarity of the premia and penalties across the two genders is
also interesting. In the results from the QES they are nearly identical. In the
QAL there is a larger penalty for below—average—looking men than for
women, but a larger premium for good—looking women. The opposite
pattern holds in the QOL. Among people who choose to work at least half
time, beauty does not generate hugely different effects on the earnings of
women and men.
         While the results are qualitatively similar in the three samples, one
might worry still more about the robustness of the estimates. One concern is
that each interviewer might have a different standard for beauty. These
differences could be regarded as a form of measurement error, lowering the
efficiency of our estimates and biasing them to the extent that interviewer
standards were spuriously correlated with respondents' earnings. To account
for any potential problems this might cause, columns (2) and (6) of Tables 4
and 5 reestimate these reduced —form earnings equations using intei-viewer —
specific fixed effects for the QAL and QOL respectively. Among men the
penalty for ugliness increases slightly in both samples; but the changes in the
premium for good looks are in opposite directions. Among women the
unexpected positive effect of below —average looks becomes larger, but none
of the other estimates of penalties and premia is affected much. Taken
together, the results suggest clearly that the relation between looks and
earnings does not arise from idiosyncratic ratings by particular
interviewers.10
          Another worry is about variables that are necessarily excluded from
some or all of the samples because they are unavailable. Obviously, variables
in the latter group cannot be examined here. But in the former group we can
consider the impact of excluding the worker's family background and

                                       14
intelligence. Including the family background measures from the QAL, as in
Table 4, lowered the absolute values of the estimated looks premia and
penalties by less than .005 for men, and by less than .02 for women. Had we
also included in columns (1) and (5) of Table 4 a dummy variable for workers
whose IQ was rated by the interviewer as being in the top 7 percent, the
absolute values of the coefficients for men would fall by .002 each and those
for women would fall by .006 each. Despite the positive correlation between
IQ and beauty, the changes are tiny. They do not alter the inferences from
Table 4 or from the estimates based on the other data sets.
         Columns (2) and (5) in Table 3 ((3) and (7) in Table 4) estimate the
relationship between hourly earnings and looks using the complete five—point
rating scheme. For men in the QES the results are remarkable: Hourly
earnings rise with each successively higher rating of a worker's appearance.
Among women in the QES and men in the QAL this is true except for
strikingly handsome or beautiful workers. For women in the QAL the
monotonic relationship is broken by the earnings premium received by plain
women. Using the five—fold distinction adds little to the ability to explain
hourly earnings (increasing the R 2 in two cases, decreasing it in two others);
and it in no way alters our conclusions about premia and penalties for looks.
         A long, large and still growing literature (e.g., Taubman, 1975;
McLean and Moon, 1980; and Averett and Korenman, 1993) has studied the
relation between weight and/or height and earnings. We can test whether our
results merely demonstrate that these few bodily characteristics explain the
beauty penalties and premia by including measures of height and weight in the
earnings equations. In the QES the interviewer rated the respondent's weight
on a five—point scale and estimated the respondent's height in inches, while
only height is available in the QAL.'1 For both samples we fonned dummy
variables based on height, categorizing women as tall if they exceeded 5'9" (6'
for men) or short if they were below 5' (5'6" for men). Self—explanatory

                                      15
dummy variables for people who are obese, or only overweight, were
constructed for the QES sample.
        The results of adding these measures to the earnings regressions that
contain the three—fold rating of beauty are shown in columns (3) and (6) of
Table 3 and columns (4) and (8) of Table 4. Other than wage premia for both
short and tall women in the QAL and a penalty for short men in the QES none
of these variables has a coefficient that exceeds its standard error. Most
important, including these measures of body type has little effect on the
coefficients on the ratings of beauty in all four samples — — much too small
to suggest that the relationship between looks and earnings arises from any
possible correlation between appearance and height or weight.
         The Canadian data allow us to examine whether additional
information about an individual's looks beyond that contained in a rating by
one interviewer adds to our ability to infer the impact of looks on earnings.
For the subset of respondents included in the bottom part of Table 1 the study
provides three independent estimates of an individual's looks. One approach
to using this information would be to create a set of dummy variables for each
of the ten combinations of looks ratings based on the three — fold classification
for each of the three years. This has the difficulties of producing a few very
sparsely occupied cells and of ignoring information contained in the five —fold
classification.
 •
         An alternative approach uses the interviewers' ratings to infer the
respondents' underlying beauty. Denote the individual's true beauty by B.
 Let B be normally distributed n(O, 1), an arbitrary scaling that does not affect
 the results (Terza, 1987). For any particular year we assume that the
 interviewer assigns a rating along the five — point scale based on her estimate
 of B. The information in Table 2 for the entire population implies that the
 informational content of a person's rating as homely, for example, is that the



                                        16
person is in the lowest 2.5 percent of the population. The best estimate of that
person's B is B = E(BIB < N1(.025)).12 Similar inferences can be drawn
based on partitioning the normal distribution for each of the other ratings
using the population percentages in Table 2.
         Given the inference about B for one year, an estimate of a
respondent's true beauty is B, the average of the three independent estimates
B. To illustrate what this scheme implies, consider an example of the
underlying beauty of a particular pair of respondents. One person is rated as
average in all three years (like 26.3 percent of the sample members); the other
is rated as above average in one year, average in another and below average
in the third (like 1.0 percent of the sample). Because few respondents are
rated below average, we infer that the second person's true beauty is less than
the first person's.
         We calculate B for each sample member used in the estimates in
Table 5 who was in the panel for all three years. Columns (3) and (6) of
Table 5 present estimates on this narrower sample using linear and quadratic
terms in the B for 1981.13 Columns (4) and (8) replace the estimate of
beauty for 1981 by the beauty index B based on all three years of information
about the worker's looks. This substitution adds to the significance of the
equations for both men and women. Obtaining additional information on a
worker's beauty provides additional information about his or her earnings.
Workers whose beauty is estimated to be higher earn more, and the marginal
impact of additional beauty is diminishing. Here there is an asynmietric effect
of looks on earnings, with lesser rewards for additional beauty and increasing
penalties for increasingly bad looks.
B. Synthesis of the Basic Results, and an Initial Internretation
         Tables 3—5 stand on their own and provide the basic evidence for the
existence of earnings differentials based on beauty. Nonetheless, it is useful
to summarize the results to infer what the three sets of data imply are the best

                                        17
estimates of the penalties and premia associated with looks. Table 6 presents
such summaries, for both genders separately and for the entire set of
observations, and for all three samples combined and for the two American
samples alone. The estimates are from regressions that pool the samples in
Tables 3—5 (or Tables 3 and 4 only) and that allow the regression coefficients
on all variables other than the beauty measures to differ across the samples.
Pooling the samples for men and women alone is not rejected by the data; and
for each gender both the penalty and premium are significantly nonzero.
Indeed, even pooling the data for both genders for all three samples is not
rejected; and the penalties and premia in both sets of pooled equations are all
significantly nonzero.
         The results make it clear that there is a significant penalty for bad
looks among men. The 9 percent of working men who are viewed as being
below average or homely are penalized about 10 percent in hourly earnings,
other things equal. The 32 percent who are viewed as having above —average
looks or even as handsome receive an earnings premium of 5 percent. Among
women there is some evidence of a premium for good looks, with an average
effect of about 4 percent; the penalty for bad looks (for the lowest 8 percent
of working women) is only 5 percent. Among women neither effect alone is
 highly significant, though they are jointly significant. Finally, the combined
 results in the bottom two rows suggest a 7 to 10 percent penalty for being in
 the lowest 10 percent of looks among all workers, and a 5 percent premium
 for being in the top 30 percent.
         While the absolute values of the point estimates of the penalties
 generally exceed the estimates of the earnings premia, these differences are not
 significant. There is only weak evidence of asymmetry in how the labor
 market treats ugliness and beauty.14
          Some might interpret our results as merely showing that the
 unobserved determinants of productivity generate extra earnings that are used

                                        18
to improve a worker's beauty. There is the conventional problem associated
with any hedonic estimation, i.e., those with higher wages holding constant
the observables will choose to invest more in beauty. Unfortunately, as is
usual, our data are not rich enough to permit a credible simultaneity
correction. Two arguments, though, suggest the problem is not crucial here.
First, the social —psychological evidence we mentioned in Section II showed
how little individuals' relative physical appearances change during adulthood.
That suggests there is limited scope for using unexplained earnings differences
to "buy" differences in beauty. Second, and more telling, if differences in
unexplained earnings were used to affect beauty ratings, their persistence over
a working life should lead to a greater simultaneity bias among older than
among younger workers, and thus smaller apparent penalties and premia if we
restrict the samples in Tables 3—5 to workers ages 18—30. In fact, all beauty
premia and penalties in the QES are larger in this subsample than in the basic
estimates in Table 3. In the other two samples half the estimates increase in
absolute value, half decrease. There is no evidence of a weaker relation
between earnings and beauty among younger workers.
         Another possible explanation for our findings is a possible tendency
for greater attractiveness and higher earnings in adulthood to be joint products
of a priviliged family background. Only the QAL contained variables (e.g.
father's occupation) that allowed us to attempt to control for such effects. If
family background in general were important, one would expect these partial
indicators of it to have a noticeable effect on the estimates. They do not,
suggesting that the unobservable background measures are unlikely to be
biasing our results seriously.'5
          These three pieces of evidence reinforce the conclusion that,
whatever the causes, people who are better—looking receive higher pay, while
bad—looking people earn less than average, other things equal. It is crucial
to stress that these penalties and premia reflect the effects of beauty in all its

                                       19
aspects, not merely one of its many components such as height, weight,
complexion, facial structure, etc.
VI. The Absence of Differences by Gender
         Particularly surprising in light of some popular discussion (e.g.,
Wolf, 1991) is the absence of significantly larger penalties and premia,
especially the latter, for women than for men. If anything, the evidence goes
in the opposite direction: Men's looks may have bigger effects on their
earnings than do women's. One simple explanation might be that our results
are a statistical artifact produced because the beauty ratings are a noisier signal
of women's physical appearance than of men's. The evidence contradicts this:
In the longitudinal part of the QOL the beauty ratings of women are slightly
k   variable over the three years than those of men.
         One way that beauty can affect women's labor—market success is by
influencing their labor—force participation. To examine this possibility we
estimate standard labor—force participation probits that include the measures
of attractiveness. These are estimated for married women (the overwhelming
majority of the samples) for both the QAL and the QOL, and for the
longitudinal subsample of the QOL.
         The coefficients on the beauty measures included in these probits are
shown in the first four columns of Table 7. The t—statistics on the above—
average looks rating are tiny and the coefficients are always nearly zero.
There is little evidence that good —looking women are more likely to be in the
labor force than otherwise identical women. Though the estimates from the
QAL are not significantly nonzero, the effects of below —average looks on
women's participation are negative in that sample; and in the QOL these
effects are significantly negative. They also are not small. For example, the
6 percent of married women with below —average looks are 8 percent less
likely to partipate than average—looking women.16



                                        20
         There is thus some evidence that women select themselves out of the
labor force if they are particularly unattractive. This selectivity, though, has
no important impact on the basic estimates of the effects of looks on earnings
(in columns (5) of TabLes 4 and 5). Correcting for selectivity in the QAL
changes the estimated premium associated with above —average looks from
 128 to .130. Accounting for this form of selectivity does not alter the
premium in the QOL and changes the earnings penalty from — .058 to — .036.
         Another possibility is that looks affect women's economic success by
altering their opportunities for marriage. Holding constant a woman's age and
educational attainment, in all three samples her physical appearance is
completely unrelated to her likelihood of being married. It does, though,
affect the quality of the husband whom she marries. We use data on
husband's education in the QES to estimate ordered probits that include our
standard pair of measures of physical appearance of the married woman (and
also her health, her husband's age and her education, to account for assortive
mating). •The results, presented in column (5) of Table 7, also show that
above—average looks have essentially no effect on the outcome, in this case
on the quality of the husband to whom the woman is matched. However, all
else equal below—average looking women marry men whose educational
attainment is less than what the women's own educational attainment
predicts.'7 Women face an additional economic penalty for bad looks in the
form of marriage to husbands whose potential earnings ability is less.
         The results show that the economic penalties facing below—average
looking women are not limited to hourly earnings. Both their success in the
marriage market and their likelihood of working outside the home are reduced
by their bad looks. No such effects exist for below —average looking men;
and there is no apparent premium in the marriage market or extra effect on
participation for either good —looking women or men.



                                       21
VII. Sorting, Productivity or Discrimination?
        Having demonstrated that the labor market does reward beauty, we
now consider the sources of the penalties and premia. The model presented
in Section III demonstrated that it is difficult to disentangle the effects of
customer discrimination/productivity differences and the sorting they induce
from the effects of employer discrimination. It suggested that to examine
these issues we need to learn how workers are sorted into occupations and to
discover how the earnings regressions of Tables 3—5 are affected if the beauty
measures are interacted with measures of the possible importance of beauty in
the occupation.
         A test for sorting requires prior determination of the occupations
where looks are likely to enhance productivity. In the absence of a widely
accepted objective measure for detennining this, we use three independent
subjective methods. The first is based on the Dictionary of Occupational
Titles (DOT) (U.S. Department of Labor, 1977). We assign each worker to
a DOT occupation using three—digit occupational codes in both the QES and
the QAL and note the DOT measure of "the job's relationship to people".
Since physical attractiveness can affect productivity through the worker's
interactions with customers or coworkers, we classify jobs with DOT measures
that suggest an important role for interpersonal communication as ones in
which looks are important)8
         The second method relies on the opinions of eight adults with at least
one year of full — time labor — market experience who were asked to rate each
of the three—digit occupations on a three—point scale: 0, looks are probably
not important; 1, looks might be important; and 2, looks are definitely
important.
             19   If the average rating of the occupation exceeded .5,   we treat

looks as being important in the occupation and form a dummy variable
reflecting this average of the subjective ratings.



                                        22
        The third measure uses the survey (Hoizer, 1993) in which employers
were asked if an applicant's appearance was an important consideration in
filling the most recent job vacancy. The occupational category of the vacancy
was also recorded, as was the gender of the applicant hired. We first divided
the survey data on the basis of the gender of the worker hired, then compiled
for each gender a list of occupations that seemed fairly homogeneous with
respect to the importance of appearance and for which there were at least ten
observations.   Next we calculated for each occupation/gender cell the
percentage of employers responding that appearance was very important or
somewhat important and matched these cell percentages where possible to
workers from the QES and the QAL.2°
        The Appendix Table lists the occupational categories chosen from the
employer survey data, along with the cell sizes and percentages of employers
responding that appearance was important. For men we defme an occupation
as one with "looks important" if more than 40 percent of the employers
responded that appearance was important; for women, the dividing line is 44
percent. The Appendix Table shows that occupations with higher percentages
are generally those with more contact between the worker and the firm's
customers.
         If workers sort themselves among occupations/employers based in part
on the relative productivity of their beauty, we would observe the highest
average rating of individuals' looks in those occupations where our indexes
suggest looks matter most. Table 8 presents the fractions of workers in each
of the three categories of individuals' looks who work in occupations where
looks are important. With three rating schemes for the occupations, two
samples and both genders we have constructed twelve tests for occupational
sorting. Formal tests for sorting yield significant x2 —statistics in only four
of the twelve rows. A good way to sunimarize the results is that all three
 rating schemes yield a significant relationship between our measures of the

                                      23
importance of beauty in an occupation and the beauty of workers in that
occupation in the QAL but not in the QES. But in seven of the twelve rows
the percentage of workers in jobs where looks are important is monotonically
increasing as one moves up the scale of individuals' looks. More important,
ui ten of them above—average looking people are most likely to work in
occupations where looks are important.
         The results in Table 8 provide some weak evidence of sorting across
occupations by beauty. Whether the weakness of the evidence is due to
imperfections in our proxies for differences in the importance of beauty among
occupations or to the relatively minor role that sorting by beauty plays is
unclear. Taken at face value, though, the results give some support to the idea
that the effects of beauty on earnings that we demonstrated in Section V are
at least partly associated with sorting.
         As discussed in Section III, it is worth knowing the extent to which
the earnings differential is a function of some feature of the occupation rather
than the appearance of the individual. To examine this issue we augment the
earnings regressions of Tables 3—5 with dummy variables signifying whether
or not looks are important in an occupation and with interactions between
these variables and the individual's own looks. The occupational —crowding
model would lead one to expect more of the looks differential to be captured
by the occupation variables, while productivity/customer discrimination or
pure employer—discrimination would lead these terms to have little effect.
         The results of this test are shown in Table 9, which presents equations
analogous to those in columns (1) and (4) of Table 3 (columns (1) and (5) of
Table 4). For the DOT and subjective measures the samples are identical to
 those used in Tables 3 and 4.          The coefficients on the main effects
 representing the respondents' own beauty are not greatly different from what
 they were in those tables; and the p —values on the F —statistics testing the pair
 of variables also differ little from the corresponding estimates in those tables.

                                           24
Even holding constant occupational beauty, below—average looking workers
receive substantial penalties (except, as before, for women in the QAL) and
above—average looking workers receive earnings premia (especially women
in the QAL).         In the samples using the employer—based estimates of
occupational looks, which contain roughly 40 percent fewer observations, the
effects of the workers' own looks are significant at least at a low level in three
of the four cases.
         The main effects of occupational looks exceed their standard errors
in six of the twelve equations. The R 2 here are higher for the QES men,
lower for the QES women, and higher in one case, lower in the other for both
QAL samples than in Tables 3 and 4, while in the reduced samples using the
employer—based indexes the R 2 are increased in three of the four cases.2'
 Taken together, the estimates provide a hint that occupational requirements
for beauty may produce independent effects on earnings; but we cannot reject
the possibility that they have no effect.
         This exercise demonstrates one thing very clearly: The effects of an
individual's own looks on his or her earnings are very robust. That there are
earnings premia and penalties for looks independent of occupation suggests
that occupational crowding along the dimension of looks is not the chief cause
of those premia and penalties. That there is some evidence of sorting implies
that pure employer discrimination does not alone describe the role of beauty
in the labor market. Tables 8 and 9 suggest that at least part of the
explanation for the apparent impact of individuals' looks on their earnings is
that beauty is productive, arising perhaps from the effects of customers'
preferences, and/or that pure employer discrimination on the basis of looks
exists. We cannot, though, determine how much of the total effect stems from
these two possible sources.




                                        25
VHI. Conclusions and Implications
        In empirical analyses based on three distinct sets of household data we
have discovered a number of facts about beauty in the labor market. Other
things equal, the wages of people with below—average looks are lower than
those of average—looking workers; and there is a premium in wages for
good —looking people that is slightly smaller than this penalty. The penalty
and premium may be higher for men, but these gender differences are not
large. There is some evidence that the labor market sorts the best —looking
people into occupations where their looks are productive.
        It is difficult to disentangle the effects of alternative sources of
earnings differentials in the data. Nonetheless, our finding that individuals
receive earnings penalties and premia even after we account for their
occupations suggests that occupational crowding does not explain how beauty
affects the labor market. Other explanations, such as inherent productivity
differences, the possibe effects of customer discrimination, or taste—based
employer/employee discrimination seem to provide better explanations.22
More light could be shed on these questions by examinations of the
relationship between looks and earnings within particular narrowly —defmed
occupations.
         That there is a payoff in the labor market for good looks and a
penalty for bad looks should be obvious without our demonstration: Why else
would workers spend time on grooming before going to work; and why would
they spend money on clothing and other items designed to enhance their
appearance at work? What our demonstration shows is the magnitude of the
incentives to expend these resources and the mechanisms by which they might
arise. The results lead naturally to studying other issues in discrimination
along various dimensions, such as physical and mental handicaps. In each case
the method we have developed to aid distinguishing between


                                     26
productivity/discrimination and occupational sorting can be applied mutatis
mutandis to discover the source of other apparently discriminatory outcomes.




                                      27
                             REFERENCES

Susan Averett and Sanders Korenman, "The Economic Reality of 'The Beauty
Myth'," Unpublished paper, Humphrey Institute of Public Affairs, University
of Minnesota, 1993.

Francine Blau and Andrea Belier, "Black—White Earnings over the 1970s and
1980s: Gender Differences and Trends," Review of Economics and Statistics,
74 (1992): 276—86.

David Bioom and Gilles Grenier, "Earnings of the French Minority in Canada
and the Spanish Minority in the United States," in Barry Chiswick, ed.,
Immigration. Language, and Ethnicity. Washington: AEI Press, 1992.

George Borjas and Marta Tienda, eds., Hispanics in the U.S. Economy. New
York: Academic Press, 1985.

Glen Cain, "The Economic Analysis of Labor Market Discrimination: A
Survey," in Orley Ashenfelter and Richard Layard, eds., Handbook of Labor
Economics. Amsterdam: North—Holland, 1986.

Alan Diiiingham, Marianne Ferber and Daniel Hamermesh, "Gender
Discrimination by Gender: Voting in a Professional Society," Industrial and
Labor Relations Review, 48 (1994): forthcoming.

Alan Fechter and Charles Thorpe, "Labor Market Discrimination against the
Handicapped: An Initial Inquiry," Urban Institute Working Paper No. 3610—
1, 1978.

Irene Frieze, Josephine Olson and June Russell, "Attractiveness and Income
for Men and Women in Management," Journal of Applied Social Psychology,
21(1991): 1039—57.

Elaine Hatfield and Susan Sprecher, Mirror, Mirror...: The Importance of
Looks in Everyday Life. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1986.


Harry Hoizer, "Multi—City Study of Urban Inequality," initial draft,
Michigan State University, 1993.

Norman Johnson and Samuel Kotz, Continuous Univariate Distributions —    1.
New York: Wiley, 1970.


                                    28
Troy McAdams, Farzad Moussavi and Michael Kiassen, "Employee
Appearance and the Americans with Disabilities Act: An Emerging Issue?"
Employee Responsibilities and Rights Journal, 5 (1992): 323 —38.

Robert McLean and Marilyn Moon, "Health, Obesity and Earnings,"
American Journal of Public Health, 70 (September 1980): 1006—9.

Robert Quinn, "Physical Deviance and Occupational Mistreatment: The Short,
the Fat and the Ugly," Unpublished paper, Institute for Social Research,
University of Michigan, 1978.

Sherwin Rosen, "Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets," Journal of Political
Economy, 82 (1974): 34—55.

Patricia Roszell, David Kennedy and Edward Grabb, "Physical Attractiveness
and Income Attainment Among Canadians," Journal of Psychology, 123
(1989): 547—59.

Paul Taubman, Sources of Inequality in Earnings. Amsterdam: North —
Holland Press, 1975.

Joseph Terza, "Estimating Linear Models with Ordinal Qualitative
Regressors," Journal of Econometrics, 34 (1987): 275—91.

U.S. Department of Labor, Dictionary of Occupational Titles, 4th. ed.
Washington: DOL, 1977.

Naomi Wolf, The Beauty Myth. New York: Anchor, 1991.




                                   29
                        FOOTNOTES


1. Examples of each are Blau and Belier (1992); Borjas and
Tienda (1985); Bloom and Grenier (1992), and Fechter and
Thorpe (1978).

2. Quoted by Fred Siegel, "The Cult of Multiculturalism,"
New Republic, February 18, 1991, p. 38, from an official
document from Smith College. The legislation was proposed
in the Philippine Congress, reported by the Associated Press,
December 13, 1992. The case law and the ADA are discussed
by McAdams et a! (1992). A recent case is Hodgdon v. Mt.
Mansfield Company, November 6, 1992, in which the
Vermont Supreme Court ruled that a chambermaid's lack of
upper teeth qualified as a handicap protected under the state's
Fair Employment Practices Act.

3. Given the distributions across the five categories only 75
percent would be so classified randomly. While 35 percent
are classified identically in all three years, only 22 percent
would be categorized this way randomly.

4. An unpublished work in the late 1970s by Robert Frank of
Cornell University correlated earnings of recent Cornell
graduates with ratings of their appearance (from pictures) by
a group of current undergraduates.

5. This potential omitted —variable problem is distinct from
the problem of unobserved productivity that is correlated with
attractiveness. In addition to biasing attempts to estimate a
looks differential, the latter correlation could be the basis for
a sort of statistical discrimination, in which attractiveness was
used by employers as a noisy signal of some other productivity
factor.

6. These are the only broadly —based surveys we could find
that contain such information. A number of other surveys,
including one interesting proprietary data set used in a (racial)
discrimination case by Mark Killingsworth, contain
information on the worker's general appearance. This latter
is more likely to be influenced by income than the physical
appearance measures that are available in our samples.
7. All the equations were recomputed using annual earnings,
with weekly hours included as an independent variable. None
of our conclusions is changed qualitatively by this
modification.

8. Note that in 1971 in the U.S. the minimum wage was
$ 1.60 per hour and in 1977 was $2.30. In Canada in 1981
the federal minimum was $3.50, and some provincial minima
were even higher. The disqualifications on the wage rate are
thus designed to exclude those observations for which
measurement errors are likely. Excluding the small fraction
of workers whose estimated hourly wage is far below statutory
minima does not imply any selectivity on a characteristic that
is correlated with looks. In the QAL, for example, there is no
relation at even the 20 percent level of significance between
the beauty measures and the probability of exclusion from the
sample for this reason. Even if there were, the fraction of
people so excluded is below 5 percent of the sample.

9. Of the respondents in the QES between the ages of 18 and
64 this disqualified 10; from the QAL, 126; and from the
QOL, 18.

10. One related possibility is that interviewers of different
sexes rate the respondents differently. This possibility is also
handled by the estimates using interviewer fixed effects. It is
not likely to be a problem in any case, since 95 percent of the
respondents in the two American samples were interviewed by
women. A related problem is that there may be differences in
the interviewers' ability to classify workers of different races.
Unsurprisingly, given that the overwhelming majority of the
respondents are white, the estimates in Tables 3 and 4 change
only minutely when African—Americans are deleted from the
sample.

11. The rating scale for weight (in descending order) was:
"Obese;" "overweight;" "average for height;" "underweight,"
and "skinny." Among women (men) 3.2 (.7) percent were
rated obese; 19.6 (17.4) percent were rated overweight; 65.8
(72.7) percent were considered average; 11.2 (8.5) percent
were rated underweight, and .2 (.7) percent were rated skinny.
12. The expectations are of a doubly—truncated normal
density and are calculated based on Johnson and Kotz (1970).

13. If the pair of dummy variabLes used in columns (2) and
(6) is included instead here, the R 2 are slightly lower, .283
for men and .408 for women.

14. Remember that hourly earnings were calculated using
actual weelcly hours, but assuming that all workers spent the
same number of weeks employed. The QES and QOL provide
data on weeks of layoff in the last year in the QES (two years
in the QOL). Tobit estimates of the detenninants of weeks of
layoff (for the roughly 7 percent of males who reported having
been laid off) were produced and included controls for
education level, experience, union status, tenure with the firm,
and firm or establishment size. In both samples the t—
statistics on the dummy variable for above—average looks
were below .5 in absolute value. Bad looks raised the
probability of layoff and lengthened its duration, with t —
statistics   of 1.54 in the QES (1.40 in the QOL). The
conclusion that there is only weak asymmetry in the effect of
looks on hourly earnings becomes a bit stronger when we
consider effects on weeks of involuntary unemployment.

15. We are indebted to Bob Willis for suggesting this point.

16. Not surprisingly, similar probits on men's labor—force
participation yielded no relationship between looks and the
probability of participation.

17. The same ordered probits estimated for the education of
wives of married men in the QES generated very small
coefficients on the beauty variables, with t —statistics below .3
in absolute value.

18. We rely on the fifth digit of the DOT code, which can
take nine different values according to whether the job
involves "mentoring," "negotiating," "instructing,"
"supervising,"    "diverting," "persuading,"       "speaking,
signaling," "serving," or "taking instructions, helping." We
treat all but the last as indications that interpersonal interaction
is an important aspect of the occupation.
19. The 28 pairwise correlations of the ratings of the 504
occupations ranged from .36 to .61, with a mean of .47.

20.    The survey targeted employers of low—education
workers. This produced too few observations in several broad
occupation cells to calculate occupational beauty ratings,
preventing many QES and QAL sample members from being
included in this part of the analysis.

21. A more straightforward test simply includes a vector of
dummy variables for one—digit occupations in the basic
equation for both samples and sexes. (Finer detail is not
possible given some of the cell sizes.) The coefficients on the
dummy variables for below — and above — average looks are
hardly altered in size or significance. Among the QES men
(women), the coefficients (analogous to those in columns (1)
and (4) of Table 3) become —.156 and .014 (—.100 and
.026). Among the QAL men (women), the coefficients
(analogous to those in columns (1) and (5) of Table 4) become
—.059 and .062 (.068 and .115).

22. Another possibility (alluded to in footnote 5) is that
attractiveness is a signal of otherwise unobservable (to the
employer) productivity. If this were so, and employers
learned about workers' productivity as theyacquire tenure, the
impact of looks would diminish as tenure increases.
Reestimates of the basic equations in Tables 3 and 5 for the
QES (QOL) based on workers with at least three (five) years
of tenure with the firm refute this possibility. Of the eight
coefficients on physical appearance four are larger in absolute
value, four smaller, and the only change greater than one
standard error is the higher penalty for below —average
looking senior men in the QOL.
Table 1. Ratings of Beauty, Canadian Quality of Life, 1977, 1979. 1981


                    Transition Matrices. 1977-79, 1979-81 Combined

                                      MEN (N — 1504)

                                                        Second Year

       First Year                       1           2         3           4     5


Strikingly handsome            1       0.2         0.9      1.0       0.0     0.0
Above average (good looking)   2        1.4       14.9 15.9           0.7     0.0
Average                        3       0.9        15.1 37.5           4.8     0.1
Below average (plain)          4       0.1         0.4      4.0       1.7     0.1
Homely                         5       0.0         0.1      0.1       0.1     0.1

     1977—79: X2(16) — 151.78; 1979—81: x2(16) — 142.67.

                                     WOMEN (N — 2147)

                                            1       2        3            4      5
Strikingly handsome            I       0.4         1.4      0.6       0.0       0.0
Above average (good looking)   2        1.0       14.3 15.8           1.0       0.0
Average                        3        0.7       13.3 37.0           4.3       0.4
Below average (plain)          4        0.0        0.8        6.2     2.0       0.2
Homely                         5        0.0        0.1        0.2     0.2       0.1

     1977—79: X2(16) — 231.13; 1979—81: x2(16) — 169.17.


                       Swiunary of Three-year Transition Matrix

                               BOTH GENDERS (N — 1330)

                                   Absolute Deviations from 1977 Rating

     1977 Rating             0,0      0.1           1,1             0,2 1,2         2,2         2,3
                                                (same)                          (same)
Strikingly handsome          0.1      0.2         0.8   0.0         0.1   1.1       0.2   0.0   0.1
Above average                8.1 13.2            10.4   0.6         0.6   0.9       0.2   0.0   0.0
Average                     26.3 19.7             6.8   1.0         0.7   0.4       0.1   0.0   0.0
Below average                0.3      2.9         3.8   0.2         0.2   0.8       0.2   0.0   0.1
Homely                       0.0      0.1         0.2   0.0         0.0   0.1       0.2   0.0   0.0

    TOTAL                   34.8 36.0            21.9 1.7           1.5 3.2         0.7 0.0     0.2
Table 2. Distribution of Looks: Quality of Employment Survey, 1977;
Quality of American Life, 1971; Canadian Quality of Life, 1977, 1979, 1981
(percent distributions)

                            Quality of        Quality of      Canadian Quality
                         Employment Survey   American Life       of Life
                                                                 (Pooled)

                            Men Women          Men Women       Men     Women
    CATEGORY

    Strikingly beautiful      1.4     2.1       2.9    2.9      2.5      2.5
     or handsome

    Above average for         26.5    30.4      24.2   28.1     32.0     31.7
     age (good looking)

    Average for age          59.7    52.1      60.4    51.5    57.9     56.8

    Below average for        11.4    13.7      10.8    15.2     7.2      8.3
     age (quite plain)

    Homely                    1.0     1.7       1.7    2.3      0.4      0.7


       N —                    959     539       864    1194    3804     5464
Table 3. The Impact of Looks on Employees' Earnings, QES 1977
              (Dependent Variable is log(Hourly Earnings))e

                      (1)      (2)      (3)       (4)      (5)       (6)

                               Men                       Women
    VARIABLE
    Looks:
    Below average   —.164              —.162    —.124                —.107
                    (.046)             (.046)   (.066)               (.071)

    Homely                    —.239                       —.   371
                              (.144)                      (.199)

    Plain                     —.156                       —.098
                              (.048)                      (.069)

    Average

    Above average     .016              .010     .039                 .035
                     (.033)            (.034)   (.048)               (.049)

    Good looking               .011                        .049
                              (.034)                      (.048)

    Handsome or                .136                       —.120
     beautiful                (.135)                      (.158)


    Obese                               .119                         —.122
                                       (.172)                        (.134)

    Overweight                         —.024                         —.016
                                       (.038)                        (.058)

    Tall                                .027                          .104
                                       (.045)                        (.114)

    Short                              —.105                         —.017
                                       (.060)                        (.124)

                    .403      .403     .404     .330      .332       .327

    p on F—stati—    .001     .004     .001      .069     .084       .173
     stic for Beauty
     Variables

    N—                         700                         409

 Standard errors are in parentheses here and in Tables 4—7 and 9. The equations here
also include continuous and indicator variables measuring actual experience (and its
square), union membership, health status, marital status, race, years of vocational
school and region, and vectors of indicator variables for educational attainment,
tenure with the firm, firm size, city size and industry. The regressions exclude
observations for which data were not available to form these measures, and for which
weekly hours worked < 20, hourly earnings < $1. and age > 64 or age < 18.
Table 4. The Impact of Looks on Employees' Earnings, QAL 1971
                   (Dependent Variable is log(1ourly Earnings))'

                     (1)     (2)         (3)     (4)      (5)    (6)         (7)     (8)

                                   Men                             Women

    VARIABLE

    Looks:
    Below average —.078 —.138                  —.079     .069    .122                .061
                   (.069) (.081)               (.069)   (.073) (.095)               (.073)

    Homely                          — 238                                —.355
                                    (.192)                               (.250)

    Plain                           —.058                                    .097
                                    (.072)                               (.075)

    Average

    Above average .065      .109                .064     .128    .129                .118
                   (.045) (.052)               (.045)   (.056) (.076)               (.056)

    Good looking                     .072                                    .122
                                    (.046)                               (.057)

    Handsome or                      .006                                    .249
     beautiful                      (.111)                               (.149)

    Short                                       .095                                 .235
                                               (.101)                               (.109)

    Tall                                        .018                                 .251
                                               (.066)                               (.214)

    Interviewer      No     Yes          No     No        No     Yes         No       No
      Effects

                   .371    .471 .370 .370               .283    .332 .288           .293

    p on P—stati— .124     .014     .258 .130           .072    .174 .060           .108
     stic for Beauty
     Variables

    N—                             476                                 307

'Also included are continuous and indicator variables measuring experience
(age — education — 6) and its square, health status, race, marital status and
region, and vectors of indicator variables measuring educational attainment, city
size, immigrant Status of the individual, his or her parents and grandparents,
father's occupational status, and industry. The regressions exclude observations
for which data were not available to form these measures, and for which weekly hours
worked < 20, hourly earnings < $75, and age > 64 or age < 18.
Table 5. The Impact of Looks on Employees' Earnings, Canadian QOL 1981
                   (Dependent Variable is log(Ronrl.y Earnings))'

                    (1)    (2)          (3)     (4)        (5)   (6)       (7)        (8)

                                 Men                               Woman
    VARIABLE

    Looks:

    Below average —.012 —.027                            —.058 —.072
                  (.052) (.054)                          (.063) (.067)

    Average

    Above average .073    .059                            .013   .010
                  (.028) (.030)                          (.027) (.029)

    B1981
                                        .033                             —.025
                                       (.188)                            (.247)

                                       —.018                               .   0007
                                       (.035)                            (.047)
                                                 .218                                  .068
                                                (.077)                                (.075)

                                                —.082                                 —.011
                                                (.039)                                (.040)

    Interviewer     No     Yes           No       No       No     Yes          No       No
      Effects

    R2             .302   .306          .285 .295         .394   .389      .410         .412


    p on F—stati— .023     .099         .135 .012         .540   .492      .845         .320
     stic for Beauty
     Variables

    N —             887    887           358      358      883    883          335          335

'Also included are continuous and indicator variables measuring actual experience
and its square, health, union and marital status, and non—English speaker, and
vectors of indicator variables measuring educational attainment, tenure with the
firm, firm size, region and industry. The regressions exclude observations for
which data were unavailable to form these measures and for which weekly hours worked
< 20, hourly earnings < $1, and age > 64 or age < 18.
Table 6. Pooled Estimatea of the Impact of Looks on Hourly Earnings



                        Penalty for     Premium for    p on        p on Inter—
                        Below—average   Above—average F—statistic sample Equality
                        Looks           Looks         for Beauty   of Beauty Effects
Men:

All three samples         —.091            .053          .0001         .246
                          (.031)          (.019)

Two    U.S.   samples     —.132            .036          .0003         .443
                          (.039)          (.027)


Women:

All three samples         —.054            .038          .042          .163
                          (.038)          (.022)

Two U.S. samples          —.042            .075          .041          .123
                          (.049)          (.037)



Men and Women
 Combined:

All three samples        —.072             .048          .0001         .106
                          (.024)          (.015)

Two U.S. samples          —.092            .046          .0002         .051
                          (.031)          (.022)
Table 7. The Impact of Looks on Married Women's Labor-Force Participation. QAI.
1977, QOL 1981. and on Husband's Education, QES 1977

                     (1)         (2)    (3)     (4)                    (5)

                       Probits on Participation             Ordered Probit on Education

                     QAL                 QOL                           QES
    VARIABLE

    Looks:
    Below average   —.168       —.310 —.468                             —.510
                    (.176)      (.153) (.239)                           (.232)

    Average

    Above average   —.034       —.010   .014                            —.001
                    (.131)      (.078) (.113)                           (.184)

                                                   .310
                                                  (.157)

                                                  —.127
                                                  (.090)

    Pseudo—R2        .148        .067   .084       .084                      .183

    N —               583        1287    621          621                    199


 1n the QAL the dependent variable equals one if the women was employed at the time
of the interview. In the QOL it is whether she stated she was in the labor force
on the interview date. Also included in the probits in both samples are continuous
and indicator variables measuring experience (and its square) and indicator
variables for educational attainment, health status, age and the presence and ages
of children of children. In the probits based on the QAL an indicator variable for
race is included, as is a measure of family income less the woman's income. In the
ordered probits husband's education is divided into four categories (less than 12
year, 12 years, 13 through 15, and 16 years and up), and his age and indicator
variables for the wife's educational attainment and health status are included.
Table 8. Occupational Sorting: Percentage of Sample in Occupations with
             Looks Important

                                    Own Looks:

   Looks Are           Below   Average        Above     Total          N
    Important          average                average

                                        QES
  (Rating of Looks):
                                         Men

              DOT       62.6     63.5          64.7      63.7   0.14   700

     Subjective         13.2     13.3          11.1      12.7   0.65   700

      Employer          46.5     52.2          44.3      49.3   2.14   428

                                         Women

              DOT       76.4     76.2          80.9      77.8   1.16   409

     subjective         21.8     26.2          28.7      26.4   0.96   409

      Employer          45.9     45.2          47.1      45.9   0.10   309

                                         QAL

                                         Men

              DOT       40.0     55.6          64.5      56.9   9.00   476

     Subjective         17.8     12.9          22.4      16.4   6.50   476

         Employer       33.3     61.2          63.3      59.3   7.48   268


                                         Women

              DOT       67.4     73.9          81.1      75.6   3.61   307

     Subjective         34.9     35.3          40.5      37.1   0.87   307

         Employer       44.1     44.5          62.6      51.1   8.30   270

X.9(2)    —   5.99
9(2) —        4.60
Table 9.   Sorting, Looks and the Determination of Earnings, QES, 1977, QAL 1971
(Dependent Variable is log(Rourly Earnings))

      Looks: Below       Below x      Above     Above x    Occupation          p on F—sta—
               average   Occupation   average   Occupation   index             tistic on
                         index                  index                          Main Effects

SAMPLE A}D OCCUPATIONAL INDEX

QES Men:

DOT           —.177      —.036         .041      .072          .052     .405      .002
              (.058)     (.095)       (.042)    (.069)        (.041)

Subjective —.162          .007         .012       .051         .124     .405       .003
              (.049)     (.127)       (.035)    (.097)        (072)

Employers     —.187      —.112        —.095      .103        —.066      .410      .026
              (.076)     (.107)       (.057)    (.084)        (049)
QES Women:

DOT           —.174      —.218         .023      —.068         .032     .329      .036
              (.075)     (.157)       (.054)     (.119)       (.085)

Subjective —.115         —.037         .050      —.036         .083     .326      .130
              (.074)     (.151)       (.055)     (.096)       (.093)

Employers     —.078      —.013         .152      —.312         .216     .315      .064
              (.107)     (.158>       (.076)     (.111)       (.077)

QAL Men:

DOT           —.102      —.057         .070       .011         .093     .373      .224
              (.107)     (.142)       (.056)     (.089)       (.055)
Subjective —.097          .078         .045       .089         .085     .371      .223
            (.076)       (.177)       (.048)     (.099)       (.102)
Employers      .145      —.107         .124      —.072        —.006     .213      .449
              (.150)     (.250)       (.121)     (.152)       (.095)
QAL. Women:

DOT            .049      —.056         .166       .175        —.066     .282      .031
              (.088)     (.159)       (.063)     (.130)       (.088)
Subjective     .130      —.172         .075       .142        —.053     .287      .266
              (.090)     (.152)       (.068)     (.099)       (.099)
Employers      .253      —.304         .261       —.355        .218     .272      .058
              (.153)     (.229)       (.127)      (.162)      (.117)
Each regression includes the same additional variables as in the corresponding
regression in Table 3 or 4. Those using the occupational indexes based on the DOT
and subjective measures also use the same samples.     Those using the survey of
employers use smaller samples, N — 428, 309, 265 and 259.
Appendix Table. Occupational Categories Taken from Employer Survey

                                MEN

                                      Percent of Employers       Cell Size
                                       Saying Looks Very
Occupation                              or Somewhat Important

Precision Production                        16.6                 24

Machine Operators and Tenders               25.0                 24

Protective Services                         30.8                 13

Construction                                33.4                 15

Handlers, Equipment Cleaners,
and Laborers cxc. Misc.                     38.9                 36

Cleaning and Building
Service Workers                            40.0                  15

Technologists and
Technicians, ax. Health                    46.2                  17

Administrative Support and Clerical
Occupations, cx. Mailroom
and Record Clerks                          46.6                  15

Mechanics and Helpers, cx. Auto.           46.9                  32

Mailroom Workers, Record Clerks            47.1                  17

Heavy Truck and Trailer Drivers            49.9                  12

Drivers of Light Delivery Trucks,
Taxis, or Buses                            55.0                  20

Fabricators, Assemblers,
Hand Workers                               60.2                  15

Auto Mechanics                             66.7                  12


Food Preparation Occups.                   66.7                  12

Sales Occupations,
Commodities ex. Retail                     70.0                  10

Retail Sales Occupations                   90.9                  22
Appendix Table, cont.

                                        WOMEN


Registered Nurses, Phys. Assts.            18.2   11

Machine Operators and Tenders              22.2   18


Office Workers i: Information,
Correspondence,and Record Clerks;
Other Ceneral Office Occups ci.
Secretaries. Receptionists                 37.1   37

Cleaning, Building Service Workers         38.9   18

Office Workers II: Office Machine
and Communications Operators;
Mailroom, Material Recording.
and other Misc. Clerks;
Adjusters and Investigators.               40.0   30

Office Workers III:
Financial Record Processing                42.3   26

Dental, Nursing, or Health Aides           42.9   14

Food Preparation Occups.                   43.8   16

Teachers, K—12                             57.1   14

Secretaries, Stenographers, Typists        59.6   52

Dental Hygienists, LPNs,
Misc. Health Technicians                   61.1   18

Retail Sales and Counter Clerks            63.7   11

Bank Tellers                               65.0   20

Retail Salespeople                         65.2   23

Personal Service Occups.: Mostly
Cosmetologists, Ushers and Attendants      71.4   14


Cashiers                                   78.6   28

Receptionists                              81.5

Waitresses and Food Counter Workers        81.8   22
