                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              ThE ECONOMIC REALITY OF
                                    THE BEAUTY MYTH




                                       Susan Averett
                                     Sanders Korenman




                                  Working Paper No. 4521




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 November, 1993


We thank Dennis Ahlburg, Feicia LeClere, Samuel L. Myers, and seminar participants at the
Office of Population Research, Princeton University and the Center on Women and Public
Policy at the University of Minnesota for their comments. Deborah Campbell provided
outstanding research assistance. All errors are our own. Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4521
                                                                             November 1993


                               THE ECONOMIC REALITY OF
                                     THE BEAU1Y MYTH


                                         ABSTRACT

       We investigate income, marital status, and hourly pay differentials by body mass

(kg/rn2) in a sample of 23 to 31 year olds drawn from the 1988 NLSY. Obese women have

lower family incomes than women whose weight-for-height is in the "recommended" range.

Results for men are weaker and mixed. We find similar results when we compare same-sex

siblings in order to control for family background (e.g., social class) differences. Differences

in economic status by body mass for women increase markedly when we use an earlier

weight measure or restrict the sample to persons who were single and childless when the

early weight was reported. There is some evidence of labor market discrimination against

obese women. However, differences in marriage probabilities and in spouse's earnings

account for 50 to 95 percent of their lower economic status. There is no evidence that obese

African American women suffer an economic penalty relative to other African American

women.



Susan Averett                                              Sanders Korenman
Department of Economics                                    Humphrey Institute of Public
 and Business                                               Affairs
Lafayette College                                          University of Minnesota
Easton, PA 18042                                           Minneapolis, MN 55455
                                                           and NBER
        Eating disorders (such as anorexia nervosa and bulimia) are a major social problem in the

United States. Estimates of the prevalence of anorexia nervosa range from I to 4 percent of the

female population (Autry et al. 1986). Although estimates of the prevalence of bulimia nervosa run

as high as twenty percent of college and high school females, studies based on representative samples

suggest the actual proportion is less than five percent of college females and less than I .5 percent of

males.' Concern about eating disorders has led to a recent explosion of consciousness-raising efforts.

perhaps best exemplified by the best-selling book The Beauty Myth by Naomi Wolf.

        There is also a growing awareness of the social stigma attached to being overweight

(examples from the popular press include Kolata et al. 1993; Coleman. 1993; Lampert. 1993). These

articles leave little doubt that Americans (especially women) experience great social and psychological

pressure with respect to body size, arid provide poignant accounts of ridicule and discrimination

experienced by obese persons.

        Economists have had little to say on the issue of body weight in contemporary industrialized

societies; our search of the Journal of Economic Literature index uncovered only one study of obesity

and economic outcomes, a cross-sectional analysis of wage rates (Register and Williams 1990).2 The

only other study of the effects of overweight on economic status we are aware o is the paper by

Gortmaker et al. that appeared in the New England Journal of Medicine as we were completing the



    'In their review, Autry et al. (p. 537) report a prevalence of 5 percent of college and high school
females and 1.5 percent of males but even these rates may be too high. Drewnoski et al. (1988)
report a prevalence of 1 percent of college females and 0.2 percent of college males in a nationally
representative sample of college students. The prevalence among female undergraduates living in
group quarters on campus, the group at highest risk, was 2.2 percent.
    2   There are Development Economics and Economic History literatures on weight and stature.
Short stature and low weight-for-height are indicators of nutritional deficits; height and weight,
therefore, may he interpreted as indicators of the economic status of populations. For an excellent
review, see Steckel 1991.
 present study.3 We summarize these studies below.

         In this paper, we describe economic differentials by body mass for a sample of men and

 women aged 23 to 31 in 1988. In so doing, we hope to contribute to a literature that describes social

 and psychological pressures that may contribute to the development of eating disorders arid to gender

differences in prevalence rates.4 Accurate information about economic differentials by body mass

can aid in the formulation of appropriate public health and social policies. Raising awareness of the

social and psychological pressures surrounding fear of weight gain, and of the stereotyping of obese

persons, represent an important step in addressing associated social and public health problems;

however, we hypothesize that attempts to change a variety of attitudes and behaviors surrounding

body weight, including the social stigma attached to being overweight, eating disorders such as

anorexia nervosa and bulimia. and obsession with body image, diet, and weight loss, will face greater

difficulties if economic differences reinforce social and psychological pressures.3

        That there is an economic aspect to behavior surrounding body weight would hardly be




     For a discussion of the labor market effects of "appearance" broadly defined, see Harnermesh
and Biddle (1993).

     For example, Autry et al. call for research to address "Psychological factors that influence the
development and maintenance of anorexia nervosa and bulimia;" and "Genetic, environmental, and
psychosocial studies that might elucidate why the phenomena are more prevalent among females (p
541)."

         For example, Sciacca et al. find in a survey of university students that, although 17 percent of
women and 20 percent of men were above "normal" body weight, 40 percent of women and 24
percent of men considered themselves overweight. In addition, 53 percent of women and 20 percent
of men reported experiencing a fair amount or great deal of discomfort from being overweight.
Sciacca et al. recommend that efforts should be made to help students who are not over recommended
weight-for-height, but who consider themselves overweight, to change perceptions or expectations
about their bodies (p. 167). While changing self-perception may be an important step in combatting
eating disorders, we must recognize the possibility that such students do not have "distorted body
images," but rather, the discrepancy between recommended weight and self-perceived overweight may
reflect an accurate perception of the social norms surrounding body weight. Put differently, there is
no reason to think that social norms should conform to recommended weights that are, after all, based
on mortality risks.

                                                   2
surprising. A recentBusiness Week article (Armstrong and Mallory, 1992) reported that U.S

companies had 1991 sales of $8.4 billion in products and services for serious dieters. A less-

restrictive definition that includes expenditures on items such as health club fees and artificial

sweeteners raises the figure to $33 billion, roughly the GDP of Pakistan, Egypt or Hungary (World

Bank, 1992, Table 3).

         Naomi Wolf provides additional anecdotal evidence that U.S. college students invest heavily

in weight-loss oriented human or social capital. She finds that audiences of (,primarily) college

women have little trouble answering a series of specific questions about the caloric content of

different foods, the number of calories one must consume to lose weight at different rates, the number

of calories consumed by different amounts of physical exercise, and so forth. An economist is

naturally led to ask if there is an economic return to such investments. Two recent articles suggest

that there is.

         Register and Williams (1990) examine the effect of obesity on wage rates. They study a

sample of 18 to 25 year olds from the 1982 round of the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth

(NLSY). They classify as obese sample members who are 20 percent or more above ideal body

weight (for height and sex). They report mean hourly wage differences of minus 16 percent for obese

women and (positive) seven percent for obese men, compared to women and men who are not obese.

In employment-selectivity corrected wage equations in which they control for race, union status,

education, enrollment status, age, health status, marital StatuS, region, recent work experience, and

broad industrial category (three dummy variables), the pay differential falls to minus 12 percent for

obese women, and to minus 5 percent for obese men. Register and Williams interpret their results as

evidence of discrimination against obese women, although they are aware of other interpretations. In

particular, they mention potential problems of endogeneity bias:    . .the obese   may have such status

[obesityl because of low earnings, to the extent that income level affects food and nutritional


                                                    3
 consumption behavior (p. 138, emphasis in originalj.

          We build upon and extend their analysis in several respects. First, we estimate differentials

 by body mass in family income, marital status, and spouse's earnings (if married) in addition to

 hourly wage rates. Second, we attempt to address the possibility of endogeneity bias in

contemporaneous relations between economic status and body weight. Third. we compare same-sex

siblings as a way to eliminate bias induced by unmeasured family background heterogeneity (e.g.,

social class).6

          Gortmaker et al. estimate effects of obesity7 on several social and economic outcomes in the

NLSY. Because of the obvious parallels between their study and ours, we review their study in some

detail.

          Gortmaker et al. relate an indicator of obesity at ages 16 to 24 (BMI above 95th percentile of

weight for height) to age 23 to 31 values of household income, years of education completed, an

index of self-esteem (measured in 1987), and probabilities of being married, graduating from college,

or being poor. In crude (unadjusted) comparisons to other women, obese women exhibit substantial

disadvantages in all outcomes except self-esteem. When Gortmaker et al. use multivariate regressions

to adjust the differentials for baseline (1979) values of income, education, marital status, maternal and




     6Register and Williams also note the need to repeat the analysis for an older sample (p. 139),
presumably because the wages of young workers are highly variable (e.g., 35 percent of males and 40
percent of females in their sample were enrolled in school). Indications of the need for a reanalysis
are provided by the small magnitude and lack of significance of several standard wage equation
coefficients. For example, in the male wage equation, coefficients of black racial identification, union
status, education, age, health status, marital status, and labor market experience are small and
insignificant. Whether this result is due to the selectivity correction can not be determined from the
information presented.

      In our paper, we use the term "obese" to refer to persons with Body Mass Indexes of 30 or
more. We use the term "overweight" to refer to persons with BMIs between 24 and 29 for women,
or 25 to 29 for men. Gortmaker et al. use the term "overweight" to refer to persons above the 95th
percentile of NCHS standards of weight for height age and sex. Since this group corresponds closely
to the group we refer to as "obese", in describing their study, we will use the term "obese."

                                                    4
paternal education, work-Limiting chronic health conditions, height in 1981, self-esteem in 1980, age

in 1981, and race or ethnic group, statistically significant differentials remain in marital status,

income, poverty, and years of education; differences in later self—esteem and in the fraction

completing college are small and not significant. Differences by obesity status for men are smaller

and, except for the lower fraction married at ages 23 to 31 among men who were obese at ages 16 to

24, were not significant at the .01 level.

        Gortmaker et al. investigate the importance of two explanations for the deficits in social and

economic status among obese women. First, they find no evidence to support the hypothesis that

obesity differentials are confounded by health status since controlling for work-related health

limitations does not change their results. Second, they reject the hypothesis that socioeconomic origin

or ability account for the obesity differentials because significant differentials in income, marriage,

and years of education remained "after we controlled for base-line differences in potentially

confounding factors" (p. 101 1). Gortmaker et al. conclude that discrimination may explain the

residual (adjusted) deficits in socioeconomic status among obese women (p. 101 1). Thus, in the final

paragraph of the paper, they offer the following conclusion and policy recommendation:

        In summary, overweight during adolescence has important social and economic consequences
        that are greater than those associated with many other chronic physical and health conditions.
        Discrimination against people who are overweight may account for these results. The recent
        Americans With Disabilities Act prohibits discrimination in employment and in establishments
        serving the public. Our data suggest that the extension of this act to include overweight
        persons should be considered, Our findings also emphasize the need for effective prevention
        of this increasingly prevalent condition.


        Our study adds detail to theirs in five key areas. First, we estimate differences in hourly pay

at ages 23 to 31. This wage analysis focuses on the area of central importance to labor market anti-

discrimination policies such as the Americans With Disabilities Act. Gortmaker et al. do not study

labor market outcomes. Like Register and Williams, we find evidence consistent with pay

discrimination against obese women. We also find that obese women are more likely than other

                                                    5
 women to report having experienced gender-based discrimination in the labor market.

         Second, we use sibling differences as an alternative approach to controlling for social class or

 family background differences between obese persons and others. This technique (same-sex sibling

differences) confirms the finding that family background differences do not account for the social and

economic disadvantages experienced by obese women.

         Third, we assess the relative contributions of marriage market and labor market differences to

the overall income differences between obese persons and persons of "recommended" weight. This

accounting exercise allows us to assess the potential for labor market anti-discrimination measures to

increase the economic status of obese women. We find that marriage market differences account for

the vast majority (as much as 95 percent) of their lower income, labor market differences account for

between five and 35 percent, depending on the sample considered.

         Fourth, we estimate "contemporaneous" (i.e., at ages 23 to 31) relationships between

economic or social outcomes and body weight, in addition to relationships between outcomes at ages

23 to 31 and obesity at ages 16 to 25 (the latter are similar to those estimated by Gortmaker et a!.).

We show that relations between social and economic outcomes at ages 23 to 31 and obesity at ages 23

to 31 are much weaJcer than those between outcomes at ages 23 to 31 and obesity at ages 16 to 25.

Women who were obese at ages 16 to 25 have lower economic status at ages 23 to 31. However,

although most women who were obese at ages 16 to 25 were also obese at age 23 to 31 (as

Gortmaker et aJ. note), only about 30 percent of women who were obese at age 23 to 31 were obese

at age 16 to 25. Moreover, women who became obese in their mid to late twenties (the majority of

women who are obese at ages 23 to 31) are substantially better-off financially than those who were

obese at both ages, and do not differ greatly from those in the recommended weight range. We argue

below that this finding implies that "contemporaneous" social and economic differentials are most

likely    the result of adverse labor or marriage market outcomes causing weight gain: using an


                                                   6
earlier BM1 measure (which should be less affected by reverse causality) strengthens the adverse

association between obesity and economic status.

        A final extension of previous research is our estimation of separate models by black or

Hispanic identification of sample members. Unlike Gortmaker et al. who report that 'The addition of

interaction terms to the models to determine whether the relation of obese to subsequent social and

economic characteristics varied according to race or ethnic group did not alter the results (p. lOll),'

we find statistically significant and large race differences in the obesity differentials; the social and

economic penalties attached to being overweight appear to be much smaller among black women. We

discuss this finding and others in the concluding section of the paper.



                                   METHODS, DATA, VARIABLES



Endogeneity or simultaneity bias

        Our general approach is to relate labor and marriage market outcomes such as wages, family

income, and marital status to an individual's body mass. As noted, for women, high body mass is

generally associated with lower family income, lower wages, lower probabilities of marriage, and

lower spouse's earnings. A major concern is that these associations are not accurate representations of

causal relations running from body mass to socioeconomic outcomes. In particular, endogenous or

simultaneous determination of body mass could lead us to find a (spurious) negative correlation

between body mass in a given year and income or marital status in the same year. For example, a

person who loses a job or has difficulty finding a spouse may gain weight, resulting in a negative bias

in the coefficient of an overweight dummy variable in a marriage or income equation.'


    *
      Of course, the bias can go in either direction. For example, if marriage causes weight gain
(possibly through its association with child bearing), then the coefficient of body mass in a marriage
equation may be upward biased. In addition, if heavy single individuals come to believe their

                                                     7
        We take advantage of the longitudinal nature of the NLSY data to gauge the direction of bias

 from simultaneous or endogenous determination of weight in models of social or economic status. It

 seems plausible to us that if the sources of negative endogeneity bias mentioned above are important.

 they should be less important if one uses an early value of the BMI, rather than a contemporaneous

value, in equations describing economic status. In particular, if job market or marriage market

problems cause weight gain, using an earlier measure of weight should reduce the biasing effects of

such a process. Therefore, in addition to estimating relations between 1988 economic status and 1988

BMI (when sample members were aged 23 to 31), we also estimate relations between 1988 economic

status and a BMI measure which is the average of 1981 and 1982 BMIs9, when sample members

were aged 16 to 25. To the extent that the 1988 BML categories "overweight' or 'obese" are. on

balance, spuriously negatively correlated with 1988 economic outcomes, using the 1982 BMI measure

rather than the 1988 measure should cause coefficients of these dummy variables to move in a

positive direction (become less negative). As we shall see, especially for women, compared to the

1988 BMI measure, the 1982 BMI enters with substantially larger negative values in the income and

marriage equations. This result suggests that, if anything, the estimated relationship between

contemporary BMI and marriage or income is, on net, biased upward due to endogeneity or

simultaneity.

        To explore the problem of endogeneity bias further, we repeat our analyses for a subsample

of persons who were single (never married) and childless (and not pregnant) at ages 16 to 25 (1982).

Estimated relations between 1982 BMI and 1988 economic status and marital status for a subsample


marriage prospects are poor, they may invest more in labor market human capital. If such investment
is unmeasured, the estimated coefficient of body mass in a wage equation will be upward-biased
(reflecting the greater unmeasured labor market human capital of heavier persons). We return to
these possibilities in our empirical analyses below.

     Hereafter, to simplify exposition, we will refer to the average of the 1981 and 1982 BMls as the
1982 BMI.

                                                  8
of single persons should be less influenced by effects of marriage and labor market outcomes on

weight (i.e., less affected by bias from endogeneity or reverse causality). Also consistent with the

hypothesis of a net upward bias in the contemporaneous associations, we find larger negative effects

of BMI on the 1988 outcomes for the subsample of persons where were single and childless in 1982.



The NLSY data

       The sample is derived from the National Longitudinal Survey of Labor Market Experience of

Youth (NLSY), which has been conducted annually SinCe 1979 (CHRR 1992). At baseline (1979),

respondents were aged 14 to 21. The NLSY oversamples black, Hispanic. and economically

disadvantaged non-black and non-Hispanic youths. Respondents were asked to report their current

weight in the 1981, 1982, 1985, 1986. 1988, 1989. and 1990 interviews. Height information was

collected in 1981, 1982, and 1985. Height information was not collected after 1985. presumably

because individuals are assumed to have attained adult suture. (Sample members were aged 20 to 27

in 1985.)

        We focus on labor market and marriage market outcomes measured in the 1988 interview.

Our sample consists of 5090 women and 4951 men who were interviewed in 1988 and for whom we

had the requisite height, weight, and hourly wage information (if they were emploved non-employed

persons are also included in the sample).1°



Variables

        The explanatory variables of chief interest are categories of the Body Mass Index (BMI; Bray



    '° Of 11,602 potential respondents, 10,465 or 90.2 percent were interviewed in 1988 (CHRR
1992). Of these, we dropped 72 due to missing or implausible hourly wages (less than 1 dollar or
greater than 100 dollars per hour) and 352 due to missing height information, yielding a total sample
size of 10,041 men and women for our analyses.

                                                   9
  1978). which is defined as weight in kilograms divided by the square of height in meters. Although

  there are many ways to combine height and weight to estimate amount of body fat, these ways tend to

  he highly correlated and are considered reliable (Kannel. 1983; Nationai Center for Health Statistics,

  1983). In addition, Bray reports a correlation between the BMI and various anthropometric measures

 (such as skinfold thickness) of 0.7 to 0.8.

         We use SM! categories that correspond to weight-for-height tables formulated by Metropolitan

 Life Insurance Company (1983). The recommended (based on associated mortality risks) BMIrange

 is 20-25 for men and 19-24 for women. We follow convention (Bray, 1979) in referring topersons

 below the recommended range as 'underweight,' men with BMls between 25 and 29 and women with

 BMIs between 24 and 29 as 'overweight,' and men or women with BMIs 30 and overas 'obese.'

 We must emphasize that the recommended weight refers to a range associated with low mortality

 risks, and may not correspond to social norms about what might constitute an overweight or

 underweight appearance (Metropolitan Life Insurance Co., 1983). We adopt these ranges because

 they are conventional, widely used, and are a convenient way to classify the sample. The

 Metropolitan Life recommended weight tables are appropriate for individuals aged 18 to 30

(Greenwood. 1983); we use weight data for a sample aged 17 to 25 in 1982 and 23 to 31 in 1988.

        We use two measures of the SM!: an average of the 1981 and 1982 BMIs, and a measure

based upon 1985 height and 1988 weight. Height information was last collected in 1985. We

examined the height data for inconsistencies and flagged 177 women and 240 men who appeared to

'shrink' more than two inches in height between either the 1981 and 1982 interviews, or the 1981 or

1982 interview and the 1985 interview. For these individuals, we assigned heights based on a

combination of the three reports." In addition, if 1981 and 1982 heights were bothmissing, they


      Among those who appeared to lose more than two inches in height, we identify two types:
those who lost more than two inches between 1982 and 1985 (Group A) and those who lost more than
two inches between 1981 and 1982 (Group B). For Group A we imputed heights as follows. For

                                                  10
were set to the 1985 value.

        Variables other than height or weight come from the 1988 interviews and hence represent

values as of that year. Controls include actual work experience, highest grade completed as of 1988.

age, region, SMSA, and black or Hispanic identification. (We conduct some analyses separately by

race/Hispanic identification.) Most of these variables are standard and self-explanatory. Two require

more explanation.

        We use a measure of actual labor market experience based on reports of weeks worked each

year after age 18. A good experience measure is important for a study of body mass and wages

because, for example, if childbearing is associated with higher body mass it may lead higher body

mass to be associated with lower wages through the effect of childbearing on the accumulation of

labor market experience (e.g., Mincer and Polachek 1974; Filer 1993).

       Our principal measure of economic status is the income-to-needs ratio in 1988, based on 1987

income (reported in the 1988 interview) and family composition as of the 1988 interview. It is

defined as the family income of the respondent divided by the U.S. Census poverty line for the family

based on its size and age composition (number of adults and children).22




those who lost less than two inches from 1981 to 1985, height in 1981, 1982 and 1985 equals the
average of the 1981 and 1985 heights. For those who lost less than two inches from 1981 to 1982.
all three heights were set to the average of the 1981 and 1982 heights. Although everyone in Group
A lost more than two inches in height from 1982 to 1985, if they grew at all between 1981 and 1985.
then 1982 height was set to a weighted average of the 1981 and 1985 heights. For Group A
individuals who lost more than two inches from 1981 to 1985, all three heights were set equal to the
mean of the 1981 and 1982 heights.
         Case B individuals were handled in the following manner. First, if they lost less than two
inches or grew between 1982 and 1985, then we extrapolated linearly to impute the 1981 value. If
they lost more than two inches between 1981 and 1982, then all three heights were set to the mean of
the three of the reported height measures.
    12
       We get similar results when we used family income as the dependent variable rather than the
income/needs ratio.

                                                  13
 Sample description

         Table I presents a cross-tabulation 1 the distribution of the sample by BMI categories in

 1982 and 1988. In 1988, at ages 23 to 31, about half sample women are in the recommended (19 to

 23) BMI range, 29 percent are between 24 and 29, 13 percent had BMIs over 30, and 9 percent were

 below 19. Especially notable is the increase with age (between 1982 and 1988) in the fraction in the

 top two categories: the fraction above 30 rose from 5 to 13 percent, and the fraction above 23 rose

 from 24 to 42 percent. The substantial increase between 1982 and 1988 in the fraction of women in

 the overweight and obese categories highlights the need to investigate the possibility of
                                                                                           endogeneity
 bias in estimated relations between BMI and economic status. In addition, only about 30 percent (201

 out of 659) of women who were in the obese category at ages 23 to 31 were also in the obese

 category at ages 16 to 25.

         There was a similar increase with age (i.e., between 1982 and 1988) in the fraction of men in

the two heaviest BMI categories; the fraction with BMIs above 29 rose from 4 to II
                                                                                   percent, and the

fraction above 24 rose from 25 to 47 percent, a slightly greater increase than among women. The

similar pattern of weight gain for men and women suggests that the increase for women was not

entirely due to biological aspects of pregnancy and childbirth." However, we explore this

possibility below.

        In Table 2a we present sample means and frequencies for women classified by BMI at ages 23

to 31 (1988). Family income, income/needs, spouse's earnings, hourly wages, years of schooling,

and the fraction employed are lower in the higher BMI categories, while the fractions poor and

minority are higher. Overweight and obese women are somewhat more likely to have children and

less likely to be married. The fact that body weight is inversely associated with economic status in


     ' The distributions (not shown) by BMI in 1982 and 1988 for the subsample of persons who
were single and childless in 1982 are remarkably similar to the those for the entire sample, despite the
fact that only about half (53 percent) of the full sample of women are members of this subsample.

                                                   12
developed societies is well documented (Kannel, 1983). One goal of this study is to use sibling

comparisons to determine whether this relationship reflects the influence of family background (e.g.,

social class) on weight, or whether there appears to be an association between weight and economic

status in later life, net of family background differences.

        Table 2b presents means for men by BMI category at age 23 to 31(1988). The patterns for

men differ from those for women. Income appears to be lowest among underweight men; differences

across the other BMI categories are modest. Men in the lowest BMI category appear less likely to be

married, more likely to be divorced or separated, and less likely to have children. A larger proportion

are black. Spouse's earnings are slightly lower among obese men.

        In Tables 3a and 3b we present means and frequencies in outcomes at ages 23 to 31 (1988)

according to BMI category at ages 16 to 25 (1982) for women and men, respectively. The patterns

are similar to those in the previous two tables, but the differentials for women by body mass are more

dramatic. For example, the income differential between obese women and those in the 19 to 24 BMI

category is about S 11,000 in Table 3a, versus about $8,000 in Table 2a. Comparing these two BMI

categories, the difference in the fraction poor in 1988 is 21 percentage points according to 1982 BMI

versus 13 percentage points according to 1988 BMI.



                                               RESULTS

        Table 4 summarizes the results of multivariate models of income, marriage, spouse's

earnings, and hourly wages for women and men. We estimated each model for the full sample

(separate models by sex) using alternatively BMI at age 23 to 31(1988) and the BMI at age 16 to 25

(1982). In addition, each model is estimated for the sub-sample of persons who were childless and

single (never married) in 1982 using the 1982 BMI. The models also Contain controls for age, years

of schooling completed, and dummy variables for region (3), residence in an SMSA (2), and black


                                                   13
  and Hispanic identification. In the wage models, we control for actual work experience instead of

  age.



  ResulLs   for women

            The figures in the table are coefficients of BMI categorical variables from least squares

 regressions,   except for those under the heading 'P(married), which are derivatives based on logit

 coefficients, evaluated at the sample means. These derivatives may be interpreted as percentage point

 differences in the fraction married. The reference group for all models are persons in the

 'recommended" BMI range. Sibling differences are estimated by least squares for the three

 continuous outcomes'4, and fixed-effects logits (Chamberlain 1980) for the dichotomous outcome

 (marital status in 1988 = married). Because necessarily sample sizes are much smaller for sibling

 analyses, coefficient estimates are less precise.'3 We therefore look to the sibling analyses for

 general support for, or obvious contradiction of, evidence from cross-sectional analyses. Cross-

 sectional estimates have the advantage of being based on larger samples, but may suffer from bias

 induced by unmeasured family background differences.

         In the first panel of the table we present differentials in outcomes at ages 23 to 31 (1988)

according to BMI category at ages 16 to 25 (1982). The cross-sectional models provide evidence that

women who were obese or overweight at ages 16 to 25, have, at ages 23 to 31. lower family income.

lower hourly wages (30+ category only), are less likely to be married, and have lower spousal

income (if married) than women in the recommended BMI range. The pattern of coefficients from



    '4Sibling differences are computed as differences from within-family means. This procedure is
equivalent to entering a dummy variable for each family of origin (e.g, Greene. 1993. pp. 466-469).
One differenced observation per family is dropped.

      For fixed-effects logits, sister pairs contribute to the likelihood function only if sisters differ
with respect to the outcome (i.e., one is married in 1988 and one is not).

                                                     14
the sibling analysis is similar, suggesting that family background heterogeneity bias is not serious in

cross-sectional estimates.

          In the second panel we present differentials in outcomes at age 23 to 31 (1988) according to

BMI category at ages 23 to 31. Differentials by BMI category in family income, spouses earnings,

and wages are similar to but smaller (in absolute value) than those in the first panel. There is no

evidence of lower probabilities of marriage among heavier women in the second panel.

          What does the comparison between the first two panels tell us? First, differences in income,

marriage, spousal income, and wages by BMI category in the second panel (age 23 to 31 BMI, age

23 to 31 outcomes) do not appear to be, on net, biased downward (i.e., are not made "too negative")

by endogenous or simultaneous determination of age 23 to 31 BMI. If anything, they appear to be

biased upward. Second, the fact that heavier women are no less likely to be married according to the

second panel but are less likely to be married according to the first panel suggests that the source of

upward bias in the second panel may be that marriage (or perhaps childbearing) raises weight.

However, as we shall see later, controlling for marital status, the presence of children, and the age of

the youngest child has no effect on the estimated wage differentials, and only a modest effect on the

income differentials by BMI.

          In the third panel of the table we present differentials in outcomes at age 23 to 31(1988)

according to BMI at age 16 to 25 (1982) for the subsample of women who were single (never

married), childless, and not pregnant in 1982. Results are similar to those in the first panel, but the

differentials across BMI categories are larger (in absolute value). Differences in the two marriage

market outcomes are especially dramatic.




Results   for men

          Results for men are presented in the bottom panel of Table 4. Significant results in the first



                                                     15
panel include lower income, lower marriage probabilities, and lower spouses earnings among

underweight men. Obese men have lower wages. When we relate outcomes at ages 23 to 31 to BMI

at the same age (second panel), we find that heavier men are more likely to be married, and,

compared to results in the first panel, underweight men's income is relatively lower. As with the

results for women, the comparison of the first and second panels suggests, if anything, that

differentials in outcomes at ages 23 to 31 between obese or overweight men and men in the

recommended weight range according to age 23 to 31 BMI category are biased upward by

endogenous determination of BMI, possibly the result of weight gain associated with marriage.



Accounting for income differences

        How much of the difference in income between obese women or underweight men and their

counterparts in the recommended BMI ranges is accounted for by labor market differences (wages and

employment), and how much by marriage market differences (probability of being married and

spouse's earnings if married)? The answer to this question depends somewhat on the sample (e.g.,

full sample or single/childless only) and the age at which the BMI is measured. The following figures

are based on BMIs at ages 16 to 25 (1982), the full samples of men and women, and have been

adjusted for race, education, age, region, and urban residence.




                                                  16
                                 BMI at A2es 16 to 25 (1982)

                            Women                   Men
                         19-23 BMI               20-24 BMI
Outcomes at              Minus 30+ BMI           Minus <20 BMI
A2es 23 to 31             ($)     (%)             ($)   (%)

Labor Market              1050     17.0           3373    85.2

Marriage Market          4957      80.4           1426    36.0

Other                     162      2.6            -839   -21.2

Total Adjusted
Income Difference        6169 100.0              3960 100.0



        The figures in this table make evident that the vast majority (80 percent) of the difference in

family income between obese women and those in the recommended weight range results from

differences in the marriage market (lower fraction married and lower spouses earnings if married),

compared to about 17 percent from the labor market. Using the age 23 to 31(1988) BMI measure

raises the proportion of the obesity differential in adjusted income accounted for by labor market

differences to about one third, and lowers the proportion due to marriage market outcomes to about

fifty percent. On the other hand, restricting the sample to women who were single and childless at

ages 16 to 25 raises the proportion of the obesity differential that is accounted for by marriage market

differences to 96 percent ($7014 out of $7332); labor market differences account for 12 percent in

this subsample. (The figures sum to more than 100 percent because obese women have slightly higher

unearned family income.) In sum, although obese women appear to be disadvantaged in the labor

market, marriage market differences account for the great majority their substantial deficits in

economic status.




                                                   17
 Race differences

        There is a literature that suggests that there are cultural differences in norms pertaining to

 ideal body type (e.g., Furnham and Alibhai, 1983). In particular, there may be a smaller social

penalty attached to being overweight for African American than white women. Consistent with this

hypothesis, black women are more likely to be above ideal" body weight, but they are less likely to

perceive themselves to be overweight (Dawson, 1988).

        This literature suggests several testable hypotheses. The most obvious is that if social pressure

is an important determinant of weight, the prevalence of overweight should be higher among African

Americans than among whites, especially for women. The figures in Tables 2 and 3 confirm for our

sample that this is indeed the case. Second, since marriage markets continue to he highly segmented

by race, especially for black women (Kalmijn 1993), we would expect these social norms to be

reflected in marriage probabilities, so that a given weight differential should be associated with larger

differences in marriage probabilities for whites than blacks.

        Finally, one might also predict that the difference in hourly wages between obese and

recommended-weight black women should be smaller (in absolute value) than the corresponding

difference among white women. This prediction requires more explanation than the other two. If

discrimination is purely weight-based, and black and white women work for the same employers, then

there would be no reason to predict a race difference in the BMI-based pay differentials. However,

black women may tend to work disproportionately for black employers or under black supervisors,

and will, by definition, work disproportionately for employers who hire many black women; thus,

social norms in their places of employment may tend to conform to African American social norms.

If black women experience racially-based employment discrimination they will, on average, work for

employers who engage in a less-than-average amount of race discrimination. It seems plausible to us

that employers who engage in less racial discrimination in hiring may also be less likely to engage in


                                                   18
other forms of discrimination. Thus, we would predict a smaller wage penalty for obese black

 women compared to their white counterparts. A final possibility worth mentioning, albeit a more

speculative one, is that marriage-market considerations may influence labor market outcomes due to

the social nature of the workplace. Since marriage markets tend to be segmented by race, white male

employers may give social factors less importance in making hiring or promotion decisions about

black women as compared to white women. In particular, they may be less likely to pay a thinness

premium to black women.

        In Tables 5a and 5b we repeat the analyses of Table 4 for subsamples of Hispanic, non-

Hispanic black and non-Hispanic white women. Figures in Table 5a are cross-sectional differences in

income, marriage, hourly wages and spouse's earnings for the full sample according to categories of

BMI at ages 16 to 25 (1982) or 23 to 31(1988). Figures in Table Sb pertain to the subsample of

people who were single and childless at ages 16 to 25. Sibling sample sizes were too small to permit

separate analyses of sibling differences by race/Hispanicity.

        We find smaller differences by body mass for African American women than for white

women. For example, regression-adjusted differences in the log of family income/needs at ages 23 to

31(1988) between women who were in the 30+ BMI range and those in the 19-24 (reference) range

were -0.42 for whites, -0.23 for Hispanics, and -0.04 for blacks. The lower penalty among

overweight black women is also apparent in models of marriage and hourly pay. However, difference

across BMI categories in spouse's earnings (conditional on marriage) are not smaller among African

Americans than among whites or Hispanics.

        In order to determine whether the substantial race differences that appear in these tables are

statistically significant, we reran the models presented in the first panel of Table 4 for women and

introduced an interaction term between obesity and black racial identification. The coefficient of this

interaction term in the income/needs equation was (positive) 0.30, and was significant at the .01 level.


                                                   19
 The coefficient of the obesity coefficient itself was -.38 (p< .01), about the size of the corresponding

 coefficients for white and Hispanic women presented in the first panel of Table 5a. The

 corresponding wage equation coefficients exhibited the same pattern: the coefficient of the black

 obese interaction was 0.16 (p < .05).

 In fact, since the coefficient of the black variable itself was -0.04, obese black women earned on

 average about 12 percent more per hour than obese white women (although this difference is not quite

 statistically significant; p .12), controlling for labor market experience, education, and so forth.

         Results for men in the bottom panel of Table 5a suggest an obesity wage penalty for white

men (last two columns) only, using either the contemporaneous or the earlier BMI measure. Family

 income deficits among underweight men appear for all three groups.



Detailed wage and income models

        In Tables 6a-6c we present more detailed analyses of wage differences. In the first row of

each panel we present (for convenience) the results reported in the corresponding column of Table 4.
In the second row we add to the variables included in the first specification: dummy variables for

married and divorced/separated in 1988, a dummy variable for the presence of children in 1988, and

an interaction of this variable with the age of the youngest child. The purpose of these models is to

test whether wage differentials across the BMI categories reflect the effects of marriage and children.

In the third row of each panel, we add seven occupation dummy variables corresponding to the

categories that appear at the bottom of Table 2. All in all, the figures in Table 6a indicate that adding

controls for marital status, children and occupation has little effect on the wage differentials by body

mass for women. In all cases, differentials are similar to those found in the least detailed models (I),

and appear somewhat larger than those reported by Register and Williams (1990).

       Table 6b presents the corresponding analyses for men. Again, adding controls for 1988


                                                   20
marital status, children and occupation has little effect on the wage differentials by body mass. The

same is true for the subsample of persons who were single and childless in 1982 (Table 6c).

        Systematic differences in pay linked to a personal characteristic which remain after human

capital differences have been accounted for are often interpreted as evidence of pay discrimination. In

this sense, the wage equation estimates provide evidence of pay discrimination against obese women.

Such pay differentials may also reflect unmeasured productivity differences correlated with body

mass. However, the hypothesis that these pay differentials result from labor market discrimination is

supported by reports by obese or overweight women that they are subjected to labor market

discrimination because of their weight (e.g., Coleman 1993; Kolata et al., 1992). Another piece of

evidence in support of the discrimination hypothesis comes from responses to a question about

experience with sex-based discrimination asked most recently in the 1983 wave of the NLSY: 'Have

you ever experienced discrimination at work?.. .Was that on the basis of sex?' The proportion of

women who responded 'yes" to the sex discrimination question varied by 1982 BMI category: 10.3,

10.8, 10.8 and 17.1 percent among women in the <19, 19 to 23, 24 to 29, and 30+ BMI categories,

respectively. (No questions were asked about weight-based discrimination.)

        In Tables la-ic we present detailed models of family income by body mass. As in Table 6a-

6c, in Tables ia-7c we gauge the sensitivity of BMI effects to the addition of control variables to the

basic specification. We estimate this set of models to address the possibility (noted in our discussion

of Table 4) that the contemporaneous associations (i.e., at ages 23 to 31) may biased upward by

endogenous detennination of weight. In particular, our results led us to speculate that marriage (or

child bearing) may be associated with weight gain between, and with higher income at age 23 to 31.

If marriage and children are an important source of omitted variable bias (or important mediating

factors), then controlling for marital status, the presence of children, and the age of the youngest child

at ages 23 to 31 should: 1. reduce the differentials at ages 23 to 31(1988) in income by body mass;


                                                   21
 and 2. reduce differences between the results based on earlier and later BMI measures.

           Controlling for marital status, the presence of children, and age of the youngest child has

 surprisingly little effect on the cross-sectional differences in income for the heaviest women (compare

 rows (1) and (2) in either panel a). These controls have larger effects on sibling differences
                                                                                                (panel b),
 so   it is difficult to reach definitive conclusion regarding the importance of marital status in explaining

 income differences by BMI.

           For men (Table 7b), controlling for marital status, presence of children,
                                                                                     age of youngest

 children, has relatively little effect on income differentials by body mass. Results for the subsample

 of women and men      who were single and childless in 1982 are similar (see Table 7c).




 Alternative hypotheses

          One hypothesis regarding the source of economic differences by BMI is that they reflect

differences in health status. Both underweight and obesity are associated with health problems; in

fact, these categories are defined by their associations with health risks. Although health differences

could explain the lower earnings of underweight men and obese women, it is not obviouswhy a

gender difference should exist (i.e., the hypothesis that the relationship between economic status and

BMI is confounded by unmeasured health status would predict that underweightwomen and obese

men should also suffer economically).

         We explored the possibility that relationships between BM! and economic statusare

confounded by unmeasured health status by including in the wage and income models an indicator of

health status based on three questions in the 1988 NLSY (the survey year that the income andwage

measures we use were collected). We created a dummy variable equal to one if the respondent

reported that health limited ability to work or amount or type of work; and zero otherwise. Table 8

presents cross-tabulations of this indicator of 1988 health limitations according to BMI category in


                                                    22
1982 and 1988 for men arid women. The prevalence of health limitations is related to obesity and

underweight in the expected manner. Women who were above or below recommended weight for

height in 1988 were 50 to 130 percent more likely to report health limitations than women in the

recommended range. Men in the <20 and 30+ ranges were about twice as likely to report a health

limitation as those in the recommended range. However, adding the health limitations indicator to the

wage and income regressions had no effect on the size or statistical significance of the coefficients of

BMI categories in any of the wage or income models summarized in the above tables.' The

absence of a change in the BMI coefficients in he income equation was especially notable given that

the coefficient of the health limitations variable itself was statistically significant and very large in all

the cross-sectional income equations (the coefficient in the log income equations was in the -0.20 to -

0.4k) range).

        A second hypothesis we considered is whether measures of self-esteem were likely to account

for economic differences by body mass.'7 In Tables 9a and 9b we present cross-tabulated responses

to 10 statements related to self-esteem for women and men. The statements were read in two

different interviews: in 1980, when sample members were aged 15 to 23, and in 1987, when sample

members were aged 22 to 30. The figures in the tables represent the fraction who agreed or agreed

somewhat to the self-esteem statements in 1980 according to BMI categories in 1982, and responses

to 1987 statements according to BMI categories in 1988 (in italic typeface). There are several


    '6More specifically, when we added the health limitations dummy variable, nearly all the
coefficients of the BMI categories were within .01 of their previous values, no coefficient changed in
size by more than .02, and no statistical inference was affected.
    ' One version of this hypothesis holds that obesity effects are confounded by unmeasured self-
esteem, amounting to a suggestion that heavier persons earn lower wages due to low self-esteem and
not weight per Se. However, self-esteem may be affected by social treatment. Another version of
they hypothesis holds that the differential economic status of obese persons is accounted for by low
self-esteem, but views low self-esteem to be primarily the result of obesity (e.g., see Gortmaker et
al., who find no effects of obesity on an index of self-esteem).


                                                     23
 noteworthy patterns.

         First, there is a marked increase with age in self-esteem within all BMI categories. Second,

 the fraction who agree or strongly agree with the self-esteem statement which is most directly related

 to labor market productivity C4. I am able to do things as well as most other pple) exhibits no

 variation by BMI category, and in fact is uniformly high. Responses to some other statements are

 suggestive of lower self-esteem among obese women, but the differences seem modest. This pattern

 is consistent with Gorunaker et al.'s finding no effect of obesity on an index of self esteem.



                                   SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION

        We have presented a range of evidence about the association between obesity and economic

 status for men and women. There are substantial deficits in family income at ages 23 to 31 among

obese women compared to women with BMIs in the recommended range. We took advantage of the

longitudinal nature of the data to argue that social and economic differentials are most likely not the

result of adverse labor or marriage market outcomes causing weight gain. In particular, using an

earlier weight measure strengthens the adverse association between obesity and economic status. In

general, we find similar results when we compare same-sex siblings as a way to control for family

background (e.g., social class) differences. In the remainder of this paper, we discuss our results in

light of the recommendation (e.g., by Gortmaker et al.) that consideration be given to extending the

Americans With Disabilities Act (AWDA) to obese persons.

        First, there is evidence of considerable cross-group variation in economic differentials related

to obesity. In our sample, only white women who were obese both at ages 16 to 24 and at ages 23 to

31 experienced a substantial wage penalty (around 20 percent). At ages 23 to 31, obese men and

obese African American women do not have substantially and statisticallysignificantly lower wages

than their counterparts in the recommended BMI range. In addition, women who entered the obese


                                                  24
 category between ages 16 to 24 and 23 to 31 have wages that are only about six percent below those

of women of recommended weight (although this difference is statistically significant). Because the

prevalence of obesity increases markedly over this range of ages, only about 30 percent of women in

our sample who were obese at ages 23 to 31 were also obese at the younger ages. These results

suggest that extending the AWDA to obese persons may not be 'target efficient' in that the majority

of persons who would be affected by a change in the law do not appear to be in need of the protection

it may provide.

        Second, and most importantly, our results indicate that extending the AWDA to cover obesity

may not be an effective way to raise the income of obese women. The great majority (as much as 96

percent) of the economic deficit associated with obesity among women in our sample results from

differences in the marriage market (lower probabilities ofmarriage and lower spousai income), not
the labor market.




                                               25
                                          REFERENCES

 Armstrong, L. and Maria M. 1992. "The Diet Business Starts Sweating." BusinessWeek June 22:
       32-33.

 Autry, J. H. 1986. "Anorexia Nervosa and Bulimia." Arirasal Review of Public Health 7: 535-543.

 Bray, G. A. 1978. "Definition, Measurement, and Classification of the Syndromes of Obesity."
        Intern onalJournoiof Obesity 2:99-112.

 Bray, G. A. 1979. "Obesity in America." InternationoJ Journal of Obesity 3: 363-375.

Chamberlain, G. 1980. "Analysis of Covariance with Qualitative Data," Review of Economic Studies
     47:225-38.

CHRR (Center for Human Resource Research), 1992. NLS Handbook 1992. Columbus, OH: The
     Ohio State University.

Coleman, J. A. 1993. "Discrimination at Large." Newsweek August 2: 9.

Dawson, D. A. 1988. "Ethnic Differences in Female Overweight: Data from the 1985 National
      Health Interview Survey." American Journal of Public Health 78(10): 1326-29.

Drewnowski, A., S. A. Hopkins, and R. C. Kessler. 1988. "The Prevalence of Bulimia Nervosa in
      the US College Student Population." American Journal of Public Health 78(10): 1322-1325.

Filer, R. 1993. "The Usefulness of Predicted Values for Prior Work Experience in Analyzing Labor
        Market Outcomes for Women," Journal of Hwnan Resources 28(3): 5 18-537.

Furnharn, A. and Alibhai, N. 1983. "Cross-Cultural Differences in the Perception of Female Body
      Shapes," Psychological Medicine 13:829-837.

Gortmaker, S., Must, A., Perrin, J., Sobol, A. and W. Dietz. 1993. Social and Economic
      Consequences of Overweight in Adolescence and Young Adulthood. New England Journal of
       Medicine 329(14): 1008-1012.

Greene, W. 1993. Econometric Analysis, 2nd. Edn. New York: Macmillan.

Greenwood, M.R.C. 1983. Obesity. New York: Churchill Livingstone.

Hamermesh, D. and J. Biddle. 1993. "Beauty and the Labor Market," Michigan State University,
     Department of Economics, October.

Johnson, W. G., and J. Lambrinos. 1985. "Wage Discrimination Against Handicapped Men and
       Women. Journal of Hwnan Resources 20(2): 264-277.

Ka]mijn, M. 1993. "Trends in Black/White Intermarriage." SocialForces 72(1): 119-146.


                                               26
 Kannel, W.B. 1983 "Health and Obesity: An Overview.' in Health and Obesity, edited by H.L.
        Conn, Jr., E.A. DeFelice and P. Kuo. Raven Press, New York.

 Kolata, G., Brody, J.E. and E. Rosenthal, "Fat in America", The New York flmes, November 22-24,
         1992, v. 142.

 Lampert, L. 1993. "Fat Like Me," Ladies Home Journal, May, pp. 154-157.

 Metropolitan Life Insurance Co. 1983. "1983 Metropolitan Height and Weight Tables." Statistical
       Bulletin. Vol 64 No. 1, Jan-June 1983.

 Mincer, I. and S. Polachek, 1974. "Family Investments in Human Capital: Earnings of Women." In
        Economics of the Family, e.d., T.W. Schultz, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press,
        397-429.                                                                               pp.

 National Center for Health Statistics, 1983. S. Abraham: Obese and
                                                                    overweight adults in the United
        States. Vital and Health Statistics. Series 11, No. 230. DHHS Pub. No. 83-1680. Public
        Health Service. Washington. U.S. Government Printing Office, January.

Register, C. A. and D. R. Williams. 1990. "Wage Effects of Obesity among Young Workers." Social
       Science Quarterly 71(1): 130-141.

Sciacca, J. P., C. L. Melby, G. C. Hyner, A. C. Brown, and P. L. Femea. 1991. "Body Mass Index
       and Perceived Weight Status in Young Adults." Journal of ConmuiaUy Health 16(3): 159-168.

Steckel Richard H. 1991. "Stature and Living Standards in the United
                                                                     States," NBER Working Paper
        on Historical Factors in Long Run Growth, No. 24, April.

Wolf, Naomi. 1991. The Beauty Myth. New York: Doubleday.

The World Bank, 1992. World Development Report, 1992. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Zuckerrnan, D., A. Colby, N. C. Ware, and J. S. Lazerson. 1986. "The Prevalence of Bulimia
       among College Students." American Journal c/Public Health 76(9): 1135-1137.




                                                27
Table Ia: Diatribut.Ofl8 of 1988 Body Maee Index by 1982 Body HaaB Index,
            Full Sanple

                                      1988 BMI

WOMEN
                 <19          19—23       24—29       30+         All        N
1982 StI
<19              394                      5.9         0.1         14.1       711
19—23             5.0        62.0        29.5         3.5         62.2      3139
24—29             0.3        13.5        49.9        36.3         19.1       962
30+               0.4         3.8        10.6        85.2          4.7       236

All               8.8        49.0        29.2        13.1        100.0
N                 442        2473        1474         659                   5048




                 <20         20—24        25—29       30+         All        N
1982 BHI
<20              31.2        62.5         5.7         0.6         10.3       506
20—24             1.9        60.3        34.9         2.9         65.1      3196
25—29             0.2        11.7        60.1        28.0         20.4      1003
30+               0.0         3.4        13.2        83.4          4.2       205

All               4.5        48.2        36.1        11.1        100.0
N                 222        2367        1774         547                   4910
Table ib: Diotribution of 1988 Body Maee Index by 1982 Body Maus Index,
            Peraone Who Were Unnarried. Childleaa, and Not Pregnant n 1982

                                     1988 BHI
WOHZN
                 <19         19—23       24-29       30+         All           N
1982 BMI
<19              36.0        57.6        6.4         0.0        15.3          408
19—23             4.7       63.3        28.4         3.6        64.2         1710
24—29             0.5       12.0        49.4        38.1        16.3          433
30+               0.9        3.6         6.3        89.3         4.2          112
All               8.7       51.6        27.5        12.2       100.0
N                231        1373         733         326                     2663




                 <20         20—24       25—29       30+        All           N
1982    BMX
<20             30.8        63.0         5.4         0.7        11.3          441
20—24            1.9        60.1        34.8         33         66.3         2597
25—29            0.3        11.6        57.7        30.5        18.3          716
30+              0.0         3.7        13.0        83.2         4.1          161
All              4.8        49.3        34.8        11.2       100.0
N                186        1928        1361         440                     3915
rable 2a: 1988 Sample Means and Frequenciea by Body Mass Index ..n 1988, Women
                             (percents unlese indLcated)


                                                   Body Mass Index    1988

                              All         <19            19—2 4      25—29       30+

FamLly Income (5)           26,387       29,361          28,683      24,182    20,435

Income! needs                  2.9          3.2              3.2        2.5          2.1

Poor                          20.5         19.6            16.9        22.6         30.7

Income rnteaing               17.0         15.8            16.3        17.8         18.8

Married                       51.7         53.6            51.6        53.1         47.6

Divorced/Sep.                  5.5          5.4              4.4        6.8          6.8

Schooling (yrs.)              12.8         12.8            13.1        12.6         12.1

Age (yrs.)                    26.7         26.4            26.6        26.8         26.8

Any kids?                     61.5         57.2            56.7        68.3         66.8
Any • age youngest             2.].         1.9              1.9        2.3          2.5

Black                        25.9          14.9            20.9        30.6         41.0

Hispanic                      15.6         10.2            14.2        19.5         16.1

BMI. 1988                    24.4          18.0            21.4        26.4         35.0

81(1. 1982                   22.3          18.8            20.8        23.3         28.4

Employed                     79.2          78. 1           82.1        77.7         72.1

Hourly wage (S)              7.52          7.51            8.03        7.06         6.44

Actual exper. (yrs.)'         6.1           5.9             6.4         5.9          5.4

Occupat ion'
  Mang./Prof.                 19.6         21.7            15.9        21.7         27.3

  Sales                      21.6          24.2            25.2        18.2         13.8

  Clertcal                    9.4          10.4             9.6         9.4          7.6

  Service                    22.7          21.3            23.2        23.5         20.2

  Manf., unskilled           16.5          12.9            16.7        16.0         19.4

  Manf.. skilled              8.2           7.7             7.3         9.3          9.7

  Other                       2.0           1.8             2.1         1.8          2.0

Spouses earnings:          23,482       26,241          25,439       21464     18,050

Unmar. & no kids 82          52.8          52.3            55.5        49.7         49.5

Sample size                  5048           442            2473        1474          659


1. If employed
2. Annual earnings of spouse, if sample person is married and spouse    employed.
 Table 2b:      1988 Sample Means and Frequencies by Body Mass Index in 1988, Men
                                 (percents unless indicated)


                                                         Body Mass Index in 1988
                                  All            <20           20—24      25—29         30.
 Family Income ($)              27,997          21,517         27,516      29,653    27,064
 Income/needs                      3.2             2.4            3.3         3.3         3.0
 Poor                             11.1            19.5           12.5         7.7        12.9
 Income missing                   21.4            28.4           21.0       20.9         22.3
 Married                          44.2            34.7           40.2       49.2         49.4
 Divorced/Sep.                     4.1             6.8            4.5        3•7          2.4

 Schooling (yrs.)                 12.6            12.0           12.8       12.6         12.2
 Age (yr..)                       26.5            26.1           26.4       26.6         26.8
 Any kids?                        35.1           29.7            31.5       38.9         40.4
 Any * age youngest                0.9            0.8            0.7         1.1          1.0
 Black                            26.8           32.0           27.7        25.8        24.1
 Hispanic                         16.3           13.1           13.1        18.8        22.9
 8)41,   1988                     25.3           19.0           22.9        26.9        33.4
 8)41, 1982                       23.4           19.5           21.9        24.3        28.5
Employed                          87.9           82.0           87.6        88.0        91.2
Hourly wage (5)'                  9.37           7.74           9•37        974         8.81

Actual exper. (yrs.)'              7.0            6.1            6.9         7.1         7.5
Occupat ion
     Mang./Prof.                  13.5           17.6           12.8        14.2        12.6
     Sales                        18.3           13.5           19.9        18.0        14.3
     Clerical                     6.5             6.3            6.7         6.5         6.0
     Service                      7.6             6.3            7.9         7.6         6.8
     !4anf., unskilled           10.6            11.7           10.0        10.7        13.0
     Manf., skilled              24.4            25.7           23.6        23.8        29.8
     Other                       19.0            18.9           19.1        19.2        17.6
Spouse's earnings2             12,538          12,145         12,773      12,664    11,432
Unmar. & no kjd '82              79.7            83.8           81.5       76.7         80.4
Sample size                      4910             222           2367       1774          547

1.    If   employed
2. Annual earning. of spouse,     if    sample person is married and spouse employed.
 Table 3a: 1988 Sample Meane and Frequencies by Body Mae. Index in 1982, Woman
                             (percents unless indicated)


                                                  Body Mae.    Index in 1982
                               All        <19           19—24          25—29     30+

 Family Income         $)   26,387       29,423         27,747         21,829   16,978
 Income/needs                  2.9          3.2               3.0         2.2       1.8

 Poor                         20.5         15.2             18.6         26.4     39.3
 Income      missing          17.0         14.9             16.9         19.2      16.9

Harried                       51.7         55.6             53.5         47.3     34.7

Divorced/Sep.                  5.5          4.5               5.0         6.9      9.7

Schooling (yrs.)              12.8         13.0             12.9         12.3     11.8

Age (yrs.)                    26.7         26.2            26.6          26.9     27.3
Any kide?                     61.5         56.5            61.1          67.0     57.6
Any * age youngest             2.1          1.8               2.0         2.5      2.6
Black                         25.9         15.2            24.6          33.2     44.9

Hispanic                      15.6         12.9            15.1         20.5      11.0
8)11, 1988                    24.4         19.8            23.1         28.9      36.3
BHI, 1982                     22.3         18.1            21.3         26.2      34.0

Employed                      79.2         79.5            80.4         76.7      72.0

Hourly wage (5)'              7.52         7.56            7.77         6.99      5.84

Actual exper. (yrs.)'          6.1          6.1             6.3          5.7       5.3

Occupat ion
  Hang./Prof.                 19.6         19.1            18.3         21.6      30.1
     Sales                    21.6        25.6             22.8         17.3      11.0
     Clerical                  9.4         9.1              9.7          9.0       7.2
     Service                  22.7        21.7             23.5         21.9      18.2

     Manf., unskilled         16.5        15.0             15.9         18.4      21.2

     Manf., skilled            8.2         7.9              7.6         10.0      10.2
     Other                     2.0         1.5              2.1          1.8       2.1
spouse. earninge            23,482      26,314         24,171         19,331    16,776
Unmar. & no kids 82          52.8         57.4           54.5           45.0     47.5
Sample size                  5048          711             3139          962      236

1.    If employed
2. Annual earning. of spouse, it sample person is married and spouse employed.
 Table Jb:    :988 Sample Means and Frequencies by Body Has. Index n    1982, Men
                               (percent. unles. indicated)


                                                    Body Ma.. Index in 1982
                                All         <20          20—2 4        2 5—29        30+
 Family Income (S)            27,997       23,638         28,128       29,766       27,267
 Income/need.                    3.2          2.7              3]         3.3          3.1
 Poor                           11.1         14,8             11.1        9.0         12.3
 Income miesing                21.4          25.3            21.2        19.4        24.4
 Married                       44.2          36.8            437         49.8        43.9
 Divorced/Sep.                  4.1           5.9             4.0         4.0         2.0
 Schooling (yr..)              12. 6         12.4            12.7        12.6        12.5
 Age (yr..)                    26.5          25.5            26.5        27.0        27.2
 Any kids?                     35.1          31.0            34.0        41.1        32.7
 Any * age younge.t             0.9          0.7              0.8         1.2         0.9
 Black                         26.8         25.7             28.8       22.4         20.5
 Hispanic                      16.3         13.4             15.3       18.8         25.4
 8HZ, 1988                     25.3         21.3             24.4       28.4         34.5
BMI, 1982                      23.4         19.0             22.4       26.8         33.0
Employed                       87.9         82.6             88.0       89.5         91.2
Hourly wage (5)'               9.37         8.23             9.50       9.59         8.93
Actual exper. (yr..)'           7.0          6.2              6.9        7.5          7.8
Occupation:
  Mang./Prof.                  13.5         16.0             13.2       13.8        10.7
  Sale.                        18.3         15.8          19.2          16.8        17.6
  Clerical                     6.5           5.5             6.7         6.6         6.8
  Service                      7.6           8.1             7.7         7.2         7.3
  Manf., unskilled            10.6          10.1          10.6          11.3         9.8
  Manf., skilled              24.4          22.3          24.3         24.8         29.3
  Other                       19.0         22.1           18.3         19.5         18.5
Spouses earninge            12,538       11,535         12,751       12,580     11,068
Unmar. & no kids '82          79.7         87.2           81.3         71.4         78.5
Sample size                   4910          506           3196         1003          205

1.  If employed
2. Annual earning, of spouse, if sample person is married and spouse employed.
    able 4:        RegreasLOflAdlUBted Differences in Marriage and Labor Market Outcomee
                       n 1988 According to SKI Category n 1988 or 1981—82

                                   Percent or Precentage Point Differences

                                                                   Spouses
                       Irconte/Need&          PrUlarried)          Earruno&             Hourly Wa&
                                 SIB               SIB                     SIB                   SIB
                       XSEC      DIFFS        XSEC DIFFS           XSEC DIFFS           XSEC     DIFFS
                                                      WONZN

Full Sample
1982 8HZ
30+                    —.25     —. 33                   —. 23*              —.25        —. 15* —.12
24—29                           —.12           —.05*    —. 10*                .03       —.01 —.03
<19                     .03      .02            .01      .02        .09       .14       —.00 —.07
N                      4188      609           5048      299       2137       198       3996     593


Full Sample
1988 BMI
30+                             —.11            .00     —.01                 —.12       —.09k —.07
24—29                  .10* —.04                .04*       .04               —.07             —.02
<19                    —.04      .201          —.00     —.08        .02          .36k   —.04   .05
U                      4188      609           5048      299       2137          198    3996     593

Single &
Childless
in 1982.
1982 BHI
30+                     .33*    —.27           —.31k                         —1.06              —.15
24—29                  —. 15*   —.01           —.10     —.   171                  .09   —.03     .04
<19                     .03      .08            .01     —.191       .17*          .14    .00 —.10
N                      2189      256           2663       146      1030            79   2559     288


                                                       (
Full Sample
1982 BMI
30+                    —.14     —.22           —.04     —.14       —.09          —.10           .•Q9*
25—29                   .05     —.03            .02     —.02        .06           .02   —.01 —.04
<20                             —.04           —.041     .02                     —.32   —.09 —.03
N                      3589      615           4910      356       1493           105   4317     781

Full Sample
1988 BHI
30+                     .02     —.28            .08*     .06        .00          —.37           —.05
25—29                   .13*     .06            .09*     .091       .14*          .17     Q3*    .03
<20                    —.22k     .17           —.04      .03        .13           .33   —.09k    .00
N                      3859      615           4910      356       1493           105   4317     781

Single &
Childless
in 1982,
1982 8HZ
30+                    —.02     —.31           —.071     —.15       .00          —.37   —.06 —.13
25—29                   .06     —.09           —.00      —.02       .06          —.11   —.02 —.081
<20                              .03           —.01      —.00      —.191         —.35   —.09 —.02
N                      3015      430           3915       264      1054            60   3442    570


Note.: Detailed note. follow Table Sb.
*
    p   <   .05;   I .05< p <.10

N is the number of observations, or (approximately) the number of pairs for same—sex
sibling difference.. See text for details.
        Table 5a: Regresuion—Aduated DifferenceB .fl Marr.age and Labor Market OUtcomø.
                      in 1988 According to BHI Category in 1988 or 1981-82  By Race

                                    Percent or Percentage Point Diffarencea

                                                                  SpOua a
                       Income/Need.'
                       1982     1988
                                               Pr(Harried)2
                                               1982     1988
                                                                  Arnjnpp'               Hourly Waged
                                                                  1982       1988        1982   1988
                       SM!      3M!            Sf1      3M!       BMI        SHI         SM!    SM!
                                                       WOKEPI

    Hi.eoanice
    30+                 —.23      —.14          —.22       .00   —.05           29
    24—29               —. 141
                                                                           —.            —. 191 — .09
                                  —.06          —.00       .06    —10      -.03
    <19                  .10       .04                                                   -.02 —.04
                                                 .03      —.04    .271      .11           .03     .141
    N                    634       634           798       798    345       345           593     593

    Black.
    30+                —.04        —.10        —.05        .02    —.26            35
    24—29                          —.04
                                                                             —.          —.08 —.05
                       —. 121                  —.01        .04    —. 31*    —.08         —.01 —.02
    <19                  .06       —.09          .07              —.10      —.10         -.07 —.09
    n                  1021        1021        1305       1305     281          281      1000 1000
    White.
    30+                —.42k                   — 25*              —.29k     —.18k
    24—29              —. j3* —.14k                                                             —.12k
                                               .08*        .04    —.15*     —.    14    —.00 —.08k
    <19                 .01      —.05                    —.01      .091
    N                  2533      2533
                                                                                .02      .00 —.051
                                               2978      2978     1511      1511        2403 2403

                                                       N
 Hisparjc.
 30+                   —.11      —.06          —.00              —.28
 25—29                 —.08      —. 15*
                                                                            —.04        —.11 —.04
                                               —.01       .08*   —.12           .07     —.04     .02
 <20                   —.20                    —.04               .19
N                       584       584
                                                                            —.02        —.07 —.01
                                                807       807     211        211         719     719

Blacks
30+                    —.00       .06          —.13               .29           —.04     .04     .06
25—29                   .06       .101
<20                    —.181 —.18
                                                .03                               .18    .01     .04
                                               —.03              —.10           .27             —.09
N                       931       931          1320      1320     275           275     1081 1081

White a
30+                   —.05       —.01         —.03        .10*   —.08      —.02                 —.09k
25—29                   .071      .13k          .02       .09*    .15.       .13k       —.01     .03
<20                                           —.05      —.04     —.29k       .07                fl*
N                     2344       2344         2824      2824     1017      1017         2517    2517


Detailed notee follow Table Sb.
*
        p <   .05; 1 .05< p <.10
U La the number of obeervatjone.
    able sb: Reareeson—AdjUBted Differencee n Marr.age and Labor Market Outcomes
-fl   1988 AccordLng to BMI Category in 1982, By Race. Suboa.rnple of Persons who were
nqLe      and Childie.. in 1982

                           Percent or Percentage Point Differences

                                                          SpOuse 0
                 Income/Needs          Prlllarried)2       Earning&         Hourly WaQe
                 Women    Men          Women     Men       Women     Men    Women   Men


He pan CB
30+              —.03    —.08           —.13    —.06       .3)     —.18     —.37 —.12
24—29            —.10    —.08           —.01    —.07      —. 281   —.00     — .02   — .04
<19               .32    —.15            .09    —.06       .351      .30     .09     .11
N                 322     430            400     609       162       138     332     551


Blacks
30+              —.15    —.00           —.12    —.06      —.46    .29       —. 15 .05
24—29            —.11     .07           —.01     .01      —. 301 —.26       —.04     .00
<19              —.00    —. 23*          .05 — .06        —.16     —.18     — .06   —.11'
u                 480     798            639    1147       128      209      517     950


Wh itee
30+              —. 51   —.04           — 44*   —.08      —. 60    —.04     —. 28* —.08
24—29            —.14     .07                    .00      —.16k      .11    —.04 —.03
<19              —.03    —.15k          —.02    —.05       .17* —.28        —.00 —.09*
N                1386    1787           1624    2159       740    707       1410 1941


Detailed notes follow Table 5b.
*
    p < .05; 0 .05< p <.10
H   is the number of observations.
Notes to Tables   4,   5a and Sb.
1.  Dependent variable   lfl(income/needa) Lfl 1987, where needs are defined a. the
poverty line for the family unit. Regression Controls inClude in addition to
dummy variables for BHI category: age, years of schooling and dummy variables
for region (3), racial/Hispanic identification (2), and residence in an SMSA (2).
2. Dependent variable is dichotomous: married in 1988." Controls entered in
the logit models include in addition to dummy variable, for 8M1
                                                                category: age,
years of schooling and dummy variables for region (3), racial/Hispanic
identification (2), and residence in an SMS? (2). Numbers shown are derivatives
evaluated at the sample mean and may be interpreted as
                                                       percentage point
differences in the probability of being married in 1988. Sibling differences are
from fixed—effect, logits models.
3. Dependent variable — ln(spouae'e annual earnings) in 1987. The sample
consist, of sampl. members who are married and whose spouses earned at least 100
dollars in 1987. Regression controls include in addition to dummy variables for
DM1 category: age, years of schooling and dummy variables for region (3),
racial/Hispanic identification (2), and residence in an SMSA (2).
4. Dependent variable — ln(sasnple
                                    member's hourly wage in survey week). The
sample consists of sample member. who worked for pay during the survey weak.
Regression controls include in addition to dummy variables for 8141
                                                                    category:
actual labor market experience, years of schooling and dummy variables  for region
(3), racial/Hispanic identification (2), and residence in an SMSA (2).
    Table 6a:   ReqressiOIVAdjUBted Differencea .n Hourly Wage Rates by 1988
                and 1982 BMI, Women.
                Dependent variable = ln(hourly wage .n 1988)

                                               OLS Coefficiente (SEa)

                                                  Body Mass Index
                                         <19           24—29            30+

    1988 BJ41

    a.   Cross section (N3996)
                (1)                   —.04              _.06a            —.09
                                      (.03)             (.02)             (.02)

                (2)                   —.041             _.06*
                                       (.03)            (.02)             (.02)

                (3)                   -.05              _.06*            —. Q9*
                                       (.02)            (.02)             (.02)
    b. Sister diffs. (n—593)
                (1)                     .05             —.02             —.07
                                       (.07)            (.04)             (.08)

                (2)                     .05             —.02             —.07
                                       (.07)            (.04)            (.08)
                (3)                     .04             —.02             —.07
                                       (.07)            (.04)            (.07)
    1982 BMI
    a. Cross section (N=3996)
                (1)                   —.00              —.01
                                       (.02)            (.02)            (.03)
                (2)                   —.00              —.01             —.16k
                                       (.02)            (.02)            (.03)
                (3)                   —.01              —.01
                                      (.02)             (.02)            (.03)
    b. Sister diffs. (N593)
                (1)                   —.07             —.03              —.12
                                      (.06)             (.05)            (.12)
                (2)                   —.07             —.04              —.14
                                      (.06)             (.05)            (.12)
                (3)                   —.091            —.03              —.11
                                      (.06)             (.05)            (.12)



*
    p-<.OS; I .05<p<.1O
(1) Controls include years of education, actual labor market experience, dummy
      variables for race/Hispanic identification (2), SMSA (2) and region (3).

(2) Controls in (1) plus two dummy variables for marital status in 1988 and
         dummy variables for "any chi1dren' and an interaction of 'any children"
         and age of the youngest child.

(3) Controls in (2) plus seven occupation dummy variables. See text for
      details.
  Table 6b:
                   Regression—Adjusted Difference, in Hourly Wage Rate, by 1988
                   and 1982 SHI, 4en.
                   Dependent variable   ln(hourly wage in 1988)

                                                 OLS Coefficient, (SE,)
                                                         Mase Index
                                           <20           25—29            30+
  1988 BIll
  a.     Cross section (N—4317)
                   (1)                   -.09              .03"            —.04"
                                         (.03)            (.02)             (.02)
                   (2)                                     .03S            .0S"
                                         (.03)            (.02)            (.02)
                   (3)                   —.08"             .03*            —.03
                                         (.03)            (.01)            (.02)
 b. Brother diffa. (n—781)
                   (1)                    .00              .03             -.05
                                         (.07)           (.03)             (.05)
                   (2)                    .00             .02              —.05
                                         (.07)           (.03)             (.05)
                  (3)                     .00             .03              —.03
                                        (.06)
 1982   BIll

 a. Cross section (P4—4317)
                  (1)                   —.09"            —.01              —.08"
                                        (.02)            (.02)             (.03)
                  (2)                   .09*             —.02              —.08"
                                        (.02)            (.02)             (.03)
                  (3)                   —.09"            —.01
                                        (.02)            (.02)             (.03)
 b.    Brother diffa. (N781)
                  (1)                   —.03            —.04              —.09
                                        (.05)            (.04)            (.07)
                  (2)                   —.03            —.04              —.08
                                        (.05)            (.04)            (.07)
                  (3)                  —.03             —.04              —.07
                                        (.05)           (.04)             (.07)


* p<.05; #     .05<p<.10
(1) Controls include year. of education, actual labor market experience, dunry
        variable, for race/Hispanic identification (2), SHSA (2) and region (3).
(2) Controls in (1) plus two dunvny variable, for marital status in 1988 and
      dummy variable, for "any children" and an interaction of "any children"
      with age of youngest child.

(3) Controls in (2) plus seven occupation duny variables. See text for
       details.
    Table 6c:      Regres.ionAdjUsted Differences in Hourly Wage Rates by 1988
                   and 1982 BMI, Persons Who Were Unmarried and Childless in
                   1982.
                   Dependent variable —   ln(hourly   wage in 1988)


                                                   OLS Coefficients (SEa)

                                                    1982 Body Mass Index
    WON                                      <19           24—29            30+
    a. Cross section (N2259)
                   (1)                      .00             —.03
                                           (.03)            (.03)             (.05)
                   (2)                     —.00             —.04             _.25a
                                           (.03)            (.03)             (.05)
                   (3)                     —.01             —.03
                                           (.03)            (.02)             (.05)
    b. Sister diffs. (n—288)
                   (1)                     —.10              .04             —.15
                                           (.09)            (.08)            (.14)
                   (2)                     —.10              .03             —.19
                                           (.09)            (.08)            (.15)
                   (3)                     —.12              .01             —.18
                                           (.08)            (.08)            (.15)
                                                   1982 Body Mass Index
                                           <20             25—29              30+
    a.   Cr088 section (N—3442)
                   (1)                     _Q9*            —.02              —.061
                                           (.03)           (.02)             (.04)
                   (2)                     Q9*             —.02              —.05
                                           (.03)            (.02)            (.04)
                   (3)                     —.10k           —.01              —.05
                                           (.03)            (.02)            (.04)
    b.   Brother   diffs. (N—570)
                   (1)                    —.02             _.08*             —.131
                                          (.05)             (.04)            (.08)
                   (2)                    —.02             _.08*             —. 121
                                           (.05)           (.04)             (.08)
                   (3)                    —.03             —.08k             —.10
                                           (.05)           (.04)             (.08)



*
    p<.OS;   I .05<p<.10
(1) Controls include years of education, actual labor market experience, duny
     variables for race/Hispanic identification (2), SMSA (2) and region (3).

(2) Controls in (1) plus two dummy variables for marital status in 1988, dunany
      variables for "any children" and an interaction of "any children" times
      age of youngest child.
(3) Controls in (2) plus seven occupation dummy variables. See text for
      details.
    Table 7a:       Regression—Adjusted Differences in 1988 Income by 1988 and
                    1982 SMI, Women.
                    Dependent variable - ln(Income/Needs in 1988)

                                                  OLS Coef ficients (SEe)

                                                     Body Mass Index
                                            <19           24—29             30+
    1988 BMI
    a.     Crc.. section (N—4188)
                     (1)                  —.04             —.10k             _.13*
                                          (.04)            (.03)             (.04)
                     (2)                  —.04             -.07•             _.14*
                                          (.04)            (.03)             (.03)


    b. Sister diffe. (n—609)
                    (1)                    .20#           —.04               —.11
                                          (.12)            (.07)             (.11)
                    (2)                    .27k           —.03               —.04
                                          (.11)           (.06)              (.10)


    1982 BMX
    a. Cross section (N—4188)
                    (1)                    .03            .14                —.25
                                          (.04)           (.03)              (.06)
                    (2)                    .02            —.   10            _.21*
                                          (.03)           (.03)              (.05)


    b.    Sister   diffe. (N—609)
                    (1)                    .02            —.12               _.33*
                                          (.09)           (.08)              (.16)
                    (2)                    .01            —.07              —.14
                                          (.08)           (.07)             (.15)



*   p<.OS; #    .O5<p<.1O
(1)      Controls include years of education, age, dummy variables for
           race/Hispanic identification (2), SMSA (2) and region (3).
(2) Controls in (1) plus two dunny variables for marital status in 1988 and
      dummy variables for "any children" and an interaction of any children"
      and age of the youngest child.
 Table 7b:       Regre.sionAdiu$ted Difference. in 1988 Income by 1988 and
                 1982 BMI. Hen.
                 Dependent variable   ln(Income/Neade in 1988)

                                               OLS Coefficients (SEe)

                                                  Body Mass Index
                                         <20           25—29            30+

 1988 BI
 a.   Cross section (U3859)
                 (1)                   —.22k             .l3               .02
                                       (.06)            (.03)             (.04)
                 (2)                   _.21*             .12               .01
                                       (.06)            (.03)             (.04)


b. Brother diffs. (fl—781)
                 (1)                    .17              .06
                                       (.15)            (.06)             (.10)

                 (2)                    .23              .07             —.26k
                                       (.14)            (.06)             (.10)


 1982 BIll
 a.   Cross section (Na3859)
                 (1)                   _.14*             .05             —.04
                                       (.04)            (.03)             (.06)

                 (2)                   _j3*              .051            —.05
                                       (.04)            (.03)             (.06)


b. Brother diffs. (N615)
                 (1)                   —.04             —.03             —.22
                                       (.10)            (.08)            (.15)
                 (2)                   —.05              .01             —.21
                                       (.10)            (.07)            (.15)




 p<.OS;      I .05(p<.1O
(1) Controls include years of education, age, dunsny variables for
      race/Hispanic identification (2), SHSA (2) and region (3).
(2) Controls in (1) plu. two dua.ny variable, for marital status in 1988, duny
      variables for "any children" and an interaction of "any children" with
      age of youngest child.
    Table lc:    Regression—Adjusted Difference. in 1988 Income by 1988 and
                 1982 3141, Persons Who Were L1nnarrjed and Childless in 1982.
                 Dependent variable — ln(hourly wage in 1988)



                                                  OLS Coefficients (SEa)

                                                   1982 Body Mass Index
                                            <19            24—29           30+
    a. Cross section (N—2189)
                 (1)                     .03              —.15k             _33•
                                        (.05)              (.05)            (.09)
                 (2)                     .01              —.10k
                                        (.04)              (.04)            (.08)


    b. Sister diffs. (n289)
                 (1)                    .08               —.01              —.27
                                       (.13)              (.12)             (.28)
                 (2)                   —.00                .03               .11
                                       (.13)              (.12)             (.27)


                                                  1982 Body Mass Index
                                       <20                 25—29            30+
    a. Cross section (N—3015)
                (1)                    —.   17             .06              —.02
                                       (.05)              (.04)             (.08)
                (2)                    —. 15               .071             —.02
                                       (.05)              (.04)             (.08)


    b. Brother diffe. (N—430)
                (1)                     .03               —.09             —.31
                                       (.12)              (.10)             (.19)
                (2)                     .01               —.05             —.29
                                       (.12)              (.10)             (.19)



*
    p<.05;   I .O5<p<.1O
(1) Controls   include years of education, actual labor market experience, duy
        variables for race/Hispanic identification (2), SMSA (2) and region (3).
(2) Controls in (1) plus two dunuTty variables for marital status in 1988, dunsiy
        variable, for any children" and an interaction of "any children" times
        age of youngest child.
 Table 8: Fraction Reporting that Health L)4nite Ability to Work, or Mount or
                             Type of Work in 1988




                                                     BMI Category


Wo•sn                                           1923           2429        12±
1982 BMI                              7.6            8.2            8.8   14.0
Number of observatiOfle               711           3139            962    236

1988 BMI                              9.5            6.2         9.4      14.3
Number of obiervations                442           2473        1474       659



Men                                             20—24          25—29

1982 3141                             6.1            5.2         6.2       9.8
Number of obeervatiOne                506           3196        1003       205

1988 B141                            10.4            4.9         5.0       9.5
Number of obeervatione                222           2367        1774       547
      Table 9a: Proportion Who Agreed With Various Self—Esteem- Statements,
                              by BMI Category, Women




                                               Age 17—25   8141   (1982)
                                               Age 23—31   BIll   (1988)
Age 15—23 Statements (1980)
Ag. 22—30 Statements (1987)             <19       19—23           24—29       30.

1.   I feel I am a person of           99.0        98.7            97.5       97.4
     worth, at least on an equal       99.5        98.9            98.5       96.8
     basis with others.

2. I feel that I hay, a number         96.9        98.0            97.1       96.9
   of good qualities.                  99.8        99.2            99.0       99•3
3. All in all, I am inclined            3.9         4.3             5.0
   to feel that I am a failure.         2.7         2.6             2.6        3.5
4. I am able to do things              95.9        97.1            95.2       96.1
   as well as most other people.       97.9        98.7            98.1       97.2
5.   I feel I do not have much          6.7         6.6             9.8       10.0
     to be proud of.                    4.3         4.4             6.4        7.4
6. I take a positive attitude         91.9        92.8             90.7    86.0
   toward myself.                     93.9        95.9             95.8    93.4
7. On the whole, I am                 90.3        91.0             88.3    86.5
   satisfied with myself              94.8        93.9             91.0    88.9
8. I wish I could have more           34.1        33.0             35.8    42.3
   respect for myself.                20.7        19.6             22.9    27.7
9. I certainly feel useless           48.5        44.3             44.4    45.6
   at times.                          28.6        26.0             27.2    .31.9
10. At times, I think                 27.8        23.2             24.3    23.6
     I am no good at all.             11.4        10.0             10.3    12.0

Approximate sample size                702        3074              943       229
                                       440        2422             1447       647
Notes:

1. Figures in the table are proportions of respondents who answered Agrea or
       Strongly Agree to the statement.
      Table 9b: Proportion Who Agreed with Various "Self— Esteem" Statements,
                                by BMI Category, Men




                                           Age 17—25 BMI (1982)
                                           Ag. 23—31 EMI (1988)
Age 15—23 statements (1980)
Ag. 22—30 statementS (1987)               <19       20—24         25—29         30+


1. I feel. I am a person of              97.5        98.1         97.7          99.0
   worth, at least on an equal           97.6        98.2         98.2          97.7
   basis with others.

2. 1 feel. that I hay, a number          97.1        98.1         98.5          98.5
   of good qualities.                    99.1        99.1         98.9          98.7
3. All. in all, I am inclined             3.3         4.1          3.8           2.9
   to feel. that I am a failure.          1.9         2.2          2.4           3.0
4. I am able to do things                96.1        97.1         97.5          96.6
   as well as moat other people.         98.6        98.0         98.5          97.9
5. I feel I do not have much              9.8         7.7          8.0          10.3
   to be proud of.                        6.2         5.8          5.6           5.9

6. I take a positive attitude            92.4        94.0         94.4          93.7
   toward myself.                        96.7        96.3         97.0          96.6
7. On the whole, I am                    91.6        92.2         92.6          90.2
   satisfied with myself                 93.8        92.1         92.4          93.2
8. I wish I could have more              41.6        36.5         35.5          41.0
   respect for myself.                   28.9        23.5         23.7          25.4
9. I certainly feel useless              38.7        35.4         36.2          34.1
   at times.                             27.3        20.8         17.8          20.7
10.   At times, I think                  20.3        17.7         16.5          18.0
      I   am no good at all.             11.9         7.0          7.3           7.2


Approximate sample size                  488         3102          973          205
                                         211         2273         1705          529

1. Figures in the table are proportions of respondents who answered "Agree" or
      "Strongly Agree" to the statement.
