                            NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           CURRENCY OPTION PRICING IN
                             CREDIBLE TARGET ZONES




                                     Bernard Dumas
                                    L. Peter Jennergren
                                      Bertil Näslund




                                  Working Paper No. 4522




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 November, 1993



This paper is part of NBER's research programs in Asset Pricing and International Finance
and Macroeconomics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                 NEER Working Paper #4522
                                                                           November 1993


                            CURRENCY OPTION PRICING N
                              CREDIBLE TARGET ZONES


                                        ABSTRACT


       This paper develops a model for valuing options on a currency which is maintained

within a band. The starting point of our model is the well known Krugman model for

exchange-rate behavior within a target zone. Results from model runs provide insight into

evidence reported by other authors of mispricing of currency options by extensions of the

Black-Scholes model.



Bernani Dumas                                            L. Peter Jennergren
HEC School of Management                                 Stockholm Schonl of Economics
78351 Jouy-en-Josas                                      5-11353 Stockholm
PRANCE                                                   SWEDEN
and NBER


Bertil Näslund
Stockholm School of Economics
S-11383 Stockholm
SWEDEN
 CURRENCY OPTION PRICING IN CREDIBLE TARGET ZONES




I. Introduction




     The Black—Scholes framework is often used for valuing

currency options- A simple variant of that framework, which is
actually only a slight extension of the Black—Scholes formula, is
the well-known Garman-Xohlhagen model (Garman and Kohlhagen
(1983]). However, this class of models is only valid for

situations with freely floating currencies. Many currencies are
not freely floating but constrained to move within explicit

target zones. Most importantly, this holds for the currencies

within the European Monetary System (fl(S). The bilateral exchange
rates of those currencies are maintained within bands by central
bank interventions. Those bands are         around central parity,
except for Spain and the TJ1( (±6%). For another example, the

exchange rate of the Swedish currency (Crown) against ECU is
similarly maintained within a band of 1.5% around central parity.

These target zones are explicit, but in addition there may be

implicit target zones for ostensibly freely floating currencies,
established under the Louvre agreement. Currency dealers take

account of implicit target zones, according to one informed
source in the banking industry. Due to the importance of target

zones, and the difference between target zones and freely



                                 1
floating currencies, it is of considerable interest to study the

pricing of options in such rncchange rate regimes.

     In this paper, we show how to price options on currencies in

target zones. For that reason, we need a model for exchange rate
behavior within such a zone, as a starting point. We take the
most influential of such models as our point of departure, the

one developed by Krugman (1991]. Although published only in 1991,
Erugman's paper hae been circulated since 1988 and has become the
beginning of an entire literature on exchange rate target zones

(e. g., Krugman and Miller [l992fl.
     The Krugman model makes two main assumptions: In the first

place, the target zone is credible (i. e., there are no

realignments). In the second place, interventions to defend the
target zone take place at the edges of the band. A main result
in the Krugmsn model is that the logarithm of the exchange rate
is an S—shaped function of a market fundamental (money supply and

"velocity"). Also, the exchange rate is insensitive to the
fundamental at the edges of the band, because of "smooth

pasting".

     Very specific predictions follow from the Krugman model.
Those predictions have been tested empirically, and have as a

rule been rejected (see, for instance, Lindberg and Sdderlind

(1992]). For instance, the Krugzian model predicts that the

distribution of the logarithm of the exchange rate should be

U-shaped and hence concentrated towards the end points of the

band. Empirical investigations reveal a hump-shaped


                                 2
distribution, though, with most of the probability mass in the

interior of the band. Empirical investigations also reveal that
target zones are not totally credible.

        Due to the importance of the Erugman model, we take it as

our point of departure, as already mentioned, despite the fact
that some of its predictions have been falsified empirically.

However, in the conclusion (Section IV), we indicate brief ].y an

alternative approach to currency option pricing in a target zone
which is not founded on the Krugiaan model.

        The outline of this paper is as follows: Section II presents

our currency option valuation model. Section III gives results
from sample model runs. Those results provide some insight into

mispricing of currency options by extensions of the Black—Scholes
model which has been reported by other authors. Section IV
contains concluding remarks.



IX. A Model for Currency Option Valuation in a Credible Target
Zone



        As is well known, in the Krugioan target zone model the log

of the domestic price of foreign exchange, denoted e, is equal at
time t to a fundamental, f(t), plus a ten proportional to the
interest rate differential between the two currencies. The latter

is equal to the expected change in the logarithm of the exchange
rate:




                                    3
     e(f)     f(t) ÷ a(r0 —         r)   (a >   0),
     r0 —
     e(f) =
            rf(t)
               —    E(de]/dt,
                      + aE[de]/dt,




where E denotes expectation and r0 and rF are the
domestic—currency and foreign—currency riskfree rates of
interestS The fundamental is constrained through foreign-exchanye
market interventions to lie within a band with lower and upper

boundaries f and f. Inside that band, the fundamental follows

Brownian motion with a drift:



     df =   pdt    + udz.



     The solution to (l} is



     e(f) =   f    +
                       a{0.Sa2eff   +

              f    ÷ az +
                            A1exp(p1f)
                                         +
                                             A2exp(p2f),                   (2)




where p1 and p2 are the roots of the characteristic equation



     O.5a12p2 ÷ app — 1          = 0.


The function e(f) given by (2) is defined for f            f   f. A1 end
A2 are determined by means of the smooth pasting conditions



     e(f) =               = 0,
                  Cf(f)

                                         4
i. e.,



        o    = 1 + A1p1exp(p1f)         +
                                            A2p2exp(p2f),
        o    = 1 + A1p1exp(p1f)         +
                                            A2p2exp(p2fl,

and are equal         to

        A1 =                        — 1}     /
                  (exp(p2(f—f))
                  (p1exp(p1f) —     p1exp(p1f)exp(p2(f—f)) },
        A2
              =
                  {exp(p1(f—f))
                                    —   l}   /
                                —
                  {p2exp(p2f)       p2exp(p2f)exp(p1(f—f)) }.

if there is no band on the fundamental, the free-float solution
e =   f÷      i is    obtained (cf. Flood and Garber [1991], Froot and

Obstfeld (1991], Krug'man [1991], Svensson [1991]).
        In our currency option valuation model, the band which is
initially given is that on the log exchange rate, not on the

fundamental. That is, the central bank(s) say be thought of as
announcing that it (they) will keep the log exchange rate between

e and         (rather than the fundamental between f and I). In the

Kruqman model, the interventions which occur at the edges of the
log exchange rate band are infinitesimal, and this leads to a

uniquely determined hand on the fundamental (Delgado and Dumas

[1990]. Froot and Obstfeld [1991, 213], Svensaon [1991, 36—37]).
Hence, we need not worry about multiple bands on the fundamental
for a given log exchange rate band. In our numerical wcrk, we



                                                 5
start with e and e and obtain f and f such that e(f) =    !   and
e(f) =      through   a search procedure.

     It is seen that the interest rate differential rD -
                                                              r     =

O.Sa2eff + /Aef is specified in the Krugman model, but not the
absolute level of r0 or rr Since the absolute level of r is
needed for the currency option valuation model, we make the

following assumption about how rD and r1 move in order to
acccnodate changes in the interest rate differential:



         r=    +
                   O.5(O.Sa2eff +
     rF r
       =       —
                   O.5(O.5cr2eff ÷ Lef).


In other words, r and rF ere specified as deviations from a
central interest rate r.

     After these preparations, we can specify our currency option

valuation model, which is applicable to call options of the

European type. Ito's lemma implies


     de       (O.Sc2eff+FLef)dt +   efadz.                              (3)




Let S be the absolute value of the exchange rate, i. e., S =

exp(e).   Again by Ito's lemma,


     dS =
              (Q.5J2eff+ief+OS(efo2)5dt      ÷ efo-Sdz.



Let V(S,t) denote the value of the currency option, as a function


                                        6
of the exchange rate S and time r to expiration. By the usual

arbitrage argument, we derive the foflowing valuation equation

for V(S,r):



     O.5(efc)2S2VSS + (O.Sa2eff-l-$ef)3V5 — V1 —

     (r+O.5(O.Sa2eff+Lef))V
                              =   0.                             (4)



It is understood in (4) that ef and e1 are evaluated at f such
that exp(e(f)) = S. Equation (4) is the same as would be
obtained, if one were to write down the corresponding valuation

equation for an investor in the foreign country and then change
variables to express the option value as a function of the log of
the domestic price of foreign exchange and in tens of domestic

money units.
     We now substitute variables twice; first to obtain the log

of the exchange rate as underlying state variable, and after that
to obtain the fundamental f as underlying state variable. We

arrive at the following equation, where U(f,r) is the value of
the currency option, as a function of the fundamental f and time
to expiration t



     O.5a2Uff + (1L—0.Sefc2)Uf — UT —
                              = 0.
     (r+O.5(0.So2eff+pef))V                                      (5)



The initial condition (at r = 0, i. e., at maturity) is




                                       7
     U(f,O) = max[O, exp(e(f)) —     exp(R)],                     (6)



where R is the log of the exercise price (exercise exchange

rate). Smooth pasting applies to the currency option, as well as

to the log exchange rate, so the boundary conditions are



     tJf(f) =   0,   and   TJf(J)
                                    0.                            (7)




It is the convenience in writing these boundary conditions which

leads us to use the fundamental rather than log exchange rate (or

exchange rate) as underlying state variable.
     The valuation equation (5), the initial condition (6), and

the boundary conditions (7) together constitute the currency call
option valuation model. It is essentially the same as the Garman-

Kohihagen model (Garman and Kohlhagen (1983]), when the band on
the fundamental becomes very wide.



III. Some Results Regarding Currency Option Valuation



     In this section, we discuss sample results from the currency

option valuation model of the previous section: our purpose is to

exhibit qualitative aspects of currency option pricing in a
target zone. In particular, we will show how a target zone

(explicit or implicit) may explain mispricing by other currency
option pricing models which has been documented by previous
authors.



                                    8
       All model runs in this section pertain to a band on the log

exchange rate with lower bound 2         of   —003268 and upper bound e of

0+04868. This means that the corresponding lower and upper bounds

on the exchange rate exp(e)         and exp() are 0.96785 and 1.04982.
Results (computed option value functions over the entire exchange

rate band) are displayed as graphs, in Figures 1 and 2, with

absolute option values plotted against absolute exchange rates.

       The exercise price exp(R) (exercise exchange rate) has been
set to exp((e+e)/2) =       1.008. The tine to expiration is 6 months
in Figure 1 and 12 months in Figure 2. The central interest rate

r is equal to 0.1. The remaining parameters are as follows:

°    = o.,   =   0.0,   and u =   0.1.
       At this point, a few words about parameter values are called

for. Other authors have tried to estimate the parameters in the

Erugnan target zone model, but the results are probably not very
reliable. Estimates of a vary, but generally they fall between
0.1   and 1 (see Flood, Rose, and Mathieson [19911; and Lindberg
and Soderlind [1991)). A very low value for o, 0.0086, was
estimated by Lindberg and Sdderlind [1991, 15). As for z, there
does not seem to be much information available.

       Consider now Figures 1 and 2. As already indicated, the only
difference between these two figures refers to the tine to
expiration1 which is 6 months in Figure 1 but 12 months in Figure

2.   The upper—most curves marked "a" and "d" are value functions
for a very wide band. They are hence essentially the sane as the
Garman-Kohlhagen solutions; where the log exchange rate equation
is the free float equation e(f) =      f   (it is noted that M =     C). The
Garnan-Kohlhagen value functions extend to the right, and left in

the figures, of course; only those portions which fail inside the
exchange rate band under consideration are shown in the figures.

The figures also show the option value functions when the band is
set as indicated above (the curves marked "c" and 'f"). It is
seen that the imposition of a target zone leads to substantially
lower computed option values.

     However, the comparison between the two curves "a" and "c",
or the two curves "d" and "f ", is unfair, in that the variability

of the log exchange rate is much lower in an option pricing model

incorporating a target zone than in the Ganan-Kohihagen model.

The variability in the latter model is a. From equation (3) in

Section 2, it is seen that the variability of the log exchange
rate in the former model is e. In order to provide a fairer
comparison between the two models, we rerun the Garman—Xohlhagen

model with e set to E(ae), the average variability of the log

exchange rate in the currency option valuation model with a
target zone.
     More precisely, for i   equal to zero, the fundamental f has
the asymptotic density w() — 1/(?—f) (for f S f            f). For &
different   from zero, the asymptotic density is w() =

6exp(Of)/exp(9F)—exp(9f)],   where 9 = 2M/o (Svensaon

[1991, 37]). Taking the expectation'of                 =             which
                                                           E(efa],
in turn equals




                                  10
       f


       [efcrw(f)ci.t.
       f




We obtain




       u(l— (21(p1(f—f)}}{(cosh(p1(f—f))—l)/einh(p             (f—f)))],



when t = 0     (it   is noted that   =
                                           —p1
                                                 in that case). For cz     0,
E[c]    equals




       a[1 +

                            cosh(p1 (f—f))   —cosh(p2 (f—f))



Xn both cases, E[a] goes to zero, as the width of the band on
the fundamental goes to zero. Also, the second expression for
        converges to the first one, as 6 goes to zero (these

limits.can be shown using l'Hospital's rule). E(a] apparently
approaches s, as the band on the fundamental becomes very wide,

if p =0. However, that limit does not hold in the second case

(p     0).

       In our case, E[cr] =    0.04634. Rerunning the Garman—Kohlhagen
model with c equal to 0.04634 rather than equal to 0.1 gives the
curves 'b" in Figure 1 and "e" in Figure 2.



                                      11
     It is interesting to note that the Garman-Kohlhagen model

now gives lower computed option values than our currency option
valuation model, for out—of—the—money options. The same is also

true for at-the-money options with 6 months to expiration (see
Figure 1). The relative difference between the two models for

out—of—the—money options is actually quite large.
     This may throw some light on evidence of underpricing of

out—of—the—money currency call options by the Ganaan—Kohlhagen
model which has been reported by some authors (Borensztein and
Dooley (1987]; Bodurtha and Courtadon [1987); of. also Courtadon

[19901). It has been suggested that this type of mispricing could

be eliminated by using a jump—diffusion model along the lines of

Merton (1976], rather than the Garman-Kohlhagen model (Bodurtha

and Courtadon (1987, 164—165]; Jorion [1988]).
     However, we would like to suggest another possible
explanation for this bias: The currency in question could be

subject to an implicit target zone. The evidence reported by
Borensztein and Dooley [1987) and Bodurtha and Courtadon [1987]

pertains to options to buy foreign currencies (British pounds,
Canadian dollars; German marks, Japanese yen, and French and
Swiss francs) for US   dollars.   The US dollar is not subject to an

explicit exchange rate band, of course, but there could be an

implicit reference zone, as also suggested by Krugman
[1991, 669]. The time period in the Borensztein-Dooley and

Bodurths—Courtsdon investigations was early 1983 to early 1985.

During that time period, the US dollar was considered very strong


                                    12
(Borensztein and Dooley (1927, 645]). That is, the US dollar
could have been near the lower end of some implicit target zone.

If so, that could perhaps explain the fact that the Carman—

Xohlhagen model was found to have underpriced currency call

options during that time period.
     It is also interesting to note that the option value
functions "c" and "f "   are   more or less straight lines, and that
the slope of the former is greater than that of the latter. In

fact, if the time to expiration becomes very long, the option
value function with a target zone will eventually become a

horizontal straight line across the diagram. In other words, the

option value is asymptotically independent of the current
exchange rate. This result, which holds also when z       0, follows
since the fundamental has an asymptotic distribution (which does

not depend on its starting value), as mentioned above. It is also
seen that the value of a currency option need not increase with

increasing time to expiration (compare the right-most parts of
curves   "c" and "f")

IV. Conclusion

     On the basis of the Krugman target zone model, this paper

has presented a model for currency option valuation. As indicated
in the introduction, the Krugman model has been criticised for

generating predictions which do not agree with the empirical
evidence. For that reason, one could have considered taking



                                     13
another target zone model as a starting point, and we will

briefly indicate one possibility.
     Rather than assuming that interventions take place only at

the edges of the band, one may assune interventions inside the

band increasing in size, as the exchange rate moves away from

some preferred level. This can be formalized by assuming that the

fundamental follows an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process inside the

band (see Delgado and Dumas [1992]7 Lindberg and Sbderlind
(1992]). If so, the log of the exchange rate inside the band

obeys a second—order differential equation with an associated

homogeneous equation known as Kunser's equation. The resulting
solution for the log exchange rate is known (see tindberg and

Sdderlind (1992, 17]). One could then build a currency option

valuation model on that foundation. This would be an interesting

direction for further research.

     Another criticism of the Kruqsan model is that target zones

are not necessarily credible (as was clearly demonstrated during
the writing of this paper, in September 1992, when several
European countries devalued their currencies). Another

interesting research direction would therefore be to extend the

Krug-man model to incorporate a realignnent mechanism and then to

construct an option valuation model for such a situation.

Elsewhere, we have taken a preliminary step in that direction

(Dumas, Jennergren, and Nslund [1992]; cf. also Bertola and

Svensson l99O), Ball and Roma [1990]).
     In conclusion, in this paper we have derived and implemented



                                  14
a currency option valuation model which incorporates the target
zone feature. We have used results from our model to reconsider

the underpricing of out-of-the--money currency options by the
Gar-man-Kohlhagen model which has been documented by earlier

authors. It appears that such underpricing could be explained by
an implicit band on the currency in question.



References



Ball, Clifford. A. • and Antonio Rosa, 1990, The European monetary
   system, jump—diffusion processes, and the pricing of options.
   Working paper.
Bertola, Giuseppe, and Lars E. 0. Svensson, 1990, Stochastic
   devaluation risk and the empirical fit of target zone models.
   Seminar paper no. 481, Institute for International Economic
   Studies, University of Stockholm.
Bodurtha, James N., Jr., and Georges R. Courtadon, 1987, "Tests
   of an American Option Pricing Model on the Foreign Currency
   Options Market," Journal of Financial and Quantitative
   Analysis 22, 153—167.
Borensztein, Eduardo R., and Michael P. 000ley, 1987, "Options on
   Foreign Exchange and Exchange Rats Expectations," IMP Staff
   Papers 34, 643—680.
Courtadon, Georges R., 1990, "Recent Trends in Foreign Currency
   Option Valuation," in Options, ed. Stewart Hodges, Manchester:
   Manchester University Press, 141-160.
Delgado, Francisco, and Bernard Dumas, 1990, Monetary contracting
   between central banks and the design of sustainable
   exchange—rate zones. Working paper no. 3440, NBER (forthcoming
   in Journal of International Economics).
Delgado, Francisco, and Bernard Dumas, 1992, "Target Zones, Broad
   and Narrow," in Exchange Rate Targets and Currency Bands, eds.
   Paul Erugman and Marcus Miller, Cambridge: Cambridge
   University Press, 35-56.
Dumas, Bernard, L. Peter Jennergren, and Bertil Maclund, 1992,
   Realignment risk and currency option pricing in target zones.
   Research paper no. 6478, The Economic Research Institute,
   Stockholm School of Economics.
Flood, Robert P., and Peter M. Garber, 1991, "The Linkage between
   Speculative Attack and Target Zone Models of Exchange Rates,"
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, 1367—1372.




                                 15
Flood, Robert P., Andrew K. Rose, and Donald J. Mathieson, 1991,
   "An Empirical Exploration of Exchange—Rate Target Zones,"
   Carnegie—Rochester Series on Public Policy 3!, 7—66.
Froot, Kenneth A., and Maurice Obstfeld, 1991, "Exchange-Rate
   Dynamics under Stochastic Regime Shifts," Journal of
   rnternational Economics 31, 203—229.
Garman, Mark H, and Steven W. Kohlhagen, 1983, "Foreign Currency
   Option Values," Journal of International Money and Finance 2,
   231—237.
Jorion, Philippe, 1988, "on Jump Processes in the Foreign Exchange
   and Stock Markets," Review of Financial Studies 1, 427—445.
Kruginan, Paul R., 1991, "Target Zones and Exchange Rats
   Dynamics," Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, 669-682.
Kruginan, Paul, and Marcus Miller (eds.), 1992, Exchange Rate
   Targets and Currency Bands, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
   University Press.
Lindberg, Hans, and Paul Sbderlind, 1991, Testing the basic
   target zone model on Swedish data. Seminar paper no. 488,
   Institute f or International Zconomic Studies, University
   of Stockholm.
Lindberg, Hans, and Paul Sbderlind, 1992, Target zone models and
   the intervention policy: The Swedish case. Seminar paper no.
   496, Institute for International Economic Studies, University
   of Stockholm.
Merton, Robert C., 1976, "Option Pricing when Underlying Stock
   Returns Are Discontinuous," Journal of Financial Economics 3,
   125—144.
Svensson, Lars Z. 0., 1991, "Targets Zones and Interest Rate
   Variability," Journal of International Economics 31, 27—54.




                                16
Figure 1. Cenput.d notion j.tu... tine to annir.tion t
0.04
               cotton ustue
0.02

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0.00
        0. 9s          n.se   i.co         1.02          1.04
                                                   exchange rate




FLour. 2. Conouted cotton ueiuee tine   to exoiretton 12 nonthe
0.06
            oat inn ueiua
0.02

0. UI

0.02

0.02

0.01

0.00
        0.9S           0.Qt   1.€O        1.02           1.04
                                                  exchange rate
