                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             AGING IN GERMANY AND THE
                                   UNITED STATES:
                            INTERNATIONAL COMPARISONS




                                     Axel Borsch-Supan




                                  Working Paper No. 4530




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 November, 1993




This paper is part of NBER's research program in Aging. Any positions or opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                  NBER Working Paper #4 530
                                                                            November 1993


                              AGING IN GERMANY AND TIlE
                                    UNITED STATES:
                             INTERNATIONAL COMPARISONS


                                         ABSTRACT

       This paper reports on a set of international comparisons of how the German and the
U.S. economies are affected by population aging. The paper's main focus is on the influence
of institutional arrangements such as government regulations and subsidies on retirement.
savings and housing choices in the two countries. Germany faces a particularly pronounced
aging process. Her dependency ratio is already now as large as it will be in the year 2015 in
the U.S., and it is predicted to exceed 43 percent at its peak in 2030. In this respect, changes
that are occurring in Germany now may be regarded as indicative for changes to come in the
United States. Retirement, savings and housing behavior differ quite markedly between
Germany and the United States, and I will show that most of these differences are consistent
with the incentives applicable to each country.


Axel Borsch-Supan
Department of Economics
University of Mannheim
P.O.B 10 34 62
D-6813l Mannheini 1
GERMANY
                                   —1—




AGING IN GERMANY AND THE UNITED STATES:
INTERNATIONAL COMPARISONS
by Axe! BOrsch-Supan




1. INTRODUCTION


       This paper reports on a set of international comparisons
of how the German and the US economies are affected by pop-
ulation aging. Purpose of the paper is to employ cross-national
comparisons to learn about the microeconomic mechanisms in
labor, financial and housing markets that are most important for
an analysis of how population aging affects our economies, and,
from an understanding of these mechanisms, to discuss policy
options that may moderate the implications of population aging.
The paper concentrates on three areas of microeconomic deci-
sions: when to retire, how much to save, and where to live. The
paper is a continuation of Börsch-Supan (1991a). For a more
macroeconomic view, the reader is referred to the many interna-
tionally comparative studies that describe cross-national dif-
ferences in the aging process and analyse aggregate economic
implications (e.g., OECD, 1988; Hagemann and Nicoletti, 1989;
Auerbach et.aL, 1990).
      In order to discuss our policy options to alleviate negative
implications of population aging on labor, financial and housing
                                     -2-
markets, it is necessary to elucidate the economic mechanisms
underlying retirement, savings and housing choices by the elder-
ly. In particular, it is necessary to understand how strongly they
are affected by public policy, such as institutional arrangements,
government regulations and laws. The main idea of this paper is
to exploit international differences in public policy in order to
learn about the responses by the elderly to these policies.
       The power of an international comparison comes from the
fact that different countries have different institutional arrange-
ments, government regulations, subsidies and laws. In a study of
only one country, it is most often impossible to separate prefer-
ences from the impact of institutions and regulations because
there are commonly too few changes of institutions and regula-
tions in one country in order to properly identify their impacts.
Germany and the United States are particularly well suited for
international comparisons. While they are sufficiently similar in
terms of mentality and social costums to make an international
comparison meaningful, they also feature important differences
in institutions and public policy.1 Moreover, Germany is one of
the countries in which population aging is most advanced lead-
ing the aging process in the United States by about 20 years. In
this respect, changes that are occuring in Germany now may be
regarded as indicative for changes to come in the United States.
Indeed, retirement, savings and housing behavior differ quite
markedly between Germany and the United States, and I will
show that most of these differences are consistent with the in-
                                       -3-
centives applicable to each country.
       The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 summarizes the
basic demographic trends in Germany contrasting her to the
United States. Section 3 reports on retirement decisions, partic-
ularly early retirement and its causes. Section 4 is devoted to a
descriptive analysis of the strikingly different savings patterns
among the aged in the two countries. Housing markets are ex-
amined in Section 5 with particular attention devoted to the
elderly's choice of living arrangements. Bach of these sections
provides a sketch of the relevant government regulations, evi-
dence of how these square with actual behavior, and implica-
tions for policy policy. The paper concludes with a brief general
summary.


2. BASIC DEMOGRAPHIC FACTS


       The expected change in the age structure of the industrial-
ized countries is dramatic and will lead to a substantially higher
proportion of older people. Population aging is particularly pro-
nounced in Germany, see Table i.2 Among the seven large
OECD countries, the aging process is least marked but still
dramatic in the United Kingdom and in the United States.
Within the next 40 years, the proportion of elderly persons in
Germany will increase to more than a quarter of the population.
Even more accentuated is the aging of households. The propor-
tion of elderly households (headed by persons aged 60 and
                                      -4-
above) in the German population is projected to increase from
21 percent in 1980 to 37 percent in 2030. Most marked is the in-
crease among the oldest old: in the year 2030, Germany will
have twice as many elderly aged 85 and above as now.
       Two distinct processes are causing these dramatic
changes. From 1950 to 1980, life expectancy at birth has in-
creased by about 7.2 percent on average in the OECD while fer-
tility in the industrialized countries has declined to below the
level that is required for replacement of the population, see
Table 2. From 1950 to 1980, German life expectancy has in-
creased by almost 7 years from 66.4 to 73.3 years,3 while at the
same time the fertility rate in West Germany has decreased
from 2.1 to 1.4, considerably below the reproduction rate that is
necessary for a stable population. The effects of both processes
sum to what is commonly termed "double aging" of the industri-
alized countries.


           Tables 1-3 go about here


       Its effects on the economy are best captured by the old-
age dependency ratio depicted in Table 3. Again, the numbers
for Germany are particularly dramatic. Her old-age depen-
dency ratio will increase from currently 0.22 to almost 0.44 in
the year 2030. Therefore, twice as many elderly aged 65 and
above will have then to be supported by the same number of
persons aged 15 to 64 as now. The projected German depen-
                                     -5-
dency ratio is the highest among all OECD countries except
Switzerland.4 The dependency ratio will fall again after year
2030 when the bulge of the baby boom has worked its way
through the age distribution. However, it is likely to remain at a
substantially higher level than now: the OECD estimate for the
year 2050 is 41.6 percent.
       The increase of the ratio of retirees to workers is even
more accentuated than that of the demographic old-age depen-
dency ratio. This ratio is closer to the economic meaning of an
old-age dependency ratio but more difficult to project because
of potential changes in labor supply behavior. Projections by
the German ministry of labor affairs indicate that this ratio will
climb from currently 0.48 to about 0.91 retirees per worker in
the year 2030.
       The dependency ratios in Table 3 show quite clearly how
the double aging process will strain the pay-as-you-go social
security systems of our countries simply because fewer con-
tributors will have to support more retirees. However, this is
not the only policy problem facing the industrialized countries.
Because the average age of the work force will increase, ag-
gregate productivity will decline unless the hump-shaped age-
productivity profile also shifts. Increasing the contribution rates
to public pension systems will create work disincentives, ex-
acerbating the potential productivity decline and partly offset-
ting the contribution increases. The double aging process will
also change the accumulation of aggregate wealth and skew the
                                    -6-
intergenerational distribution of it in a complicated fashion be-
cause older people save differently than younger people. It will
assert a growing burden of family support on the young genera-
tion when elderly are becoming frail and unable to live indepen-
dently. These issues are taken up in the following sections.



3. RETIREMENT DECISIONS


3.1 Institutional Background

       Germany and the United States have pay-as-you-go public
pension systems with the resulting sensitivity to shifts in the age
distribution that is in the focus of most debates about popula-
tion aging. Both countries supply, in effect, a minimum level of
retirement income to workers with little labor income. And
both countries feature a fairly broad coverage of workers by so-
cial security: in the United States, about 95 percent of all
workers are insured by Social Security, including self-employed,
while in Germany only self-employed (8.9 percent of the labor
force in 1988) and workers with very small incomes (5.6 per-
cent) are not covered (Casmir, 1989).
       Apart from these similarities, Germany and the United
States differ substantially in their retirement incentives. First,
about a quarter of the labor force is subject to mandatory retire-
ment in Germany. This includes the entire public sector and
                                     -7-
some private sectors. In most cases, mandatory retirement age
is 65. In the United States, age discrimination laws prohibit
mandatory retirement. Part-time work is also very restricted in
Germany due to inflexible work regulations and high fringe
benefits independent of hours worked sustained by an insider
coalition of unions and employers.
       Second, although in both countries the public retirement
system is augmented by private pensions, they play only a minor
role in Germany while they are a significant source of retire-
ment income in the United States. About half of the American
elderly aged 60 and above are covered by pension plans. For 13
percent of these, pensions contribute to more than 20 percent of
their incomes, for 2 percent to even more than half of their
retirement incomes.5 This is in striking contrast to Germany.
In 1984, 82 percent of all elderly in West Germany received only
social security income. Another 8.5 percent have additional pri-
vate pension income (mainly annuities from life insurance), and
only 7.6 percent have both social security and firm pension in-
come.6 The difference in the importance of private pension
plans is most striking when the average contribution of firm pen-
sions to retirement income is considered: Private pensions con-
tribute to about 15 percent to the income of American elderly,
but to only slightly more than 3 percent for German elderly.
       Not only the significance but also the pattern of private
pension plans is different. The United States feature a broad
range of pension provisions among firms even within the same
                                    -8-
industry (Kotlikoff and Wise, 1987) while pension plans are
rather homogeneous in Germany (Jacobs, Kohli and Rein,
1987). Main reason for the homogeneity in Germany is the cen-
tralization of union activities: all unionized employees in a Ger-
man industry are members of the same union, and labor con-
tracts apply also for non-union members of the same industry.
       A third difference between the social security systems in
the United States and Germany is the general level of public
retirement income. In the United States, Social Security is
tailored to prevent poverty among the elderly and to secure a
minimum reasonable standard of living. In Germany, public
pensions are essentially proportional to life time earnings be-
cause they are intended to provide approximately the same
living standard before and after retirement. Hence, German
public pensions provide for a substantially higher replacement
rates than their US counterparts, particularly so for higher in-
come levels. As a matter of fact, the stated rationale for not
having complete replacement in Germany is not the added utili-
ty of leisure but the cessation of work-related expenses after
retirement. Only very high incomes are not subject to the pro-
portionality rule because the income subject to social security
contributions is capped. Table 4 presents net replacement
ratios by income classes, i.e., average after-tax retirement in-
comes as percentages of average after-tax labor incomes. On
average, German social security income is about 33 percent
higher than the American one, resulting in an average net re-
                                     -9-
placement ratio of more than 70 percent. This also implies that
the unbequeathable and intangible social security wealth is con-
siderably higher in Germany than in the United States. This is,
on average, only partially compensated by higher private pen-
sion wealth in the United States.


           Table 4 goes about here


       Incentives with respect to retirement timing also differ be-
tween the United States and Germany. While the social
security provisions in both countries offer the opportunity to
retire at different ages (the so-called "window of retirement"),
they differ considerably in how benefit levels are adjusted for
retirement at different ages. Table 5 displays these adjustments.
They relate the retirement income for retirement at age 65
(normalized to 100 percent) to the retirement income at earlier
or later retirement ages and combine the reduction factors for
early retirement with the delayed retirement credit for retire-
ment after full-benefit retirement age. Currently, full-benefit
retirement age is 65 in both countries. It will remain so in
Germany while it will gradually increase to age 66 in the year
2005 and to age 67 in 2022 in the United States.
      The first column in Table 5 displays non-distortionary ad-
justment factors which I dubbed 'fair".7 These adjustment fac-
tors keep the present discounted value of retirement benefits
minus contributions constant across all retirement ages between
                                      -10-
60 and 70 and therefore do not distort the choice of retirement
age conditional on the fact that the worker has worked at least
until age 59. I will use these adjustment factors as a yardstick
for the current and the reformed relative pension benefits in the
United States and Germany.


           Table 5 goes about here


       In the United States, benefits increase during the window
of early retirement --   age   62 to age 65 -- in a way that is rea-
sonably close to actuarially fair. For retirement ages past age
65, benefits increase less than actuarially fair. Latest date to
apply for old age pensions is 70.
       In Germany, until this year, benefits were proportional to
years of service with no further adjustment applied, resulting in
a very small percentage increase in retirement benefits for post-
poning retirement once a large number of years in service is
reached. The window period -- effectively age 60 to 65 -- is
characterized by three regulations. First, everybody can retire
at age 65. Second, in order to receive retirement benefits at age
63, 35 years of service are necessary.8 Third, retirement at age
60 is possible for all women and for those male workers who
cannot be appropriately employed ("berufs- oder er-
werbsunfáhig") for health or job related reasons. The latter rule
has been interpreted very broadly and its application -- loosely
speaking -- required only the help of the family doctor. Its ap-
                                   — 11   —




plication was traditionally encouraged by employerw who
wanted to thin out their work forces. The rule applies also when
there are no vacancies for the worker's specific job description
available, thereby fudging the distinction between unemploy-
ment and retirement.9
       In both countries social security reforms took place which
steepened the adjustment rate profiles. In the United States,
the reduction factors before retirement age 65 are now very
close to actuarially fair. For retirement ages past age 65,   bene-

fits increase faster than under the old law but the increase
remains less than actuarially fair. The reformed German system
provides substantially more incentives for later retirement than
the American one. However, the reduction factors before
retirement age 65 are still substantially above the non-
distortionary ones in the first column of Table 5.
       Although not completely free of distortive incentives, the
 American public retirement system is more age neutral during
 the window period than the German system. Particularly in the
 reformed system, there is little economic incentive for Amer-
 icans to retire at one age or another in the window of early
 retirement and only a small disincentive to retire later than at
 age 65, while the German social security system tilts the retire-
 ment decision heavily towards the applicable early retirement
 date. Strangely enough, the old German system provided a
 large increase in retirement benefits for work at ages 66 and 67.
 However, this reward was too small to offset the early retire-
                                   -12-
ment incentives, see below.
       The tax treatment of labor earnings while receiving public
pensions differs also strongly between the two countries. In the
United States, receiving a public pension does not preclude
working, although additional labor income during the entire
window period age 60 to 70 is taxed at a 50 percent rate if it ex-
ceeds certain limits. In Germany, labor income additional to a
public pension which exceeds a very small allowance is taxed at
100 percent during the early retirement period. However, there
is no penalty at all for working after age 65.


       All differences between the public and private pension
systems in the two countries -- mandatory retirement age, the
role of private pensions, replacement levels, adjustment factors
of public pensions, and taxation of labor income while receiving
public pensions -- are likely to generate similar implications on
retirement choices. If retirement choices respond at all to the
economic incentives provided by public and private pension
plans, they are likely to be more uniform in Germany, while
they should be more divers in the United States, i.e., more
individual-specific and more firm-specific. Moreover, because
retirement income is on average higher than in the United
States, and the German system is less than actuarially fair for
late retirees, we should observe a lower supply of labor in old
age in Germany as compared to the United States -- provided
that the preference for leisure is roughly comparable in the two
                                       - 13   -
countries.


3.2 Descriptive Evidence: Old-Age Labor Supply


       Indeed, this is what we find in a first glance at the data.
Table 6 presents labor force participation trends in seven
OECD countries. The differences between Germany and the
United States are striking. Although both countrieshave experi-
enced a declining trend in retirement age (similar to the other
OECD countries), labor force participation of the elderly is sub-
stantially lower in West Germany than in the United States.1°
In the United States, labor force participation among persons
aged 65 years and more has fallen from 26.6 percent in 1965 to
10.3 percent in 1985. While in West Germany 24 percent of the
elderly still had a job in 1965, this percentage has fallen to a
mere 5.2 percent in 1985. This participation rate is the lowest in
the seven major OECD countries.


             Table 6 goes about here


       The trend visible in Table 6 is approximately in line with
changes in the ratio of retirement to labor income. In the
United States as well as in West Germany, social security retire-
ment income has increased relative to labor income. While
nominal wages have increased 3.7-fold in the United States and
4. 1-fold in West Germany, the average old age social security
                                   -14-
benefits have increased 4.6-fold in the United States and 4.3-
fold in West Germany.11 This increase of pension income rela-
tive to labor income is due to the effective indexation of social
security benefits in both countries. In West Germany, for exam-
ple, pension benefits have been linked to gross average labor in-
come. 12 Retirement income is taxed at a much lower rate than
labor income due to the generous exemptions. Hence, the prog-
ressivity of the income tax schedule produced a more than pro-
portional increase of net retirement income relative to the in-
crease of net labor income.
        Cross-national survey data provide additional evidence
that economic factors have strongly influenced old-age labor
supply behavior. Table 7 presents a closer look at retirement
rates for male workers in West Germany and the United States,
based on the 1984 wave of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics
(PSID) and its German counterpart, the 1984 wave of the Socio-
Economic Panel (SOEP). Because incentives for part-time
work are rather different in the two countries, it is important to
define retirement consistently and to distinguish full retirement
from partial and no retirement. We define retirement by hours
worked and use three states of labor force participation. Full-
time work is 35 hours or more per week, past-time work is be-
tween 15 and 34 weeldy hours, and full retirement is less than 15
hour per week.


           Table 7 goes about here
                                    - 15 -



       The range of retirement ages is much wider in the United
States than in West Germany. While the United States feature
a smooth transition between work and retirement with a large
percentage of part-time work, the West German age-retirement
profile is characterized by a sudden jump from full-time work to
full-time retirement at range 60-64, accompanied by a rather
low percentage of part-time occupation. More detailed analysis
shows that in the United States retirement ages are more evenly
distributed with a peak at age 62. This is consistent with the fact
that the adjustment of benefits in the United States is approxi-
mately actuarially fair. We observe people retire at all ages,
most notably also at ages 63 and 64 in the interior of the window
period. This is quite different in Germany. Here, retirement is
very much concentrated at ages 60, 63 and 65, at exactly the first
years when each of the three above-mentioned retirement
regulations apply, and very few people retire at ages in between
these dates.


       In order to turn these pieces of suggestive evidence into
numbers which can be employed for policy analysis, I employ a
simplified version of the option value model developed by Stock
and Wise (1990). It relates applicable economic incentives --
mainly the replacement rate and the retirement-age-dependend
adjustment factors-- to observed retirement age, conditional on
other determinants of retirement behavior such as socio-
                                     -16-
demographics and health. Its key variable éapturing economic
incentives is the option value to postpone retirement at a given
age. It is defined as the maximum attainable expected dis-
counted utility from consumption if the worker would retire at
some later age minus the expected discounted utility if the
worker would retire now (Lazear and Moore, 1988).
      The consumption possibilities entering the option value
are computed using the applicable pension rules. In Germany,
the public pension system dominates retirement income. There-
fore, economic retirement incentives are rather well captured by
the replacement rates of the public pension system from Table 4
together with the retirement age-dependent adjustment factors
from Table 5. In the United States, private pensions plans may
dominate the importance of the public pension system for an in-
dividual worker. However, survey data in the United States
have little information on the structure of each private pension
plan that may be applicable to each individual worker. I will
 therefore shy away from attempting to make parallel analyses
 for the United States and Germany.
        The detailed construction of the model and estimation
 results are presented in Börsch-Supan (1992a). In essence, I
 estimate a logit model in which I regress the probability of being
 retired on the option value, socio-demographic variables, health
 variables and a set of age-specific constants for each age in the
 window period. The main results can be summarized as follows:
 the model fits the data rather well, the option value is statistical-
                                     -17-
ly highly significant, and age-specific constants remain in-
significant. These are strong findings because they imply that
during the main window of retirement, the actual behaviour is
well described by the option value, the main economic incentive
for retirement.
       These estimation results can be used in a microsimulation
model to predict retirement ages under alternative social
security rules. Specifically, I replace each person's actual option
value by the option value computed with alternative retirement-
age-dependent adj ustment factors. The baseline retirement
probabilities are fitted to replicate the population retirement
probabilities. I therefore project all other determinants of
retirement timing not included in the explanatory variables into
the future, particularly preferences and social customs. In this
respect, I am likely to underestimate the total effects of the
simulated social security changes.
       Table 8 summarizes the microsimulation results in form of
the average retirement age and required contibution rates.
From the number of pensioners implied by the simulation
results, I compute the average retirement age and the ratio of
pensioners to employed persons. Using the pay-as-you-go
budget equation of the social security system, I then calculate
the social security contribution rates necessary to balance con-
tributions and payments for the years 1990 and 2000. The first
row of Table 8 relates to the German social security system as it
was in place until 1992. The second row presents simulation
                                     - 18 -

results for the German social security system, when the adjust-
ment factors of the 1992 reform were employed. Finally, the
third row displays results for a "fair" system using the non-
distortionary adjustment factors of column one in Table 5.


           Table 8 goes about here


       The 1992 social security reform will remove some but by
no means all of the distortions towards early retirement in
Germany. Retirement before age 60 will be reduced from 32.2
percent to 28.4 percent in 1990, and the average retirement age
will increase by about half a year. As a consequence, the contri-
bution rates necessary for a balanced budget would have been
18.1 percent rather than 18.7 percent in 1990, and will be 19.5
percent rather than 20.1 percent in the year 2000.
       However, a system with non-distortionary adjustment fac-
tors as defined above would have a much stronger effect on
retirement age and therefore also on the contribution rate
necessary to balance the public pension system's budget. It
would increase the average retirement age by about two years
and would result in contribution rates that are substantially
lower (more than two percent) than the ones under the old and
the reformed German social security systems.
                                     -19-
3.4 Policy Implications

      Main conclusion from the evidence presented is the strong
and consistent response of retirement behavior to public policy.
The differences in retirement behavior between the two coun-
tries are quite clearly in line with economic incentives to retire-
ment in each country and with the institutional differences be-
tween them. The fine tuning by retirement age-dependent
benefit adjustments appears to be well reflected in the observed
choices of retirement ages. We learned that our pension sys-
tems are indeed powerful instruments to influence retirement
decisions.
       In principle, individuals should be able to decide about
their retirement date. However, changes in the average retire-
ment age have side effects on the soundness of the social
security systems, average wages, aggregate productivity, tax
revenues, and aggregate savings. Advancing retirement ages
amplifies the effects of a rising old-age dependency ratio, poten-
tially above the economic potential and the will of a generation
of workers to come. While this affects mainly the public pen-
sion system, private pension funds and health insurance systems
are also affected because health insurance is heavily subsidized
for retirees in Germany and in the United States. The increase
in the general support ratio will lead to a level of social security
and general taxes that will create strong work disincentives. In
West Germany, Schmãhl (1989) projected social security contri-
                                    -20-
bution rates exceeding 40 percent of gross labor income, not in-
cluding rising general taxes to finance added health expendi-
tures. Such high tax rates are simply not sustainable. Although
this effect has been in the focus of most debates about popula-
tion aging and has led to the above-mentioned social security
reforms in Germany and in the United States, our simulation
shows that this lesson has not yet arrived in Germany because
this year's social security reform has not really removed early
retirement incentives.
       Replacing the strong incentives for German workers to
retire early by a more age-neutral system appears likely to gen-
erate more evenly distributed retirement ages than those
depicted in Table 7. A gradual adjustment of replacement rates
may be not only a more subtle but also probably a more effi-
cient way to induce later retirement than the shift of eligibility
ages that were enacted in the German social security reform act
of 1992. It is likely to be more efficient because it avoids the
bunching that is a current characteristic of the German retire-
ment behavior and that appears to be an expression of the con-
straints imposed on retirement choices.
        Changing the retirement system too late will become more
complicated by the change in the politics of the social security
 system. The political power will shift from the working popula-
 tion, as it is now the case, to the older generation along with the
 surge of the dependency ratio. In West Germany, for example,
 from about the year 2020 on, the majority of the voters will be
                                     -21-
pensioners and workers who will become retired within the next
ten years. We then obtain a typical free-rider situation because
the older generation can outvote the younger generation in
determining their retirement income as well as the rate of social
security taxes the younger generation has to pay.



4. SAVINGS BEHAVIOR


4.1 Historical and Institutional Background

       Attitudes towards saving are very different between the
United States and Germany. Germans have traditionally valued
saving per se and were reluctant to follow the Am'Hcan con-
sumerism despite the strong American influence on German
post-war development. Although this attitude appears to be
changing with each new generation, it changes surprisingly slow-
ly. Table 9 presents comparable personal savings rates for the
 two countries. Savings rates have always been higher in
 Germany than in the United States but the discrepancy is partic-
 ular large in recent years. Although both countries have experi-
 enced declining savings rates since 1975, the relative decline is
 much larger in the United States.


            Table 9 goes about here
                                   -22-
      The different historical experiences of Germans and
Americans may help to explain the higher aggregate savings
rates that have emerged in Germany as soon as a moderate
standard of living was achieved in the 1960s. The elderly in this
decade have all experienced World War II. This catastrophe,
however, has affected Americans and Germans very differently.
During war time and until the German currency reform in 1948,
most Germans could not even satisfy their basic needs such as
food and clothing. This experience was not shared by their
American contemporaries. In addition, during the so-called
economic miracle in the 1950s in Germany, saving was heavily
promoted in large scale public campaigns.
      The attitude of valuing saving as being good per se (and
valuing personal loans as something to be avoided) is reflected
in the German tax treatment of savings and loans. There are
several schemes subsidizing savings in Germany, many of them
heavily advertised. In turn, taxation of interest income is only
half-heartedly enforced.
       On paper, asset income including capital gains is taxed
like ordinary income. Income from stocks and bonds is subject
to automatic withholding of 25 percent which is then credited
against the actual income tax burden. Although dividends are
subject to corporate income tax, this tax is credited against per-
sonal income taxes. Hence, Germany has no double taxation of
dividend income like the United States have. Interest income
from pass book savings and similar liquid capital is currently not
                                    - 23 -

subject   to automatic withholding. Moreover, direct notification
of the internal revenue service by the bank (as routinely done in
the United States on form 1099) would be a violation of Ger-
man privacy laws. Although the government has stepped up its
public relations effort to stimulate compliance with the tax code,
interest income remains routinely undeclared. Finally, capital
gains are only taxable when they were earned by "speculation."
The law considers holding financial assets speculative if these
are sold within six month after purchase. For land, holding peri-
ods are speculative if they are shorter than two years. Long run
capital gains therefore escape taxation in Germany.
          The German government has several special incentive
programs to subsidize savings. A general program is designed to
foster capital accumulation among the lower income groups
("Vermögensbildungsgesetz"). This program is in place since
1961 and was substantially extended in the 1970s. Employees or
pensioners deduct a certain amount from their income and
direct deposit it into long-term savings accounts. The govern-
nient then supplements the contributions of eligible by a fixed
percentage savings premium capped by an upper limit. In the
seventies, these premia were as high as 40 percent and the in-
come limit for eligibility was sufficiently high to cover incomes
far into the middle class. Currently, savings into productive cap-
ital are subsidized by a 20 percent savings premium, savings into
real estate by 10 percent, and the income limit is DM 54,000 per
year for married couples, a lower middle class income of about
                                     -24-
$ 33,000.
       Capital market institutions do not differ greatly between
the United States and Germany. In both countries, financial
markets are only mildly regulated, and portfolio options are
quite comparable in the two countries. If at all, the well-to-do
in the United States face more portfolio options due to a some-
what more dynamic market for financial instruments than their
German counterparts. Differences in savings options between
Germany and the United States include mainly different dedi-
cated savings programs. In the United States, IRAs and Keoghs
are subsidized savings dedicated to retirement income (Venti
and Wise, 1987). Such programs do not exist in Germany.
However, bequeathable savings dedicated to housing invest-
ments are substantially subsidized and play a major role in Ger-
man private capital accumulation (Borsch-Supan and Stahl,
1991a).
       An important difference in the institutional background
for savings decisions in the two countries is the extent of income
maintenance by compulsory social security programs. This
brings up the question of whether social security and private
savings are substitutes, a topic of great interest and controversial
discussions (Barro, 1974; Feldstein, 1974). Because one needs
to observe differences in the extent of social security programS
in order to measure these potential substitution effects, an inter-
national perspective is helpful for this. As we have seen in
Table 4, social security income differs dramatically between
                                   - 25 -

Germany and the United States. The German old age social
security system in Germany provides a substantially more gener-
ous replacement of net income across all income ranges com-
pared to the social security system in the Unites States. The
high average net replacement ratio of more than 70 percent may
provide a sufficient level of retirement income for the elderly
and hence reduces the incentive for life cycle savings in order to
finance consumption in the retirement period.
      In addition, there are pronounced differences in the
health insurance systems between the two countries. In
Germany, all retirees are enrolled in the mandatory health in-
surance system which covers all health expenditures with the ex-
ception of long-term institutionalized care not related to acute
illness. Coverage is far more comprehensive than that of
Medicaid and Medicare in the United States. Therefore, the
precautionary savings motive to safeguard against unexpected
expenditures, particularly health care related expenditures,
should be less pronounced in Germany.


       In summary, we have a mixed message concerning the im-
pact of institutions on savings. On one hand, tax treatment of
savings is more favorable in Germany than in the United States
which should, ceteris paribus, induce relatively higher savings
rates in Germany. On the other hand, two of the main econoni-
ic rationales for saving -- assuring a comfortable retirement in-
come and precaution against high health expenses -- are less im-
                                   -26-
portant in Germany than they are in the United States because
the safety net is tighter in Germany. This should, ceteris
paribus, reduce savings among households younger than retire-
ment age. Among the older elderly, however, the tighter safety
in Germany might actually increase net savings since the gener-
ous retirement income might not only prevent German elderly
from depleting their assets but even provide income levels suffi-
ciently large to induce savings in old age. We will take up this
point when we look at the evidence on savings behavior among
the aged.


4.2 Evidence on Savings Behavior Among the Aged


       It is not straightforward to compare wealth data between
the two countries. The wealth distribution is very skewed in
both countries. Average wealth is therefore sensitive to a few
very wealthy persons while median wealth is zero for most asset
categories. I employ wealth data from the PSID and SOEP
wealth supplements in 1984 and 1988. Response rates to these
supplements were lower than to the core questionnaire (particu-
larly so in Germany) and the quality of the wealth data is likely
to be less reliable than other PSID and SOEP data, mainly, be-
cause the wealth data is self-reported and subject to severe un-
derreporting. However, the wealth data presented is roughly
comparable between the two countries because the PSID and
SOEP wealth supplements are based on the same design princi-
                                   -27-
pies. Valuation is complicated by the large discrepancy between
exchange rate and purchasing power in the mid 1980s. The
average exchange rate between the Deutsche Mark and the US-
J)ollar was about 1$ to 2.70DM, substantially higher than the
average purchasing power parity, about 1$ to 1.70DM according
to OECD figures. Because I am interested in real wealth, I use
purchasing power parity.
      Table 10 displays tangible wealth by household, stratified
by age categories. The reported values for the United States are
in line with data from the American Retirement History Survey
reported by Hurd (1989) which yields some confidence into the
data. 13 Total tangible household wealth is the sum of several
asset categories reported in the two surveys. Financial wealth
includes liquid wealth such as passbook savings and money
market mutual funds, dedicated savings such as the above-
mentioned IRA and Keogh accounts in the United States and
Bausparkassen savings in West Germany, and stocks and bonds.
Non-housing wealth is defined as the sum of financial wealth
plus farm and business property plus real estate not including an
owner-occupied home. The self-reported estimated sales value
of an owner-occupied home is then added to yield total tangible
 household wealth.


            Table 10 goes about here


        In addition to the tangible wealth reported in Table 10, al-
                                    - 28 -

most all elderly have intangible and unbequethable wealth,
mainly social security and pension wealth. Total intangible
wealth in the United States is estimated to be almost as large as
the tangible wealth reported in Table 10 (Hurd, 1989) and even
more in Germany.
       According to the PSID and SOEP data, total tangible
household wealth is on average across ages 50 and above lower
in West Germany than in the United States. Valued at purchas-
ing power, West German elderly households hold roughly 20
percent less tangible wealth than American elderly households.
However, the 20 percent lower level of tangible wealth in West
Germany corresponds to a 33 percent higher level of intangible
social security wealth (according to the replacement ratios in
Table 5). The higher sum of tangible and intangible wealth in
West Germany is a reflection of the higher aggregate savings
rate depicted in Table 9. The difference in wealth levels be-
tween the two countries is therefore consistent with Feldstein's
view that private wealth has at least in part been substituted for
by social security wealth in West Germany. 14


           Table 11 goes about here


       Another although more indirect piece of evidence hi tavor
of the Feldstejn view can be drawn from data on income sources
displayed in Table 11. In West Germany, annuity income (al-
most exclusively social security income, as I noted in the discus-
                                   -29-
sion about the role of private pensions in Section 3) is the most
important income source for all households aged 60 and above.
In turn, asset and labor income play a more important role in
the United States. For very old Americans (aged 75 and above),
income from assets contributes to about a quarter to total in-
come. Hurd obtains similar results based on a much larger
sample from the American Current Population Survey (Hurd,
1989, Table I 5).


        Not only the levels of tangible and intangible wealth but
also the age-wealth profiles are different between the two coun-
tries, as revealed by Table 10. While American elderly have
non-housing wealth levels that are only slowly declining after
age 55, the German age-wealth profile is irregularly shaped with
a pronounced peak at ages 60 to 64 and a remarkable increase
in financial wealth at very old ages. These observations are not
in line with pure life-cyc1 theory predictions and deserve a
more careful analysis than the PSID and SOEP data can pro-
vide.
        Wolff (1990) analyses American wealth data, using the
Survey of Consumer Finances and the Consumer Expenditure
Survey. His results show a similarly slow decline in wealth
levels. Also the German age-wealth profiles are not specific to
the relatively small SOEP sample on which Table 10 is based.
The same pattern is also evident in the much larger sample of
the German 1978 and 1983 consumer expenditure surveys.'5
                                    -30-
       Tables 12 through 14 display results from these two sur-
veys. Table 12 reports on net household savings, defined as the
sum of all purchases of assets minus the sum of all sales of as-
sets. These assets include financial assets and real estate includ-
ing owner-occupied housing. Changes in financial assets are
deposits and withdrawals to and from all kinds of savings ac-
counts, purchases and sales of stocks and bonds, partnerships,
and dedicated savings programs (particularly to building
societies). New loans are subtracted and repayments added to
net savings. Not included in savings are durables (other than
housing), cash and unrealized capital gains.
       Savings rates in Table 13 are computed by dividing the
above net household savings by household income net of taxes
and social security contributions, if applicable. Finally, Table 14
reports on financial wealth, defined as in Table 10.16 All three
tables are stratified by survey year, age and birth cohort. Cell
sizes range from 776 to 4343 observations, resulting in precise
averages. The upper number refers to the 1978 German income
and expenditure survey, the lower number to the one conducted
in 1983.


            Tables 12-14 go about here


       Although it would be desirable to consider more than just
two periods, the data permits a rough distinction between age
and cohort effects. In particular, Table 12 reveals that savings
                                       31 -

among the very old in Germany is not only positive, savings ac-
tually increase with age, holding birth cohort constant. This in-
crease is even more pronounced in the savings rates, Table 13,
and generates levels of financial wealth that are increasing with
age, Table 14. Since housing wealth stays virtually unchanged as
households age (see. Section 5 on housing), the German data
features a flat if not increasing age profile of total wealth.
Börsch-Supan (1992b) shows that qualitatively similar profiles
are obtained by analysing mean and median savings, savings per
household and per capita, and savings by pensioners and savings
averaged across all households.
       The American and the German age-wealth profiles arc
not consistent with the ones predicted by the pure life-cycle
hypothesis. The upward swing in the German age profile of
savings rates is in straight contradiction to the predictions of the
life cycle hypothesis. In the United States, according to the
PSID wealth data, Table 10, the elderly aged 80 and above still
hold more than two thirds of the maximum wealth attained im-
mediately before retirement.


       Why do the elderly draw so little of their financial assets
down at old ages, particulary in West Germany? One reason
would be to leave bequests. If that were the case, elderly with
children should, on average, arrive at higher wealth levels than
elderly without children -- otherwise, there would be little to be-
        17
queath.     However, regressions of non-housing wealth on the
                                    - 32   -
number of children born, holding age and income constant, do
not produce positive coefficients, neither in Germany nor in the
United States.18 While the estimated negative coefficients are
only wealdy significant, they rule out that a bequest motive has
created the flat or increasing asset profiles in Germany.'9
       There is also little reason to suspect that precautionary
savings generates the observed savings pattern in Germany. As
I mentioned in the previous subsection, the comprehensive
coverage of the German health insurance should permit the
German elderly to draw down their assets disregarding potential
health expenditures while the American elderly who are on
average much less covered should have a stock of precautionary
liquid wealth. However, the opposite is the case: non-housing
assets increase with old age in West Germany while they slightly
decrease in the United States. Hence, it is unlikely that precau-
tionary savings drive the pattern of age-asset profiles in the two
countries.
       Concerning the German sample, it also appears unlikely
that mortality differences between the rich and the poor are be-
hind the U-shaped age-savings profile. If the rich survive the
poor and if saving is positively correlated with income, sample
selection generates higher savings in the sample of older people
unless income had concurrently fallen which was not the case
between 1978 and 1983. Savings rates, however, should stay ap-
proximately constant because they hold income constant and
therefore roughly correct for the sample selection by differential
                                     - 33 -

mortality. However, savings rates are rising even faster than ab-
solute savings (see Tables 12 and 13). It is therefore unlikely
that the nbscrvcd patterns have been created by differential
Jnolahity between rich and poor elderly.
       I am favoring a different interpretation of the data which
is supported by Table 15. This table displays the relative fre-
quency of elderly households with an excess of annuity income
over consumption expenditures. This table points out that it is
more helpful to investigate why German elderly COflSUC 50
little than wondering why German elderly save so much. An-
nuity income exceeds consumption expenditures and this in-
creasingly with age. The decline in consumption expenditures is
too large to be attributed merely to underreporting: for about a
quarter of the elderly aged 75     and   above, annuity income is
more than 50 percent higher than consumption expenditures. In
fact, almost all of this decline can be attributed to a reduction in
food, travel and transportation consumption, categories in which
the marginal utility from consumption is very likely to decline in
old age because of deteriorating health or increasing loneliness.
It is important to note that in Germany the decline in food,
travel and transportation expenditures is not offset by larger
health expenditures since almost all of the (indeed increasing)
health bills are covered by the compulsory health insurance, un-
like to the United States.


           Table 15 goes about here
                                    -34-
       The wealth pattern observed in Table 10 is therefore con-
sistent with the view that the elderly in Germany find them-
selves saving out of generous annuity income and not drawing
down their existing wealth as they might have planned before
realizing their declining marginal utility from certain kinds of
consumption. Moreover, since borrowing against social security
wealth is impossible, anticipation of the declining expenditures
may generate low levels of tangible wealth immediately before
retirement but could not prevent asset accumulation once ex-
penditures fall short of retirement income.


4.3 Policy Implications

       A first, although tentative conclusion can be drawn about
future aggregate savings as the German and the American pop-
ulation ages. It appears counterfactual to employ asset profiles
drawn from a textbook version of the life cycle hypothesis in or-
der to forecast lower future wealth levels in Germany and, al-
though to a lesser degree, in the United States. Decreases in
savings in the United States and Germany may be less dramatic
than projected by Auerbach et al. (1990) or may not occur at all.
The high savings rates and the associated large asset holdings
among the elderly in Germany are more likely to lead to an in-
crease in aggregate savings, at least during the medium-run
transition period in the next thirty years when the baby-boom
                                      - 35 -

generation becomes aged. One should be cautious to ex-
aggerate the dread of lower capital intensity due to population
aging and a need to borrow at the expense of worsening the
terms of trade. Whether aggregate savings will be lower or
higher in the long-run when the bulge of the baby-boom genera-
tion has disappeared and new cohorts with potentially very dif-
ferent savings attitudes are present, is impossible to tell.
       Second, the cross-sectional evidence is consistent with the
so-called Feldstein view that social security wealth replaces pri-
vate savings. Although aggregate savings are higher in West
Germany, this is due to higher annuity wealth while the average
tangible wealth held by elderly German households is actually
lower than in the United States.
       Moreover, the evidence is consistent with the view that
elderly reduce their consumption because of declining health
and that the German elderly, endowed with generous social
security benefits, even realize savings which may have been
unintended when they were younger and against which one can-
not borrow.
       This raises several welfare issues. There is the question of
whether the elderly are "over-annuitized," specifically in
Germany. Evidence, that the level of annuity income for the
oldest old is on average considerably larger than their expendi-
tures, has strong implications for a social security reform.
Notwithstanding the need to prevent poverty among some of the
elderly, it may be reasonable to tax wealth heavier or to adjust
                                    -36-
annuity incomes more than the recent social security reforms
did. Such an argument must be judged in light of the above
mentioned projections of social security contribution rates ex-
ceeding unsustainable 40 percent in Germany when the depen-
dency ratio peaks
       Finally, there is little evidence for a bequest-motive driven
increase in savings during old age. Although bequests volumes
are relatively large -- about 1.8 percent of GDP in the United
States (Kotlikoff and Summers, 1981), 3 percent of GDP in
France (Kessler, 1990) -- the bulk of this appears to be
unintended bequests. The efficiency arguments against taxing
bequests -- distorting efficient intergenerational transfers -- are
therefore not really applicable.



5. HOUSING AND LIVING ARRANGEMENT ChOICES


5.1 Institutional Background


       Policy intervention in housing markets is intense both in
Germany and in the United States. Subsidies and regulations
strongly distort tenure choice, mobility and living arrangement
decisions in the two countries. However, the actual subsidies
and regulations are quite different. Once again, an internation-
al perspective is illuminating how public policy influences actual
behavior.
                                   -37-
       In the United States, most housing subsidies are directed
to home ownership, while subsidies in Germany are directed
towards rental housing (Mayo and Barnbrock, 1985). Both
countries subsidize homeownership by deductions from income
taxes. In the United States, mortgage interest for the purchase
of home and land can be deducted without upper limit, thereby
changing the marginal price of housing and inducing more hous-
ing consumption in terms of land, dwelling space and housing
quality. In Germany, mortage interest is not deductible for
owner-occupied homes. Rather, depreciation of the dwelling
can be deducted as a fixed percentage of dwelling value, up to a
limit which is slightly lower than the average dwelling value in
Germany. Hence, the marginal price of housing is lowered only
for relatively small houses. Land, which is a much larger per-
centage of total purchase price in Germany than in the United
States, is not subsidized at all. For middle class households and
a typical home in 1985, homeownership subsidies were approxi-
mately 2.5 to 3 times higher in the United States than in
Germany (Borsch-Supan, 1985, Tables 3-6).
     Rental housing subsidies in the United States are typically
directed to low-income families, while the rental allowances in
Germany are administered as entitlements. Traditionally, most
older people were eligible for housing assistance which covered
on average 23 percent of rents in 1985 (Mayo and Barnbrock,
1985). Since mobility in rental housing is much higher than in
owner-occupied housing, largely because of much higher trans-
                                    - 38 -

action costs, the subsidies in the United States do not only dis-
tort the tenure choice but indirectly also reduce mobility and
may therefore create lock-in effects for the elderly.
         Differences in rental housing regulations between the two
countries are also important. Germany has very stringent tenant
protection laws. While initial rents are essentially unrestricted,
later rent increases are bound by an index that considerably lags
the spot-market level, preventing fast rent increases when land
and house values appreciate quickly. Eviction is generally not
permitted. In the United States, only very few cities have rental
housing regulations, most notably New York. These rules make
rental housing relatively more attractive in Germany than in the
United States, and they are likely to discourage housing
mobility, particular so for the elderly who have typically particu-
larly long tenure durations and therefore high tenure discounts.
         The financial and regulatory incentives which reduce
mobility in West Germany may also induce the elderly to live in
housing units that are larger (and possibly more expensive) than
those which the elderly would choose in an undistorted housing
market. At the same time, the housing market distortions in
Germany make it more difficult for younger households to buy
larger housing units (Behring, Börsch-Supan, and Goidrian,
1988).
         Another major institutional difference between Germany
and the United States that is likely to distort housing and living
arrangement choices is the already mentioned extent of corn-
                                    -39-
pulsory health insurance. In Germany, compulsory health insur-
ance includes coverage for long-term hospital care while there is
virtually no compensation for in-home care of elderly parents.2°
Until recently, hospitals had an excess supply of beds, and elder-
ly used to stay for extended periods of time in hospitals. The
public health insurance has no preset limit on the length of hos-
pital stays to be covered as long as a hospital doctor approves
the stay. In the United States, hospital and nursing home bills
not covered by health insurance may force the elderly to leave
hospital and nursing homes early and stay with their children.
       I-Iealth care coverage, public subsidies which reduce rental
housing costs for the elderly, and the generally tighter social
safety net for the elderly in West Germany represent economic
disincentives for family support and shared living arrangements
as compared to the United States.


5.2 Evidence on housing and Living Arrangement Choices


       The institutional differences between Germany and the
United States are indeed reflected in the differences in housing
choices and living arrangement choices. Consider first the
choice of tenure. Table 16 presents ownership rates and aver-
age relative shares of housing and non-housing assets for the
elderly in the two countries. Elderly in West Germany are much
more likely to live in rental housing than the elderly in the
United States. While in the United States roughly 70 percent of
                                    -40-
the elderly own their own home, less than a half of the elderly
do so in West Germany. In both countries, ownership rates
peak at age 55-59 and decline thereafter. The decline of home
ownership is of course reflected in the increasing share of non-
housing assets in total wealth among the elderly. In spite of
lower ownership rates, the average share of housing assets is
quite high in Germany because the relative price of housing and
land is substantially higher in Germany than in the United
States.


           Table 16 goes about here


      Another important housing policy difference mentioned
above are the tenants' protection regulations in West Germany
which are much tighter than in the United States. They are in-
deed mobility deterring as can be seen from Table 17 which
presents mobility rates in the two countries. Mobility is much
higher in the United States for all age groups, but particularly so
for the elderly aged 70 and above who have about five times
higher mobility rates than their German counterparts. The very
large number of moves among elderly aged 80 and above in the
United States are moves to family members, particularly to their
own adult children.


           Table 17 goes about here
                                   -41-
      Moves among the elderly, when they occur, release hous-
ing for the younger generation, as can be seen in the other
columns of Table 17. On average, in both countries recent
movers have about one room less than movers.2' This result is
in line with panel data observations (Venti and Wise, 1990;
Feinstein and McFadden, 1988).
      However, although movers reduce dwelling size in both
countries, there are just too few moves in Germany to have art
impact on dwelling size consumption. This is in line with the
speculation that the mobility reducing regulations in Germany
have in effect reduced dwelling size adjustments among the
aged. Indeed, Table 18 shows that although Germans have
smaller houses than Americans when they are aged 50 and
younger, this difference levels out when they become aged.


           Table 18 goes about here


       The decline in housing consumption with age is much
more pronounced in the United States than in West Germany.
In particular, there is little if any reduction of dwelling size
among German homeowners as they age.
       Per capita housing consumption increases in both coun-
tries, a consequence of the decreasing average household size.
In the United States, this increase is partially offset by moves to
smaller dwellings, in contrast to Germany where the low
mobility implies a much steeper increase of per capita dwelling
                                    - 42 -

size consumption.

        So far we have relied on cross-sectional evidence. In both
countries, housing consumption declines very little as
households age. In fact, longitudinal data show strong cohort ef-
fects: for given age, later birth cohorts show an increase in hous-
ing consumption. Table 19 presents the German case. The bot-
tom row represents the average floor space consumption of a
panel of households in the SOEP in five years from 1983
through 1988. The lack of change replicates the result that Ger-
man households, on average, do not decrease their housing con-
sumption as they age. However, by comparing different cohorts
at the same age -- i.e., by comparing the entries on the seven
diagonals for each of the seven age groups -- we see that suc-
ceeding cohorts increased their housing consumption. The
right-most column depicts the range of standard deviations for
each age group. The cohort effects for the 55-75 year old
households are significant even though the households were
traced within only a short five-year span of the German panel
data.


           Table 19 goes about here


         I now turn to the evidence on living arrangement choices.
I cast living arrangements into four categories. An elderly per-
son lives "independently" if no other person lives in the
households except a spouse and minor children, and in "shared
                                    -43-
living arrangements" if at least one other person lives in the
household, most frequently an adult child. For independent
living arrangements, we distinguish the cases of a spouse present
and absent. For shared living arrangements, we differentiate
between "head" and "taken-in." In the first case, the elderly per-
son is the head of household, while in the second case somebody
else is head of household. Most frequently, an adult child has
taken her or his parent in. Table 20 presents how frequently
these living arrangements were chosen by the elderly in the
United States and West Germany, based again on comparable
survey data from the PSID and the SOEP.


           Table 20 goes about here


       The most significant difference in living arrangement
choices between the two countries is in the percentage of shared
living arrangements. It is much higher in the United States. Al-
most a third of the very old live with their adult children or
others. This fraction is only a fifth in Germany. Note that the
percentage living alone is about comparable for elderly aged 65
and above while the percentage living as couples is substantially
lower in the United States. This is a reflection of the much
higher incidence of divorces in the United States. In 1986, the
United States had about 22 divorces per 10,000 married women,
West Germany only 8.3. Consequently, marital rates are about
10-12 percent lower than in West Germany for elderly aged 65
                                    - 44 -

and above.
      The data in both countries do not produce reliable
estimates of institutionalization. They have thus been omitted
from Table 20. The PSID attempts to keep track of in—
stitutionalized sample persons with less than perfect success
(Börsch-Supan, 1990; Eliwood and Kane, 1990). The SOEI
starts in 1984 with a non-institutionalized sample and therefore
underestimates the percentage of elderly living in nursing
homes. If at all, these panel studies reveal a decreasing propor-
tion of elderly living with adult children and an increasing pro-
portion living alone and in institutions (Borsch-Supan, 1990;
Ellwood and Kane, 1990).
       A similar trend is observed in the German SOEP paneS
for the choice between living alone and living in with children
see Table 21, set up in a similar fashion as Table 19 on housing
consumption. The longitudinal data reveals three effects.
Going down each column, the pure age effect mirrors Table 20
and shows the familiar fact that the proportion of elderly living
in with children increases with age. However, this effect is mor
than offset by a strong cohort effect. This effect is visible by fo
lowing each diagonal, holding age constant. Younger German
cohorts are much less inclined to live in with their children than
the older ones. These cohort effects are statistically highly sig
nificant and dominate the aggregate effect in the bottom row of
Table 21: The proportion of the elderly in the SOEP surve
who live in with their children decreases from 1984 to 1988.
                                     - 45 -



           Table 21 goes about here


5.3 PoUcy Implications


       The different housing market policies in West Germany
and the United States have the predicted impacts: higher owner-
ship rates in the United States, dramatically lower mobility rates
and a lower proportion of shared living arrangements in West
Germany. While it would be unreasonable to attribute all dif-
ferences in observed housing and living arrangement choices by
the elderly to the different housing market policies, the con-
sistency of the responses is striking.
       Having realized the effectiveness of housing market
policies we should ask ourselves whether these policies make
sense in a situation of rapid population aging. I recognize
several problems here. First, housing supply by intergenera-
tional transfer is impeded due to suppressed mobility by the
elderly. Second, supply by new construction is distorted into the
direction of too few, too large houses. Third, there are too little
incentives, even some economic disincentives for family care
and multigenerational living arrangements. The first point is
caused by the honieownership subsidies in the United States and
by the tenants' protection legislation in West Germany. The
second point relates mostly to the United States, again because
of homeownership subsidies, while the third one is most
                                        - 46 -

relevant in West Germany with her compulsory health insurance
system. In the following, I will comment on these points in more
detail.
          A first problem is that elderly who ponder moving in a
smaller dwelling are discouraged to do so in both countries. In
the United States, there is little incentive to give up valuable tax
deductions unless reductions in dwelling size are compensated
by quality improvements in dimensions other than size. The
situation is complicated by the fact, that the United States offer
little attractive appartment housing for rent since the tax laws
split the tenure choice along income lines, creating the well-
known external effects that make rental housing so inferior in
the United States.
          In West Germany, where many more elderly live in rental
housing, the rent adjustment provision of the tenants' protection
laws supports high initial rents for movers and large discounts
for sitting tenants, so-called tenure discounts, creating windfall
gains for the older and large rental burden for the young. The
size of the wedge between rents for flow and stock supply ap-
pears inefficient and a smoother adaptation of rents in times of
demand pressures welfare improving. Let me stress that, if
elderly want to stay, they should do so. My point is that the
numbers in Table 17 indicate that there are elderly who would
adjust their housing consumption downwards if it were not for
the penalty of a large rent increase.
          The horneownership subsidies in the United States and
                                   -47-
the rent adjustment provision in West Germany also distort the
supply of new housing. By lowering the marginal price of land
and dwelling, the tax deductions in the United States channel
resources to large houses where the marginal room has little
utility, thereby suppressing the supply of a larger number of
smaller houses which appears to be more appropriate in times
of population aging. In West Germany, the rent adjustment
clause, if binding, lowers expected returns of a prospective land-
lord and therefore reduces supply. The argument, however, is
quite subtle because not all of the wedge between spot market
and long-term rent must be inefficient. Tenure discounts may
serve as an efficient device to minimize maintanance and
revolving costs in a similar manner as seniority payments create
efficient wage schedules. Since tenure discounts are also ob-
served in completely unregulated markets, one may argue that
the German rent adjustment provision is not binding and can be
dropped without harm. This may be true in steady state. How-
ever, the policy dilemma starts when increases in demand raise
spot market rents. Now the rent adjustment provision becomes
binding and suppresses supply at the expense of the newcomers
while protecting sitting tenants (and providing windfall gains to
them). Population aging is an example where this is the case.22
       Mobility reducing policies impede the intergenerational
transfer of housing which represents an important mechanism of
housing supply. The direct transfer alone -- homes that are
inherited-- amounts to 28 percent of all owned homes in
                                    - 48 -

Germany.23 The indirect transfer is much larger: in 1983, about
74 percent of all recent home buyers purchased existing homes
in the United States. This percentage has been steadily increas-
ing to over 80 percent in 1989.24 Population aging implies at
increased length of stay in the family home by the older genera-
tion which leads to a relative shortage of housing for the
younger generation.
      The magnitude of this longevity-induced shortage effect i
substantial as is evident from the following back-on-the-
envelope calculation. The current cohort of elderly aged 80
comprises about 350,000 persons in approximately 250,00(
households. If a one-year increase in life expectancy implies
that this cohort will stay one year longer in their current dwell-
ings, an increased housing demand of 250,000 units is generated.
Since average life expectancy has increased by 1.3 years in West
Germany from 1981 to 1986, the annual additional demand due
to population aging amounts to 65,000 dwelling units. This i:
about 28 percent of the entire new construction activities in
1986.25
       In Germany, the prolonged duration of more elderly ii
their homes is unlikely to be offset by a decreasing demand of
the younger generation. Hence, German housing markets will
stay tight for the next future unless more downgrading of dwell-
ing size in old age and a quicker speed of new construction is
forcefully encouraged. Since population aging is slower in thc
United States and housing markets are currently not as tight as
                                     -49-
in Germany, similar problems are less pronounced in the United
States.


          Another area in which we identified distortions are living
arrangement choices. In the United States, the extent of family
care appears to be much higher than in West Germany, al-
though the trend is in direction of a decreasing proportion of
elderly living with adult children and an increasing proportion
living alone and in institutions. Since living alone and living in
an institution incur much higher social costs (induced health ex-
penditures, stationary and ambulatory services for the elderly,
etc.) than living with others, it appears wise to intercept some of
the external effects by subsidizing home care. The case is
strongest in West Germany, where current health insurance
policies create an additional distortion by effectively subsidizing
living alone.
          If the current proportions of living arrangements are not
reversing, the demand for social support services such as am-
bulatory care will increase dramatically. For low income elder-
ly. the associated expenses have to be born by welfare programs
diianccd by encral taxes. They are thus subject to the familiar
 rul)lc!ns 01 pay-as--you—go social insurance schemes iii ti LUCS 0!

 r1CFcasii1 dependency ratios.
                                   -50-
6. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS


       What do we learn from a microeconomic, cross-nationi
analysis about the interrelation between economic policy and
population aging? A first and important point is to realize the
effectiveness of economic policy. Retirement decisions, savings
behavior and housing and living arrangement choices are very
consistent with the incentives provided by economic policy in
form of regulations, taxes and subsidies in Germany and the
United States. Examples are the response of retirement dates
to pension schedules, the consistency of cross-national dif-
ferences in savings with cross-national differences in retirement
income and health insurance provisions, and the reaction of
housing choices and mobility to homeownership subsidies and
rental regulations.
       Second, the analysis identifies several trouble spots where
incentives set by economic policy work in the wrong direction in
times of population aging. Germany has failed to respond quick-
ly to the dangers of unsustainably high social security contribu-
tions. This is particularly worrisome in the light of social
security benefits which are so large in old age that they induce
forced savings among the better-to-do elderly. The United
States have adjusted their social security system relatively ear-
lier in spite of a less pronounced increase in the ratio of
pensioners to workers. Neither country provides adequate sup-
port for family care and multigencrational living arrangements.
                                  -51-
Providing incentives here is particularly important in order to
offset the shortage of family care generated by the
demographics of a dwindling number of children per elderly.
                                         - 52 -

FOOTNOTES


        1. On a more mundane yet important level, \V
Germany and the United States have rich and comparable Ion
gi tud i nal iii icro data sets that shed light on the cc 'noin ic sit ua
tion of the elderly: the Panel Study of Income Dymimics (P II)
and its German counterpart, the Socio—Econornic Panel
(SOEP).
        2. The numbers in this section are quoted from OECD
(1988) and refer to former West Germany. Because East and
West Germany have approximately the same age distributions,
German unification does not affect the aging of the German
population in any substantial way. East Germany features a
higher mortality rate and had a decade of higher fertility be-
tween the mid-seventies and reunification. Higher mortality is
commonly attributed to environmental problems and the lack of
sufficient health services in former East Germany. It is most
likely to adjust quickly to the West German mortality rates. The
period of high fertility appears to have been caused by the om-
nipresent East German child care system which used to support
labor force participation during the childbearing years of young
women (Chesnais, 1987). This system was dismantled after
unification, and the East German fertility rate has came down to
below the West German level.
       3. In 1985, life expectancy at birth was 71.5 years for Ge
man male, 78. 1 years for German female.
                                     - 53 -

       4. The projected old-age dependency ratio for Switzerland
in 2030 is 0.47.
       5. Hurd (1989), Table II 6.
       6. According to the 1984 wave of the German Socio-
Economic Panel.
       7. This term is somewhat misleading because the system as
a whole is not actuarily fair. The PDVs were computed for a
discount rate of 3.3 percent, the value which would equalize life
time discounted benefits and contribution for the historical con-
tribution rates and current life expectancy.
       8. This includes time spent at military service, education,
about one year for childbearing, etc.
       9. In the years between 1984 and 1989, Germany reduced
the retirement age de facto to age 58 ("Vorruhestandsregelung")
because workers could apply to the status "berufsunfahig" at that
age. They received unemployment compensation at ages 58 and
59 and then a social security pension as if they had retired at age
60.
       10. Since I pre-1990 data, I refer to West Germany only.
       11. The numbers are obtained from the Statistical Ab-
stracts of the United States and the "Statistische Jahrbücher für
die Bundesrepublik Deutschland '.
       12.   The 1992 social security reform has changed this to an
indexation with respect to net income.
       13. However, the Retirement History Survey data are sub-
ject to the similar measurement problems as the PSID data.
                                     - 54 -

        14.   Feldstein (1974).
        15. "Einkommens- und Verbrauchsstichprobcn", s"
Börsch-Supan and Stahl (1991b) and BOrschSupan (l)Q2b'.
        16. It excludes business and farm property included ft
Table 10.
        17. One might also wish to leave bequests to persons or in-
stitutions other than own children, but the bequest motive ap-
pears strongest with respect to own children.
        18. See Börsch-Supan (1991a). I intentionally excluded
housing wealth because larger families have larger houses that
have, on average, higher sales prices. Because mobility is low
among home-owners, many elderly who had large families arc
still living in their large houses, with or without a bequest mo-
tive.
        19. To get semantics straight: the point is not to test for
the presence of a bequest motive per Se, but to test whether a
bequest motive is the source of the observed asset and savings
profiles as people age.
        20. The German income tax provides a tax deduction of
just DM 1800 (roughly $ 1100) in this case.
        21. It should be noted that the observed reduction in
dwelling size does not, at least on average, imply a reduction in
housing equity among elderly American homeowners when they
move (Venti and Wise, 1990).
        22. It is important to stress that tenants' protection per se
-- the prohibition of eviction and a rent increase beyond market
                                      - 55 -

rents -- is   a social achievement particularly important for the
elderly who face higher psychic, sometimes also monetary
moving costs.
         23. Computed from the 1988 wave of the Socio-Economic
Panel.
         24. Statistical Abstract, various issues.
         25. In 1986, 225,00 dwelling units were constructed in
West Germany (Statistisches Jahrbuch, 1988).
                                 -56-
REFERENCES


Auerbach, Alan J., L.J. Kotlikoff, R.P. Hagemann, and (IL
      Nicoletti. 1990. The Economic Dynamics of an Aging Pop-
      ulation: The Case of Four OECD Countries. OECD
      nomic Studies No. 14, Spring.
Barro, Robert J. 1974. Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?
      Journal of Political Economy 82.
Behring, Karin, A. Börsch-Supan, and G. Goidrian. 1988.
      Analyse und Prognose der Nachfrage nach Miet- und
      Eigentumerwohnungen in der Bundesrepublik
      Deutschland. Berlin: Duncker und Humblot
Bernheim, B.Douglas, Andrew Shleifer, and Lawrence H. Sum-
      mers. 1985. The Manipulative Bequest Motive. Journal of
      Political Economy 93.
Borsch-Supan, Axel. 1985. Tenure Choice and Housing
      Demand. In U.S. and West German Housing Markets,
      eds. K.Stahl and R.Struyk. Washington, D.C.: The Urban
      Institute Press.
Börsch-Supan, Axe!. 1990. Elderly Americans: A Dynamic Anal-
      ysis of Household Dissolution and Living Arrangement
      Transitions. In Issues in the Economics of Aging, ed.
      David Wise. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Börsch-Supan, Axel. 1991a. Implications of an Aging Popula-
      tion: Problems and Policy Options in West Germany and
      the United States. Economic Policy 12.
                                   - 57 -

Borsch-Supan, Axe!. 199 lb. The Choice of Living Arrangements
      in Germany. Paper prepared for the European Population
      Conference in Paris, France, October 1991.
Börsch-Supan, Axel. 1992a. Population Aging, Social Security
      Design, and Early Retirement. Journal of Institutional and
      Theoretical Economics, forthcoming.
Börsch-Supan, Axel. 1992b. Saving and Consumption Patters
      Among the Elderly: The German Case, Journal of
      tion Economics, forthcoming.
Börsch-Supan, Axel, and Konrad Stahl. 1991a. Do Dedicated
      Savings Programs Increase Aggregate Savings and Hous-
      ing Demand? Journal of Public Policy.
Börsch-Supan, Axel, and Konrad Stahl. 1991b. Life Cycle
      Savings and Consumption Constraints. Journal of
      tion Economics.
Bundesminister für Arbeit und Sozialordnung. 1990. Die
       Renten reform 1992. Bonn: Bundespresseamt.
Casmir, Bernd. 1989. Staatliche Rentenversicherungssysterne im
       internationalen Vergleich. Frankfurt: Uing.
Chesnais, Jean-Claude. 1987. Quand un peuple en devient deux:
       une Allernagne et l'autre. Population et Societes 209.
Eliwood, 1)avid, and Thomas Kane. 1990. An American Way of
       Aging. In Issues in the Economics of Aging ed. David
       \Vise, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
I'einstein and McFadden. 1988. The Dynamics of Housing
       Demand by the Elderly. In Issues in the Economics of
                                   - 58 -

      Aging.. ed. David Wise. Chicago: University of Chicago
      Press.
Feldstein, Martin. 1974. Social Security, Induced Retirement,
      and Aggregate Capital Accumulation. Journal of Po1jjça
      Economy 82.
French, Johannes. 1987. Sozialpolitik. München: Oldenbou rg.
Hagemann, Robert P, and Guiseppe Nicoletti. 1989. Population
       Ageing: Economic Effects and Some Policy Implications
       for Financing Public Pensions. OECD Economic Studies
      No. 12, Spring.
Hurd, Michael D. 1989. Issues and Results from Research on
       the Elderly: Economic Status, Retirement, and Savings.
       Journal of Economic Literature.
Jacobs, Klaus, Martin Kohli and Martin Rein. 1987. Testing the
       Industry-Mix Hypothesis of Early Exit. Discussion Paper
       prepared for Wi ssen schaftszentru m Berlin.
Kessler, Denis. 1990. Presidential Address at the Fourth Annual
       Meeting of the European Society of Population Econom-
       ics, Istanbul. Journal of Population Economics, forthcom-
      ing.
Kotlikoff, Lawrence J., and Laurence Summers. 1981. The Role
       of Intergenerational Transfers in Aggregate Capital Ac-
       cumulation. Journal of Political Economy 89.
Kotlikoff, Lawrence J., and David A. Wise. 1987. Incentive Ef-
       fects of Private Pension Plans. In Issues in Pension
       nomics, eds. Z.Bodie, J.Shoven and D.Wise, Chicago: Uni
                                   -59-
      versity of Chicago Press.
Lazear, Edward P., and Robert L. Moore. 1988. Pensions and
      Turnover. In Pensions in the U.S. Economics, eds.
      Z.Bodie, J.Shoven and D.Wise, Chicago: University of
      Chicago Press.
Mayo, Stephen K., and Jörn Barnbrock. 1985. Rental Housing
      Subsidy Programs in West Germany and the United
      States. In U.S. and West German Housing Markets, eds.
      K.Stahl and R.Struyk. Washington, D.C.: The Urban In-
      stitute Press.
OECD. 1988. Ageing Populations: The Social Policy
      tions. Paris.
Schmähl, Winfried. 1989. Labour Force Participation and Social
       Pension Systems. In Workers versus Pensioners:
       generational Justice in an Ageing World, eds.P.Johnson,
       C.Conrad and D.Thomson. Manchester,New York: Man-
       chester University Press.
Stock, James H, and David A. Wise. 1990. In Issues in the
       nomics of Aging ed. David Wise. Chicago: University of
       Chicago Press.
Venti, Steven F., and David A. Wise. 1987. Have IRAs In-
       creased U.S. Savings?: Evidence from Consumer Expendi-
       ture Surveys. Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcom-
       ing.
Venti, Steven F., and David A. Wise. 1990. But They Don't
      Want to Reduce Equity. In Issues in the Economics Qf
                                  -60-
       Aging ed. David Wise. Chicago: University of Chicago
       Press.
Wolff, Edward N. 1990. Methological Issues in the Estimation of
       the Size Distribution of Household Wealth. Journal of
       Econometrics 43.
FlJi;Ei!ir1y_PoQulation in Se in. OFCD Countries

                 Population Aged 65 and Over
                        (percentages)
                                               Populatlon Ai,d    O drid
                                                         (mlii tars
                                                                             :r
                    1950     1990     2030          1980          2030

Canada               7.7%    11.4%    22.4%         0.44          1 89
France              11.4     13.8     21.8          1.53          3 60
Germany              9.4     15.5     25.8          1 . 60        2     65
ta1y                 8.0     13.8     21.9          1 28          2 .   56
Japan                5.2     11.4     20.0          1.63          6. 64
United Kingdom      10.7     15.1     19.2          1.48          2 .   60
tnjted States        8.1     12.2     19.5          5.22         12 63

Source: OECD 1988
TALJ 7 Li Ic Expctancy and                   Frt ii y       R:i   sI   S(V'fl QFfl) (Tn r   I




                                Li 1   Lx

                             l5()      lQi        ri.',r
CiniI.                                       H

Frinc I'                               7',        11
(errnlIlv                    6f 6      733        l(   •,
                                1      76         12
                                2            6         1

  I       nd K i                H      71          71
      t   'd Sr.it ,s        66        71          7


Notes:   ivriae life expectincv ir Kiith in v'
b. n;e-sprific fertilit.v   cnmmn1 rs •Il chi 1-.iri
               ()fij) ULI8
TAI.E 3; Old-A.e Dependency Ratios for Seven OECD Countries

                      Population Aged 65+/Population Aged 15-6

                    1980    1990    2000    2010    2020      2030

Canada              14.1    16.8    19.0    21.4    28.9      37.3
France              21.9    20.9    23.3    24.5    30.6      35.8
Germany             23.4    22.3    25.4    30.6    33.5      43.6
                    20.8    20.1    22.6    25.7    29.3      35.3
Italy
                    13.5    16.2    22.6    29.5    33.6      31.9
Japan
United Kingdom      23.2    23.0    22.3    22.3    25.5      31.1
United States       17.1    18.5    18.2    18.8    25.0      31.7



Source; OECD 1988
                                    I I SecurtSy         Pensions

                           Net Replacement ratio

Relative lncoe          United States          Geraanv

      50%                    61%                   67%
      75                     55                    66
     100                     53                    71
     150                     45                    77

     200                     41                    75
     300                     30                    33



Notes a. In percent of the wages of an average production worker.

b. Average after tax pension divided by average after tax labor

income. 40 years of services assumed. Married couple supplement

not included.

Source Casmir (1989).
TAPLE 5: Adjustcnt of public Pensions by Retirement Ae

                      Pension as a percentage of the pension that one
                           would obtain if one had retired at age 65
Re-
tire-                           Cermany                         United States
ment       "Fair
Age        Systema before Reformb after Refornit before Reforrnd after Refornie

 60        64.6%        87.5%   f)        69.5% h)         i)                   i)
 61        70.4         90.0    f)     75.6     h)         i)                   i)
 62        76.7         92.5    f)     81.7     h)        80.0              77.8
 63        83.7         95.0    g)     87.8     h)        86.7              85.2
 64        91.4         97.5    g)     93.9     h)        94.4              92.6
 65       100.0        100.0          100.0              100.0             100.0
 66       109.6        109.9          108.5              103.0             105.6
 67       120.6        120.1          117.0              106.0             111.1
 68       132.5        123.0          125.5              109.0             120.0
 69       146.2        125.8          134.0              112.0             128.9
 70       161.9        128.7          142.5              115.0             137.8



Notes:

a. Hypothetical adjustments that keep the present discounted value of

      retirement benefits minus contributions constant across all retirement ages

      between 60-70 at 3.3 percent discount rate.

b. "Gesetzliche Rentenversicherung' until 1992.

c. 'Gesetzliche Rentenversicherung" after 1992 Reform has fully phased in.

d, Old Age Social Security (OASDI) until 1983.

e. Old Age Social Security (OASDI) after 1983 Reform has fully phased in.

f. Applicable only for women and workers who cannot be appropriately employed

      due to health or mismatch reasons ('berufs- oder erwerbsunfahig")

g Requires 35 years of service.

h. Applicable only workers who cannot be appropriately epoved due tü                 hilh
      or msisr.,itch reasons ("berufs- oder erverbsunfahig")

 i, ot yet eligible for Social Security benefits.

 Source: French, 1987; Casniir, 1989; Social Security Bulln .               .   Jul'. lS3
ThJ_6Jipr Force Participation Rates Amony._Peronsd6ndfter
                        1965     1975      1985

Canada                  26.3k    l8.5      12 3
France                  28.3     13°        5.3
Germany                 24.0     10.8       5 2
Italy                   18.4     10   4     8 °
Japan                   56.3     44.4      37.0
United Kingdom          23.7     15.8
United States           26.6     20.7      10.1


Source: OECD 1988
TAf%LE 7; M1e Retireiient and Labor Force Participation Rates

                   United States                     West Germany

  Age    Full-Time Part-Time Retired       Full-Time Part-Time Retired

 50-54     76.6%        11.0%      12.4%     91.5%        0.6%       78%
 55-59     65.9         17.4       16.7      79.1         1.5       19.4
 60-64     38.8         16.9       44.3      37.7         1.6       60.8
 65-69     12.2         22.3       65.4      4.1          7.5       88.4
 70-74
 75-79
  80+
            7.2
            2.5
            1.6
                        13.7
                        12.7
                         4.8
                                   79.1
                                   84.8
                                   93.5
                                              1.7
                                              2.5
                                              1.2
                                                          l.
                                                          3.2

                                                          0.0
                                                                    95.3
                                                                    95.7
                                                                    98.8


Notes;

Full time: More than 35 weekly work hours.

Part time: Between 15 and 35 weekly work hours.

Retired: Less than 15 weekly work hours.

Source; 1984 PSID, 1984 SOEP.
Tkie 8. SIu1ted pveaje RetIreenge and Contribution Lites
                                  Mean Retirement Age   Contribution Rate

                                      (years)             1990    2000


Current System                          58.5              18.7%   20.1%
System After 1992 Reform                59.0              18.1    19.5
Nondistortionary System                 60.7              16.2    1TL


Source:   Authors calculations.
TABLE 9: grgate Savtn,,s Rates
 Year         West Germany          United States

  1960             8.6%                  5.7%
  1965             12.2                  7.0
  1970             13.8                  8.0
  1975             16.2                  8.7
  1980             14.2                  7.9
  1985             13.0                  6.4
  1990             14.8                  5.1

Note Personal   Savings as Percentage of Personal Disposable Income

Sourc Monatsberichte der Deutschen Bundesbank, various issues;

         Economic Report of the President 1992, Statistical Appendix
 MJ 10; Hpusehold We1th y Ae nd Asset Caoy
           (Averages across households, in 1000 $)

               United   States                      west Germany

            Non-        Own                 Non-         Own
Age       Housing     Housing    Total    Housing      Housing     Total

50-54      40.2         51.9     92.1      19.8         54.2       73.9
55-59      47.1         48.2     95.3      29.8         63.6       73.2
60-64      45.1         41.6     86.7      41.9         56.5       Q6 ..
 65-69     37.8         38.8     76.6      35.0         36.8       71.8
 70-74     38.0         31.5     69.5      22.4         45.7       68 1
 75-79     41.3         34.3     75.6      31.4         28.7       60.1
 30÷       37.2         30.5     67.7      31.0         29.8       60.8


Notes; Financial wealth includes pass book savings. M1-tMFs, dedicated savings

(IRA, Keogh, Bausparkassen etc.), stocks and bonds. Non-Housing wealth

is financial wealth plus real estate (except owner-occupied home),

farm and business property. Housing wealth is the estimated sales value

of owner-occupied home. All values are self-reported.

Source; 1986 PSID, 1988 SOEP at 1986 prices, valued at purchasing power

parity (1$—DM1.70).
TA!LF 11: Sources of Income

                  United States                  vest Germany

Age       Labor Annuities Assets         Labor Annuities Assets

50.56     75.6%      18.7%        5.6%   85.4%       7.3%
55-59     66.1       26.0         7.8    76.5       14.4         9.0
60-64     43.2       47.4      9.3       37.0       51.9        11.1
65-69     14.5       70.1     14.8        6.1       87.0         8.9
70-74      6.4       79.9     13.7        2.7       82.0        15.3
75-79      2.6       74.1     23.2        0.6       81.8        17.6
80+        1.8       72.9     25.3        0.7       86.3        12.9



Notes: Labor includes ful1 and part-time wages.

Annuity income includes social security, pensions and other transfers.

Asset income includes interests, dividends, rents, and profits.

Source: 1984 PSID, 1984 SOEP.
IMLE 12; ilousehold SavLr by Ae nd Cohort. 1978 and 1983
           (DM per year, in 1983 DM)
                         Birth Cohort

 Age    1928-24 1923-19 1918-13 1q1209 lO8-04 < 190

50-54    5136
55-59    3771     4677
60-66             2468     2830
65-69                      1459     2450
70-74                               2016     2368
75-79                                        2501     3717
80-4-                                                 4015


Notes: Age is age of household head. In each column, the upper

number refers to 1978, the lower number to 1983.

Source; Einkommen- und Verbrauchstlchproben 1978 and 1983.
TAML 13: Saving Rates by Ae and Cohort. 1978 and 1983
           (net household savings/net household income)

                          Birth Cohort

 Age    1928-24 1923-19 1918-13 1912-09 1908-04 < 1904

50-54     7.3
55-59     5.3      7.0
60-64              3.5      3.8
65-69                       2.4      3.9
70-74                                4.1      4.8
75-79                                         5.8         8.8
80+                                                       9.7



Notes: Age is age of household head. In each column, the upper
number refers to 1978, the lower number to 1983.

Source: Einkommen- und Verbrauchstichproben 1978 and 1983.
Thj.E J4; fthMcJl Wealth byg,*nd Cohort. 1978 and 19
            (1000DM, in 1983 DM)

                             Birth Cohort

Age      1928-24 1923-19 1918-13 1912-09 1908-04 < 19O

50-54     26.5
55-59     27.1       28.3
60-64                28.9     27.5
65-69                         27.5      25.8
70-76                                   28.7     26.5
75-79                                            28.7   30 3
80+


Notes Age    is age of household head. In each colunin. the upper

number   refers   to 1978, the lower number to 1983.

Sourc Einkorrimen- und Verbrauchstichproben 1978 and 1983.
Tj\fl.E 15: Flderly   with ExpendItures Lower   thjn   Mnuty Income

                        Percentage of Elderly in Age Group
          with a Ratio of Annuity Income to Consumption Expenditures

 Age           < 1.0          1.0 to 1.2    1.2 to 1.5        >   1.5

50-54              97.7           1.5            0.5              0.3
55-59              92.0           3.9            2.9               1.2
60-64              69.3          13.4           11.4               5.9
65-69              47.3          23.5           18.0              11.2
70-74              42.9          22.7           20.6              13.8
75-79              38.1          19.2           21.6              21.1
80+                30.5          17.3           23.2              29.0


Notes:   Annuity   Income include public and private pensions, payments

from life insurance and private transfers.

Source: 1983 EVS, based on 18,259 elderly age 50 and above.
TAM.1frj.SflcJ sht Rates and Shares of Housn          ad NpHousin_Assets
               United   States                   West Germany

         Ownership     Housing       Ownership          Housing
Age        Rate      Wealth Share      Rate           Wealth Shire

50-54      758%           63.4%          56.3%          73.3%
55-59      76.0           61.2           60.8           59.3
60-64      73.5           58.6           53.7           56.5
65-69      69.2           55.5           49.2           51.3
70-74      64.8           50.1           61.7           67.1
75-79      68.4           53.1           46.7           48.3
80+        62.4           46.2           40.8           49.0


Note.. Housing wealth is a self-reported estimate of the sales

price of an owner-occupied home.

Source; 1984 PSID, 1984 and 1988 SOEP.
IAJLi 17:    Mobility Rates and IIous1n. Consumption Adjust,.ents

                     United   States                    West Germany

            Mobility          Dwelling Size:   Mobility       Dwelling Size:
 Age          Rate        Mover Non-Mover'       Rate        Mover son-Mover

50-54        10.6%            3.8      5.0       2.6%
55-59        10.2             3.2      4.8       2.0
60-64         9.4             2.7      4.5       2.5
65-69         6.9             3.3      4.2       2.8        ) 2.8      3.7
70-74         9.1             3.0      4.1       1.8
75-79         4.8             3.3      3.9       1.1
80÷          15.4             2.7      4.0       1.3


Note; Mobility rate is the percentage of movers, i.e., households who

moved within the last 12 months since being interviewed.

Source; 1984 PSID and 1984 SOEP.
Th118 rI!01S n Consuipt1oJNuiiherofRooris
                  United States                   vest Germany

 Age     Owners     Renters Per Capita   Owners     Renters   mr Capi a
50- 54    5.2          3.7        1,9     4.6         3.4        1.6
55-59     5.0          3.3        2.0     6.6         3.3        1.7
60-64     6.8          3.1        2.1     6.5         2.9        2.1
65-69     6.6          2.9        2.2     4.2         2.8        2.3
70-74     4.6          2.7        2.3    4.2          2.6        2.2
75-79     6.4          2.7        2.3    4.1          2.5        2.?
80+       4.5          2.3        2.6    6.5          2.5        2.6

Note: Number of rooms excluding kitchen, bathrooms, and rooms smaller

than 6 square meters (about 60 sqft).

Source; 1984 PSID and 1986 SOEP.
ThMZ 19: Age nd Cohort     Effects in Housing Consuipt1on
            (Dwelling size (area in square meters))

                          Survey year

Cohort        1984 1985 1986 198? 1988               Age      Standarddev.

 1934-38                                     102.5   50-54       1.7-2.2
   33-37                             101.1
   32-36                     100.5
   31-35              99.4
 1930-34      101.6

 1929-33                                     98.7    55-59       2.0-2.2
   28-32                              95.4
   27-31                     95.0
   26-30              94.3
 1925-29       93.7

 1924-28                                      92.2   60-64       2.1-2.3
   23-27                              92.4
   22-26                      91.4
   21-25              91.5
 1920-24       90.5

 1919-23                                      87.4   65-69       2.3-2.7
   18-22                              84.7
   17-21                      82.4
   16-20              78.6
 1915-19       80.0

 1916-iS                                      79.8   70-74       2.4-2.7
   13-17                              76.7
   12-16                      76.1
   11-15              73.3
 1910-14       75.2

 1909-13                                      71.2    75-79      2.8-3.1
   08-12                              73.6
   07-11                      74.0
   06-10              74.9
 1905-09       72.7

 1904-08                                      70.8    80+         3.4-4.4
   03-07                              71.1
   02-06                      69.5
    01-05             70.7
  1900-04      69.3
 All           93.3 93.4 93.5 93.4 93.5               50+          0.93


 Sourc      SOEP, waves   1986-1988
!.LJ_ZQ LJvInp. Arranpeaents      of the Elderly

                 United States                         West Gerrsny

         Independent        Shared            Independent        Shared

Age     Couple   Alone   Head     Taken-In   Couple   Alone   Head    Taken-In

50-54   55.3%    14.2%    17.6%     12.2%    82.2%     7.9%    7.3%     2.6%
55-59   58.3     16.9     13.8      10.1     82.9      8.5     7.2      1.4
60-64   51.2     20.1     18.6       9.4     77.4     14.3     5.9      2.4
65-69   48.7     25.5     14.3      11.2     67.8     22.1     6.4      3.7
70-74   44.0     33.3     12.0       8.8     57.3     34.5     5.1      3.1
75-79    38.5    40.3      9.5      11.3     45.0     44.6     3.8      6.7
80+      18.6    46.6      9.0      23.5      31.4    47.8     4.8     16.0


Notes: Independent (Couple): No other adult except spouse in household.

Independent (Alone): No other adult in household.

Shared (Head): Elderly is head of household with another family unit.

Shared (Taken-In): Elderly lives In household headed by another person.

Source: 1984 PSID and 1988 SOEP.
TM1- 2L A.e and    Cptort Eflects In the LIvth. Arrangement Choice
  (Proportion of   Persons Living in Multigenerational Households)

                      Survey year

Cohort      1984 1985 1986 1987 1988          Age      Standarddev.

 1919-23                               2.3    65-69      1.1-1.4
   18-22                        2.0
   17-21                  2.0
   16-20            2.0
 1915-19     4.3

 1914-18                               1.6    70-74       1.3-1.5
   13-17                        2.0
   12-16                  2.3
   11-15            2.7
 1910-14     5.6
                                                                     -

 1909-13                               4.2    75-79       1.3-1.6
   08-12                         5.8
   07-11                  8.6
   06-10            9.3
 1905-09     9.1

 1904-08                               13.7   80÷         1.6-2.2
   03-07                        13.6
   02-06                  132
   01-05           17.6
 1900-04    198
   All      754 5.95 5.20 4.83 4.72           65÷          0.76


Note: Kultigenerational households are corilposite households con-

sisting of elderly parents and their adult children.

Source: SOEP, waves 1984-1988, persons aged 65-.
