NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL
MOBILiTY IN ThE 1990s

Maurice Obstfeld

Working Paper No. 4534

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November, 1993

I am grateful to Matthew Jones and Luisa Lambertini for valiant research assistance on this
paper and to Polly Allen, Tamim Bayoumi, Giuseppe Bertola, Barry Eichengreen, Jeffrey
Frankel, Kaku Furuya, Morris Goldstein, Peter Kenen, Jim Nason, Franco Passacantando, and
David Romer for helpful suggestions. Discussion at the April 1993 fiftieth anniversary
conference for Princeton Essays in International Finance helped sharpen the paper's
arguments. Any remaining errors are mine. I acknowledge with thanks financial support
from: the Centre for Economic Policy Research MIRAGE project; the National Science
Foundation; the Ford Foundation (through a grant to CIDER at UC-Berkeley); and the UCBerkeley Hewlett Faculty Grant program. David Backus, Tamim Bayoumi, Robert Dekle,
Morris Goldstein, Kellett Hannah, Fumio Hayashi, James Poterba, and Data Resources, Inc.,
generously provided data and advice. This paper will be published in Peter B. Kenen (ed.)
Understanding Interdependence: The Macroeconomics of the Open Economy, Princeton
University Press, 1994. This paper is part of NBER's research program in International Trade
and Investment. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4534
November 1993
INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL
MOBILITY IN THE 1990s

ABSTRACT
This paper surveys the performance of international capital markets and the literature
on measuring international capital mobility. Three main functions of a globally integrated
and efficient world capital market provide focal points for the analysis. First, asset-price
arbitrage ensures that people in different countries face identical prices for a given asset.
Second, to the extent that the usual market failures allow, people in different countries can

pooi risks to their lifetime consumption profiles. Third, new saving, regardless of its country
of origin, is allocated toward the world's most productive investment opportunities. The
paper evaluates the international capital market's performance of these roles by studying data
on international interest-rate differences, international consumption correlations, international

portfolio diversification, and the relations between national saving and investment rates. The
conclusion is that while international capital mobility has increased markedly in the last two
decades, international capital movements remain less free than iniranational movements, even
among the industrial countries.

Maurice Obstfeld
Department of Economics
787 Evans Hall
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER

Over the past two decades, global trade in financial assets has been
spurred by advances in communication and transaction technologies, by the

creation of new financial products, and by a widespread trend toward
deregulation of domestic and international capital—market activities. In

almost all respects, the consequences of these developments remain
controversial. 1

In theory the potential benefits of international capital mobility
are clear: individuals gain the opportunity to smooth consumption by

borrowing or diversifying abroad, while world savings are directed to the
world's most productive investment opportunities. The size of these

gains, and the extent to which they are being attained in practice,
remains uncertain and furnishes an active area for research. Answers are
needed urgently: high on the policy agenda in a number of countries is a
choice between further integration into world or regional capital markets
and the retention of traditional macroeconomic policy options.

This paper surveys the performance of international capital markets
and the literature on measuring international capital mobility. Section 1
reviews the main functions and implications of capital mobility. Section

2 examines recent evidence on the world capital market's ability to

arbitrage the prices of similar assets. The market's record in allowing
countries to diversify risks is taken up in section 3. Section 4 focuses
on interpreting divergences between national saving and domestic

investment rates. Section 5 concludes.

'An excellent overview of the expanding range of international financial
markets is contained in Goldstein et al. (1993).

1. Free international capital mobility: Definition and implications
Capital is freely mobile within a multi-country region when its

residents face no official obstacles to the negotiation and execution of
financial trades anywhere and with anyone within the region, and face

transaction costs that are no greater for parties residing in different
countries than for parties residing in the same country. The definition
implies that national authorities do not interpose themselves between

transaction partners from different countries, other than through the
provision of a nationality—blind legal framework for contract
enforcement.

Actual conditions may differ from this ideal of free international
capital mobility. Governments can impose taxes on cross-border financial

flows and payments, including certain types of reserve requirement, as

well as quantitative limits and outright prohibitions. The mere threat of
such measures can discourage international capital movement, as can

official "moral" suasion in which threats of formal regulation may be

implicit. The prospect of partial or full government expropriation of
foreign-owned assets lowers the financial openness of some economies.

Differences in language and business practice can raise the cost of an

international financial deal relative to that of a similar deal between
residents of the same country.

In measuring the strength of such barriers to international capital
movement, an essential comparative benchmark is the ideal case of perfect

international capital mobility, in which capital is free to move
internationally and transaction costs literally are zero. This section
therefore reviews the main implications of perfect capital mobility,
2

implications that will be compared with recent experience in the sections

to follow. A main theme of the paper is that such comparisons are seldom
straightforward: many commonly used barometers of capital mobility are

based on strong, often questionable, auxiliary assumptions about the
world.

The law of one price
Perhaps the most basic implication of perfect capital mobility is

that an asset's price must be the same wherever it is sold. With
sufficiently detailed data it would be possible to test this implication

directly on a wide array of assets. In practice, however, most tests of
the law of one price compare the prices in different localities of a
narrow set of closely comparable assets, namely, claims on specified
future currency payments.

The dollar price of $1 to be delivered in country A one period from

today is l/(l+i), where

is the one-period nominal dollar interest

rate in country A. In country B on the same date, the nominal dollar

interest rate is L. Under perfect capital mobility the price of a future
dollar is the same no matter where the claim to the dollar is located.
Thus, the equality

=

for any other currency).

holds

true (as does the corresponding equality

Empirical studies have pursued this implication

of perfect capital mobility by comparing nominal currency interest rates

in different financial centers, for example, the interest rates on large
dollar certificates of deposit sold in New York and those on London

Eurodollar deposits of the same maturity. Strictly speaking, such assets

do not guarantee the same payment in all states of nature--for example,
3

the unregulated offshore Eurodollar market may be more prone to a
generalized financial crisis than the onshore U.S. money market.

Nonetheless, the relation between nominal interest rates on the same

currency in different financial centers is probably the least ambiguous
of the commonly-used indicators of international capital mobility.

In contrast, little can be learned about international capital
mobility from cross-country comparisons of nominal or real uncovered

returns on different

currencies. Such tests are uninformative about

capital mobility because they necessarily appeal to auxiliary maintained

assumptions that may be valid or not independently of the degree to which
capital is mobile.

To illustrate, let 1US be the one-period dollar interest rate
the corresponding rate in the London Eurodollar market, tDM the

York,

nominal deutsche mark (DM) interest rate in Frankfurt,

the EuroDM

interest rate, and X$/DM the subsequent one-period percentage change in
the dollar price of DM.
Consider how information about capital mobility is embedded in the

ex post difference in dollar returns beween dollar deposits in New York
and DM deposits in Frankfurt, .US

—

.G

Let 6(.) denote a

—

conditional expectation. If one decomposes the preceding dollar return

differential into
.US

—

.E

L) +

I
U.S. onihore—
Offahore dir—

ferential

£

.E

- LDM

-

ex$/DM) +

I
foreign—exchange

risk premium

£

I

I

expectation
error

German offshore

onshore difI

4

G

— x$/DM) + (LDM - LDM).

erenti a!

it becomes apparent that all direct information about international
capital mobility is contained in the two onshore—offshore differences.

Perfect capital mobility has the clear implication that both of the
onshore—offshore interest-rate differentials above must be zero; but the
implications of perfect capital mobility for foreign-exchange risk premia

and exchange-rate forecast errors are much less obvious.
The risk premium links expected returns on assets (such as
different—denomination Eurocurrency deposits) that are identical in

location and in all other respects except for currency of denomination.
As stressed in my 1986 paper, however, hypotheses about the relative

returns on two London deposits can yield no direct information on capital
mobility among financial centers.

It is similarly difficult to think of a significant direct link
between capital mobility and the exchange—rate forecast errors of market

participants. Conceivably the degree of capital mobility affects the
information-revelation process in foreign-exchange markets, with some

impact on the distribution of forecast errors. But no definite hypotheses
concerning such effects have been advanced, let alone tested.

Thus, only with the aid of specific and probably irrelevant
maintained hypotheses about the risk premium and expectations can one

glean information about capital mobility from ex post uncovered return

differentials such as

—

1DM

—

X$,DM•

Tests based on international

differences in real interest rates——domestic nominal rates less expected
domestic inflation--would require even more maintained auxiliary

5

hypotheses than those based on uncovered returns.2 A more direct

approach, yielding results vastly easier to interpret, is to analyze the
one observable and relatively unambiguous indicator of capital mobility,

the onshore—offshore interest differential.3 Results based on this

indicator are reported in section 2.

Consumption insurance

Capital mobility allows countries to trade differential consumption

risks; the effect is to provide each other with insurance against purely
idiosyncratic national consumption fluctuations. In practice consumption

insurance is provided by trade in a wide array of contingent and
noncontingent securities: a cross-border exchange of common stock, for

example, will alter the statistical distribution of both trading
partners' future consumptions. The insurance function of international

capital markets is best illustrated, however, by assuming that countries
can trade a set of Arrow—Debreu securities, one of which entitles its

owner to a specified payment on a particular date if, and only if, a

2For a detailed discussion see Obstfeld (1986).
3Tests of covered interest parity between different countries, such as
those reported by Giavazzi and Pagano (1985) and Frankel (1993), can be
formulated so that they are equivalent to comparisons of onshore and
offshore interest rates in the same currency. To return to the example,
let
be the one-period forward premium for DM in terms of dollars
quoted in the London market. Eurocurrency arbitrage ensures that = tM
+
—
+
between the
s,DM' so the covered differential
s/DM
Frankfurt DM market and the Eurodollar market is identical to the
—
onshore-offshore DM differential
LDM•

6

well—defined event, or "state of nature," occurs.

Figure 1 illustrates the effect of trade in such securities for a
world in which there are two countries peopled by representative agents,

A and B, two states of nature, 1 and 2, and in which consumption of a
homogeneous nonproduced output is the only argument in utility functions.

At the endowment point E, country A is relatively well—endowed with state

1 consumption and country B with state 2 consumption; that is, state 1 is

relatively more favorable to the fortunes of country A, state 2 to those
of country B. Otherwise the two countries are, for simplicity, portrayed
as being identical. If the free exchange of Arrow—Debreu securities is

allowed, country A exports, and country B imports, securities that pay

off in state 1; to balance this trade country A imports, and country B

exports, securities that pay off in state 2. At the resulting free—trade
allocation, point F, both countries have raised their utilities by

reducing the variability of consumption across states of nature.
Notice that this outcome is predicted by the classical principle of
comparative advantage, whereby a country exports the good whose domestic

autarky price is relatively low.4 The relative price of the two available
Arrow-Debreu securities can be identified with the price of state 1
consumption in terms of state 2 consumption. As usual, the free-trade

price, shown as p in figure 1, lies between the countries' autarky
prices; and in a trading equilibrium, the countries have equated their

marginal rates of substitution across states to p, and thus to each
other.

4Svensson (1988) places this result in a generalized setting.
7

The implication of the particular example shown in figure 1 is that
under free trade in state—contingent assets, each country will equalize

its consumption across states of nature. This implication is too strong
as a general empirical prediction because national differences in wealth
usually would preclude consumption equalization across states of nature

even in a Pareto-optimal world. In general, the implication of an

efficient allocation of consumption risks is that countries' marginal

utilities of consumption are perfectly correlated across states of
nature; notice that if this statistical perfect correlation holds true,

national marginal rates of substitution across states of nature
necessarily coincide.5

The preceding empirical prediction stems from two distinct

assumptions: that there is free international asset trade, and that the
available set of securities available to trade is complete, so that all
consumption risks are insurable. In theory either of these two

assumptions can fail independently of the other; in practice, it is clear
that the existence of nonverifiable contingencies and actions limits the

extent to which individuals can contract to share risks. Even under

=
5Let cA(s.) be country A consumption in state
u. be the probability of state , and let U Ec (s1),c

1,

2, ...,

N),

let

,c

=

ZNIrUAICA(S)J be country A's expected utility. Then, with similar

notation for country B, marginal utilities are perfectly correlated if,
for some constant A and for every state , lr.uAlEcA(s.)) =
B
B
Air.u '[c (s.)J. But this condition implies the equalization of marginal
rates of substitution across states, ir.u '(c (s.)1/n9u 'Ec (s,)I =
ir.u B,B
Ec

(s.)J/iuB,B
Ic (st)l.

8

perfect capital mobility, there thus may be no close ex post association
between national consumption levels. Other things equal, however,

increasing international capital mobility should entail an increasing
tendency for positively correlated consumption comovements among

countries. Evidence related to this prediction is discussed in section 3.

The International allocation of investment
If the set of state—contingent assets people trade is sufficiently

rich, perfect capital mobility leads to an efficient international

allocation of investment: at the margin, a decision to invest a unit of
output in country B rather than country A should not affect the expected

value of the flow of future world output.
The clause concerning the richness of the available asset menu is

crucial, because the expected value of world output is the sum of output

realizations in different states of nature weighted by state-contingent
output prices. If the required set of state—contingent assets does not
exist, people generally won't have common marginal rates of consumption

substitution across all states of nature, and there is no presumption
that investment will be efficiently allocated throughout the world.6

In a world of uncertainty and incomplete markets, it therefore is

difficult to judge how close global investment patterns are to those that
free capital mobility would imply. Researchers hoping to assess capital

6lJnder restrictive theoretical conditions, an efficient complete-markets
allocation can be reached even when a complete set of state-contingent
assets is not traded. For different examples, see Rubinstein (1974) and
Cole and Obstfeld (1991).

9

mobility from this perspective have been forced to rely on very rough
measures of constrained investment efficiency.

A number of studies attempt to compare, directly or indirectly
through an examination of capital—output ratios, the marginal

contribution of installed capital to national outputs. In the presence
of capital installation costs, however, this marginal product of capital
need not be the same everywhere. What should be observed under capital

mobility is a tendency for time-averaged marginal products of capital in
various countries to converge. Correspondingly, world investment should

flow disproportionately toward countries where capital is relatively more
productive.

A controversial way of evaluating the efficiency of the global
allocation of investment is proposed by Feldstein and Horioka (1980) and

Feldstein (1983). They argue that the productivity of capital in a
country is not systematically linked to the determinants of its saving
rate, and infer that national saving and domestic investment rates should

not be systematically associated either if capital is internationally
mobile. Other things equal, a rise in a country's saving rate should

cause a current-account surplus that directs the freed resources toward
their most efficient worldwide uses; other things equal, an increase in
the productivity of a nation's capital should cause a current-account
deficit that draws in savings from abroad. Feldstein and Horioka's

conclusion that this picture does not match the postwar facts has spawned

a large literature that is reviewed in section 4 below.

10

2. Evidence on the law of one price
Section 1 argued that the least ambiguous evidence on international

capital mobility comes from a comparison of nominal interest rates on

onshore and offshore loans of the same currency. Under perfect capital

mobility, the interest rate on a three-month French franc deposit in
Paris, for example, should equal that on a three-month French franc
deposit in London.

Numerous studies have compared onshore-offshore interest

differentials or the closely related covered interest differentials;
partial surveys are in Frankel (1993) and Obstfeld (1986). Frankel (1993,

table 2.4) reports statistics on the size and variability of covered
interest differentials for a range of industrialized and developing
countries over the period September 1982—April 1988. His conclusion is

that by 1988, departures from free capital mobility, indicated by large
short—term covered interest differentials, were small for a number of
countries. (Popper 1993 reaches the same conclusion regarding long-term

differentials.) Included in the group of financially open economies are
Canada, Germany, the Netherlands, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, Hong

Kong, Singapore, Austria, Belgium, Sweden, and Japan. For other economies

in Frankel's sample, most glaringly Greece, Mexico, and Portugal,

substantial barriers to capital movement apparently remained as of 1988.
This latter group includes France, Ireland, and Italy, European Comunity
(EC) members that adopted timetables for capital—account liberalization

as part of the single-market program set out in the EC's Single European
Act of 1987.

Table 1 summarizes a set of more detailed and up-to-date data for
11

four industrialized countries, France (panel A). Italy (panel B), Germany

(panel C), and Japan (panel D). For each currency the onshcre interest

rate is the three—month domestic interbank rate, the offshore rate the
three-month rate in the London Euromarket. Daily Reuters data covering
January 1982—April 1993 (as reported by Data Resources, Inc.,) are used.

As these data did not appear to be completely accurate, suspicious
observations were checked against the daily reports in the FLrtarictal
Ttmes of London and corrected when necessary.

Many empirical studies ignore the existence of information on both

the ask and bid rates of interest at which banks are willing to supply
and accept funds.7 Ask and bid prices are essential data in comparing

rates of return internationally, however, because the rates market

participants actually face include transaction costs that sum to (at
most) the ask-bid spread quoted by banks. In addition, use of the

distinct ask and bid rates allows the researcher to test a wider range of
hypotheses about financial market links.

Under free capital mobility, borrowers have the option of using
whichever market is cheapest, while lenders can place funds wherever they

get the highest net return. Thus, while borrowing and lending rates in a
given center need not be the same, borrowing rates should be the same in
all centers where borrowing is occurring, lending rates should be the

same in all centers where lending is occurring, and thus the ask-bid

spread should be the same in all centers where both activities are

7One plus the ask rate is the price of current money in terms of future
money that a bank requires in order to supply current funds; it always
exceeds one plus the bid rate, which is the price of current money in
terms of future money that a bank will pay for current funds.
12

occurring.

The first two columns of numbers in table 1 compute period daily
averages of differences beween onshore and offshore bid (denoted by an

underbar) and ask (denoted by an overbar) rates of interest on loans of
domestic currency. As above, the subscripts on the nominal interest rate

i refer to currency of denomination while the superscripts refer to
location, either the home country (F' for France, I for Italy, G for
Germany, J for Japan) or the offshore Eurocurrency market (symbolized by

the letter E). The last two columns of table 1 report average onshore and

offshore ask-bid spreads, which must be the same if ask and bid rates are
the same onshore and off. The use of period averages is not ideal.
because large postive and negative daily observations could cancel when

the average is taken. The standard deviations given in parentheses below

the average return differences offer a rough idea of the extent to which
such cancellation has occurred. Figures 2—6, which graph the daily data

on onshore-offshore bid differences, also contain some of this
information.8

In principle, two financial centers linked by free capital mobility

could have different ask rates (if banks are not lending in one center)

or bid rates (if no deposits are being taken in one center). This
situation is unlikely to prevail for any length of time, however, and
thus should not be relevant in analyzing the period averages reported in

the table. Table 1 also reports the returns to a hypothetical arbitrageur
who borrows in one center at the ask rate and lends in the other center

81n comparing these figures, be aware that their left-hand scales differ.
13

at the bid rate. (The third column is the return to borrowing offshore
and lending onshore, the fourth column the return to borrowing onshore
and lending offshore.) Since actual arbitrage opportunities would always

be exploited, hypothetical arbitrage profits are an unambiguous indicator
of capital—market segmentation and must always be absent under free

capital mobility. Obviously, the indicators in table 1 are not
independent of each other. For example, offshore-to-onshore arbitrage is

profitable only if the onshore bid exceeds the offshore bid and the
offshore ask—bid spread is sufficiently small; similarly, profitable
onshore—to—offshore arbitrage requires an offshore bid above the onshore

bid and a sufficiently small onshore ask-bid spread.

The first period analyzed in the table extends through the entry
into force of the Single European Act in January 1987. For France (panel

A) there is evidence of significant barriers to capital mobility during

this period. Average ask and bid rates of interest on French franc loans
are much higher offshore than onshore; and the average profitability of
hypothetical onshore-to-offshore arbitrage operations is substantially

positive. The interpretation of these results is that France maintained
controls on capital outflows that kept domestic rates below Eurocurrency
rates, particularly around realignments (Giavazzi and Pagano 1985). The

especially high divergences occurring around realignments are apparent in

figure 2. Note also that the ask—bid, spread is lower onshore than

offshore, consistent with the relatively thinness of the Eurofranc market

in the first half of the 1980s.
The last three periods shown begin roughly around the last French
realignment within the European Monetary System's Exchange Rate Mech
anisin
14

(ERM) (February 1, 1987), the deadline for abolition of French capital

controls under the Single European Act (July 1, 1990), and the month of

the surprise Danish rejection of the Maastricht Treaty on European
monetary and political union (June 1, 1992). This last event set off a
period of turbulence in exchange markets that culminated in the
"flotation' of ERM currencies on August 2, 1992.

In all three of these periods the average onshore—offshore

difference is on the order of 10 basis points in magnitude for both bids
and asks. Hypothetical arbitrage profits are negative on average, and
average ask-bid spreads much closer in the two markets. Clearly, the
integration of onshore and offshore money markets is much higher than
before 1987.

The final period, that of the ERM crisis, is clearly more turbulent

than the previous two: the standard errors of returns are much higher, as
are ask-bid spreads. As figure 3 (an enlargement of the January
1992-April 1993 data) shows, some large gaps between onshore and offshore

bid rates emerged during September 1992, when the franc first came under
concerted attack by speculators. Similar data have been identified as
evidence of lingering capital controls by some commentators.9

Notice in figure 3 that the onset of ERM turbulence is the dividing
point between a period in which onshore bid rates usually exceed offshore

rates by a small amount, and one in which the reverse is true. This
pattern would be consistent with a shift from a regime in which the

9The Economist offered this interpretation of the unusual onshoreoffshore French franc differentials. See "A Funny Thing Happened,"
Economist, October 10, 1992, p. 97.
15

market attaches a small but positive probability to future capital
controls, to one in which mild official discouragernents to capital
outflow are actually in place. Between September 1992 and April 1993

there are, however, only four instances of pure profits from
onshore-to-offshore arbitrage, all in 1992: on September 22 and 23, on
November 24, and on December 1.

The case of Italy (panel B of table 1) also shows evidence of
restricted capital mobility before February 1987. Average offshore bid

and ask rates both exceed onshore counterparts, and there exists a small
mean (15 basis point) profit from undertaking a hypothetical
onshore-to-offshore arbitrage.1° As Giavazzi and Pagano (1985) observed

using a shorter data sample, domestic Italian interest rates diverge less
from the corresponding offshore rates than do French domestic rates

during this initial period. Nonetheless, the data are consistent with the
view that Italy, like France, restricted capital outflows and thus held

domestic interest rates artificially low. As in the case of France, the
ask—bid spread before February 1987 is higher offshore.

The next subperiod, February 1, 1987-June 30, 1990, shows some

convergence to offshore conditions: average onshore rates now rise a bit
above average offshore rates, average arbitrage opportunities disappear,
and the absolute mean difference between offshore and onshore spreads
narrows.

After July 1, 1990 average onshore rates actually rise further above
offshore rates and apparent opportunities for profitable offshore-to—

10

The large standard error on this small mean value implies episodically
large notional profit opportunities.
16

onshore (that is, inward) arbitrage open up (see figure 4). Italy adopted
a narrow ERM band for the lira in January 1990 and then removed its
remaining capital—account restrictions in May. Subsequently, Italy's

desire to avoid realignment clashed increasingly with the lira's ongoing
real appreciation and with the growth in domestic public debt. Plausibly,

the onshore interest interest premium reflected market fears that capital

controls might be reimposed in the future to shore up Italy's
increasingly strict interpretation of its ERM commitments. Consistent

with this view is the behavior of the average onshore premium after June
1, 1992, a period that includes Italy's abandonment of the ERM for a
float on September 17, 1992: the average premium drops and average

arbitrage profits disappear as one key motive for reimposing capital
controls evaporates.'1 After September 1, 1992 the sole instance of a pure

profit from outward arbitrage occurs on January 4, the first business day
of 1993.

Panel C of table 1 shows that before February 1987, Germany's

onshore interest rates were on average slightly above offshore rates,
consistent with official measures discouraging capital inflow (see also

figure 5). There is even a slight average profit from hypothetical inward
arbitrage during this period. Ask—bid spreads, however, are essentially

the same in the onshore and offshore markets throughout the full sample
period.

In all three subperiods after February 1987, onshore and offshore

Changes in Banca d'Italia required-reserve policy may also have played a
role in these developments. See Goldstein et al. (1993, p, 73).
17

rates are very close on average and mean arbitrage profits are negative.
Some large onshore premia emerge during the fall 1992 ERM crisis,
however: over the period September 1992—April 1993, offshore—to—onshore

arbitrage appears profitable on 51 out of 242 business days! This pattern
may reflect continuing government intervention in the capital markets.
Goldstein et al. (1993, p. 56) mention the "gentlemen's agreement"
whereby the Bundesbank may impose high marginal reserve requirements on

loans in excess of a certain limit to German banks from their London
branches.

For Japan (panel D of table 1) a less complete set of data were
available from Reuters. The available data show a very small average

difference between onshore and offshore bid rates over the first sample
subperiod, consistent with Japan's substantial liberalization of capital
movements in December 1980.12

Surprisingly, the subperiod beginning with February 1987 shows a 60

basis—point average excess of offshore over onshore bid rates; figure 6

makes clear that this differential is much too long-lived to ascribe to
the time-of—day difference in the Japanese onshore and offshore data.
Ueda (1993, p. 19) suggests that before November 1988 the Bank of Japan

used heavy administrative guidance to separate the interbank loan market

from both the onshore certificate of deposit market and the Euroyen
market; during the subperiod in question, the Bank of Japan wished to
hold interbank rates below onshore and offshore open—market rates.'3 Thus,

12Marston (1993a) examines differences in Japanese and U.S. short—term

interest rates and reviews related literature.

November 1988 the Bank took measures liberalizing the interbank
18

the onshore-offshore gaps in figure 6 indicate a segmentation within the
domestic financial market that, as a side effect, insulated part of that

market from global forces.
Over the last two subperiods the mean onshore bid exceeds the mean

offshore bid by relatively small amounts. The ask-bid spread in the
Euroyen market is so slim that even the small onshore premium implies

positive average arbitrage profits from borrowing offshore and investing

onshore. These divergences grow stronger in the period starting with June

1992. In light of the data's imperfections it is hard to put too much
weight on these numbers as indicators of capital-market restriction.
Faced with a punctured "bubble" economy and a rising yen in these years,
however, Japanese officials did have incentives to discourage capital
inflows through informal means.

What conclusions follow from these and similar data for other

industrial countries? For the four countries in table 1 as well as for
others such as the United States and United Kingdom that have liberalized

international financial transactions, there are extremely close links
between onshore and offshore money markets, links that increased in

strength over the 1980s. The data also show, however, that even for these
countries actual or prospective government interventions remain a

significant factor in times of turbulence. And in most cases governments

still have instruments that can drive at least temporary wedges between

onshore and offshore interest rates. European countries that have not
completely opened their capital accounts, such as Spain, Portugal,

market.
19

Ireland, and Greece, openly retain such instruments; all four used them
during the ERM currency crisis that began in 1992.14 Even most of these

countries have strong links to world capital markets. For example,

Ireland's onshore and offshore interest rates were close on the whole
during the period from the late 1980s to 1992 (see figure 7).
Matters are different in the developing world, where high explicit
or implicit barriers to capital flows remain common. Discussions of
financial liberalization and international interest—rate linkages for
developing regions can be found in Calvo, Leiderman, and Reinhart (1992),
Glick and Hutchison (1990), and Mathieson and Rojas-Suarez (1993).

3. The diversification of global consumption risks

This section examines evidence on the world capital market's success
in helping countries trade consumption risks to achieve a mutually

preferable allocation of consumption across states of nature. Researchers
have taken several approaches to this question. Some look directly at
national or regional correlations in consumption. Others look at the

extent of trade in explicitly state-contingent assets. As will become

apparent in the discussion, the implications of such data for capital
mobility are ambiguous unless specific and strong side assumption are

made about the functioning of domestic and international capital markets.

Much recent research is aimed at testing these assumptions, and as

difficult as the task is, it is justified by the need better to
understand the current and potential risk allocation role of world

14See Goldstein et a!. (1993) and Committee of Governors of the Central
Banks of the Member States of the European Economic Community (1993).
20

capital markets.

International consumption correlations
A simple maximization problem illustrates how global consumption

allocations would behave in the ideal case of perfect international trade
in a complete set of state—contingent assets. Since the resulting
allocation is Pareto—optimal, its properties can be read off from the
first—order conditions that a world planner would derive in maximizing a

social welfare function linear in national utilities.
An analytically convenient starting point is the assumption of a
representative national agent for each country. This assumption, which

will be discussed further below, amounts to supposing that risks have
already been shared optimally within each country, leaving only the

remaining gains from trade between countries as the analytical focus.
Country ?'s representative agent maximizes (from time t = 0) the expected
utility functional

=

where a E (0,1)

is a discount factor, c (as before) is consumption of an

internationally tradable good and

is consumption of a nontradable good

(possibly leisure).15

15This formulation already imposes strong restrictions on national utility
functions (e.g., time— and state—separability), and more will be imposed
later. Without some assumptions on preferences, however, no observable
implications of international risk sharing could be derived.
21

Given N countries and fixed country welfare weights , = 1, 2,
N, the planner maximizes the social welfare function

N..
LIf = : fu
by distributing the tradable consumption available on each date, and in

each state, among the N countries. If c is world tradable consumption on
date t, a necessary condition for distributing it efficiently among
countries is

(1)

w.u(c,x) = u(c,x) (for

where

all countries

and ),

u1(c,x) is a partial derivative with respect to c. Equation (1)

implies that for tradable goods, marginal rates of substitution across

states of nature are equalized internationally in an efficient
allocation. Because nontradables cannot be shifted among countries,

however, the corresponding condition on marginal utilities from the
nontradable need not hold.

To derive more specific predictions from (1), suppose that no

nontradables x are consumed and that utility functions have the specific

form u(c',x) =

(2)

l—R

(c)'

.

Then if

logc —

1oc1.

(1) implies

ct = (R/Rjc;

that is, with isoelastic preferences logarithmic growth rates of

consumption are perfectly correlated ex post in all countries. If
22

countries have different (fixed) rates of time preference, equation (2)

will contain a constant term but the perfect correlation prediction will
still hold true.

If capital is internationally mobile but asset markets

are incomplete, conditions weaker than perfect correlation will

characterize the relationship between countries' ex post intertemporal
marginaL rates of substitution. As noted above, informational asymmetries

generate moral hazards that make certain risks uninsurable. In the
extreme case where only a riskless consumption—indexed bond is traded

among countries, expected, but not ex post, intertemporal marginal rates
of substitution will coincide internationally. This case is the one
analyzed in stochastic versions of the life-cycle/permanent—income

hypothesis. If only nominally risk-free bonds are traded, expected

intertemporal marginal rates of substitution for money (rather than
consumption) will be equalized.16 More generally, ex post cross-country

differences in intertemporal marginal rates of substitution will be
uncorrelated with any random variables on which international contracts

can be written. Under incomplete markets asset trade allows the sharing

of some, but not all, risks.
To compare reality against the predictions of the specific
complete—markets model just set out, table 2 examines the correlations of

national annual real private consumption growth rates, measured in per

capita terms, with rest-of-world per capita private consumption growth
over two eras in the development of world capital markets, 1951-72 and

16See Kollmann (1992) and Obstfeld (1989).

23

1973_88.17 The consumption data come from the Penn World Table assembled

by Summers and Heston (1991); the "world" shown in table 2 consists of
countries with continuous 1930-88 data rated of quality C— or above by
Summers and Heston.

All the correlation coefficients, denoted p(c,c1') (where cW is rest—
of—world real per capita consumption), are below the value of 1 that

would obtain with isoelastic utility were capital perfectly mobile and

markets complete. Several regularities in the results are, however,
apparent.

For the post-1973 period--a period during which the volume of
international financial transactions has increased enormously relative to
world output--consumption growth in industrial countries is on average
somewhat more highly correlated with rest-of—world consumption growth

than is consumption growth in developing countries. Within the group of

industrial countries, however, there are sharp differences.
For a majority of EC members, domestic and world consumption growth

are relatively strongly correlated; Greece, Portugal, and Spain, which

still maintain capital controls, as well as Italy, which did so through
early 1990, are in the minority, as is, surprisingly, Luxembourg. For
virtually all EC countries the correlation coefficient rises between the
first and second subperiods (most dramatically for Germany). Multiple

'7The current model implies that each country's consumption growth is
perfectly correlated with world consumption growth under the assumption
that all countries have the same value of R.. Looking at correlations
with world consumption growth, rather than at the customary pairwise
consumption—growth correlations, economizes on the number of estimates
reported. This procedure also has some potential statistical advantages
(see Obstfeld 1994).
24

regressions show that this last result persists even after one controls
for possible parallel responses to the two OPEC oil-price shocks.'8
For industrial countries outside the EC, the consumption

correlations tend to be lower except for Switzerland and Japan. Moreover,

apart from those two countries, there is a tendency for the correlations
to decrease, not increase over time. To explain the contrast with the EC
countries would require a country-by--country analysis. One general

factor, however, may be the exchange—rate regime: these countries opted

for greater exchange—rate flexibility than the EC countries in the early
1970s partly because they desired to decouple domestic from world
consumption growth. The Japanese example shows, however, that floating

exchange rates and even capital controls (which persisted in Japan
through 1980) need not rule out a strong coherence between domestic and
world consumption growth.

One way to highlight the change in German and Japanese consumption

behavior after 1973 is through a simple regression. Let

denote country

its

's real per capita GDP, tnv its real per capita investment, and

real per capita government spending. Absent international asset markets,

domestic per capita consumption c would be limited to y — tnv
The regression

Ct =

+ a1c

+

c2Mog(y

—

..

nv

—

—

+

gives an indication of whether consumption growth is more strongly

18See Obstfeld (1994) for further discussion.
25

g.

associated with global or with domestic factors.'9 The Summers-Heston data

lead to the following results:

Japan

Germany
1951-72

1973-88

= -0.18 '
(0.33)
= 1.07

(0.32)

= -0.15
(0.37)

= 0.76
(0.13)

2=

= 1.18 ,

0.02

(0.42)

(0.20)

2=

0.76

(0.13)

= 0.35.
(0.26)

The regressions show a stunning reversal for both countries. In the
earlier period national consumption growth is insignificantly correlated
with world consumption growth but moves nearly one—for-one with the

growth of GDP net of investment and government spending. From 1973 on the

opposite is true.
A fundamental identification problem is suggested by the columns in

table 2 labeled p(yyW) which report correlations between national per

capita output growth rates and rest-of-world per capita output growth.
For most of the industrial countries these correlations rise between the
two subperiods shown. Thus, while any increase over time in the
consumption between national and world consumption growth could be due to

increased risk sharing through the international capital market, it could
also be explained by other mechanisms, such as a naive Keynesian
consumption function in which consumption merely tracks current output or

by one of the richer behavioral models discussed by Carroll and Summers

'9See Obstfeld (1994) for more discussion of this equation and its
estimation.
26

(1991). The table 2 correlations p(c,y) between domestic output and

consumption growth are high in most cases, but are often well below
unity.
Again, only country—by—country analysis can resolve this question.

For example, tests reported in Obstfeld (1994) show that the high
post-1973 correlation of Japanese with world consumption growth may

reflect only the high correlation coefficient between world consumption

and Japanese output (0.72), coupled with the high correlation of Japanese
consumption and output. In contrast, German output growth also has a very
high correlation coefficient with world consumption growth (0.84), yet

adds no significant explanatory power to a regression of German on world
consumption growth. These regressions are somewhat analogous to those
Campbell and Mankiw (1991) examine in modeling departures from the
permanent-income theory.

Among the developing countries in table 2. a few have reasonably
high post-1973 correlation coefficients with world consumption
growth-—notably, a few Central American countries, Chile, Cyprus, and

Thailand. But this is not the norm. Notice that the developing countries

with high post-1973 values of p(c,c1'') also have high values of p(yyW) a
pattern probably due to the rudimentary financial markets available in
most of these countries over much of the sample period.
Before drawing strong conclusions from table 2 about feasible gains

from risk—sharing, recall that (2) was based on some restrictive
auxiliary assumptions, for example, the assumption that nontradables are
not consumed. If some consumption goods are nontradable, there is no

necessity for national consumptions to be perfectly correlated: risks
27

relating to the consumption of nontraded goods may be impossible to share
(Stockman and DelIas 1989). At best, consumption of tradabies will obey

(2) if the utility function u(c,x)

is separable (but still isoelastic

in ci). In more complicated models, even this simple property can fail
despite complete markets.2°

By investigating the stochastic consequences of a labor/leisure

tradeoff and/or nontradables, several studies have tried to reconcile
consumption correlations such as those shown for the industrial countries
in table 1 with complete markets and perfect capital mobility.
Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland (1992) and Stockman and Tesar (1990)

observe that the pairwise correlation coefficients between
(Hodrick—Prescott (1980) filtered) industrial -country consumption levels

tend to be lower than the corresponding output correlations. This

property of the data is quite evident in table 2: after 1973, p(c,cW)
exceeds p(y,yW) only for Denmark, Finland, Sweden, and Switzerland among

23 industrial countries. Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland fail to replicate

this pattern using a plausibly calibrated two-country intertemporal
production model with uncertainty.

Stockman and Tesar introduce nontradable consumption into a similar
equilibrium business—cycle model and find that the addition of preference

shocks allows a closer approximation to the empirical correlation
coefficients for national consumptions and outputs. Devereux, Gregory,

and Smith (1992) show that a specific utility nonseparability between
consumption and labor supply allows an equilibrium business-cycle model

20

Stulz (1981) addresses these questLons in a general setting.
28

to replicate the U.S.-Canada consumption-correlation coefficient. They do

not, however, subject their model to the tougher test of fitting other
moments of the data. Van Wincoop (1992a, table 1) adjusts annual 1970-88
consumption data from the United Nations System of National Accounts for

both nontradability and durability. He finds that for most industrial
countries, the correlation between the growth of adjusted domestic per
capita consumption and adjusted world per capita consumption is much

higher than in table 2 above (albeit still imperfect). His calculations

do not, however, control for the possibility that correlations are also
higher among the growth rates of similarly adjusted per capita domestic
outputs.

Lewis (1993) carries out a panel study of the growth of nondurable,
tradable consumption using data from 48 countries sampled at five-year
intervals over 1970-85. Remarkably, she finds that while domestic output

growth is a strong and significant determinant of total consumption
growth in her panel, its effect on nondurable, tradable consumption
growth is statistically insignificant; furthermore, domestic output
growth explains less than 1 percent of the dependent variable's variance
(as opposed to about two—thirds of the variance of total consumption
growth). Although imprecisely estimated, the coefficient of output growth
in Lewis's equation for nondurable, tradable consumption remains sizable.

In light of possible measurement errors, and her panel methodology's

merging of countries with different degrees of financial openness, a
judicious conclusion is that durability and nontradability go part but
probably not all of the way in explaining why total consumption growth is

highly correlated with domestic output growth. Lewis does not look at
29

the influence on consumption of idiosyncratic factors other than income
growth, so her results do not explain why, as in van Wincoop's (1992a)
study, international consumption correlations remain imperfect even after

attention is restricted to nondurable tradables.
The message of this body of work seems to be that after allowing f or
nontradables and durables, equilibrium complete-markets models that

assume perfect capital mobility still cannot provide a satisfactory
explanation of international consumption correlations unless unexplained

preference shifts are assumed as in Stockman and Tesar (1990). Taste
shocks are not inherently implausible, but until they are modeled more

fully, there is no way of telling if the heavy explanatory burden they
bear in the Stockman-Tesar model is reasonable.2'
An alternative approach starts by acknowledging that the assumption

of complete asset markets is glaringly at odds with the facts. Events
such as job loss generally are not completely insurable because of the
potential for moral hazard. More generally, labor incomes cannot be
privately insured against all contingencies. Some shocks simply cannot be

foreseen with sufficient clarity to be provided for in contracts. Thus,
even with perfect capital mobility, there is no reason to expect high
correlations even between the tradable—goods consumptions of different
countries.
Empirical studies of U.S. micro—data, such as Cochrane (1991), Mace

21Canova and Ravn (1993), Lewis (1993), and Obstfeld (1994) all allow for
preference shocks in their formal tests of consumption risk—sharing

models. In tests on quarterly data for 9 OECD countries, Canova and Ravn
find little evidence against moment restrictions implied by a model based
on equation (2) above. They do, however, reject long—run implications of
the model.
30

(1991), and Mankiw and Zeldes

(1991),

confirm that even within modern

industrial economies there are unexploited opportunities f or risk
sharing.22 In line with this conclusion, van Wincoop (1992b) finds that
the correlations among (Hodrick—Prescott filtered) per capita consumption

levels in Japanese prefectures are well explained by a simulation model
in which domestic Japanese financial markets are incomplete and subject

to limited participation.
These considerations have three implications for the class of models

discussed so far in this section. First, the representative national
consumer is a hypothetical construct that, while perhaps useful for
illustrating the incremental gains from international compared with
national risk-sharing, gives a misleading picture of how national
consumption levels actually are determined. Second, imperfect

correlations among industrial-country consumptions are likely to be in

large measure the result of asset-market incompleteness rather than
international capital—market segmentation. Third, studies of
international consumption-correlatedness that counterfactual ly assume

complete markets probably cannot throw much light on the international

mobility of capital. A more fruitful approach is to consider models
admitting alternative financial-market structures (for example, Cole
1988), and ultimately models in which market incompleteness arises

22lndeed, Altonji, Hayashi, and Kotlikoff (1992) find such unexploited
opportunities even within extended U.S. families. Deaton (1992, p. 37),
who surveys related microeconomic literature, reminds us that moral
hazard problems are relevant even within families.
Van Wincoop (1992c) shows that such a model also can rationalize
cross-country consumption correlations.
31

endogenously (for example, Gertler and Rogoff 1990 and Lucas 1992).

Comparing regional and international rtsksharing
If asset markets are incomplete, is there any way that consumption

correlations or related measures can throw light on the extent of
international capital mobility? Atkeson and Bayoumi (1992) propose an

imaginative approach to this problem: they use the measured extent of

regional risk-sharing within the United States as a benchmark against
which the efficiency of international risk-sharing among a group of
industrial countries can be judged. In principle, this methodology can
help one judge the extent to which low international consumption

correlations are due to international asset—trade barriers as opposed to
incomplete markets.

The findings, though generally pointing to higher regional than
international financial integration, are somewhat ambiguous. Regional

financial transfers within the U.S. appear to be much larger in absolute

value than resource transfers into or out of the main industrial
countries, suggesting more extensive asset trade within the U.S. In

contrast, U.S. regional growth in real retail sales (a consumption proxy)
is no less correlated with regional ouput growth than is OECD national
consumption growth with national output growth.

Atkeson and Bayoumi also find that in U.S. data, regional shifts in

capital income are virtually uncorrelated with regional capital product
but are highly correlated with U.S. capital income. In Europe, national
capital incomes, though uncorrelated with national capital products, seem

much less correlated than in the U.S. with total European capital income.
32

Atkeson and Bayoumi interpret this result as indicating better
capital—income diversification within the U.S. than within Europe, but an

opposite interpretation is entirely compatible with their findings: U.S.
investors do not hold assets abroad, whereas Europe is open enough

financially that much of its capital income is earned on other
continents. The consumption correlations in table 2 do not obviously

contradict the alternative view.
Table 3 provides another regional/international comparison using
yearly data assembled by Robert Dekle on per capita consumption and

income (which is interpreted here as an output proxy) in 45 of the 47
Japanese prefectures over 1975_88.24 The column labelled p(c,c) shows the

correlation of prefectural per capita private consumption growth with
mean per capita consumption growth in the other 44 prefectures. These

numbers are similar on the whole to those reported for countries in table
2; slightly less than half the time, the consumption correlations are
below the corresponding income correlations, labeled p(y,yJ)• The column

labeled p(c,y) shows the correlation between per capita consumption and

income growth by prefecture. In about two-thirds of the cases these
numbers are rather high, as are most of the corresponding numbers for

national economies in table 2; but in other cases the correlations are
relatively low and sometimes even negative. While there is thus some

limited evidence that risk sharing within Japan may be more efficient

than is risk sharing among industrial countries, this is not evident in

24See Dekle (1993) for a description of these data and an econometric
analysis of their implications for inter-regional capital mobility.
33

the intra—national consumption correlations.

in contrast to these results for Japan, Crucini (1992) finds in
annual 1971-90 data that consumption growth rates among Canadian

provinces generally are more highly correlated than are provincial output

growth rates or different countries' consumption growth rates.
A problem in comparing regional risk sharing within nations with

risk sharing among nations when asset markets are incomplete is that a
predominance of uninsurable country-specific shocks can create a spurious

impression of greater risk-sharing within than between countries. Another

drawback of the approach is that more goods are nontradable across

national borders than across regional borders, so that, other things
equal, one would naturally expect inter-regional consumption correlations

to be higher than international ones. Finally, government-mediated

transfers and spending play a significant role in pooling risks within
countries. It is conceivable that any finding of higher inter-regional

than international consumption correlation is entirely an artifact of
government intervention. Despite these and other ambiguities, refinements

of this general approach promise a better understanding of how
international and intranational financial linkages differ.

The extent of international portfolio diversification
Further evidence on the world capital market's promotion of

international risk sharing comes from a direct examination of
international portfolio positions. The consensus of studies such as
French and Poterba (1990, 1991), Golub (1991), and Tesar and Werner

(1992) is that there is a substantial "home bias" in the portfolios of
34

industrial-country investors. French and Poterba and Tesar and Werner
argue that conventional models of portfolio choice can explain these

patterns only if domestic investors have a much more optimistic view of

the expected return on domestic assets than do foreign investors.
Alternatively, imperfect capital mobility simply could make extensive

international diversification prohibitively costly or infeasible. But in

view of the efficiency of international interest-rate arbitrage among
industrial countries (section 2). no one believes that costs or official
impediments to foreign investment are universally high enough fully to

explain the home bias in equity portfolios. Thus, there is an

trzterrzattonal dtversiftcaton puzzteY
One widely-cited estimate reports that in December 1989 U.S.

investors held 94 percent of their stock-market wealth in home equities,
Japanese investors 98 percent, and U.K. investors 82 percent (French and
Poterba 1991). These figures apparently do not control for holdings by
"home"—based corporation of assets located abroad, for example, Nissan's

Sunderland, U.K. auto plant. Investors may diversify, moreover, through

holdings of assets other than equities, such as direct investments and
bonds. French and Poterba (1991) report, for example, that 79 percent of
German corporate equity was domestically owned at the end of 1989, which

suggests a substantial home bias in German investors' portfolios.
Germany's December 1991 gross external assets, however, amounted to 72.9

percent of its GDP and its gross external liabilities to 51.4 percent of

Dumas (forthcoming) surveys models of international portfolio choice
from the perspective of the international diversification puzzle and
other asset-market puzzles.
35

its GDP——numbers which could be indicative of extensive foreign

diversification.26 Such diversification might help explain the robust
correlation of German with world consumption growth noted above.

The German case may be atypical; U.S. and Japanese investors, for
example, probably have not used foreign diversification opportunities as
extensively.27 Several explanations for this puzzle have been proposed.

Stockman and Dellas (1989) argue that the presence of nontraded goods and
services may impart a significant home—asset bias to investors' portfolio
decisions. The empirical importance of home—asset bias due to

nontradables remains to be established, however.28 Another explanation
hinges on a different type of general—equilibrium consideration: if an

investor's labor income (which generally is nontradable) is negatively

correlated with her domestic capital income, the gains from foreign
diversification of capital income are reduced. This argument suggests

that the appropriate criterion for evaluating the gains from
international diversification is the scope for raising mean consumption

growth and lowering its variance. And if this scope is limited,
international diversification may be discouraged by even minimal

26Data on total German external assets and liabilities come from Deutsche
Bundesbank (1993, P. 45). I have supplemented these numbers with a 1991
GDP estimate of $1.58 trillion.
27For the U.S., external assets were 34.5 percent of GDP at the end of
1991 and external liabilities 40.9 percent. The corresponding Japanese
figures are 59.2 percent (external assets) and 47.9 percent (external
liabilities). Position data come from Deustsche Bundesbank (1993, p. 45).
My GDP estimates are $5.68 trillion for the U.S. and $3.39 trillion for
Japan. These figures show considerable growth over the comparable 1987
figures reported by Brainard and Tobin (1992, p. 536). Their numbers show
that for the U.K. assets and liabilities already exceeded GNP in 1987.
28Alternative theoretical models of home—asset bias are proposed by Eldor,
Pines, and Schwartz (1988) and by Tesar (1993).
36

investment barriers such as transaction costs.
Cole and Obstfeld (1991) use a model calibrated to U.S. and Japanese

data to illustrate that the welfare gains from aggregate risk-sharing
among industrial countries may be as small as one-fifth of 1 percent of
GNP per year.29 Golub (1991) takes issue with this result, arguing on the

basis of 1970-87 data that despite small aggregate gains, Japanese and
U.S. recipients of exclusively corporate income cannot pool risks with

human or noncorporate capital and, as a result, would gain substantially
from freer asset trade. Thus, strong incentives for cross—border
diversification might remain. Van Wiricoop's (1992c) calibration model

similarly implies that owners of capital can face significantly stronger
incentives to diversify than aggregate consumption figures suggest. A

useful extension of this work would attempt to distinguish empirically
between the labor incomes of stockholders and nonstockholders.

Brainard and Tobin (1992) and Baxter and Jermann (1993) argue that

because human capital is largely nontradable, its owners have a strong
incentive to go short in domestic equities and long in foreign equities
when the returns to domestic human and physical capital are positively
correlated. Whether this deepens the home bias puzzle in practice

requires further research on the international correlations among returns
to human and physical capital. Golub (1991). for example, shows that
human and physical capital returns (measured by labor income and

corporate profits, respectively) appear negatively correlated for Japan,

29See also Mendoza (1991) and Obstfeld (1992), who present alternative
estimates of small industrial—country gains from asset trade.
37

and that the optimal portfolio of a Japanese worker can be skewed toward

home equities. This inference, however, depends on Golub's assumption

that the national-income account proxies he uses to
human

measure

returns to

capital and equity do not distort the true statistical relationship

between those variables.

Even the magnitudes of the aggregate gains from risk sharing among
industrial countries are in dispute. Van Wincoop (1992a), who examines a

larger sample of countries, assumes a lower rate of time preference, and
allows for some nondiversifiable consumption risk, finds gains from risk
sharing much larger than those found by Cole and Obstfeld. Obstfeld

(forthcoming, a) shows that financial integration can bring very large
welfare gains if diversification has effects on investment and output
growth rates. Before the puzzle of low diversification is resolved, more
work on understanding both the magnitude and distribution of the gains

from international risk sharing is needed.
The importance of transaction costs also is unclear. Cole and
Obstfeld (1991) argue that small transaction costs--for example, the

extra paperwork needed to obtain a tax credit for asset income withheld
by a foreign government--could substantially discourage international
diversification. Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland (1992) confirm this as a

theoretical possibility. They show that introducing small costs of
international transactions into their empirically calibrated model leads

to an equilibrium very close to the autarky allocation. This result,
however, is based on a representative-agent model which may seriously

understate individual, as opposed to aggregate, gains from trade. Tesar
and Werner (1992) find that the turnover rate for foreign equity
38

investments is higher than that in domestic equity markets, and offer

this difference as evidence that transaction costs are not important in
promoting international equity-market segmentation. Transaction costs

other than turnover costs could, however, be important impediments to
cross—border investments.

To summarize, the available data on international portfolio

positions suggest that many industrial countries are not diversified

nearly to the extent that standard models of global portfolio choice
would predict. The reasons could range from transaction costs to
internationally asymmetric information (Gehrig 1993) to differential tax
treatment of domestic and foreign investors (Gordon and Varian 1989) to

irrational expectations concerning the relative returns on domestic and
foreign investments.30 Future progress in unraveling the apparent puzzle
may come from a more disaggregated analysis of different income groups'
investing behavior. Even at the aggregate level, more detailed
information on national balance sheets would give a better perspective

from which to evaluate the risk and return characteristics of national
portfolios.

Such analyses would throw light on a related outstanding puzzle: how
to reconcile convincingly the possibly small aggregate gains from pooling

national consumption risks with the apparently large unexploited gains to
expected wealth maximizers from international equity diversification.

This is no small task. The literatures on stock—market volatility and the

30

.
.
.
Morris
Goldstein
has suggested that there is. also a noticeable
regLorlal

bias in international investment, a phenomenon consistent with the notion
that informational barriers to international investment are important.
39

equity—premium puzzle show how hard it is to rationalize the behavior of
equity returns on the basis of simple optimal-consumption models. Mankiw
and Zeldes's (1991) observation that United States stockholders have more

variable consumption than nonstockholders could be part of an explanation

if true in other industrial countries. Even this finding does not enable
Mankiw and Zeldes fully to resolve the equity—premium puzzle for the
United States.

Gains from risk-sharing by developing countries
Even if it is true that industrial countries would reap only modest

gains from further international pooling of risks, there is ittle doubt
that developing countries could benefit enormously.
Lucas (1987) proposed the thought experiment of eliminating the

variability of United States consumption around its trend path. For the

U.S. and for most other industrial countries, the aggregate or social
benefit this hypothetical event would confer is small—-far less than 1

percent of GNP per year in most cases. These small numbers are upper
bounds on the aggregate gains to industrial countries from international
risk sharing (absent dynamic investment effects).

Even the aggregate cost of consumption variability is significant

for most developing countries. For a representative sample, table 4 shows
the welfare gain per year from eliminating consumption variability,

expressed as a percent of annual consumption. The calculations use the
Summers—Heston (1991) data on per capita consumption and assume that the

natural logarithm of real per capita consumption follows a random walk
with trend. Consumers have generalized isoelastic utility functions with
40

annual time discount factors 0.95 (Lucas's number), relative risk

aversion coefficients of 1, and intertemporal substitution elasticities

of o.25.3'
The

numbers in table 4 are based on a greater reduction in

consumption variability than would be feasible in reality. But they
suggest that for many developing countries, mechanisms to reduce
consumption risk—-such as increased access to world financial markets or

Shiller's (1993) proposed market in perpetual claims to national
GDPs--could yield a dramatic payoff.

4. The allocation of global investment
A well-functioning world capital market should direct investment

toward its most productive global uses. Economic efficiency requires that

the expected value of investment in any location be the same. The most

direct approach to evaluating efficiency would compare capital's rate of

return in different countries, but it is difficult to find
internationally comparable measures of the ex ante return to capital.
This section therefore focuses on two indirect approaches. One indirect

approach argues that capital should flow from countries where it is
relatively abundant to countries where it is relatively scarce. A second
indirect approach is based on an examination of countries' saving and
investment patterns.

31For details on the formulas used see Obstfeld (forthcoming, b). The
assumptions on time preference, risk aversion, and intertemporal
substitutability are conservative; more realistic assumptions would raise
the costs in table 4.
41

Does capital flow to capital—poor countries?
In the simplest one—sector growth models, capital mobility ensures

that countries sharing a common technology will converge to identical

capital-output ratios. Figure 8 shows that for the two years 1973 and
1987, this equality was not even approximately true among the six OECD
countries for which Maddison (1991) has constructed comparable

capital-stock data. Moreover, there is very little tendency for
capital-output ratios to converge between 1973 and 1987. A
cross—sectional regression of the change in the log capital—output ratio

K/Y on the initial log capital—output ratio yields a small and
insignificant slope coefficient:

log(K/Y) 1987

—

log(K/Y)1973

0.16 — 0.07 log(K/Y)
;
1973
(0.13)
(0.47)

R2

= 0.01.

Are such persistent international differences in capital—output

ratios prima fade evidence of capital market failure? Suppose aggregate
output in a country is produced via the (possibly country—specific)

Cobb-Douglas production function of capital K and N other productive

factors L.,

(3) Y =

(GKK)a

ll(e.L.).

The marginal product of capital in this economy is
42

MPK =

K/Y

If countries' outputs are given by Cobb-Douglas production functions of

form (3), then even when those production functions differ in factor

productivities (the 6s) and in the array of noncapital inputs, their MPK

ratio equals the inverse of their relative capital-output ratio provided

only that they share a common value of , capital's share in GDP.
This simple result has strong implications. Figure 8 suggests, for
example, that as of 1987, K/Y was around 1.9 for Japan but under 1.3 for
the United States. With a common a = 1/3, the value suggested by Mankiw,
Romer, and Well (1992), the marginal product of capital would have been

17.4 percent in Japan, much below its value of more than 25.3 percent in
the United States. Under free capital mobility investment should have

been higher in the U.S. than in Japan; in reality the reverse was true.
If one applies this type of argument to compare returns to capital in
developed and developing countries (as do King and Rebelo 1993 and Lucas

1990), the discrepancies are even greater.

A pitfall in the preceding reasoning is the assumption of an
internationally common aggregate production function of form (3). If

there are multiple production activities with different capital
requirements, aggregate capital-output ratios can differ widely between

economies that pay the same factor rewards. Furthermore, factors could be

more substitutable in some activities (at least in the long run) than the
Cobb-Douglas form assumes. For example, capital substitutes for land in

some Japanese production activities that are carried out in the U.S. with
43

more land and less capital. The evidence that a is a universal constant

is weak. Expected changes in relative prices will influence expected

returns. Finally, uncertainty is being ignored, If the productivity
coefficients 8 are stochastic and imperfectly correlated across
countries, we wouldn't expect to observe the same K/Y ratio everywhere:

more capital should be placed in countries where the payoff to investment
is most highly correlated with the marginal utility of world consumption.
Bardhan (1993) explores several models in which big international wage

discrepancies coexist with small differences in international returns to
capital.

Examination of countries' aggregate capital-output ratios cannot, in
itself, be informative about opportunities for efficiency-enhancing
international investment flows. A more convincing, albeit painstaking.

method is to evaluate sectoral rates of return directly, as in Minhas's
(1963) famous study. Little recent work along these lines is readily
available.

The Feldstein-Hortoka approach

As section 1 above described, Feldstein and Horioka (1980) and

Feldstein (1983) proposed as a barometer of capital mobility the size of
the association between economies' savings rates and their investment

rates. They reasoned that in a world of capital mobility, each country's
savings are free to flow to their most productive uses anywhere in the
world——there is no reason for an increase in national saving necessarily

to augment the source country's domestic capital stock. These papers use

regressions of domestic investment rates on national savings rates to
44

measure the fraction of an exogenous increase in national savings that
will remain at home, the "savings retention coefficient" as Feldstein and
Bacchetta (1991) call it. The saving-investment puzzle is to explain why

this coefficient appears to be high, even in recent data, despite the
high international capital mobility suggested by the evidence on
interest—rate links reviewed in section 2.
Informed policy decisions may depend on whether the
saving—investment puzzle really is explained by low capital mobility, or

by factors that simultaneously drive both saving and investment. For
example, under perfect capital mobility an increase in the government
deficit of a small economy need not crowd out domestic investment, even
if consumers do not behave according to the Ricardian equivalence

proposition: instead, foreign savings are available in perfectly elastic
supply to finance additional national borrowing. Feldstein and his
collaborators, in contrast, have interpreted their saving—investment

regressions as implying that any fall in national saving will, over the
long run, cause a commensurate fall in domestic investment, as in a
closed economy.

The Feldstein—Horioka approach raises two distinct questions. First,

is a close association between saving and investment in fact evidence of

low international capital mobility, as argued in the initial papers by
Feldstein and Horioka? Second, do regressions of investment on saving

actually measure the investment effect of an exogenous change in the
saving rate, for example, one caused by fiscal policy? These two

questions are inseparably linked: before the investment effect of a
change in national saving can be predicted, the precise mechanism
45

underlying the estimated saving-investment association must be

understood. Because of space limitations, however, this survey will focus

on the first question, the relevance of the statistical saving—investment
32
relationship for assessing international capital mobility.

Cross-sectional versus time-series estimation

In answering this

question it is helpful to distinguish between two possible econometric
approaches to the estimation of saving-investment relationships.
Feldstein and Horioka (1980) implemented a cross—sectional estimation

strategy. In this approach each observation consists of a country 's
average investment and saving rates over a given time period; the
estimated regression equation based on a cross—sectional sample of N

countries is

(4) (I/Y). =

CS

+ CS(s,y) +

where (IIY). is country 's average nominal investment rate out of
nominal GM' or GDP over the chosen time period, (SIY). is its average

saving rate over the same period, and u. is a random disturbance.
A second estimation strategy is based on time—series data. In this
approach each observation consists of a given country's investment and

saving rates over some time period t. The estimated regression equation

based on a time-series sample for a single country is

(I/Y) =

TS

+ TS(s/y) + u

320bstfeld (1991) analyzes econometric pitfalls of using saving-investment

regressions to predict the effects of exogenous shifts in saving.
46

(or the corresponding equation in first differences).33
In a world of completely immobile capital, the error terms in (4)
and (5) represent measurement error and both estimation strategies yield
estimated slope coefficients near 1. More generally, however, the two

estimation strategies could yield quite different slope coefficients,

even when all countries are integrated into world capital markets to a
similar degree, because

in (4) and TS in (5) measure very different

things.

Suppose, for example, that in the sample of N countries mean saving
rates have a high positive cross-sectional association with mean

investment rates, but that for each country, deviations of saving rates
from the time—series mean are uncorrelated with deviations of investment

rates from the time-series mean. Suppose also that the• cross—sectional

observations are country averages over T periods. Then the ordinary least
squares (OLS) estimate 13CS will be high if T and N are sufficiently

large, but TS will be near zero for each country. If instead mean saving
rates and investment rates have a zero cross-sectional correlation, but
for each country, deviations from its mean saving and investment rates

tend to be close, (3 will be near zero for T and N sufficiently large
_'Ts

but the estimates 13

.
will
be high.

The cross—sectional estimation strategy attempts to capture the
relationship between Long—run saving and investment rates; for this

33Feldstein (1983) reports panel estimates that combin: the cross—section
and time-series strategies by assuming that 3 and 13 are equal.

47

strategy to succeed, each country's saving and investment rates must be

averaged over a sufficient interval to eliminate the influence of
short-run fluctuations around long-run means. The time-series estimation
strategy is meant to uncover the short—run relationship between national
saving and domestic investment. Both long-run and short-run relationships

are pertinent to an assessment of capital mobility. Explanations of the
time—series relationship between saving and investment will not, however,

throw much light on the cross-sectional relationship unless the time
period chosen for cross—sectional estimates is so brief that transitory
shocks to saving and investment swamp underlying long-run patterns.

Conversely, explanations of true long-run patterns may have little power
to explain short-run comovemerits.

Results of cross—sectional estimation

Feldstein and Horioka (1980)

estimated (4) for a sample of 16 OECD countries, averaging annual data

over subperiods of l960-74. Data on gross saving and investment rates35
averaged over the entire 1960—74 period led to a representative OLS

result:

(I/Y). =

0.035

+

0.887(S/Y). + u.;

R2 = 0.91.

(0.018) (0.074)
Feldstein and Bacchetta (1991) provide an update; a typical estimate of

34Their country sample was Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark,
Finland, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, New

Zealand, Sweden, the U.K., and the U.S.
35Gross, rather than net rates, are more appropriate for this regression.
A regression in net rates imposes the assumption that all replacement
investment is financed by domestic savings.
48

CS based on a sample of 23 OECD countries over the more recent period
1974-86 is 0.868 (with a standard error of 0.145). a result quite close

to the original findings.

36

This regression presents a much starker puzzle

about the international capital market than those based on 1960-74 data

because it is generally believed that the world capital market, while
relatively shallow and segmented prior to the early 1970s, has become
less regulated and expanded vigorously since then.37 Notwithstanding this

evolution, the Feldstein—Bacchetta findings still imply that a one
percent increase in the national saving rate remains cross—sectionally

associated with a nearly equal increase in the domestic investment rate.

A further update is provided in table 5, which presents the result
of estimating (4) for 22 OECD countries over subperiods of l974_90.38
Saving and investment rates are gross nominal flows divided by nominal
GDP

or

GNP.

The point estimates for 13CS in table 5 are lower than those that
Feldstein and Horioka (1980) report and somewhat lower, on the whole,
than those that Feldstein and Bacchetta (1991) report. The R2 statistics

are also below the ones in Feldstein and Horioka (1980). Figure 9 shows a

scatter plot for the 1981—90 data, together with the fitted regression
line.

36The countries are those listed in the previous footnote plus France,
Iceland, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Switzerland, and Turkey.
37See Marston (1993W for evidence on the 1960s.

38The countries are the Feldstein-Bacchetta sample less Turkey, which can
be classified as a developing country. Luxembourg traditionally is

omitted from this sample; it is such an extreme outlier that its addition
reduces the cross-sectional regression coefficient to insignificance.
49

The results are suggestive of a decade—to—decade downward trend in

cs: the estimated coefficient over 1974-80, 0.867, has dropped to 0.636
by 1981—90. Such a trend, even if established, would be difficult to

interpret unambiguously. For example, the 1986-90 estimate of CS is

higher than that for 1981-85, yet one would not take this as evidence of
a decreasing degree of international capital mobility. The coefficient

differences are not significant in statistical terms.
The basic finding is that the positive cross—sectional association
between OECD saving and investment rates is economically and

statistically significant, although far from perfect and possibly
declining over time. Although the cross—sectional results are less

striking than those for 1960-74, they may present more of a puzzle given

the present level of industrial-country residents' participation in
international capital markets.39
Results for a wider sample including developing countries are not

reported, because there is less of a saving—investment puzzle as far as
those countries are concerned. Most of these countries even now control

capital flows and in some periods have faced binding external credit
constraints. Notwithstanding these tangible impediments to capital flow,

over the period from 1960 to the early 1980s (when the debt crisis
began), the cross—sectional association of saving and investment rates is

often found to be lower for the developing countries than for the OECD
countries. 40

39For documentation of this activity see, once again, Goldstein et a!.
(1993).

40See Fieleke (1982), Dooley, Frankel, and Mathieson (1987), and Summers
50

Results of time-series estimation

Table 6 examines the time-series

properties of annual saving and investment rates over 1974-90 for the 22
countries that made up the cross-sectional sample, plus Luxembourg.

"Levels" estimates of TS comes from OLS estimation of (5) (with a time
trend included in the regression). "Differences" estimates come from the
regression
TS

Table

+

T5(s'Y)t

+

7 reports the corresponding simple correlation coefficients between

linearly detrended and differenced saving and investment rates.

There is a wide dispersion of outcomes, a reflection not only of
different degrees of financial openness, but also of different country

sizes and the different shocks that have buffetted these diverse
economies. For most countries the saving and investment time series are

positively related, and typically the relationship is strong. Australia,
New Zealand, and Portugal all show positive time-series saving—investment

associations despite having run sizable current-acount deficits over

parts of the sample period. (Portugal's 1982 deficit was 13.5 percent of
GDP.) Norway, which did the same, shows a strongly negative relationship.

These findings underscore the point that annual time-series correlations
contain little information about the relationship between saving and
investment over long periods.4'

(1988).

41Observe that choice of detrending method can make a big difference (for
51

Even under perfect capital mobility, positive regression

coefficients such as those reported in the table are not hard to explain.
If labor is internationally immobile, for example, positive shocks to
investment productivity can cause both investment and saving to rise
(Obstfeld 1986; Finn 1990; Tesar 1991; Ghosh, forthcoming). If the usual

outcome of such a shock is a current-account deficit, and if productivity
shocks are the dominant form of disturbance, then it would not be

surprising to find an estimate of Ts above 1, a result found for several
countries in table 6 but difficult to explain if capital is
internationally immobile. A positive time—series correlation between

saving and investment is reinforced if global as well as local shocks to
investment and saving are important (as Glick and Rogoff, 1993, find).42

Unlike the time series results, which can be rationalized in several
plausible ways, the cross-sectional finding that countries with higher
long-term saving rates also have higher long—term investment rates is

more difficult to explain in a world of capital mobility. The balance of

this section therefore focuses on alternative interpretations of the
cross—sectional saving—investment pattern as it persisted through the
1980s.

Explanations for the cross-sectional saving-investment relationship
Many researchers have taken the high estimates of 13CS in (4) as

example, the United Kingdom).
42Baxter and Crucini (1993), Cardia (1992), Mendoza (1991a, 1991b), and
Stockman and Tesar (1990) explore simulation models with perfect capital
mobility in which high time-series correlations between saving and
investment arise.
52

evidence that national savings for the most part still are retained at
home and are not channeled toward their most efficient global uses by the
world capital market. Others have tried to approach the saving—investment

puzzle by identifying economic forces that underlie both saving and
investment and cause long—term averages of these two variables to move

together. A wide variety of mechanisms has been proposed.

Demographic factors

Characteristics of a nation's labor force can

simultaneously affect national saving and the profitability of domestic
investment. Labor-force growth provides one example: higher growth can

raise national saving by increasing the ratio of young savers to old
dissavers; at the same time higher growth raises the investment needed to
keep the labor force equipped with capital (Black 1982; Obstfeld 1986).
Summers (1988) and Feldstein and Bacchetta (1991) dismiss the

hypothesis that labor-force growth is "the" cause of the cross-sectional
saving-investment relationship. They show that the addition of growth
variables to the cross—sectional regression does not reduce the apparent
influence of saving on investment. Notwithstanding these regressions, it

remains quite plausible that labor—force developments are a part of the
story, more important in some countries than in others. Tesar (1991)

presents some evidence along these lines, showing that the fraction of
the population aged between 15 and 64 is positively related to both
saving and investment rates. The question deserves more detailed study.
Other potential links between household allocation decisions and

investment remain to be investigated. For example, are there systematic
links among fertility rates, saving, expenditures on schooling, and the
profitability of domestic investment?
53

Real interest rates

Even if capital is perfectly mobile and

uncovered interest parity holds true, national real interest rates need
not be equal. Frankel (1986, 1993) claims that this point resolves the
Feldstein-Horioka puzzle. The puzzle arises, he argues, because increases

in national saving depress the local real interest rate, spurring
investment and inducing a statistical correlation between saving and
investment rates.
While this mechanism may help us understand time—series correlations

between saving and investment rates, its bearing on the longer—run
cross—sectional patterns is less obvious. Under the conditions listed in

the last paragraph, the real interest differential between two countries
equals the expected percentage change in their currencies' real exchange

rate. If real interest effects are to explain the cross-sectional
regression results, countries with high saving and investment rates must

have low real interest rates and so their currencies must be conttnually
appreciating in real terms against foreign currencies.
Cardia (1992) describes a simulation model which is based on
Frankel's suggested mechanism, but which nonetheless may have some

explanatory power for the cross-sectional Feldstein-Horioka pattern. In
her model, adjustment to shocks can be drawn out over decades because of
capital-installation costs and an overlapping—generations population

structure. Although Cardia does not report cross-sectional simulations,
the long-lived effects of the disturbances she considers probably would
contribute to a strong cross— sectional association between long saving-

and investment-rate averages.

As Balass's (1964) work implies, models with different sectoral
54

productivity growth rates can exhibit permanently trending real exchange
rates. This suggests another potential mechanism causing high-saving,

high-investment countries also to be countries with low real interest
rates. Imagine a small-open economy producing traded and nontraded goods

using capital (which is internationally mobile) and labor (which is not).

Assume that initially all countries are identical. Consider the effect of
a permanent increase in traded-goods productivity growth in one economy.

The currency of this economy will begin to appreciate in real terms

at a higher rate, its real interest rate will fall, and its investment
rate will rise. Saving, which depends on the real interest rate, also
will change. If the average domestic intertemporal substitution

elasticity is below 1 (as several empirical studies suggest), the fall in

the real interest rate will cause saving to rise (and the rate of total
real expenditure growth to fall). Saving and investment thus will tend to
show a positive cross-sectional correlation, seemingly driven by

cross—country real interest rate differences but really driven by
differences in traded-goods productivity growth.43
No one has yet established a robust cross—sectional relationship

among saving, investment, the real interest rate, and the real exchange
rate's expected path. Mechanisms such as the one described thus remain
speculative.

431n general, when an economy has several sectors of differing capital

intensity, some of which produce nontraded goods, there is no longer a
presumption that the economy's consumption side and its production side
(including investment) can be analyzed separately, even under capital
mobility. This point is made through various examples by Murphy (1986),
Engel and Kletzer (1989), and Wong (1990).
55

Hysteresis of factor supplies

Results presented above (figure 8)

show that OECD countries are characterized by wide and persistent
differences in capital—output ratios. This pattern suggests another
possible explanation for the saving—investment puzzle.

European countries entered the postwar era burdened by external
payments controls and limited access to foreign resources. For some time,

therefore, countries had to finance most of their capital accumulation
through domestic savings. High-saving countries accumulated large capital

stocks and specialized in capital-intensive industries, while low-saving
countries ended up producing a more labor-intensive product mix.
The subsequent liberalization of capital movements need not have

disturbed this production pattern greatly. In the presence of labor-force
growth, however, high-capital countries required high investment rates to
maintain their established industries, while low-capital countries could

get by with lower investment rates. Since the high-capital countries also
were those with high saving rates, a high cross—sectional correspondence

between saving and investment rates was the result. On this view, the

historical accident of capital immobility during the first part of the
postwar period had an effect on the distribution of national investment

rates that persisted even after capital mobility returned.
If the preceding interpretation is valid, countries with higher
saving and investment rates should have higher shares of capital income
in GDP. Mankiw, Romer, and \Veil (1992) argue, however, that this is not

the case and that in fact there is little international variation in

56

capital's GDP share.44 Their argument, based on limited data from the
1960s and 1970s, contradicts Kaldor's (1961) fifth 'stylized fact" of

economic growth: "A high correlation between the share of profits in
income and the share of investment in output" (p. 178). More research on
this point would be useful.

Corporate financing frictions The need for firms facing imperfect
domestic capital markets to finance investment out of corporate savings
has been suggested as another explanation of the Feldstein-Horioka

puzzle. But is a tight link between corporate saving and investment
enough to produce a tight link between national saving and investment? A

dollar rise in corporate saving may raise domestic investment if firms
are borrowing-constrained, but it will raise national saving only if

shareholders fail to pierce the corporate veil and adjust their own total
saving downward by a dollar. The largest corporations, moreover, do not
face binding finance constraints.

A related hypothesis concerns the possibility that domestic and

foreign residents value domestic equities differently, as generally is
the case in the absence of efficient consumption risk—sharing among
countries. (Dooley, F'rankel, and Mathieson, 1987, examine a polar case in

which claims to domestic physical capital are nontradable.) In this
situation, domestic saving and investment could be correlated, even for a

small country, despite perfect international arbitrage in bonds. Can this
type of equity-market segmentation help explain the cross-sectional

44This pattern would be consistent with a world in which national outputs
are produced according to (3) (with the same in all countries) and
capital is internationally immobile.
57

saving—investment results? One obvious approach would be look for a

negative cross-sectional correlation between the cost of capital and the

saving rate in industrial countries.45

The general point is that strict domestic

segmentation

of financial

markets could generate a saving—investment relationship.

Country-by-country empirical documentation for this mechanism has not yet
been produced.

Government policies Systematic current-account targeting by
governments would, if successful, tend to produce a strong
cross—sectional saving investment association, even with high capital
mobility (Fieleke 1982; Summers 1988). Fiscal and monetary policy, as

well as capital controls, have all been used to limit the sizes of
current-account imbalances. There is some evidence that government

policies in a number of countries have aimed to curtail external
imbalances (Artis and Bayoumi 1989), but it is difficult to judge how
well these policies succeeded. It is also possible that government

policies aimed at domestic stabilization or international reserve
management have effects similar to current—account targeting.

If capital mobility is high, however, there may be less reason for a
government to target the current account than if capital mobility is low:
economy—wide credit constraints that private agents may fail to

internalize are less stringent. On the other hand, governments trying to
fix currency exchange rates in the face of speculative pressure may well

45mere is some evidence of such a relationship in the past; see McCauley
and Zimmer (1989). However, it is hard to disentangle the effect of
saving from the effect of tax provisions that simultaneously affect
saving and the cost of capital.
58

take actions that limit current account imbalances.

The economy's intertemporal budget constraint An open economy
faces an intertemporal budget constraint relating the difference between
its saving and investment——the current account--to the change in its net

external assets. Under some economic conditions this constraint alone
implies that saving and investment ratios averaged over sufficiently long
periods must be close despite capital mobility.46

To appreciate this point, let At denote a given country's nominal

net foreign assets at the end of period t and recall the current-account
identity's implication that At — At_i

=

S

—

Suppose

that the data

are average saving and investment rates over T periods. Let at = At/Yt be

the ratio of external assets to income and

=

the growth

—

rate of nominal income. Then the current-account identity implies that
the difference between the averaged saving and investment rates is48

TS —I
(6)

4; E

t=1

TA —A
E

t=l

t
=

46See

ii

flaT

+

t

I

—

'T—1

"T jaT_l

+

... —

(___

Obstfeld (1986, p. 73), Sinn (1992) and Vikøren (1991).

47This relation will not hold exactly in the data because saving as
measured by national income and product accounts does not include capital
gains or losses on foreign assets (see Obstfeld 1986).
48The income growth rates below are nominal rather than real rates because
the national income and product account concept of saving does not
correct income for the inflationary erosion of nominal assets' real
values.

59

= 11

+ ... + g2a1 + g1a0

— a0 +

In principle, the foregoing identity alone places no constraints on
the average difference between saving and investment rates. Suppose,

however, that there is a steady—state ratio of net foreign assets to
income from which the economy does not greatly diverge between the start
and end of the sample period. Then if nominal income growth is moderate,
(6) implies that the averaged difference between saving and investment

rates may well be small.

Mature economies may have attained a

stationary distribution of the foreign assets/GNP ratio; the
intertemporal trade gains that arise between mature economies generally
will be transitory and their distribution symmetical.49 This conjecture

may help explain why even in the late 1980s a fairly high cross-sectional
saving—investment relation persisted for the industrial countries. The

conjecture also explains why, before the debt crisis of the 1980s,
developing countries displayed lower cross—sectional saving—investment

correlations than developed. Developing countries with significant

unexploited investment opportunities have external debts well below their
steady—state levels. This perspective suggests that ultimately, the
cross-sectional saving—investment correlation within a group of countries

49An exception is Norway, which borrowed abroad so heavily during the
1970s to develop its oil production that by 1978 its foreign debt/GDP
ratio stood near 60 percent (Vikøren 1991). Even Norway repaid this debt
quickly: by 1985 the country's net foreign debt stood at around 12
percent of GDP, its 1970 level. The United States current account
deficit, driven by goverment deficits and demographic shifts, is another
exception.
60

with open capital markets depends on the extent of each one's long—term

intertemporal trade gains with other countries. Attempts to assess these
gains (as in Ghosh, forthcoming, and Glick and Rogoff 1993) are critical
for understanding how puzzling the saving-investment puzzle really is.

Comparisons with the gold standard and with regional data
An indirect way to judge whether the Feldstein-Horioka puzzle

reflects true capital immobility or some subset of the alternative

factors listed above is to examine the strength of the cross-sectional
saving—investment association in settings of presumed capital mobility.

Data from the gold-standard period and regional data have both been used

for this purpose.

The saving-investment relation under the gold standard

Table 8

reports results for three data samples. The first consists of Australia,
Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Norway, Sweden, the U.K., and

the U.S. with data averaged over 1880-1913. The second sample adds Japan,
using data averaged over 1885-99 and 1900-13. The third sample, based on

1926-38 data, subtracts France but adds Finland, which gained
independence from Russia in 1917. 1 first discuss the pre—1914 results,

which fall under the classical gold standard.5°
Over 1880—1913, the estimated regression coefficient 13CS is almost

significant (with a one-tailed test) and not too different from the
estimates in table 5 based on data from the 1980s. (The R2 is, however,

50For details on data construction, see Jones and Obstfeld (1994).

61

much lower in table 8). Over 1885-99 the estimate

is the same but

significant. For the 1900—13 period (with data pictured in figure 10),

the coefficient rises to 0.77, but loses significance.51

To the extent that the classical gold standard was a period of high
international financial integration, the pre-1914 findings in table 8 and

figure 10 suggest that the recent long-run behavior of saving and
investment rates is not inconsistent with substantial capital mobility.
True, the dispersion of saving and investment rates during the gold

standard is greater than among industrial countries over the 1980s; and
among the largest economies we now see nothing like the surpluses the
U.K. persistently ran. Three factors should be considered, however, in

assessing capital mobility under the classical gold standard and
comparing it with curent conditions. First, as Nurkse (1954) emphasized,
international capital movements were abetted by complementary large-scale

labor movements from Europe into regions of recent (white) settlement.

Nothing like the level of migration seen then has occurred in the postwar
era.52 Second, the inclusion of Australia and Canada means that deviopingand developed-country data are being pooled, a procedure that would
loosen the saving-investment association in modern data. Finally,

Britain's close cultural and political ties with some borrowers certainly
facilitated its large—scale foreign lending. As is evident from figure

51Bayoumi (1990) finds no cross—sectional saving-investment association
for a smaller eight—country sample over any subperiod of 1880-1913.
Eichengreen (1990) amends Bayoumi's data and adds the United States. The

results in table 8 are very similar to Eichengreen's, despite my use of
different data for some countries and an expanded set of countries.
52See Razin and Sadka (1993) for a recent discussion of international
labor mobility.
62

10, Canada and the U.K. are behind the poor fit of the 1900-13
regression.

Table 8 also reports a regression for the interwar period following
the (short—lived) reinstatement of the international gold-standard,

1926-38; the data are displayed in figure 11. The results stand in the

sharpest possible contrast to those for the classical gold standard, and
show a stronger saving-investment association even than the 1960-74
Feldstein-Horioka results. Eichengreen (1990) discusses possible reasons

for this contrast, which are complex but seem related to a genuine
post-World War! decline in capital mobility. One factor behind this

decline was the rise of the political Left. This development made

international investors less secure in their property rights than they
were before 1914. It also focused the attention of policymakers on

domestic economic problems at the expense of laissez-faire principles of
international economic relations.

During the classical gold-standard era governments practiced less

pervasive management of their economies than afterward. Do the results of
this section therefore show that the hypothesis of current—account
targeting is not needed to explain the current cross—sectional

saving-investment relation? Not at all. Even under the gold standard,
some governments may have curtailed current-account imbalances as a side

effect of actions taken to maintain gold convertibility, or in pursuit of
foreign policy aims.

Regional saving-investment links

The use of regional saving and

investment data is a potentially fruitful way to throw light on the

63

saving—investment puzzle.

53 Bayoumi and Rose (forthcoming) construct

saving and investment data for 11 British regions over 1971-85; they find
no significant positive cross-sectional relationship between saving and

investment rates. Bayoumi and Sterne (1993) find a similar result for
Canadian provinces. Sinn (1992). who looks at both 1953 and 1957 data for

the 48 U.S. states and Alaska, finds a negative cross-sectional
relationship between saving and investment rates. Data over 1975-88 on

average saving and investment rates for the 45 Japanese prefectures

listed in table 3 are graphed in figure 12. Again, no positive
relationship is apparent.

The data used in these calculations aren't always ideal. For
example, Bayoumi and Rose have data for only part of regional expenditure
and investment. More seriously, Bayoumi and his coauthors define saving

as regional GDP less a regional consumption measure, not as GNP less that

measure. Thus, these measures of saving fail to include in income not

only net interest and dividend payments from outside the region, but also
net transfers from the domestic central government and others. The much

greater dispersion of saving than investment rates in figure 12 raises
suspicions that measurement errors are a problem in the Japanese saving

data shown there, despite their definition as prefecture GNP less
consumption.

There are, moreover, differences between regions and countries that

53Murphy (1984) applied a similar idea to the 143 largest industrial
corporations from the 1981 Fortune 500. He found a significant
cross—sectional relation between corporate saving and investment. It
would be interesting to know if this relationship has held up in view of
financial-market developments since the early 1980s.
64

might weaken the saving-investment link. The comparative ease with which

labor can migrate between regions could alter the response of regional
saving and investment to disturbances. (This is especially possible in
Japan, where commuting between prefectures is significant.) Furthermore,

regions within countries tend to be more specialized in their production

activities than are countries themselves. Thus, some of the shocks that
can make national saving and domestic investment move together may not
induce similar comovements in regional saving and investment.

The strength of factors such as these is unknown at present. Until
more work is done and better data assembled, the regional
saving-investment regressions provide the most persuasive evidence that
national boundaries or policies placed limits on industrial—country

current-account imbalances through the 1980s.

Since regional current accounts are not objects of government
policy, the regional results leave current—account targeting as a prime
suspect behind the cross-sectional saving—relationship that has persisted

in international data. The results are also consistent with the view that
capital is still not as mobile between as within countries.

5. Conclusion

The main conundrum in thinking about international capital mobility

is to reconcile measures of mobility that superficially contradict each
other. How can one square the generally smooth international

interest-rate arbitage documented in section 2 with the low international
consumption correlations and home portfolio bias discussed in section 3

or the still-sizable cross-sectional coherence between saving and
65

investment documented in section 4? In this paper I have reviewed a
number of economic models and data limitations that potentially can

contribute to a reconciliation. Despite years of research, however,
economists still have not reached the semblance of a consensus on which

factors are most relevant. Much work remains to be done; hopefully, the

rapid evolution of world capital markets, if not braked by renewed

regulation, will furnish more clues as well as data.

After such a a lengthy and arduous trek through the literature, I
owe the reader more, however, than just a plea for more of the same. So
here are my tentative conclusions.

I-low mobile is capital in the world economy? As far as industrial

countries are concerned, capital mobility appears substantial when judged

by the measure of past experience, such as the classical gold-standard
era. I have not presented as thorough a review of developing country

experience in this paper, because that experience is diverse and the

market access of many developing countries is currently in flux. It is
clear, however, that most of the developing world still stands outside
the nexus of industrial—country financial markets.

Capital mobility appears noticeably lower between industrial

economies than it is within them, although intereconomy capital mobility

certainly has increased over time. The threat of government intervention
in coss-border capital movements has not disappeared. (Indeed, in the
wake of the August 1993 ERM collapse, European Commission President

Jacques Delors signaled his support of concerted EC measures to limit

66

capital mobility.54) Financial flows apparently are less extensive between

than within countries. International portfolio diversification appears
inexplicably limited for some major countries. And long-run saving and

investment rates remain positively associated in international cross

sections to an extent greater than is true in the (usually imperfect)
regional data that are available. This last phenomenon could reflect
central government policies that have the effect of limiting national
current—account imbalances.

It is doubtful that capital will ever be as mobile between nations
as it can be within them. The mere existence of national governments
sovereign within their borders means that no investor can think about

domestic and foreign assets in quite the same way. What is at issue,

then, is the extent to which actual conditions approximate free capital
mobility. Among industrial countries the approximation has become better

and better in recent years, but it still has some ways to go.

54.

.
.
Return of Capital
Controls Raised
by Delors, Financial TLmes,
September 16, 1993, p. 1.

See

•1

•1

67

References
Altonji, Joseph G., Fumlo Hayashi, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, "Is the
Extended Family Altruistically Linked? Direct Tests Using Micro Data,"
American Economic Review 82 (December 1992), pp. 1177-1198.

Artis, Michael, and Tamim Bayoumi, "Saving, Investment, Financial
Integration, and the Balance of Payments," WP/89/102, International
Monetary Fund, Research Department, December 1989.
Atkeson, Andrew, and Tarnini Bayoumi, "Do Private Capital Markets Insure
Regional Risk? Evidence from the United States and Europe," mimeo,
University of Chicago and International Monetary Fund, June 1992.

Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Finn E. Kydland, "International
Real Business Cycles," Journal of Political Economy 100 (August 192),
pp. 745—775.

Balassa, Bela, "The Purchasing-power Parity Doctrine: A Reappraisal,"
Journal of Political Economy 72 (December 1964), pp. 584-596.

Bardhan, Pranab, "Disparity in Wages but Not in Returns to Capital
between Rich and Poor Countries," Center for International and
Development Economics Research, Working Paper C93-017, University of
California at Berkeley, July 1993.
Baxter, Marianne, and Mario J. Crucini, "Explaining Saving/Investment
Correlations," AmerLcan Economic Review 83 (June 1993), pp. 416-436.

Baxter, Marianne, and Urban J. Jermann, "The International
Diversification Puzzle is Worse Than You Think," Rochester Center for
Economic Research Working Paper 350, May 1993.

Bayoumi, Tamim, "Saving-Investment Correlations," International Monetary

Fund Staff Papers 37 (June 1990), pp. 360-387.

Bayoumi, Tamim, and Gabriel Sterne, "Regional Trading Blocs, Mobile
Capital, and Exchange Rate Coordination," mimeo, Bank of England,
January 1993.
Bayourni, Tamim A., and Andrew K. Rose, "Domestic Saving and
Intra-National Capital Flows," European Economic Review, forthcoming.

Black, Stanley W., "Discussion," in Saving and Government PoiLcy,
Conference Series 25, Boston, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, 1982, pp.
158-161.

Brainard, William C., and James Tobin, "On the Internationalization of
Portfolios," Oxford Economic Papers 44 (April 1992), Pp. 533-565.

68

Calvo, Guillerrno A., Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen M. Reinhart,
"Capital Inflows and Real Exchange Rate Appreciation in Latin America:
The Role of External Factors," WP/92/62, International Monetary Fund,
Research Department, August 1992.
Campbell, John Y., and N. Gregory Mankiw, "The Response of Consumption
to Income: A Cross-Country Investigation," European Economic RevIew 35
(May 1991), pp. 723-767.

Canova, Fabio, and Morten Overgaard Ravn, "International Consumption
Risk Sharing," miineo, European University Institute, March 1993.

Cardia, Emanuela, "Crowding Out in Open Economies: Results from a
Simulation Study," Canadian Journal of Economics 25 (August 1992), pp.
708-728.

Carroll, Christopher D., and Lawrence H. Summers, "Consumption Growth
Parallels Income Growth: Some New Evidence," in B. Douglas Bernheim and
John B. Shoven, eds., National Saving and Economic Performance, Chicago,
University of Chicago Press, 1991, pp. 305-343.

Cole, Harold L., "Financial Structure and International Trade,"
International Economic Review 29 (May 1988), pp. 237-259.
Cole, Harold L., and Maurice Obstfeld, "Commodity Trade and
International Risk Sharing? How Much do Financial Markets Matter?"
Journal of Monetary Economtcs 28 (August 1991), pp. 3-24.

Cochrané, John H., "A Simple Test of Consumption Insurance," Journal of
Political Economy 99 (October 1991), pp. 957-76.
Committee of Governors of the Central Banks of the Member States of the
European Economic Community, Annual Report 1992, April 1993.

Crucini, Mario J., "International Risk Sharing: A Simple Comparative
Test," mimeo, Ohio State University, August 1992.
Deaton, Angus. Understanding Consumption, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1992.
Dekie, Robert, "Saving—Investment Correlations and Capital Mobility: On
the Evidence from Japanese Regional Data," mimeo, Boston University,
October 1993.

Deutsche Bundesbank, "The Trend in Germany's External Assets and
Investment Income," Monthly Report of the Deutsche Bundesbank 45
(January 1993), pp. 43-66.
Devereux, Michael B., Allan W. Gregory, and Gregor W. Smith, "Realistic
Cross-Country Consumption Correlations in a Two-Country, Equilibrium,
Business-Cycle Model," Journal of International Money and Finance 11
(February 1992), pp. 3-16.
69

Dooley, Michael, Jeffrey Frankel, and Donald J. Mathieson,
"International Capital Mobility: What Do Saving-Investment Correlations

Tell Us?" International Monetary Fund Staff Papers 34 (September 1987),
pp. 503-530.
Dumas, Bernard, "Partial-Equilibrium vs General-Equilibrium Models of

International Capital Market Equilibrium," in Frederick van der Ploeg,
ed., Handbook of International Macroeconomics, Oxford, Basil Blackwell,
forthcoming.

Eichengreen, Barry, "Trends and Cycles in Foreign Lending," in Horst
Siebert, ed., Capital Flows in the World Economy, Ttlbingen, J.C.B. Mohr,
1990, pp. 3-28.
Eldor, Rafael, David Pines, and Abba Schwartz, "Home Asset Preference
and Productivity Shocks," Journal of International Economics 25 (August
1988), pp. 165-176.

Engel, Charles, and Kenneth Kletzer, "Saving and Investment in an Open
Economy with Non-Traded Goods," International Economic RevIew 30
(November 1989), pp. 735-752.

Feldstein, Martin, "Domestic Saving and International Capital Movements
in the Long Run and the Short Run," European Economic Review 21
(March/April 1983), pp. 129-51.

Feldstein, Martin, and Philippe Bacchetta, "National Saving and
International Investment," in B. Douglas Bernheim and John B. Shoven,
eds., National Saving and Economic Performance, Chicago, University of
Chicago Press, 1991.

Feldstein, Martin, and Charles Horioka, "Domestic Saving and
International Capital Flows," Economic Journal 90 (June 1980), pp.
314-329.

Fieleke, Norman S., "National Saving and International Investment," in
Saving and Government Policy, Conference Series 25, Boston, Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston, 1982, pp. 138-157.
Finn, Mary G., "On Savings and Investment Dynamics in a Small Open
Economy," Journal of International Economics 29 (August 1990), pp. 1-21.

Frankel, Jeffrey A., "International Capital Mobility and Crowding-Out in
the U.S. Economy: Imperfect Integration of Financial Markets or of Goods
Markets?" in R. W. Hafer, ed., How Open is the U.S. Economy? Lexington,
Mass., Heath, 1986.
"Quantifying International Capital Mobility in the 1980s," in On
Exchange Rates, Cambridge, Mass., MIT Press, 1993.

French, Kenneth R., and James M. Poterba, Japanese and U.S.
Cross-border Common Stock Investments," Journal of the Japanese and
International EconomIes 4 (December 1990), PP. 476-493.
"Investor Diversification and International Equity Markets."
American Economic Review 81 (May 1991), pp. 222-226.
Gehrig, Thomas, "An Information Based Explanation of the Domestic Bias
in International Equity Investment," Scandinavian Journal of Economics
95 (March 1993), pp. 97-109.
Gertler, Mark, and Kenneth Rogoff, "North-South Lending and Endogenous
Domestic Capital-Market Inefficiencies," Journal of Monetary Economics
26 (October 1990), pp. 245-266.

Ghosh, Atish R., "Capital Mobility amongst the Major Industrial
Countries: Too Little or Too Much?" Economic Journal, forthcoming.
Giavazzi, Francesco, and Marco Pagano, "Capital Controls and the
European Monetary System," in Capital Controls and Foreign Exchange
Legislation, Milan, Euromobiliare, June 1985, pp. 19—38.
Glick, Reuven, and Michael Hutchison, "Financial Liberalization in the

Pacific Basin: Implications for Real Interest Rate Linkages," Journal of
the Japanese and International Economies 4 (March 1990), pp. 36-48.
Glick, Reuven, and Kenneth Rogoff, "Global versus Country—Specific
Productivity Shocks and the Current Account," International Finance
DiscussiOn Papers 443, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
April 1993.

Goldstein, Morris, David Folkerts—Landau, Peter Garber, Liliana

Rojas-Suarez, and Michael Spencer, International Capital Markets, Part
I. Exchange Rate Management and International Capital Flows, Washington
D.C., International Monetary Fund, April 1993.

Golub, Stephen S., "International Diversification of Social and Private
Risk: The U.S. and Japan," mimeo, Swarthmore College, November 1991.
Gordon, Roger H., and Hal R. Varian, "Taxation of Asset Income in the
Presence of a World Securities Market," Journal of International
Economics 26 (May 1989), pp. 205-226.

Hodrick, Robert J., and Edward C. Prescott, "Post-war U.S. Business
Cycles: An Empirical Investigation," mimeo, Carnegie—Mellon University,
November 1980.

Jones, Matthew T., and Maurice Obstfeld, "Saving and Investment under
the Gold Standard," mimeo, University of California at Berkeley, 1994
Kaldor, Nicholas, "Capital Accumulation and Economic Growth," in F.A.

Lutz and D.C Hague, eds., The Theory of Capital, New York, St. Martin's
Press, 1961, pp. 177-222.
71

King. Robert G., and Sergio T. Rebelo, "Transitional Dynamics and
Economic Growth in the Neoclassical Model,' American Economic Review 83
(September 1993), pp. 908-931.
Kollmann, Robert, "Consumptions, Real Exchange Rates and the Structure
of International Asset Markets," mimeo, Université de Montréal, 1992.

Lewis, Karen K., "What Can Explain the Apparent Lack of International
Consumption Risk Sharing?," mimeo, University of Pennsylvania, July
1993.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr., Models of Business Cycles, Oxford, Basil
Blackwell, 1987.

'Why Doesn't Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?" American
Economic Review 80 (May 1990), pp. 92-96.
"On Efficiency and Distribution," Economic Journal 102 (March
1992), pp. 233-247.
McCauley, Robert N., and Steven A. Zimmer, "Explaining International

Differences in the Cost of Capital," Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Quarterly Review 14 (Summer 1989), pp. 7-28.

Mace, Barbara J., "Full Insurance in the Presence of Aggregate
Uncertainty," Journal of Political Economy 99 (October 1991), pp.
928-956.

Maddison, Angus, Dynamic Forces In Capitalist Development, Oxford,
Oxford University Press, 1991.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer, and David N. Weil, "A Contribution to
the Empirics of Economic Growth," Quarterly Journal of Economics 107
(May 1992), pp. 407-437.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Stephen P. Zeldes, "The Consumption of
Stockholders and Nonstockholders," Journal of Financial Economics 29
(1991), pp. 97-112.

Marston Richard C., "Determinants of Short—Term Real Interest

Differentials between Japan and the United States," Bank of Japan
Monetary and Economic Studies 11 (July 1993a), pp. 33-61.
"Interest Differentials under Bretton Woods and the Post—Bretton
Woods Float: The Effects of Capital Controls and Exchange Risk," in
Michael D. Bordo and Barry Eichengreen, eds., A Retrospective on the
Bretton Woods System, Chicago, University of Chicgao Press, 1993b, pp.
515-538.

Mathieson, Donald J., and Liliana Rojas-Suarez, Liberalization of the
Capital Account: Experiences and Issues, Occasional Paper 103,
Washington, D.C., International Monetary Fund, March 1993.
72

Mendoza, Enrique G., "Capital Controls and the Gains from Trade in a
Business Cycle Model of a Small Open Economy," International Monetary
Fund Staff Papers 38 (September 1991a), pp. 480-505.
"Real Business Cycles in a Small Open Economy," American
Economic Review 81 (September 1991b), pp. 797-818.

Minhas, Bagicha Singh. An International Comparison of Factor Costs and
Factor Use, Amsterdam, North-Holland. 1963.
Murphy. Robert G., "Capital Mobility and the Relationship between Saving
and Investment Rates in OECD Countries," Journal of International Money
and Finance 3 (December 1984), pp. 327-342.
"Productivity Shocks, Non—Traded Goods and Optimal Capital
Accumulation," European Economic Review 30 (1986), pp. 1081-1095.

Nurkse, Ragnar, "International Investment Today in the Light of
Nineteenth-Century Experience," Economic Journal 64 (December 1954), pp.
134-150.

Obstfeld, Maurice, "Capital Mobility in the World Economy: Theory and
Measurement," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public PolIcy 24
(Spring 1986), pp. 55-103.
"I-low Integrated Are World Capital Markets? Some New Tests," in
Guillermo A. Calvo et al., eds., Debt, Stabiltzation, and Development:
Essays in Memory of Carlos Dtaz-Alejandro, Oxford, Basil Blackwell,
1989, pp. 134-155.

"Comment," in B. Douglas Bernheim and John B. Shoven, eds.,
National Saving and Economic Performance, Chicago,University of Chicago
Press, 1991, pp. 261-270.

"International Risk Sharing and Capital Mobility: Another Look,"
Journal of International Money and Finance 11 (February 1992), pp.
115-121.

"Are Industrial—Country Consumption Risks Globally Diversified?"

in Leonardo Leiderman and Assaf Razin, eds., Capital Mobility:
Stabilizing or Volattztrtg?, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1994.
"Risk—Taking, Global Diversification, and Growth," American
Economic Review (forthcoming, a).

"Evaluating Risky Consumption Paths: The Role of Intertemporal
Substitutability," European Economic Review (forthcoming, b).

Popper, Helen, "Long-Term Covered Interest Parity: Evidence from
Currency Swaps," Journal of International Money and Finance 12 (August
1993), pp. 439-448.
-73

Razin, Assaf, and Efraim Sadka, "The Interactions between International
Migration and International Trade," Research Memorandum 316, Institute
for Advanced Studies, Vienna, February 1993.
Rubinstein, Mark, "An Aggregation Theorem for Securities Markets,"
Journal of Financial Economics 1 (September 1974), pp. 225-244.
Shiller, Robert J., "Aggregate Income Risks and Hedging Mechanisms,"
Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper 1048, Yale University, June 1993.
Sinn, Stef an, "Saving-Investment Correlations and Capital Mobility: On
the Evidence from Annual Data," Economic Journal 102 (September 1992),
pp. 1162-1170.

Stockman, Alan C., and Harris Dellas, "International Portfolio
Nondiversification and Exchange Rate Variability," Journal of
International Economics 26 (May 1989), pp. 271-289.

Stockman, Alan C., and Linda L. Tesar, "Tastes and Technology in a
Two-Country Model of the Business Cycle: Explaining International
Comovements," NBER Working Paper 3566, December 1990.

Stulz, René M., "A Model of International Asset Pricing," Journal of
Financial Economics 9 (1981), pp. 383-406.
Summers, Lawrence H., "Tax Policy and International Competitiveness," in

Jacob A. Frenkel, ed., International Aspects of Fiscal Policies,
Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1988, pp. 349-375.
Summers, Robert, and Alan Heston, "The Penn World• Table (Mark 5): An
Expanded Set of International Comparisons, 1950-1988," Quarterly
Journal of Economics 106 (May 1991), pp. 327-368.

Svensson, Lars E. 0., "Trade in Risky Assets," American Economic Review
78 (June 1988), pp. 375-394.
Tesar, Linda L., "Savings, Investment, and International Capital Flows,"
Journal of International Economics 31 (August 1991), pp. 55-78.

"International Risk-Sharing and Nontraded Goods," Journal of
International Economics 35 (August 1993), pp. 69-89.
Tesar, Linda L., and Ingrid M. Werner, "Home Bias and the Globalization
of Securities Markets," NBER Working Paper 4218, November 1992.
Ueda, Kazuo, "A Comparative Perspective on Japanese Monetary Policy:
Short-Run Monetary Control and the Transmission Mechanism," in Kenneth

J. Singleton, ed., Japanese Monetary Policy, Chicago, University of
Chicago Press, 1993, pp. 7-29.
van Wincoop, Eric, "Welfare Gains from International Risksharing,"
mimeo, Innocenzo Gasparini Institute for Economic Research, 1992a.
74

"Regional Risksharing," mimeo, Innocerizo Gasparini Institute for
Economic Research, 1992b.

"International Risksharing," mimeo, Innocenzo Gasparini
Institute for Economic Research, 1992c.

Vikeren, Birger, "The Saving-Investment Correlation in the Short Run and
in the Long Run," mimeo, Research Department, Norges Bank, 1991.
Wong, David Y., "What Do Saving-Investment Relationships Tell Us about

Capital Mobility?" Journal of International Money and FInance 9 (March
1990), pp. 60-74.

75

B

State 2
consumption

A

State I consumption

FIGURE 1: Trade across states of nature

FRENCH INTEREST RATE DIFFERENTIAL
Onshore—Offshore Bid
5
0
—5

•10
—15

—20

—25

—30

Jun—92
Jun—90
Jun—88
Jun—86
Jun—84
Jul—82
Jun—9 1
Jun—89
Jun—87
Jun—85
Jun—83

FIGURE 2:

French franc onshore—offshore bid interest
rate differential, January 1982—April 1993

FRENCH INTEREST RATE DIFFERENTIAL
Onshore—Offshore Bid
2.5
2
1.5

0.5

0
—0.5
—1

Jan—92
Mar—92

FIGURE 3:

Dec—92

Aug—92

Apr—92
Jun—92

Oct—92

Apr—93
Feb—93

French franc onshore—offshore bid interest
rate differential, January 1992—April 1993

ITALIAN INTEREST RATE DIFFERENTIAL
Onshore—Offshore Bid
4
2
0
—2

—4
—6

—8

—10
—12
Jun—92
Jun—90
Jun—86
Jun—88
Jun—84
Jul—82
Jun—91
Jun—85
Jun—87
Jun—89
Jun—83

FIGURE 4:

Italian lira onshore—offshore bid interest
rate differential, January 1982—April 1993

GERMAN INTEREST RATE DIFFERENTIAL
Onshore—Offshore Bid

0.8
0.6

0.4
0.2
0
—0.2

—0.4
—0.6

Jun—92
Jun—90
Jun—88
Jun—86
Jun—84
Jul—82
Jun—91
Jun—89
Jun—87
Jun—85
Jun—83

FIGURE 5:

German mark onshore—offshore bid interest
rate differential, January 1982—April 1993

JAPANESE INTEREST RATE DIFFERENTIAL
Onshore—Offshore Bid
1.5

0.5
0
—0.5

—1

—1.5
2

Jun—92
Jun—90
Jun—86
Jun—88
Jun—84
Jul—82
Jun—9 1
Jun—89
Jun—87
Jun—85
Jun—83

FIGURE 6:

Japanese yen onshore—offshore bid interest
rate differential, January 1982—April 1993

IRISH INTEREST RATE DIFFERENTIAL
Onshore—Offshore Bid

3-

Oct—86

Oct—87

Oct—88

Oct—89

Apr—87 Apr—88 Apr—89 Apr—90

FIGURE 7:

Oct—92
Oct—91
Apr—91 Apr—92 Apr—93

Oct—90

Irish punt onshore—offshore bid interest
October 1986—April 1993
rate

differential,

Capital-Output Ratios for Some Industrial Countries
1973 versus 1987
2

1.8

1.6

N
00
1.4

C

1.2

0.8

0.8

I

1.4

1.2

1.6

1.8

Ratio in 1973

FIGURE 8:

Industrial—country capital—output
ratios, 1973 and 1987 (from Maddison
1991)

2

Saving and Investment Rates for the Industrial Countries
1981-90
0.35

ip

0

0.3

no
australia

swi

nz 0

0.25

0

0
Ic

00

gre

I

0.2
0.15

0.1
0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

0.35

Saving/ON?

actual — fitted

FIGURE 9:

Average saving and investment rates for
22 industrial countries, 1981—90

FIGURE 10:

Average saving and investment rates for
11 countries under the classical gold
standard, 1900—13

and Investment Averages
1 900—191 3 (as percent GNP/GDP)
Saving

0.26
CAN

O.24

0.22U

U
DEN

-

0.18-

NOR

0.16-

•

JAP

0.1-

U
ITA

ER

0.140.12-

USA

SWE
U
UK

0.080.08 0.1 0.120.140.160.18 0.2 0.220.240.26
S/Y
I

FIGURE 11:

Saving

Average saving and investment rates
for 11 countries in the interwar
period, 1926—38

and InvesTment Averages

1926—1938 (as percent GNP/GDP)
0.22-

02-

NOR

0.18ITA

uI

016
>-

LWE

0.14U

0.12-

CAN

0.1•

0.080.06 GER

O..0..—

I

I

I

I

0.040.060.08 0.1 0.120.140.160.18 0.2 0.22
s/Y

FIGURE 12:

Average saving and investment rates for
45 Japanese prefectures, 1975—88

0.45
a)

04

o

L035

.
II.

•
•

-

O.3

II.

••

U

•
U

C/)

O.25
C
(I)

C/)

0

0.15
0.1

0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45
Gross saving rate

Table 1
Domestic interbank versus Eurocurrency three—month interest rates:
Daily data, January 1, 1982—April 30, 1993 (in basis points)

A.

1F—i£

-F
1Fr
—i-E
Fr

Jan. 1, 1982-

—227

Jan. 31, 1987

(336)

—254
(375)

Feb. 1. 1987—
June 30, 1990

—11
(16)

July 1, 1990—
May 31, 1992

(7)

Period

—Fr —Fr

8

June 1, 1992AprIl 30, 1993

France
F —E

1 —iFr
—Fr
—267
(375)

E—i
-F
1—Fr
Fr

Onshore
ask-bid

214

13

(336)

(3)

Offshore
ask—bid
40
(49)

—10

—23

—2

13

13

(20)

(19)

(17)

(4)

(10)

—11

—20

12

19

(10)

(8)

(5)

1

(11)

—1.

—3

(34)

(40)

(7)

—35

—32

(45)

(36)

32

34

(20)

(38)

B. Italy

Period
Jan.

I

E

!L1LI

—I -E

.1 -E

1L11L1

!L1'Lj
—124

E -I

(308)

15
(265)

—14

—91

(49)

(47)

1, 1982—
Jan. 31, 1987

—50

—89

(262)

(311)

Feb. 1, 1987—
June 30, 1990

29

48

(48)

(47)

July 1, 1990—
May 31, 1992

56

63

9

(29)

(36)

(29)

June 1, 1992—
April 30, 1993

36
(49)

28

—8

(50)

(43)

Onshore

L11Li ask-bid

—111
(37)

—73
(62)

Offshore
ask-bid

34

74

(10)

(57)

62

43

(20)

55
(24)

(7)

47
(6)

36

45

(42)

(33)

Table 1 (continued)

C. Germany

C

Period

E

!DM—DM

Jan. 1, 1982—
Jan. 31. 1987

-G -E
1DM'DM

17

16

(17)

(17)

July 1, 1990—
May 31, 1992

June 1, 1992—
April 30, 1993

E -G

Onshore

Offshore

!DM1DM

ask-bid

ask-bid

5
(18)

—28

11

13

(16)

(4)

(3)

—8

—15

10

13

(10)

(2)

(3)

—8

13

13

(8)

(2)

(1)

—18

11

13

(13)

(2)

(2)

3

5

Feb. 1, 1987—
June 30, 1990

G -E
!DM—1DM

(10)

(10)

—5

—5

(9)

(8)

7
(13)

(12)

(11)

—18
(9)

—6

5

(12)

D. Japan

1J—1-YE

Period

—v

Jan. 1, 1982—

—7

Jan. 31, 1987

(28)

Feb. 1, 1987—
June 30, 1990

-60

1 —1-EV
-J
V

i.J —i—EV

—Y

na

—20

9
(37)

June 1, 1992—
April 30, 1993

17
(19)

na

Onshore
ask-bid

Offshore
ask-bid

na

—68

na

na

na

na

8
(3)

(33)

na

13
(4)

(28)

(33)

July 1, 1990May 31, 1992

I£—i-JV

-Y

2
(37)

na

10
(19)

na

na

7
(3)

na

7
(2)

Note: Numbers in parentheses are standard deviations. Subscripts denote asset

currency of denomination (Fr =

V =

yen);

franc,

Li =

lira,

DM = deutsche

mark,

superscripts denote asset location (E = London Eurocurrency market,

F = France, I =

Italy,

G = Germany, J

Japan). Overbars denote ask Interest

rates (the rates at which banks lend funds), underbars bid Interest rates
(the rates banks pay on deposits). Data are daily except for weekends and
holidays.

Table 2

Consumption and output correlations:
International data, 1951—72 and 1973—88

Correlation 1951-72
Country

p(ee')

p(9•9W)

p(ê)

Correlation 1973-88

p(eW)

p(99W)

p(ê,9)

Industrial countries
EC members
BELGIUM
DENNARJ<

FRANCE
GERMANY

GREECE
IRELAND
ITALY
LUXEMBOURG
NETHERLANDS
PORTUGAL
SPAIN
U.K.

0.58
—0.02
0.14
0.49
—0.10
—0.33
0.29

0.47
—0.04
0.41
0.31
0.03
0.58
0.35
—0.18
0.27
0.18
0.01
0.49

0.66
0.75
0.64
0.78
0.69
0.77
0.62
0.20
0.77
0.55
0.90
0.60

0.49
0.60
0.50
0.72
0.13
0.48
0.27
0.21
0.56
0.06
0.32
0.59

0.58
0.39
0.56
0.87
0.41
0.57
0.61
0.73
0.59
0.44
0.39
0.66

0.81
0.80
0.71
0.68
0.56
0.76
0.90
0.19
0.75
0.89
0.93
0.81

0.39
0.33
0.43
0.20
0.17
0.06
0.38
0.36
0.27
0.32

0.06
0.27
0.42
0.34
—0.18
0.43
-0.07
0.01
0.07
0.50

0.88
0.59
0.71
0.82
0.91
0.57
0.81
0.56
0.74
0.56

—0.00
0.29
0.10
0.19
0.05
0.62
—0.03
0.05
0.18
0.64

0.31

0.72
0.55
0.30
0.06
0.27
0.71
0.16
0.37
0.04
0.53
0.67

0.66
0.71
0.90
0.46
0.85
0.86
0.77
0.43
0.36
0.79
0.81

—0.04
0.29
0.44
0.29
0.63
0.64
0.11
—0.17
0.56

0.25
0.08
0.62
0.51
0.65
0.64
0.26
0.05
0.44

0.92
0.74
0.85
0.79
0.95
0.92
0.88
0.67
0.95

0.50
0.09
0.26
—0.11
—0.10

Others

AUSTRALIA
AUSTRIA
CANADA
FINLAND
ICELAND
JAPAN
NEW ZEALAND
NORWAY
SWEDEN
SWITZERLAND
U.S.A.

Develooin2 countries
ARGENTINA

BOLIVIA
CHILE
COLOMBIA

COSTA RICA
CYPRUS
DOMINICAN REP.
ECUADOR

EL SALVADOR

0.00
—0.07
—0.32
0.28
0.15
0.20
0.03
—0.01
0.38

0.02
0.34
0.02
0.11
—0.09
—0.04
0.10
0 • 19
0.21

0.96
0.59
0.69
0.89
0.89
0.62
0.92
0.63
0.89

Table 2 (continued)

Correlation 1951-72
Country

GUATEMALA
HONDURAS
INDIA
KENYA
MEXICO
MOROCCO
PARAGUAY
PAKISTAN
PERU
PHILIPPINES
SOUTH AFRICA
THAILAND
TRINIDAD&TOBAGO
TURKEY
URUGUAY

p(&ê')

—0.28
0.16
—0.13
—0.04
—0.01
—0.18
0.13
0.03

0.11
0.03
0.39
—0.27

—0.20
—0.13
0.17

p(99W)

—0.40
0.20
—0.09
0.24
0.22
—0.05
—0.21
0.33
0.35
—0.15
0.20
—0.23
—0.09
0.21
0.42

p(y)
0.81
0.58
0.59
0.93
0.92
0.94
0.78
0.59
0.60
0.77
0.85
0.94
0.69
0.96
0.95

Correlation 1973-88
p(eeW)

0.39
0.54
—0.13
—0.08
—0.27
0.22
—0.32
—0.20
—0.26
—0.06
—0.49
0.51
—0.30
0.06
0.09

p(9yW)

0.48
0.68
—0.16
0.20
0.02
—0.04
0.01
0.06
—0.18
—0.12
—0.10
0.61
—0.33
—0.18
0.28

p(9)
0.95
0.91
0.93
0.82
0.98
0.62
0.93
0.44
0.94
0.80
0.88
0.84
0.95
0.86
0.90

Note: The numbers p(,t?') [or p(2,291)) are simple correlation
coefficients between the annual change in the natural logarithm of

the country's real per capita consumption (or output) and the
annual change in the natural logarith!n of the rest of the world's
real per capita consumption (or output), with the "world" defined
as the sample listed in the table. National per capita consumptions
and outputs were calculated using variables 1, 3, and 6 listed in
appendix A.l of Summers and Heston (1991). The numbers p(O,) are
correlations between each country's log consumption per capita and
log output per capita changes.

Table 3

Consumption and income correlations by prefecture:
Japanese data, 1975—88

Preftcrure

p('&t')

Hokkaido

0.595
—0.096
0.750
0.219
0.496
Fukushima 0.065
0.077
Ibaraki

Aomori
Miyagi
Akita
Yamagata

p(9,9')

p(ê,9)

0.165
0.196
0.555
0.433
0.303
0.386
0.205

0.339
0.905
0.420
0.367
0.748
0.898
0.630

Tochigi
Gunma
Saitama
Chiba
Tokyo
Kanagawa

0.100 0.115 —0.589

Nagano
Shizuoka
Toyama
Ishikawa
Gifu
Aichi

0.252 0.358 —0.474

0.644
0.404
0.547
0.238

0.668
0.337
0.267
0.055

0.444
0.696
0.693
0.978

0.240 —0.015 0.872

Yamanashi 0.658 0.513 0.567

Mie
Fukui
Shiga

0.297 0.415 0.081
0.098 0.232 —0.713

0.723 0.380 0.764
0.258
0.349
0.039
0.012
0.625

0.423 —0.313
—0.004 —0.265

0.211 —0.618
—0.106 0.849
0.602 —0.142

Prefecture

p('ê,t')

Kyoto
Osaka
Hyogo
Nara

0.682 0.149 0.778
0.719 0.053 0.776

Wakayaina

Tottori
Shimane

0.136 0.105 0.455
0.413 0.858 0.491
0.170 0.551 0.717

Okayaina

0.245 0.103 —0.568

p(9,9')

p(&9)

0.480 —0.000 0.742
0.181 0.766 —0.211

Hiroshima 0.661 0.075 0.736
Yamaguchi 0.777 0.331 —0.201
Tokushima 0.313 0.613 0.705
0.610 0.494 0.555
Kagawa
0.277 0.215 0.577
Ehime
0.070 0.122 0.115
Kochi
0.319 0.123 0.569
Fukuoka
0.505 0.534 0.913
saga
Nagasaki —0.218 0.254 0.704
0.059 0.221 0.907
Kumamoto
—0.020 0.096 0.537
Oita
0.010 0.528 0.824
Miyazaki
Kagoshima 0.046 0.218 0.982
—0.249 0.036 0.949
Okinawa

Note: The numbers p(O,c') [or p(p,9')] are simple correlation
coefficients between the annual change in the natural logarithm of
the prefecture's real per capita consumption (or income) and the
annual change in the natural logarithm of the other 44 prefectures'
average real per capita consumption (or income). The numbers p(,p)
are correlations between prefecture log consumption per capita and
log income per capita changes. Data supplied by Robert Dekie.

Table 4
Gains from the elimination of consumption variability:
Selected developing countries

Country

Botewafla

Kenya
Morocco
Tanzania
Zimbabwe
Bangladesh

India

Malaysia
Thailand
Turkey
Barbados
Mexico
Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Venezuela

Note:

Annual

percent consumption gain

4.56
4.27
1.54
4.53
5.31

3.04
0.93
1.17
1.07
1.52
2.69
0.54
1.94
1.80
2.75
2.22

The calculations assume that the logarithm of per capita consumption

follows a random walk with trend and that individuals have
generalized isoelastic utility functions with annual time discount
factor 0.95, relative risk aversion parameter 1, and intertemporal
Data are taken from Sumeera and
substitution elasticity 0.25.

Heaton (1991).
(forthcoming).

For details on the calculation see Obetfeld

Table 5
CroeB—sectional

regressions of investment rates on saving rates:
Period average data, 1974—90

Period
1974—90
1974—80
1981—90
1981—85
1986—90

Note:

R2

0.60

0.715
(0.131)
0.867
(0.170)
0.636
(0.108)
0.567
(0.147)
0.636
(0.094)

0.56
0.64

0.43
0.69

Estimates of equation (4) in text.

Standard errors appear in
parentheses below estimates of slope coefficient . The sample of
22 countries consists of Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada,
Denmark, Finland,

Prance, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,

Japan, the Netherlands, New

Zealand,

Norway, Portugal, Spain,

Sweden, Switzerland, the U.K., and the U.S.

Table 6
Time—eerie. regression. of investment rates on saving rates:
Annual data, 1974—90

0.857
0.732
0.749
0.963
0.657
1.172
1.101
0.561
0.892

0.792
0.825
0.637
1.097
0.727
1.803
0.909
0.327
0.845
—0.450
—0.037
0.214
1.161
—0.135
0.381
1.154
—0.614
0.736
1.104
0.717
1.221
0.113
0.848

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France

Germany

Greece
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Luxembourg
Netherlands

New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States

Note:

(differences)

(levels)

Country

Levele estimates are

based

(I/Y)t a +

+

—0.654
0.208
1.154
1.100
0.042
0.457
0.787

—0.515
0.718
0.246
0.574
1.547
1.002
1.090

on the OLS regression
+
"differences" estimates on the

(S/Y) yt u,

OLS regression A(I/Y) —

+ 5A(S/Y)

+

Au.

Table 7
Time—eeries correlation coefficients between saving and investment rates:
Annual data, 1974—90

Country

p (levels)

0.834
0.746
0.848
0.745
0.783
0.846
0.851
0.401
0.836
—0.333
—0.031
0.150
0.837
—0.247
0.505
0.517
—0.659
0.591
0.711
0.785
0.784
0.092
0.773

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada

Denmark
Finland
prance
Germany
Greece
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Luxembourg
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States

Note:

p (differences)

0.742
0.575
0.773
0.823
0.662
0.682
0.710
0.610
0.750
—0.333
0.157
0.560
0.795
0.071
0.518
0.562
—0.474
0.584
0.193
0.514
0.736
0.668
0.895

teve].5" estimates are simple correlation coefficients between
(I/Y) and (S/Y)t, where both variables are linearly detrended.
"Differences" estimates are correlation coefficients between
A(I/Y) and

t(S/Y)t.

Table 8
Cross—sectional

regressions of investment rates on saving rates during
the classical gold standard and interwar period: Period average data

R2

Period

1880—1913

0.576
(0.335)

0.27

1885—99

0.568
(0.228)
0.774
(0.436)
0.959
(0.082)

0.41

1900—13
1926—38

Note:

0.26
0.94

Standard errors appear in
parentheses below estimates of slope coefficient . The 1880—1913
sample consists of Australia, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany,
Italy, Norway, Sweden, the U.X., and the U.S. The 1885—99 and 1900—
13 samples add Japan. The 1926—38 sample subtracts France and adds

Estimates of equation (4) in text.

Finland.

