NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A COMPARISON OF THE UMTED STATES
AND CANADIAN BANKING SYSTEMS
IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY:
STABILITY VS. EFFICIENCY?

Michael D. Bordo
Hugh Rockoff
Angela Redish

Working Paper No. 4546

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November, 1993

Paper prepared for the Conference on Anglo-American Finance: Financial Markets and
Institutions in 20th-Century North America and the U.K. New York University Salomon
Center, New York City. December 10, 1993. This paper is part of NBER's research program
in Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4546
November 1993
A COMPARISON OF THE UNITED STATES
AND CANADIAN BANKING SYSTEMS
IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY:
STABILITY VS. EFFICIENCY?

ABSTRACT
This paper asks whether the vaunted comparative stability of the Canadian banking

system has been purchased at the cost of creating an oligopoly. We assembled a data set that
compares bank failures, lending rates, interest paid on deposits and related variables over the

period 1920 to 1980. Our principal findings are that: (1) interest rates paid on deposits were
generally higher in Canada; (2) interest income received on securities was generally slightly
higher in Canada; (3) interest rates charged on loans were generally quite similar; (4) net rates
of return to equity were generally higher in Canada than in the U.S..

Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Brunswick, N.J. 08903
and NBER

Angela Redish
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, B.C. V6T 1Y2
CANADA

Hugh Rockoff
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Brunswick, N.J. 08903
and NBER

1. Introduction
One of the most important functions of economic history is the isolation of natural experiments

that can help resolve theoretical and policy debates among economists. This paper illustrates this point
by showing how a long-term comparison of banking in the United States and Canada can clarify a number

of issues related to the appropriate role of government in the regulation of banking.
In the past two decades a major policy debate has raged in the United States over reforming the
banking system. Several problems in the American banking system have been identified. These include:

(I) restrictions on the activities banks can engage in (in part a consequence of the Glass-Steagall Act
(1933) separation of commercial from investment banking); (2) limits in certain states on the number of

branches a bank can have, (3) limits on interstate branching, and (4) deposit insurance.
The Canadian banking system, characterized since the turn of the century by nationwide branch

banking, a small number of banks and a large number of branches, has often been viewed, because of

the advantages of diversification, as superior to the American system of unit (or state branching
restricted) banking. (Calomiris, 1992; White, 1983; O'Driscoll, 1988). Indeed, the Canadian banking
system has been presented as a possible role model for the United States.
The Canadian experience has been one of considerable stability. There has been only one major

failure since World War I, (the Home Bank in 1923) and there were no failures during the Great
Depression. There have been, however, a large number of mergers and branch closings, especially
during the Depression. It has been argued that many more failures would have occurred if mergers
between strong and potentially insolvent banks had not been arranged.' In addition, some believe that
the Canadian banking system in the Great Depression was technically insolvent but that it was propped
up by an implicit guarantee by the Canadian government (Drummond, 1991; Krysanowski and Roberts,
1993).2

In contrast, the American system has been characterized by a number of periods of instability.

Rates of bank failures were high in the 1920s and, of course, the entire system collapsed during the
1930s. Federal deposit insurance established in 1934 seemed to cure the problem for a time, but then
it reemerged in the 1980s. And in the early 1990s some observers came to believe that the expansion of

bank credit was being unduly restricted by efforts to insure stability through increased regulation of bank
capital.

There is a difference, however, between the way American and Canadian observers view the two

systems. American observers have argued that the difference in stability is a strong argument for
adopting a variant of the Canadian system; that is to permit American banks to branch nationwide.
Canadian observers, however, argue that the greater stability of the Canadian system comes at the
expense of oligopoly and undue concentration of economic power as a result of high barriers to entry,
including minimum capital requirements (a multiple of those in the United States) and a costly chartering

provision (Bond, Shearer and Chant, 1984; Shearer, 1992; Porter Commission, 1964). Indeed, by 1966
five of the eight chartered banks held 90% of bank assets. Non-price competition, collusive rate setting

and other restrictive practices, it is believed made consumers of banking services in Canada worse off

than their American counterparts. Moreover, as a result of too few resources in banking, it is argued,
the chartered banks earned monopoly profits.
Despite the divergent regulatory environments in the two countries, and despite the very different

outcomes, there have been few studies that attempt to compare the two systems over a long period of

time. This is unfortunate because the comparison between the two banking systems holds much else

constant. We have two countries at comparable levels of economic development and with similar
cultural, political, and social traditions. If it could be shown that the banking system in one country

performed better than the other, there would be a strong prima facie case that the difference in
performance lay in the regulatory system rather than some other part of the economic or social
environment.

Our paper seeks to compare the two systems over the period 1920 to 1980 along two key
dimensions: stability and efficiency. The choice of dates is dictated by the availability of comparable data

in the two countries. However, the terminal dates clearly demarcate a period in which the contrast
between the systems was at a maximum. By 1920, the full-fledged Canadian nationwide branch banking
system was in place and few changes in structure occurred until the 1967 revision of the Bank Act. Both

the 1967 and 1980 Bank Acts drastically changed the Canadian banking environment by allowing
2

competition in banking services by non-bank financial intermediaries, by permitting entry by foreign
banks, by instituting deposit insurance, and by proscribing many oligopolistic practices.
In the United States the dual banking system (national and state banks) was in full force by 1920
(White, 1983). The McFadden Act of 1927 crystallized a system in which each state had its own banking
system. Beginning in the later 1970s regulations were eased and the system began moving in the direction

of a nationwide branch banking system like Canada's. Individual states began permitting more intrastate

branching. As of 1990 only one state. Colorado, still completely prohibited branch banks. In addition,
banks found ways around the restriction on interstate branching through the development of bank holding

companies. Legal exceptions were made for banks acquiring failed banks and savings and loans in other

states. Finally, and most important, a number of states, through reciprocal legislation, created regions
in which banks were permitted to branch across state lines. By 1991 only Hawaii and Montana denied
entrance to banks from all other states. Still, the United States remains far from a system in which banks
are free to establish branches, acquire existing banks, and merge with other banks throughout the country

as they wish.

The Canadian banking system during our period was both a branch banking system and an
oligopolistic system (defined as a small number of banks), and ideally one would want to control for these

characteristics separately. It might appear that the period 1870-1920, when the Canadian system was a

branch banking system with up to 51 banks would offer such a comparison. However, the rapid
contraction of the system after 1900 (described in Section 2 below) suggests that, at least given the
technology of the era, and the scale of the Canadian market, branch banking in the absence of regulatory

barriers would be oligopolistic. Our goal isto determine whether the oligopolists were able to use their
combined market power.

We begin our analysis with a comparison of bank failures. We then present data relevant to the

efficiency issue: (1) the rate of interest paid on deposits, (2) rates charged on loans, (3) net returns on

equity. Comparisons reveal that (1) rates of interest paid on deposits in the two countries are very
similar. (2) rates charged on loans in the two countries are very similar, (3) rates of return on equity,
however, were somewhat higher in Canada, for most of the period covered. These simple comparisons
3

are then followed by detailed analysis of possible sources of difference between rates of return on equity

based on balance sheet identities. Although we have not pinned down all the sources of differences in
the net rates of return to equity, preliminary analysis suggests that the greater degree of stability of the
Canadian system allowed banks to structure their portfolios in more profitable ways.

Section 2 describes the history of the banking systems of the two countries. It shows that the
difference between the systems was the result of different time-dependent paths resulting in part from the

underlying political structure. The great divergence in the regulatory system does not itself seem to be
the result of any obvious economic difference between the two countries. Section 3 describes the data.

Section 4 presents evidence on stability. Section 5

presents

evidence on the efficiency of the two

country's banking systems and attempts to explain the differences found in the net rates of return on
equity. Section 6 contains a short conclusion and a discussion of future research plans.
2. Divergent Paths

The structure of the American banking system which is unique among the industrial nations of

the world -- there were about 12,000 banks in the United States in 1990 — is the result of the federal
system of government, and the jealousy with which states have guarded their privileges. Before the Civil
War commercial banics were chartered by state governments (with the exception of the First and Second

Banks of the United States -- both of which were terminated). Some states, particularly in the South,
permitted branch banking, but many states permitted only unit banks or severely limited branching. States

also excluded branches of banks chartered in other states.
The antagonism in many states toward branches from other states and toward internal branching

was the result of numerous causes. Partly it reflected a general fear of "monied interests." Partly it
reflected the desire of each state to maximize its own political capital and in many cases its own revenue

by restricting the supply of bank charters. But in many cases, it reflected the political pressures that
existing banks could bring to bear to prevent legislative changes that would permit competition.
In 1863 during the financial turmoil of the Civil War the United States passed a National Banking

Act under which the federal government could establish banks. A federal agency was set up, run by the

Comptroller of the Currency, to issue charters and administer various regulations. It was hoped that all

4

of the existing state banks would convert to national status. But this did not happen. The tax on state bank

notes that had been counted on to drive the state banks into the national system proved less effective than

intended. Many state banks found that they could do well by relying solely on deposits. The regulations
imposed on state banks, moreover, were often less onerous than the regulations imposed on the national
banks, providing an offset to the greater prestige that adhered to a national charter. Over time, as deposit

banking expanded, the state systems grew and came to rival the national system.
Gradually, successive Comptrollers of the Currency developed the doctrine that the national banks

were subject to the same restrictions with regard to branching as the state chartered banks in the state
where the national bank was located. This doctrine was codified in the McFadden Act of 1927. The result

was the 'dual banking system' as it came to be called. Each state had a distinct banking system. The

rules on branching varied from State to state. Some, such as California, permitted statewide branch
banking and systems analogous to the Canadian system developed. At the other extreme some, such as

Illinois, prohibited branch banking altogether. In the latter cases, rural areas in particular were
characterized by large numbers of small vulnerable banks.

Repeatedly after the Civil War (in 1873, 1884, 1890, 1893 and 1907) the financial system was
hit by panics (or "stringencies") in which large numbers of banks failed, and the public, fearing complete

collapse of the system, withdrew cash. After the Panic of 1907 a National Monetary Commission was
set up, and on the basis of its recommendations the Federal Reserve System was established in December
1913. The Federal Reserve, it was hoped, would prevent future panics by acting as a lender of last resort

when a panic threatened, and through its regulatory activities with regard to member banks. (National

banks were required to join and state banks could do so if they chose.) For a variety of reasons,
however, the Federal Reserve failed to act aggressively to stem the tide of bank failures in the early
1930s, and the banking crisis of 1930-1933 turned out to be worse than any previous crisis.
New legislation was passed intended to further strengthen the system, although without attacking

the fragmented structure of the system, the root cause of the problem. The link between gold and the
money supply was broken (removing an important constraint on the ability of the Federal Reserve to act

as lender of last resort), interest on time deposits was restricted and interest on demand deposits was
5

prohibited. investment banking was separated from commercial banking, and a system of national deposit

insurance was established. Deposit insurance was administered by the newly created Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation which was also given regulatory powers.
For a time the reformed system worked well. Bank failures were infrequent after 1934, and the
public was satisfied that a remedy at last had been found for the instability of the banking system. In the

1970s, however, rising inflation created new strains, and the rate of bank failures increased. The
restrictions on deposit interest were particularly troublesome since inflation was raising the general level
of interest rates. In 1980 Congress passed the Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control

Act which, among other things, created deposit accounts on which banks could pay competitive rates of
interest.

In recent years recognition has been growing that the fragmented structure of the system is a
drawback both because it weakens the banking system internally and because it makes it harder for

American banks to compete in international markets. As a result, traditional restrictions on branch
banking have been weakened. Exceptions have been made for banks purchasing insolvent banks in other
states. Bank holding companies have been permitted to circumvent restrictions by carrying on a restricted

range of activities in other states. Chains of banks under common ownership have been able to provide

some of the economies of scale possible with branching. And some states have passed laws allowing
branches of banks chartered in other states that have made reciprocal arrangements, thus creating regions

of the country in which banks are relatively free to branch across state lines. Nevertheless, the banking
system of the United States remains greatly fragmented when compared with other industrial nations, and

especially with her neighbor to the North.

The first bank to open in Canada (or rather the colonies that became Canada) was the Bank of
Montreal which was chartered in 1821. The charter permitted it to open branches, make loans against
real bills, buy securities, issue notes and hold deposits. Since that time branching has remained a feature

of Canadian banicing, (in 1980 there were 11 banks and 7414 branches) but much else has changed.
Although relative to the United States, Canada has always had a small number of banks, the number has

declined dramatically from the historical maximum of 51 banks in 1874. Between 1874 and 1900 the
6

number declined to 35, primarily reflecting 17 insolvencies, and by 1925 there were only 11 banks
remaining, mainly as a result of 27 mergers. The shift from insolvency to amalgamation reflected a
legislative change that made it possible for banks to merge without having a specific act of parliament.

The shift, together with considerable anecdotal evidence, has led many observers to argue that prior to
the mid-20s the Canadian system was not particularly stable.
In addition to the absence of branching restrictions, other regulatory restrictions have been less

severe in Canada. The Office of the Inspector General of Banks began bank inspections in 1924
following the failure of the Home Bank, but even in 1980 had only 7 inspectors. In that same year, the
office of the Comptroller of the Currency which regulates national banks had 2089 examiners (White,

1992, p. 92) --

and

this comparison excludes examiners based at the Federal Deposit Insurance

Corporation, and in state regulatory agencies. The introduction of the Bank of Canada in 1935 led to
required reserves and the phasing out of privately issued bank notes.

In 1962 the federal government appointed a Royal Commission on Banking and Finance (the
Porter Commission) whose report in 1964 argued that the concentration in the Canadian banking industry

had imposed considerable costs on Canadians. Testimony by bankers stated that they had discouraged
price competition -- both for deposits and on loans -- although they emphasized the fierceness of non-price

competition. The Commission's report advocated increasing the extent of competition in the banking
system, and leveling the playing field between banks and near-banks.
Although jurisdictional disputes (near-banks are primarily under provincial jurisdiction) prevented

adoption of some of the Commission's recommendations, many were adopted. Reserve requirements
were lowered. Lending activities, which had been expanded in 1954 to include insured mortgages and
chattel mortgages, were further broadened to include all mortgages. Lending rate ceilings which had been

reduced from 7% to 6% in 1944 were removed in the 1967 revisions to the Bank Act. Also in 1967 the

federal government introduced compulsory deposit insurance (the CDIC). Since rates were not risk
adjusted and near-banks were also eligible to join, this increased the competition for the chartered banks.

In f980 the privately owned and operated Canadian Payments Association took over operation of the
clearing house from the Canadian Bankers' Association as a result of the government's insistence that the

7

non-bank depository institutions have equal access to the payments system

3. The Data

We have collected annual data for both the United States and Canada covering primarily the

period 1920 to 1980, the period when the contrast between the Canadian and American systems is
greatest. For the United States we have concentrated on the national banks, primarily because good
balance sheet and income data exist from the founding of the system in 1863 up to today, but also because

the National Banks are generally larger and thus resemble the Canadian banks. The United States data
are available in the Annual Recorts of the Comptroller of the Currency, although many of the series we

use are reproduced in Historical Statistics of the United States and All Bank Statistics. The

begins in 1863. With the exception of net income (available from 1863), detailed income
statement data is not available until after 1919. Specifically, "Interest and Fees (Discount) on Loans'
begins in 1919, and "Interest and Dividends on Bonds, Stocks and Other Securities" begins in 1927. This
latter category, is art aggregation of income from United States government securities and other securities

consisting mainly of obligations of state and political subdivisions in the United States. These
subdivisions are identified after 1945. "Interest Paid on Total Deposits" is available after 1929.

Balance Sheet data is available since 1863. Categories of interest here include "Total Loans,"
"Total Deposits," and "Total Capital." The disaggregation of "Total Deposits" into time, demand, and

government deposits is made available, discontinuously, after 1929. "Total Capital" (what we refer to
as equity) is defined as preferred, common and capital stock, surplus, undivided profits and reserves for
contingencies. Return ratios are constructed by dividing interest income (expense) by the asset (liability)

responsible for generating the income (expense). Real ratios are constructed by subtracting changes in
the Consumer Price Index. The following balance sheet shows the breakdown we have worked with.

8

Bank Balance Sheet

Assets

Liabilities and Capital

R=

reserves

D=

S=

Securities

OL = Other Liabilities

L=

Loans

K=

Deposits

Capital

OA = Other Assets

A=

Total Assets

Total Liabilities and Capital

For example, our estimate of the average interest on loans is computed by dividing income from loans
from the income statement by total loans (L) from the annual balance sheet. In some cases it would be
desirable to have more disaggregated data -- to be able to distinguish the interest on demand deposits from

the interest on time deposits, for example. Nevertheless, even the broad categories that we are able to
collect consistently over the period make possible some interesting comparisons between the United States

and Canada.

The data for Canada are similar, so similar in fact as to suggest that the assemblers of the
Canadian data assumed that users would want to make comparisons with the United States. Each
Canadian bank is required to file monthly balance sheets with the government which publishes them in
the Canada Gazette. Historical (aggregate) data are reprinted in the Historical Statistics of Canada (1983)

and, for more recent years the Bank of Canada Review. Since 1929 income and expenses accounts for
the banks are reported annually and the aggregated data are available in the Historical Statistics of Canada

and the Bank of Canada Review (February 1993).

4. Stability
The relative stability of the Canadian banking system during the period we cover is well known.

Between 1920 and 1980, only one major Canadian bank failed: The Home Bank in 1923 with a capttal

(paid in plus reserve) of $2.5 million, about 1 percent of total bank capital at the time. The failure of

9

the Home Bank was the result of excessive lending on western real estate, whose value collapsed in the

deflation of 1920. During the 1930s a number of branches were closed, and closings may have been
analogous in some ways to the bank failures that occurred in the United States. But depositors never lost
any money and borrowers could turn to other branches of the same institution, although some of the long

term ties between borrowers and their local branches were severed.

In recent years there have been a number of troubling failures suggesting something of a
convergence in the levels of stability in the two systems. Two small banks in Alberta failed due to
concentration on oil related lending. There have also been a number of failures among the Canadian Trust

companies, analogous to the failures in the U.S. among the Savings and Loans. But there have been no
failures among the large banks with nationwide branch systems that we focus on.
The very different picture for the United States is illustrated in Figure lA which plots the annual

percentage of insolvent national banks for the whole period since the founding of the national banking
system, and Figure lB which plots the same ratio for the period since 1935. The depression of the l890s,
the high rate of failure (mostly among rural banks) in the 1920s, the catastrophe of the 1930s, the relative

stability during most of the postwar period, and the increased difficulties in recent years are readily
apparent in the figures.
Typically, it is the smaller national banks that fail, so the picture is somewhat changed if we turn
to Figure 2A which plots the ratio of the capital of insolvent national banks to capital in all national banks

for the period 1920-1990, and Figure 2B which plots the same ratio for the period after 1935. The
depression of the 1930s still stands out in sharp relief, but the banking difficulties of the late l980s fade

Into the background. The reason is simply that insolvencies in recent years have been confined to very
small national banks, state chartered banks, and the savings and loan associations. Larger national banks

have been exempt. The peak in 1974 is the failure of the Franklin National Bank, a large bank with
branches in New York City and Long Island.

10

But why should we be so concerned about differences in bank failure rates? In general we want

entrepreneurs to take risks, and if they do, we expect that some projects will turn out badly, and that
some businesses will fail. So in most industries we do not want a government policy that aims at zero
failures. Nevertheless, it has long been accepted that banking is different, and that for several reasons a
major goal of government policy should be reducing the rate of bank failure to near zero. For one thing,

a bank failure may disrupt a wide range of local businesses that depend on the bank for credit or other

services. Second, a bank failure may hurt a large number of relatively poor depositors, so the welfare
effects of bank failures may be more troubling than the welfare effects of failures of similar magnitude

in other industries. Finally, of course, there is the possibility that a bank failure could set off a panic
producing a cumulative contraction of money and credit. The establishment of deposit insurance in both
countries, and of central banks with the authority to act as lenders of last resort, reflect the public attitude
toward bank failures, and have served to mitigate the differences in failure rates in the two countries since

the 1930s. Still, to the extent that a difference remains, these arguments strongly suggest remaking the
U.S. banking system in the Canadian image.
But, as we noted above, the Canadian system is characterized by a small number of banks, that

at least at first glance may have the ability to collude and exploit the public. We now turn to a
comparison of lending and other activities in the two systems.
5. Efficiency
Economists generally think of banks as intermediaries that issue short-term liabilities, demand and

time deposits, and then invest in longer term liabilities, government or private securities and various types

of individualized loans. The profits of the bank are generated by the difference between the rate of return

paid on deposits and the rate received on longer term investments, and from the bank's specialized skill

in placing and administering individualized loans. This picture is, to be sure, oversimplified. Modern
banks engage in a wide range of other activities -- managing trust funds, issuing letters of credit, selling

11

foreign exchange, and so on -- and in some cases these activities may overshadow more traditional forms

of banking. It is also, we hasten to add, a picture that applies more to banks in the English speaking
world than to banks in other areas. But in comparing Canadian and United States banking it makes sense

to start with the traditional simplified view of a bank and see how far that takes us.
Even in this simplified model there are several distinct areas in which monopoly power could

make itself felt. Below we will consider three separate markets: (1) the market for deposits, (2) the
market for securities, and (3) the market for loans. We will then look at the bottom line, the net rate of
return to capital. Presumably, no matter the market in which banks exercise monopoly power, it should

show up, in the end, in the net rate of return to equity.
Monopoly power could make itself felt through the exploitation of depositors. A banking cartel
could pay lower interest rates than those that would emerge from the free play of economic forces. This,

of course, is not the only possibility. It may be that a branch banking system would provide competition
in small markets when a unit banking system would not.

On the other hand, we must also take regulation into account. From 1934 to 1980 American
deposit interest rates were tightly regulated. Interest on checkable deposits was entirely prohibited, and

interest on time deposits was subject to a ceiling that was sometimes below market rates. These
regulations were imposed after the banking crisis of the early 1930s. Undoubtedly, bankers sought these

restrictions in order to increase their profits, but the argument they made — that "excessive" price
competition during the twenties had contributed to the crisis by forcing banks to hold "excessively" risky
portfolios -- fell on receptive Congressional ears. We would expect that what was in effect a government

run cartel would have been more efficient at exploiting bank depositors than a private cartel. Figure 3A
plots nominal deposit interest rates in Canada and the United States; Figure 3B plots real deposit interest

rates, calculated by subtracting the annual percentage change in the consumer price index from the
nomtnal return. Canadian nominal rates are above United States nominal rates throughout. The gap begins

12

to widen in the nineteen sixties. The freer Canadian rates moved up with inflation, while the more heavily

regulaed American rates did not. Evidently, the United States government enforced cartel was more
potent than the Canadian system that permitted a small number of highly branched banks freedom to set

their own rates.

As might be expected the differentials appear to be smaller when real rather than nominal
magnitudes are compared. But even here the opening of the gap in the 1960s, and the sharp run up at the

end of the seventies, are visible.

We expect that if the Canadian banks were exploiting monopoly power they would do so by

restricting the supply of loans and raising interest rates on them. This is not, however, the only
possibility suggested by the literature. It has been argued that in the United States in the nineteenth
century many southern and western towns became one-bank or few-bank towns as a result of restrictions

on branch banking. The result was that banks in those areas could charge monopoly loan rates (Sylla,
1969). If this situation continued into the twentieth century it is possible that U.S. loan rates might be

above Canadian rates. To examine this issue we computed proxies for nominal loan rates for both
countries by dividing gross loan income by total loans for both countries.3 Figure 4A plots the nominal
loan rates for Canada and the United States and Figure 4B plots the real loan rates. We had expected to
find that Canadian loan rates would normally be above United States loan rates due to the market power
of the Canadian banks. We should have had more faith in the equalizing force of competition. Generally,

the two series track each other fairly closely, and in the one period in which a sustained gap opens up,

from the mid-1940s to the late 1960s, it is the United States loan rate that is higher. This evidence
suggests that Canadian borrowers were not being exploited by cartel-like practices of the Canadian
bankers.
We have no compelling explanation for the gap that opened up from the mid-1940s to the late
l960s, One possibility is that the Canadian ceiling on bank lending rates which, as we noted above, was

13

reduced from 7% to 6% in 1944, but then removed in the 1967 revisions to the Bank Act, kept Canadian

rates below their equilibrium level.

The gap is less visible in Figure 4B. Partly this is due to the change in scale. The postwar
movements (and differences) in real rates are all small compared with the violent movements in the 1930s

and 1940s. But movements in inflation rates also eliminate the gap in some of the early years, so that it
does not open up clearly until the mid-1950s. The examination of the real rates, however, lead us to the

same conclusion with regard to the role of monopoly power: there is no evidence of a sustained
differential in favor of the Canadian banks that would indicate significant welfare losses from monopoly

behavior on the part of the Canadian banks.4

In addition to not accounting explicitly for local monopoly power in the United States, our
comparison of bank lending rates may also be biased by not accounting for the fact that U.S. banks
operate in a heterogenous mix of loan and deposit markets, ranging from the large corporate market to
commodity markets that are more protected from direct competition with the open markets. Though our
use of the mean loan rate could account for each source of bias taken in isolation it may not account for

both. One way to deal with these issues -- a subject for further research — is to compare all U.S. banks
(state, national, savings and loan and mutual savings banks) with the sum of Canadian chartered banks

and near banks (the trust companies) or else to compare U.S. money center banks with Canadian
chartered banks.
Our estimates of bank lending rates, we must also admit, may be biased downward by the holding

of compensating balances.5 If, for example, a bank required a borrower to keep on deposit funds equal
to 20 percent of the loan, and if the borrower would not- otherwise hold deposits of that amount in any

bank, then a nominal rate of 10 percent on the loan, would be equivalent to a true rate of 12.5 percent
(10/[1-.21). This is most likely to have been a problem in Canada during the period from the mid-40s to
the inid-1960s when the 6 percent usury ceiling was in place.

14

Surveys of bank lending practices in the United States (Baxter and Shapiro, 1964; Burns, 1972;

and Mahoney 1988) have shown that compensating balance requirements are substantial, and have
changed over time. The mere existence of compensating balances, however, does not necessarily imply
that our estimates are in error because compensating balances can be used for a wide variety of purposes

besides hiding increases in lending rates. For example, compensating balances can be used to forge and
maintain long-term relationships with customers. And they can be used by a bank to monitor the behavior

of their borrowers. In either case, if a customer would have maintained the deposit in the lending bank
or with a competitor in the absence of the compensating balance requirement, the compensating balance
cannot be viewed as increasing the effective loan rate to the extent illustrated by the numerical example

given above. Compensating balances may also be used for other purposes such as compensating banks
for providing lines of credit or, during some periods in U.S. history, paying interest on deposits indirectly

by providing lower loan rates for depositors. For further discussion of the many uses of compensating
balances see Gilbert (1977), Meinster (1977), Duca (1991), and the references cited there.

Unfortunately, we have not been able to think of any practical way of estimating the probable
extent of the bias. Until further information on the nature and extent of compensating balances becomes

available, this point must simply be held in mind as a possible qualification of our results.
We did not expect major differences in rates of return to the security portfolios of the banks. The
securities held by banks, typically, are traded on highly competitive domestic and international markets.
It seemed unlikely that the Canadian banks would be able to exercise sufficient market power to influence

the rates of return.
Figure 5A plots nominal returns to the security portfolios, and Figure 5B, the real returns. There
is evidently a small but persistent gap between the nominal returns on Canadian securities and the nominal

return on U.S. securities throughout the period we cover. The gap is less persistent when we examine

real rates in Figure 5B, but it is still visible throughout mostof the postwar period. There are several

15

possible explanations: (1) differences in the risk structure of the security portfolios, (2) differences in
country risk. But we have not pursued this difference since it did not seem directly related to the issue
of monopoly power.

Our examination of the spreads (rates charged less rates paid), to sum up, turned up little
evidence that cartel behavior on the part of Canadian banks allowed them to exploit their customers, at
least in comparison with U.S. banks. We therefore expected that when we turned to the net rate of return

to equity, there would be little persistent difference.

Figure 6A plots the nominal return to bank equity (net returns divided by total capital); and
Figure 6B plots real returns. A consistent gap, however, emerges in favor of the Canadian system. Except

for a segment in the l950s and 1960s (which corresponds to the time when United States loan rates were

relatively high) Canadian rates of return to equity were generally higher than American rates.6

This presented us with something of a paradox: on the one hand there is little evidence of
monopoly power in Canadian loan and deposit markets and yet, on the other hand, there is evidence that

Canadian banks often earned higher net returns on equity. On the basis of comparisons of the balance
sheets we concluded that it could be explained, at least proximately, by the structure of bank balance
sheets. Table 1 below shows two key ratios at decade intervals. Notice that in every year the Canadian
banks devoted a larger proportion of their assets, usually a considerably larger proportion, to loans. The

Canadian banks, moreover, were more highly leveraged than U.S. banks. In some years the difference
was striking. In 1950 for example the Canadian leverage ratio was almost twice the U.S. ratio.
To test whether balance sheet differences explain the gap between net rates of return on equity
we computed two counterfactual gaps. In one we kept the U.S. balance sheet Structure but changed the

"prices' -- we used Canadian loan rates, security rates, deposit rates, and expense ratios. In the other we
kept U.S. prices but changed the balance sheet-- we used Canadian loan-asset, security-asset, and asset-

capital ratios.

16

More formally we used the following identity derived from the definition of the rate of return on

equity and the balance sheet identity.

(1) ROE = (A/K)*{rl*(L/A) + rs*(S/A) - rd*(D/A) - x}
where ROE is the rate of retum on equity
A is total assets
K is total equity

rl is the rate of return on loans
rs is the rate of return on securities
L is total Loans
S is total Securities

rd is the rate paid on deposits
D is total Deposits, and
x is residual costs and earnings per dollar of assets.

We then defined three gaps. The actual gap is the Canadian ROE less the U.S. ROE. The price gap is

the U.S. ROE with rI, rs, rd, and x changed to the Canadian levels less the actual U.S. ROE. The
balance sheet gap is the U.S. ROE with k/K, L/A, S/A, and D/A changed to the Canadian levels. To
put it somewhat differently, the price gap and the balance sheet gap can be thought of as the determinants

of the actual gap. The price gap and the balance sheet gap, as we have defined them, however, do not

sum exaetly to the actual gap, because of interaction effects. The results of these computations are
displayed in figures 7A (nominal) and 7B (real).
The overall picture is clear. Balance sheet differences greatly favored the Canadian banks. If the
only differences between Canadian banks and U.S. banks were their leverage, loan-asset, security-asset,

and deposit-asset ratios, the gap between the Canadian ROE and the U.S. ROE would have been even
larger than it actually was. Price differences, on the other hand, worked against the Canadian banks. If

17

the only differences between the Canadian banks and U.S. banks were their rates of return on loans and
securities, their rates paid on deposits, and their administrative costs, the Canadian ROE would have been

below the U.S. ROE.
The relative importance of balance sheet and price variables, however, changed over time. During

the period. 1929-1944, there was little difference in rates of return to earning assets and deposit rates,
so the effect of the Canadian balance sheets (high earning asset ratios, and high leverage) was to raise
the actual Canadian ROE above the US ROE. During the period. 1945 - 1966 especially after 1955, the
two determinants offset each other. The loan rate in Canada was lower than in the US, possibly because
of legal restrictions on lending rates, and this offset the positive effects of the Canadian balance sheets.

The result was little difference in ROEs. During the first part of the period 1967-1979 an improvement

in Canadian spreads compared with U.S. spreads (driven by rising Canadian loan rates) pushed the
Canadian ROE above the US ROE. A deterioration in Canadian spreads compared with the U.S. (driven

by higher deposit rates in Canada) then set in, but this was more than offset by a rapid increase in
Canadian leverage, thus keeping the Canadian ROE above the US ROE for the remainder of the period.
To explain these results we would suggest three related factors. (1) Regulatory differences. U.S.

national banks were subject to higher reserve requirements than Canadian banks until the 1960s. US.
required reserve ratios at national banks for demand deposits generally averaged between 7 and 9 percent
until the famous doubling of reserve requirements in 1936 and 1937, it then remained in the neighborhood

of 15 percent until the mid-1950s. (Cagan, 1965, p. 361). From 1935 to 1954 the required reserve ratio

in Canada, on the other hand, was five percent on Canadian dollar deposits. In 1954 it was raised to 8
percent, still well below the U.S. level. In 1968, however, Canadian reserve requirements were increased

to 12 percent on demand deposits, to 4 percent on time deposits, and a secondary reserve requirement
against foreign and domestic deposits was introduced -- changes which appear to have brought Canadian

and U.S. standards roughly into line.

18

During part of the period, moreover, restrictions on U.S. deposit rates, although they worked to
increase profit rates, may have made U.S. banks sensitive to the danger of losing deposits when market

rates rose, forcing them to maintain more liquid reserves. In addition, debt-equity ratios were lower in

the U.S., partly as a result of regulation.
(2) Economies of scale. It may be that Canadian banks enjoyed economies of scale that permitted

them to reduce their holdings of liquid assets compared with American banks. A rural branch of a bank

in Canada, for example, might have been able to concentrate on lending, while a corresponding rural
independent bank in the United States might have been furced to hold relatively more liquid reserves
because it was not able to rely completely on other banks or the Federal Reserve when it needed reserves.

Recently. Nathan and Neave (1992) have provided some evidence for this explanation.7

(3) Stability. Finally, the low risk of failure in Canada might have made it possible for the
Canadian banks to hold smaller amounts of non-interest bearing assets, and to proceed to higher assetequity ratios. The regulatory differences discussed above under (1), moreover, were in tom the result of
attempts to achieve stability without upsetting the traditional industrial structure of U.S. banking. Reserve

requirements and similar controls, in other words, were second best attempts to achieve stability that
reduced the ability of U.S. banks to sen'e their customers effectively.
6. Conclusion
This exercise addresses the question of whether the vaunted comparative stability of the Canadian

banking system has been purchased at the cost of creating an oligopoly that exploits bank borrowers or

other users of banking services. We assembled a data set that makes possible comparisons of bank
failures, lending rates, interest paid on deposits, and related variables over the period 1920 to 1980 when
the contrast between the two systems was at a maximum. Our principal findings are that (1) interest rates
paid on deposits were generally higher in Canada in real and nominal terms, (2) interest income received
on securities was generally slightly higher in Canada in nominal and real terms, (3) interest rates charged

19

on loans were generally quite similar in nominal and real tenns except in one period when loan rates were

higher in the United States, and paradoxically, (4) net rates of return to equity were generally higher in

Canada than in the U.S. in nominal and real terms.

We then conducted an analysis of the difference in net rates of return to equity. Our analysis
suggests that the higher rate of return to equity in Canada was due to the higher proportion of Canadian
portfolios devoted to lending and to the higher asset-equity ratios of the Canadian banks.
Tentatively, we have attributed the differences between the U.S. and Canadian balance sheets to
regulatory differences, economies of scale, and the generally greater stability of the Canadian system. The

last factor may well have been the most important: because the threat of failure was low banks could

reduce reserve ratios and increase leverage without alarming customers, or provoking regulatory

restrictions. The difference in net rates of return, in other words, might have been a return to an
unmeasured component of Canadian bank capital -- their reputation for soundness. But to reiterate, this
is partly conjecture. Further research is needed to clarify this explanation and to distinguish it from other

candidates. What is clear at this point is that there is no evidence that cartel behavior among Canadian
banks created gross differences in lending rates or other measures of bank behavior that would imply that

the Canada paid a high price for the stability it enjoyed relative to the U.S. This conclusion, moreover,
is reinforced by recent studies of Canadian banking that use very different methodologies (Nathan and

Neave, 1989; Shaffer, 1993).

In addition, we should note that our brief for the Canadian system takes the existing U.S.
banking system as the relevant alternative. A considerable number of studies of U.S. banking markets,

have shown that it is reasonably competitive. (Gilbert 1984, which surveys a considerable number of
studies, and Shaffer and DiSalvo 1991). So the finding that Canadian users of bank services were treated

about as well as their neighbors to the south over the period 1920-1980, while experiencing a much

higher level of bank stability, speaks well for the Canadian system. But of necessity studies of
20

competition in U.S. banking markets do not address the effects of permitting unlimited merging,
acqutring, and branching. It is possible that the massive reorganization resulting from such a policy would

produce much greater efficiency in the U.S. banking system. So our comparison does not rule our the
possibility of some cartel-based inefficiency in the Canadian banking system when it is compared with

a hypothetical reorganized U.S. system, or, for that matter, a more open Canadian system.
The conclusion that the Canadian banking system was both more stable and more efficient than
her American counterpart raises the broader issue of which system was better for economic development.

On the one hand, the Canadian branch banking system had greater lending capacity than did the U.S. unit

(restricted branching) system, but the latter substituted for this deficiency by developing more open and

deep capital markets. Both systems in turn possessed advantages and disadvantages compared to the
European 'universal' banking model. Each banking system represents a different mix of 'market-based'
and 'institution-based' financial systems. Which model is superior is an open question.

21

References

Baxter, Nevins D. and Harold T. Shapiro. (1964) "Compensating-Balance Requirements: The Results

of a Survey. Journal of Finance 19: 483-96.
Bodenhorn, Howard and Hugh Rockoff (1992). 'Regional Interest Rates in Antebellum America. "In
Claudia Goldin and Hugh Rockoff, eds., strategic Factors in Nineteenth Century American
Economic History: A Volume to Honor Robert W. Fogel. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Boyd, John H. and Stanley L. Graham (1991). "Investigating the Banking Consolidation Trend."
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis quarterly Review, Spring, pp. 3-14.
Burns, Joseph E. (1972) "Compensating Balance Requirements Integral to Bank Lending." Federal
Reserve Bank of Dallas Business Review February, 1-8.

Busche, Kelly and John F. Chant. (1992) "The Imminent Failure Hypothesis in Canadian Banking."
Simon Fraser University (mimeo).

Cagan, Phillip. (1965) Determinants and Effects of Changes in the Stock of Money, 1875-1960, New
York: Columbia University Press for the NBER.

Calomiris, Charles. (1992) "Regulation, Industrial Structure, and Instability in U.S. Banking: An
Historical Perspective." Ch. 1. in Michael Klausner, I.,awrence J. White, editors. Structural

Change in Banking. Homeward, Illinois:Irwin.
Davis, Lance. (1965) "The Investment Market, 1870-1914: Evolution of a National Market" Journal

of Economic History, 25: 355-99.
Drummond, Ian, (1991) "Why Canadian Banks Did Not Collapse in the 1930's" in Harold James,
Hakan Lindgren, and Alice Teichova (eds) The Role of Banks in the Interwar Economy:
New York, Cambridge University Press. pp. 232-250.

22

Duca, John V. (1992) 'U.S. Business Credit Sources, Demand Deposits, and the Missing Money.
Journal of Banking and Finance 16: 567-83.
Gilbert, R. Alton. (1977) "Effects of Interest on Demand Deposits: Implications of Compensating

Balances." Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 59: 8-15.

_______ (1984) "Bank Market Structure and Competition: A Survey." Journal of Money, Credit,
and Banking 16:617-45.

Haubrich, Joseph 0. (1990) "Nonmonetary Effects of Financial Crises: Lessons From the Great
Depression in Canada." Journal of Monetary Economics 25:223-252.
James, John. (1976) "The Development of the National Money Market," Journal of Economic
History 36: 878-97.

Keehn, Richard. (1975) "Market Power and Bank Lending: Some Evidence from Wisconsin, 18701900," Journal of Economic History 35: 591-620.

Kryzanowski, Lawrence and Gordon Roberts. (1993) "The Performance of the Canadian Banking
System 1920 - 1940." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking (forthcoming).

Mahoney, Patrick I. (1988) "The Recent Behavior of Demand Deposits." Federal Reserve Bulletin

74: 195-208.
Meinster, David R. (1977) "The Demand for Compensating Balances." Southern Economic Journal

45: 1538-46.
Nathan, Alli, and Edwin H. Neave. (1989) "Competition and Contestability in Canada's Financial
System: Empirical Results." Canadian Journal of Economics 22: 576-94.

"Operating Efficiency of Canadian Banks." Queens University Working Paper (1992).
O'Driscoll, Gerald P., (1988) "Deposit Insurance in Theory and Practice." In Catherine England and

Thomas Huertas, eds., The Financial Services Revolution. Boston: Kiuwer Academic
Publishers.

23

Reiort of the Royal Commission on Banking and Finance, (Porter Commission). (1964)
Ottawa:Government of Canada.

Shaffer, Sherrill. (1993) "A Test of Competition in Canadian Banking." Journal of Money Credit and
Banking. 25: 49-61.

Shaffer, Sherrill and J. DiSalvo. (1991) 'Conduct in a Banking Duopoly.' Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia, working paper 91-12.

Shearer, Ronald A., John F. Chant, David E. Bond, (1984) The Economics of the Canadian

Financial System: Theory, Policy and Institutions. Second Edition, Scarborough, Ontario:
Prentice-Hall Canada, Inc.

Shearer, Ronald A. (1992). 'The Canadian Financial System" New Paigrave Dictionary of Money

and Finance. London:MacMillan.
Smiley, Gene. (1975) "Interest Rate Movements in the United States, 1888-1913." Journal of
Economic History 35: 591-620.

Sylla, Richard. (1969) "Federal Policy, Banking Market Structure, and Capital Mobilization in the
United States, 1863-1913." Journal of Economic History 29: 657-86.
White, Eugene N. (1992) The Comotroller and the Transformation of American Banking. 1960-1990.

Washington D.C: Comptroller of the Currency.
White, Eugene N. (1983) The Regulation and Reform of the American Banking System, 1900-1929.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

24

* For excellent research assistance we would like to thank Patrick Coe, Sherrie Metcalfe, and Joseph
Santos. The University of British Columbia small grants program provided financial assistance.

Endnotes

1. According to Bushe and Chant (1992), however, based on an examination of rates of return on
Investment between mergee and mergor banks 1900-1931, there is little evidence for the 'imminent
failure" hypothesis.
2. Evidence by Haubrich (1990) on the other hand, shows that though there was a significant reduction
in the number of branches in Canada during the Great Depression (still less than one half the number of
bank failures in the U.S.), this did not have the same deleterious effects on economic activity as Bernanke

(1983) found for bank failures in the U.S.
3. Similar proxies have been widely used to estimate rates of return to bank loans in the United States
in the nineteenth century. See Davis (1965), Sylla (1969), Keehn (1975), Smiley (1975), James (1976),
and Bodenhorn and Rockoff (1992). The actual return on loans is not available for the nineteenth century.

They have to be estimated by imputing a return to the security portfolio. For our period, however,
interest on loans is available separately.

4. We also plotted a moving five year standard deviation of the loan rates — to test whether rates were

more stable in one country or the other -- but there were no readily apparent differences.
5. We thank Ronald Shearer for pointing out the potential significance of compensating balances to us.
6. Some difference might have been expected on the basis of exchange rate risks or other country-related

risks. For example, even during a period of fixed exchange rates Iong-tenn investors in banks would
have to be concerned about future devaluations or revaluatjons of the Canadian dollar. The difference in

rates of return to the security portfolios (figure 5A) are likely to capture these risks, and this difference
seldom exceeded 100 basis points. The net rate of return gap, when it emerged, was often substantially

25

larger. We also examined the gap in short-term government treasury bill rates, but this gap was also of
much too small a magnitude to explain the gap in net rates of return to equity.
7. Although Boyd and Graham (1992) fmd that for the U.S., economies of scale are created by middlesized banks while most mergers occur among large banks.

8. The most likely avenue for achieving greater competition within the Canadian system would be
removing restrictions on the ability of foreign banks to compete in the Canadian market.

26

Tab!. I
Kay At R.atioa, 1920-1980

toA.U

U.S.

Ratio (PvL)

CnnLosmto

Aa Ratio (Pect)

U.S.As5c4st0
Capital Ratio

CanaduanAac*sto
Capital Ratio

1920

53.1%

72.7%

8.7

11.6

1930

51.2

69.1

7.2

10.2

1940

27.2

41.9

10.6

13.4

1950

32.6

43.6

14.5

27.4

1960

45.7

63.6

12.6

17.0

1970

50.9

61.2

13.7

21.6

1980

54.9

72.1

18.1

33.4

lourca:

S.. S.cti 3.

for a d..crip&ai of the data

27

7

6

4
3

— Z Insolvent

0.24
0.22
0.2

0.18
0.16

0.14
0.12
6.•

0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02

—%

Insolvent

28

Figure 2A
2.8
2.8

2.4
2.2
2

1.8
1.8

1.4
1.2
0

0.8
0.6

0.4
0.2

— Z of CpLtI

Figure 2B
Percentage of Capital: Insolvent National Banks
_______________

smpI

post 1935

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0,1

o.o:

1960

19 0

—

Time
7. of Capilal

29

19 0

I 980
1990

Figure 3A

Interest Rate on Deposits
Canada v. U.S.

10

9

8

7

6

4

0

1929

1939

1949

—

1959

Canada

1969

1979

U.S.

Figure 3B
Real Interest Rate on Deposits
Canada V. U.S.

10

5

0

0

—5

—10

—15

1929

1939

19.19

— CanVd

1999

U.S.

30

1969

1979

Figure 4A

Return on Loans
Caiada

15

V.

U.S.

14
13

12
11
10
9
8
7

6
5
4
3
2

199

I

195

1940

J

1950

1945

— Cnad

1960

I

195

1970

196S
U.S.

Figure 4B

Real Return on Loans
18
18

14
12
10
8
8

4
2
0
—2
—4
—6
—8

—10

—12

— Canada
31

U.S.

I

1975

1980

Figure 5A
Return on Securities
Canada v. U.S.

11
10

9
8
7
6

4
3

1929

I

195

1940

1945

1950

1960

I
19S5

— Canada

1985

U.S.

Figure 58

Real Return
on Securities
Canada
v. U.S.

—2
—4
—6

—

-8
to

—12
—14

— Canada

U.S.

32

19'70

L
19,5

1980

Figure 6A

Eeturri on Equity
Canada v. U.S.

34
32
30
26
26

24
22

20
—

18

16
14

12
10
8

6

1929

1939

1949

1959

— ROE Canada

— Canada
33

ROE US

U.S.

1969

1979

Figure 7A
Determinants of the ROE Gap

40 30

20

10

0
0

—10

—20

'I \i\\/\
1929

1939

Actual ROE Gp —

1949

1959

1969

Balance Sheet Gap

Price Gap

Figure 7B

1939

1949

Actual ROE Gap — Price Gap
34

1959

Ralance Sheet Gap

1979

