                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      LABOR ADJUSTMENT UNDER DIFFERENT
                          INSTITUTIONAL STRUCTURES:
                        A CASE STUDY OF GERMANY AND
                              THE UNITED STATES




                                    Susan N. Houseman
                                   Katharine G. Abraham




                                  Working Paper No. 4548




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  October, 1993



We have benefitted from comments on an earlier draft of this paper made by participants at a
workshop on Institutional Frameworks and Labor Market Performance" at the
Vissenschaftszentrum für Sozialforschung in Berlin, December 1992. We are grateful to
Carolyn Thies for providing outstanding research assistance and to Claire Vogelsong for
secretarial supportThis paper is part of NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4548
                                                                               October 1993


                        LABOR ADJUSTMENT UNDER DIFFERENT
                            INSTITUTIONAL STRUCTURES:
                          A CASE STUDY OF GERMANY AND
                                THE UNITED STATES


                                         ABSTRACT


        Like most Western European countries, Germany stringently regulates dismissals and
layoffs. Critics contend that this regulation raises the costs of employment adjustment and
hence impedes employers' ability to respond to fluctuations in demand. Other German labor
policies, however, most especially the availability of unemployment insurance benefits for
those on short time, facilitate the adjustment of average hours per worker in lieu of layoffs.
        Building on earlier work, we compare the adjustment of employment, hours and
inventories to demand shocks in the German and U.S. manufacturing sectors. We find that,
in the short run, whereas U.S. employers rely principally on the adjustment of employment
levels to respond to demand shocks, German employers rely principally on the adjustment of
average hours per worker. The adjustment of overall labor input is generally similar in the
two countries. Short-time work makes a very important contribution to short-run hours
adjustment in Germany. \Ve find little evidence that inventories help to buffer demand
fluctuations in either country. Our findings suggest that, given appropriate supportiig
institutions, strong worker job security can be compatible with employers' need for flexibility
in staffing levels.


Susan N. Houseman                                                 Katharine G. Abraham
W.E. Upjohn Institute                                             Department of Economics
 for Employment Research                                          University of Maryland
300 South Weseriedge Avenue                                       College Park, MD 20742
Kalamazoo, MI 49007                                               and NBER
I.       Introduction

         Historically, U.S. employers have had the right to hire and fire at

will. Adjustment to downturns has been accomplished largely through layoffs,

rather than through reductions in average hours per worker or other
alternatives to layoffs. In contrast, in Germany, as in most Western European

countries, workers historically have enjoyed strong job rights, including the

right to advance notice of layoff and the right to severance pay or to

negotiations over compensation for layoff.

         In recent years, laws and practices concerning collective dismissals

have been under scrutiny both in the United States and in many Western

European countries, including Germany. In the United States, the massive

dislocations of the 1970's and early 1980's pushed many workers out of their

jobs and have led to growing pressure for legislated and collectively bargained

job rights. Perhaps most significantly, a new law requiring large employers

to give 60 days' notice of plant closings and major layoffs was passed by the

U.S. Congress in 1988. Ironically, at the same time that the United States has

been moving to strengthen workers' job security, many European countries

have weakened their job security legislation in an effort to promote greater

labor market flexibility.' In Germany, the Employment Promotion Act of

1985 relaxed certain regulations on layoffs and permitted greater use of

temporary and fixed-term contracts.
          Central to the debate over workers' rights to job security on both

 sides of the Atlantic has been their presumed adverse impact on labor market

 flexibility. Critics have claimed that strong job rights prevent employers from

 adjusting to economic fluctuations and secular changes in demand. It also has

 been alleged that, by inhibiting layoffs during downturns, strong job security

 provisions reduce employers' willingness to hire during upturns and thereby

 contribute to high levels of unemployment.2 A forthcoming EC white paper

 reportedly will recommend that European governments further weaken their

 employment protection laws.3

         Relatively little research, however, has been done on the effects of

 employment protection laws on labor market adjustment. Although German

 employment protection laws in and of themselves would be expected to slow

 the adjustment of employment to changes in demand, the magnitude of these

effects is not known. Moreover, it does not necessarily follow that the costs

of adjusting labor are higher in Germany than in the United States and

consequently that German employers adjust less quickly to changing demand

conditions. To determine the relative costs of adjusting labor in Germany and

the United States, one must consider other relevant labor market institutions

in both countries. For example, because the unemployment insurance (UI)

system in the United States is experience rated, U.S. employers• generally

incur higher UI taxes when they lay off workers; although German employers

face greater regulation of layoffs than do American employers, they incur no

                                     2
tax penalties associated with layoffs.        Moreover, German employment

protection laws may inhibit the use of layoffs, but other German policies, such

as unemployment compensation for workers on short time, facilitate the use

of alternatives to layoffs, including work sharing. Elsewhere (Abraham and

Houseman, 1993, forthcoming) we present evidence to suggest that, although

German employers adjust employment levels more slowly than their U.S.

counterparts in response to demand changes, they make larger short run

adjustments to average hours per worker.           Differences in total labor

adjustment tend to be small.

         In this paper we build upon our previous work examining employment

and hours adjustment in the former West Germany and the United States. We

use an interrelated factor demand model to jointly estimate employment and

hours adjustment in the manufacturing sectors of the two countries. Results

based on this model strengthen the conclusions drawn in our earlier work.

         Because the availability of UI benefits for short-time work in

Germany facilitates the use of work sharing as an alternative to layoffs there,

we also consider the contribution that short-time work makes to total labor

adjustment. In addition, we review evidence on the effects of changes in

employment protection laws on labor adjustment in Germany. Finally, we

look at whether and to what extent finished goods inventories help to smooth

fluctuations in production in Germany and the United States.           If labor

adjustment costs are greater in Germany than in the United States, as is usually

                                       3
  presumed, we would expect finished goods inventories to play a more

  important buffer role in Germany, thereby mitigating the need to adjust labor

  input to demand changes there.



 II.         The German and U.S. Industrial Relations Systems

          We interpret differences in employment and hours adjustment patterns

 in Germany and the United States in light of the two countries' labor market

 institutions, and so begin with an overview of selected features of their

 industrial relations systems. The German and U.S. industrial relations systems

 differ in many respects, but the most relevant for our present purposes are

 differences in layoff policies, UI rules and regulations concerning the use of

 overtime.

Germany

         In Germany, as in most Western European countries, there is a long

tradition of requiring employers to give advance notice of dismissal to
individual workers. The first advance notice law in Germany was passed

during the 1920's. Today, required periods of notice to individual workers

vary from two weeks to six months, depending upon whether the worker holds

a blue-collar or a white-collar job and upon his or her seniority and age.4

         In addition to stipulating advance notice for individual workers,

German law gives the works council, a legally-mandated body of elected

worker representatives, important powers in the event of a collective dismissal.

                                       4
Under current law, employers must keep both the works council and the local

employment office advised of any developments that might lead to a collective

dismissal over the next twelve months, and must consult the works council "as

soon as possible" when contemplating such a layoff. The most important

provision of the current law was introduced in 1973 and requires that, in cases

of collective dismissal at an establishment normally employing more than

twenty employees, management and the works council must negotiate a social

plan that stipulates compensation for workers who lose their jobs. In the event

that the two parties cannot agree on a social plan, the law provides for binding

arbitration. The social pian requirement greatly enhances the works council's

power to influence management decisions with respect to employment and

hours adjustment.

        Although social plans are required only in the event of a collective

dismissal, the number of workers who must be laid off for a layoff to fall into

this category is not particularly high. For example, prior to 1985, for
establishments with 60 to 250 workers, a collective dismissal was defined as

the layoff of 10 percent of the work force over a 30-day period; for

establishments employing 500 or more workers, the threshold was just 30

dismissed workers over a 30-day period. The Employment Promotion Act of

1985 raised these thresholds somewhat and gave new enterprises a four-year

exemption from the social plan requirement.5



                                       5
          Settlements in social plans vary considerably from case to case, and

 depend upon the worker's tenure and wage, as well as the company's financial

 condition. A recent study by Hemmer (1988) provides the best available data

 on the amounts of compensation paid out. In a sample of 145 social plans

 negotiated between 1980 and 1985, the median settlement was between 10,000

 and 15,000 DM per recipient, or about 15 to 25 weeks pay for a person with

 average blue-collar industrial earnings. The fact that a social plan is required

 only in situations involving a mass layoff creates an incentive for the firm to

 rely on attrition and perhaps on smaller layoffs spread out over time instead

of on a mass layoff.

         As in the United States, German workers who are laid off are eligible

to collect UI benefits. The payroll tax that fmances these benefits, however,

is not experience rated so that, unlike their U.S. counterparts, German

employers incur no increase in UI tax liability when they lay off workers.

Because of the advance notice and other requirements associated with

collective dismissals, temporary layoffs are virtually unknown in Germany.

The German UI system does provide for short-time benefits.           With the

approval of the Bundesanstalt für Arbeit (Employment Service), firms can

reduce employees' hours of work and those employees can collect pro-rated

UI benefits, which are fmanced in the same way as benefits to laid off

workers. Firms applying for short-time benefits must show that other



                                      6
measures for accommodating the fall in demand, such as reductions in

overtime and rebuilding inventories, have already been taken.6

          In contrast to U.S. law, German law contains no provision, covering

overtime premia, which instead are governed by the terms of industry-level

collective bargaining agreements. The typical agreement provides for an

overtime premium of about 20 percent, which is considerably lower than the

50 percent premium mandated by U.S. law.

          Although the availability of subsidized short-time benefits and the low

overtime premium that is typical in German collective bargaining agreements

can be expected to encourage reliance on hours adjustments by German

employers, it should be noted that any change in scheduled hours at an

establishment must be approved by the works council. Works councils,

however, are generally accommodating in these matters.

The United States

          The situation with respect to advance notice of layoffs and

negotiation over layoffs historically has been quite different in the United

States.   Prior to 1988, advance notice of layoffs and plant closings was

required in only three states: Maine, Wisconsin, and Hawaii. In the absence

of any national law requiring advance notice, workers often received little or

no warning prior to being let go.7 In 1988 the U.S. Congress passed the

Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification Act. The law, which took

effect in 1989, requires employers to give workers and state and local

                                       7
 government officials sixty days' advance notice before a mass layoff or plant

 closure. In general, a mass layoff is defined as a layoff of at least one-third

 of the work force at a single site within a thirty-day period or a situation in

which at least one-third of the workers have their hours reduced by at least 50

percent for six months.8

         The U.S. advance notice law is far weaker than German collective

dismissal law. The requirement that employers negotiate a social plan with the

works council is widely regarded as the most important in German collective

dismissal law. U.S. law does not require that companies consult with worker

representatives or pay compensation to laid-off workers. Moreover, even the

advance notice requirement in existing U.S. law appears to be having little

effect. A recent survey by the General Accounting Office (1993) found that

three quarters of all companies that had workforce reductions of a sufficient

scale to trigger notice requirements either failed to file notice or gave less than

60 days' notice. These findings suggest that in most cases companies either

slip through the law's large loopholes or simply fail to comply with the law.

         Although U.S. employers are not required to make severance

payments to laid-off workers, the fact that the U.S. UI system is experience

rated means that layoffs may lead to an increase in UI tax liability. For a

U.S. employer, the effective UI cost of laying off a worker depends upon

three things: his or her weekly benefit amount; the duration of benefit receipt;

and the share of benefits for which the employer ultimately pays through

                                        8
higher UI taxes. Weekly benefit amounts average roughly 35 percent of

weekly wages; the average duration of benefit receipt varies somewhat over

the business cycle, but has averaged about 14 weeks; and, at the margin, a

typical employer bears about 60 percent of the cost of benefits paid to laid-off

workers (though many employers are already paying the maximum UI tax rate

and thus incur no increase in costs if they lay off additional workers).9 Thus,

a rough estimate of the UI cost to a typical employer of laying off another

worker is about three weeks' wages in the form of increased UI tax liability.

         Paying UI benefits to workers whose hours have been reduced is a

recent innovation in the United States. Only seventeen states have laws

allowing pro-rated payment of UI benefits to workers whose hours are reduced

under approved worksharing plans, and most of these laws were passed in

1985 or later. Current U.S. law specifies that nonexempt employees are

entitled to a 50 percent wage premium for hours worked in excess of 40 hours

per week. Although U.S. employers are typically free to alter work schedules

as they choose, both the lack of provision for short-time benefits and the

relatively high overtime premium mandated by federal law can be expected to

discourage reliance on hours adjustments.



III.    Employment and Hours Adjustment

        Because of the institutional differences just described, we would

expect to observe quite different patterns of labor adjustment in Germany and

                                      9
 the United States. Employers may adjust labor input along two margins: the

 number of workers and average hours per worker. Given the higher costs of

 adjusting employment in Germany, we would expect slower adjustment of

 employment to changes in the demand for labor in Germany than in the United

 States. In the event of a downturn, layoffs may be delayed by the requirement

 that the firm give advance notice and, in the case of a mass layoff, further

 delayed by the negotiation of a social plan with the works council. Given that

 mass layoffs are relatively costly in Germany, we would expect greater

 reliance on attrition to achieve desired work force reductions there than in the

 United States, and might also expect layoffs to be more spread out over time.

In addition, during both downturns and upturns, German employers are likely

to delay employment adjustments until they are reasonably certain that any

observed change in labor demand will persist.

         While we would expect the adjustment of employment to be slower

in Germany than in the United States, we would expect greater adjustment of

average hours for workers in the short run. The fact that employment

adjustment costs are typically higher in Germany than in the United States

should increase employers' reliance on hours adjustments. In addition, absent

works council opposition to schedule changes, the availability of short-time

compensation and lower German overtime premia make it less costly for

German employers to adjust average hours per worker.10 A priori, it is

unclear whether the adjustment of total labor input is more or less costly in

                                      10
Germany than in the United States, and thus unclear whether German

employers are, in fact, less able to adjust labor input to changes in demand.

         To analyze this issue empirically, we model the dynamic adjustment

of employment and hours to fluctuations in output using the following

interrelated factor demand model:


           mE1 =           +               +
                     a10       a11lnE11         a12Inh1 + 11nS + 411t
 (la)
                                    +            +
                                      ,12t2          El:


            lnh      a20 +                 +                +            +
                               a21lnE1_1        a22lnh1_1       fi2lnS
 (ib)                                            +
                                    + 422t2          €2:


where E is production employment; h is average hours per production worker;

S is shipments; t and t2 are time trends; and the a's, fl's, and 's are
parameters to be estimated. This system of equations allows for the fact that

the paths of adjustment of employment and hours may be interdependent; not

only does the adjustment of a particular factor depend on changes in

shipments, but it also depends on the path of adjustment of other factors.

         We estimate this model using quarterly, seasonally adjusted data.12

We estimate each equation in the model independently. Based on the results

of Durbin-h tests, we correct for first-order serial correlation in the equation

error terms, where appropriate. Separate models were specified for aggregate

manufacturing and for eleven disaggregated manufacturing industries in each

country. We take care to identify comparably defined industries because we

wanted, insofar as possible, to hold constant technological factors that might

                                           11
 affect labor adjustment patterns in drawing cross-county comparisons. 13

 Data limitations unfortunately prevent the inclusion of any nonmanufacturing

industries in our analysis. Sources and additional details concerning the data

are provided in the data appendix.

         We use the parameter estimates from equations (la) and (ib) to

simulate the dynamic effects of a one-unit, permanent shock to shipments on

production employment, average production hours, and total production

worker hours.      Implied responses over different horizons, along with
associated standard errors, are reported in Table 1.14 (Selected coefficients

from the models underlying these simulations are reported in appendix Table

1 A.) For aggregate German manufacturing, for example, Table 1 shows that

a one percent decrease (increase) in shipments would result in a 0.17 percent

decrease (increase) in production employment, a 0.40 percent decrease

(increase) in average hours, and a 0.57 percent decrease (increase) in total

production hours in the quarter contemporaneous to the shock. Assuming the

decrease to shipments persists, four quarters following the initial one percent

shock, employment would have decreased an estimated 0.69 percent, average

hours would be 0.17 percent lower, and so total hours would be 0.85 percent

lower.

         The results for aggregate manufacturing indicate that German

employers rely relatively more on changes in hours per worker to adjust total

labor input in the short run, whereas even in the short run U.S. employers rely

                                      12
primarily on adjustments to the number of workers. Although employment

adjustment is significantly greater in the United States than in Germany across

all time horizons examined here, the adjustment of average hours is greater in

Germany, significantly so in the contemporaneous quarter. In the quarter that

a shock to shipments occurs, average hours adjustment accounts for about 70

percent of total hours adjustment in Germany, whereas in the United States

employment adjustment accounts for about 70 percent of initial adjustment.

As expected, average hours adjustment declines both in an absolute and in a

relative sense in Germany over time, as employers alter employment in

response to a permanent shock. Figure 1 depicts these quite different patterns

of employment and hours adjustment in Germany and the United States.

         Although the adjustment of average hours is greater in German than

in U.S. aggregate manufacturing, this greater average hours adjustment does

not fully compensate for the smaller adjustment of employment in the short

nm, and total hours adjustment is significantly smaller in German
manufacturing up to four quarters after the shock. Results for aggregate

manufacturing may be somewhat misleading, however, if the composition of

the manufacturing sector is different in the two countries and adjustment

patterns differ substantially across detailed industries within countries. To

investigate this possibility, we estimate employment and hours adjustment

models for ten manufacturing industries for which we could develop a clean

concordance between the German and U.S. data. Because of economists' and

                                      13
policymakers' interest in the automotive sector, we also include that industry

in our comparison.15

         When we examine the results for the disaggregated industries a

somewhat different picture emerges. For only two industries--stone, clay and

glass and non-electrical machinery--is short-run total hours adjustment

significantly greater in the United States than in Germany. In five of the

eleven industries--paper, leather, primary metals, electrical equipment, and

autos--we generally observe significantly greater employment adjustment in the

United States and significantly greater average hours adjustment in Germany

over short time horizons. In these industries, however, the greater initial

adjustment of average hours in Germany appears to compensate for the slower

adjustment of employment levels, and the adjustment of total labor input is not

significantly different in the two countries. In another three industries--

textiles, apparel and instruments--adjustment patterns are quite similar in the

two countries; the short-run adjustment of employment, average hours and

total hours does not differ significantly in Germany and the United States.

Finally, in one industry, printing, the adjustment of total hours is actually

significantly greater in Germany than in the United States, owing to the

significantly greater short-run adjustment of employment in Germany.

        In sum, we fmd that, contrary to popular belief, German
manufacturing industries generally adjust labor input as quickly as do U.S.

manufacturing industries in response to demand shocks. In most industries

                                      14
short-mn employment adjustment is smaller in Germany than in the United

States, often significantly so.    In most of these industries, however,

significantly greater short-mn average hours adjustment compensates for the

slower adjustment of employment, and there is no significant difference in

total hours adjustment.   These results are consistent with those reported in

earlier studies comparing employment and hours adjustment in German and

U.S. manufacturing industries.        Houseman (1988) and Kohier and

Sengenberger (1983) studied adjustment in steel and autos, respectively. Both

found that German employers adjust employment levels less, but average hours

per worker more, in the short run in response to demand shocks. In Abraham

and Houseman (1993, forthcoming), we found that employment adjustment

generally was significantly slower in the German than in the U.S.

manufacturing industries studied, but that total hours adjustment was more

similar and often insignificantly different, implying that average hours

adjustment was generally greater in Germany.t6

        One way of inferring the effects of German employment protection

laws is to compare, as we have just done, employment and hours adjustment

in Germany with that in another country, such as the United States, in which

there is little regulation of layoffs. Another way of inferring the effects of

these laws is to test for changes in employment adjustment that coincide with

major changes in employment protection laws. If these laws have a major

effect on the way German employers adjust employment, we would expect the

                                      15
 speed of employment adjustment to slow following the imposition of more

 stringent regulations and, Conversely, to increase following the relaxation of

 regulations.

          Recent history offers two such events in Germany. The first is the

 introduction of the requirement that employers negotiate a social plan with the

 works council in the event of a mass layoff, which was embodied in the 1972

 Amendments to the Works Constitution Act. This social plan requirement is

widely regarded as the among the most important provisions in German

employment law. In Abraham and Houseman (1993), however, we report

evidence to suggest that this law had, at most, a marginal effect on employer

behavior. Even before the social plan requirement was enacted, employers in

the German manufacturing sector relied primarily on the adjustment ofaverage

hours per worker, and very little on that of employment levels, to vary labor

input in the short run.

         Some observers have suggested that German adjustment patterns were

greatly altered by this new requirement.       Legislation such as the 1972

amendments to the Works Constitution Act often is treated as an exogenous

event that forces significant changes in the typical employer's behavior. It

may be more realistic, however, to treat such legislation as a codification of

what has come to be viewed as best practice. If this view is correct, the

amendments to the Works Constitution Act may have forced changes in the

behavior of some marginal employers whose previous behavior lay outside the

                                      16
norm, but is unlikely to have caused major changes in the behavior of the

typical employer.

         The 1985 Employment Promotion Act, which weakened employment

protection, was a second significant change in German law. This legislation

exempted new employers from the requirements of negotiating a social plan,

raised the threshold that defmes a mass layoff, and relaxed restrictions on the

use of temporary workers who are not subject to the laws' provisions. Again,

at least some observers have characterized these as significant changes. In

Abraham and Houseman (forthcoming), however, we find no change in the

speed of adjustment of employment or hours after 1985. This finding echoes

that of Kraft (1990) who also finds no evidence of a change in the speed of

employment adjustment after 1985 in tests based on data for 21 German

manufacturing industries.



IV.      Short-Time Work in Germany

         We have shown that in the German manufacturing sector employers

primarily vary the hours that their employees work, rather than the number of

employees they hire, to adjust labor input to demand changes in the short run.

In contrast, American employers extensively adjust employment to changes in

demand conditions, even in the short run. Unemployment compensation for

short-time work is an important component of the German UI system and

facilitates the use of hours adjustment there, whereas most states in the United

                                      17
 States do not offer benefits to workers on short time. Below we assess the

 importance of short-time work to overall labor adjustment in Germany and

evaluate the relative merits of short-time work as an alternative to layoffs.

         Figure 2 provides some evidence that fluctuations in short time are a

significant factor in German adjustment. The figure depicts the percent of

workers in German manufacturing on short-time work from 1973 to 1990

using seasonally adjusted monthly data. During good years few workers are

on short time. The number rises sharply during recessions. At the trough of

the recession in the mid-1970s about 16 percent of manufacturing workers

were on short time. Even at the trough of the recession in the early l980s,

which was considerably milder than the earlier recession, over 12 percent of

manufacturing workers were on short time.

         In earlier work (Abraham and Houseman 1993, forthcoming), we

have attempted to characterize the contribution of variation in short-time hours

to observed labor adjustment in a somewhat more formal fashion. Our general

strategy has been to ask how the adjustment of total hours would have differed

had no workers been placed on short time, assuming that employers'

adjustment behavior otherwise remained unchanged. We have addressed this

question by comparing alternative models of total hours adjustment fit using

as our hours measure, first, actual total production hours and, second, the

hypothetical total number of production hours obtained by adding hours of

short-time compensation paid to the number of production hours actually

                                      18
worked. The results of this sort of exercise can be used to answer questions

concerning the share of the total adjustment of hours in response to a shock

to shipments accounted for by short time hours.

         In Abraham and Houseman (1993), we reported fmite distributed lag

models of hours adjustment, with and without hours changes attributable to

short time, to changes in shipments, fit using data for each of nine

disaggregated manufacturing industries covering the 1974 to 1984 time period.

The share of current quarter hours adjustment attributable to variation in short

time hours averaged about 45 percent and that at lags of one to two quarters

averaged in excess of 60 percent. In Abraham and Houseman (forthcoming),

we used Koyck models fit with data for the 1973 to 1990 period to assess the

contribution of short time to hours adjustment in the manufacturing sector as

a whole. Our estimates implied that, absent the hours changes directly

associated with receipt of short time compensation, the current quarter

adjustment of total hours to a change in production would have been 40

percent smaller than that actually observed.

        As a check on the robustness of the conclusions drawn from our

earlier work, we also have estimated a more complete set of hours adjustment

models for the 1973 to 1990 time period. This new estimation added models

for the full set of disaggregated manufacturing industries for which the

requisite data could be obtained and, for closer comparability with the work

reported in the present paper, substituted shipments for production as the

                                      19
measure of output, but otherwise used the same approach as Abraham and

Houseman (forthcoming). Both for manufacturing as a whole and for each of

the seven disaggregated manufacturing industries for which the models could

be estimated, we again fmd that variation in short-time hours makes an

important contribution to observed labor adjustment.17

         Benefits for short-time work in Germany are intended primarily,

though not exclusively, for workers affected by temporary reductions in

demand. In the United States the structure of the UI system encourages the

use of temporary layoffs rather than short-time work during downturns in

demand. Temporary layoffs, which are common in the United States, are

virtually unknown in Germany. From the employer's perspective, there is a

sense in which the use of short time and the use of temporary layoffs are close

functional substitutes. Both allow a temporary reduction in labor costs during

a period of slack demand. There are, however, important respects in which

the two differ.

         First, a temporary layoff may significantly disrupt the production

process. Unless the temporary layoff affects the entire work force, it is likely

to require a substantial reorganization of work assignments.         If senior

employees enjoy bumping rights, laying off even a small number of workers

may lead to a large number of job reassignments. When workers are later

recalled, productivity may suffer as workers who have been away from the job

for an extended period become reacelimated to the work they are doing.

                                      20
         Second, there is a significant risk that employees placed on temporary

layoff will not be available for recall. Rough calculations based on the

findings reported in Katz and Meyer (1990) indicate that, over the duration of

a temporary layoff that lasts thirteen weeks, 25         percent   of workers on

temporary layoff take a new job; over the duration of a twenty-six week

temporary layoff, 40 percent of those on layoff take a new job.'8 If workers

who had been temporarily laid off do not return, the firm must incur the costs

of hiring and training replacement workers. The costs associated with hiring

and training new employees largely could be avoided if workers were placed

on short time instead of on temporary layoff.'9

         Moreover, short time and temporary layoffs are not the same from the

employee's perspective. Workers on temporary layoff are likely to face great

uncertainty about whether they will ever be recalled. Findings reported by

Katz and Meyer indicate that, among laid off workers who initially believe that

they will be recalled, only about 70 percent end up returning to their previous

employer.20 This low percentage in part reflects the fact that some workers

choose to take new jobs, but also occurs because many workers never receive

recall notices. Rough calculations based on Katz and Meyer's econometric

analysis of layoff spells suggests that as many as 25 percent of workers who

initially believe that their layoff spell will be temporary do not receive a recall

notice within a year following the layoff.2' Workers on temporary layoff

who are never recalled experience longer than average unemployment spells,

                                        21
in part because they are less likely to look for new work than workers who are

certain their layoff is permanent and in part because potential employers are

reluctant to hire someone who may quit if recalled to their previous job.

These lengthy spells of unemployment represent a loss of income for the

individual workers and a loss of resources to society.

         Extensive reliance on layoffs is also less equitable than work sharing,

for it concentrates the costs of adjustment on a relatively small number of

workers who suffer large losses of income and other job-related benefits.

Short-time work arrangements spread the costs of adjustment more evenly

across members of the work force.

         Short-time work may be used to accommodate structural as well as

cyclical downturns. In a permanent decline in demand, the use of short-time

work does not prevent employment reductions; rather, the temporary use of

hours reduction measures can help an employer achieve work force reductions

with minimal resort to layoffs. By extending the time over which these work

force reductions occur, employers can make greater use of attrition and other

alternatives to layoff.

         The use of short-time work in instances of structural adjustment is,

however, more controversial. Economists typically take the position that in

a permanent decline in demand, workers should be reallocated to other sectors

as quickly as possible. To achieve this aim, large-scale layoffs, when

necessary, have been advocated, on the assumption that dislocated workers will

                                      22
then be forced to find new employment. Several recent studies of displaced

workers in the United States show, however, that workers permanently laid off

from their jobs often experience long periods of unemployment. Among

displaced workers aged 20 to 61 who lost full-time jobs between 1979 and

1981, for example, 31 percent of male blue-collar workers, 38 percent of

female blue-collar workers, 14 percent of male white-collar workers, and 28

percent of female white-collar workers experienced more than a year of

subsequent joblessness.22 Only 65 percent of prime-aged full-time workers

displaced during 1984 held full-time jobs in January 1986; 8 percent held part-

time jobs, 16 percent were unemployed, and 11 percent had withdrawn from

the labor force.23

         By using short-time work as an interim adjustment measure and

relying on attrition to reduce the work force, firms can greatly reduce or even

avoid layoffs. In this way, job reductions occur among those who have the

most attractive outside opportunities or who are best able to relocate, and those

who have poor outside opportunities or who are unable to relocate are not

thrown out of work.



V.       Inventory Adjustment

         In the dynamic factor demand models estimated above, we allow only

employment and average hours per worker to vary in the short run. The

theoretical literature in economics, however, has long speculated that

                                       23
companies use finished goods inventories to buffer production and labor

against short-run fluctuations in demand. Under the assumption that there are

significant costs to adjusting labor and other factor inputs, firms might be

expected to build up finished goods inventories during a downturn and to draw

down inventory stocks during an upturn to mitigate costly changes in
production and labor. If, in fact, the cost of adjusting labor input is greater

in Germany than in the United States, we might expect that finished goods

inventories would play a more important role in smoothing over demand

fluctuations in Germany than in the United States.

         To assess their role in the adjustment process in Germany and the

United States, we expand the system of equations estimated above to

incorporate inventories:


              1nE =     a10
                              +a11lnE,_1
                                             +
                                               a12lnh_1
                                                          +
                                                              a13ln11
 (2a)
                        +         +          +        +
                           l311nS


              1nh =     a20
                              +
                                  a211nE1
                                             +
                                                 alnh1    +
                                                              a23lnI1
 (2b)
                         +          +        + $22 2 +


 (2c)
         lnI =    a30
                        +
                            a31lnE1 +    a321nh_1
                                                    ÷
                                                        a331ni'1 + 3lnS
                              +         + 432t2 + e31




where I represents fmished goods inventories and all other variables are

defined as above. In this model an equation is added to estimate the short-run

response of finished goods inventories to output changes.               In addition,

                                        24
employment and hours adjustment are assumed to depend upon the path of

adjustment of inventories. This model is quite similar to that estimated in

Topel (1982).24

        Several caveats should be noted concerning the data used to estimate

these equations. Unfortunately, inventory data for Germany, which come

from a special survey conducted by the IFO-Institute für Wirtschaftsforschung,

are only available beginning in 1980. Therefore, we estimate equations (2a),

(2b) and (2c) over the 1980-90 period, using seasonally adjusted, quarterly

data, for both Germany and the United States. In addition, the IFO survey

reports finished goods inventories in terms of the equivalent number of weeks

of shipments, rather than in terms of the value of inventories. To convert the

German weeks-of-inventory terms to stock values, we calculated the average

weekly shipments over the preceding twelve months and multiplied this figure

by the reported number of weeks of inventories.

        Inventory data also are not reported for aggregate manufacturing in

Germany. To construct an aggregate manufacturing series we summed the

value of finished goods inventories across all of the more detailed industries

for which inventory data were reported and for which we had shipments and

labor market data. We aggregated shipments, employment, and hours data

across the same set of industries to form a consistent series. This aggregate

industry represents most of manufacturing. The primary industries excluded

are food and tobacco.

                                     25
         Finished goods inventory data are not available for the U.S. auto

industry and, because of changes in industry definitions, we do not have a

complete series on inventories for the U.S. electrical equipment and

instruments industries. In addition, because of missing post-1985 German

shipments data, we do not report estimates of the expanded model for the

paper industry. Data sources and additional details concerning the construction

of the variables used in our analysis are given in the data appendix.

         Paralleling the analysis reported above, we use the parameter

estimates from equations (2a), (2b) and (2c) to simulate the response of

production employment, production hours, and finished goods inventories to

a one unit shock to shipments. The results of these simulations are
summarized in Table 2. (We report selected coefficient estimates from the

equations underlying these simulations in appendix Table 2A.) The patterns

of employment and hours adjustment shown in Table 2 are similar to those

shown in Table 1. Short-run employment adjustment is typically larger in the

United States than in Germany.        Conversely, short-run average hours

adjustment is usually larger in Germany than in the United States. In contrast

to the estimates reported in Table 1 for the 1973-90 period, the aggregate

manufacturing equations for the 1980-90 period do not imply a significant

difference in the adjustment of total hours in the two countries. Consistent

with the estimates for the 1973-90 period, the 1980-90 estimates for

disaggregated industries generally imply that total hours adjustment is not

                                     26
significantly different in Germany and the United States. In sum, comparisons

of employment and hours adjustment appear to be sensitive neither to the

period of estimation nor to the inclusion of inventories in the model.25

         If inventories serve as a buffer stock, one would expect inventories

to fall when shipments rise and to rise when shipments fall. In Table 2, which

shows the response of inventories to a permanent one unit, positive shock to

shipments, one would expect initial inventory adjustment to be negative. For

aggregate manufacturing, inventory adjustment is negative for most time

horizons in both Germany and the United States, but is never significantly

different from zero in either country. For the disaggregated industries

reported in Table 2 inventory adjustment also tends to be very imprecisely

estimated in both countries. Even where initial inventory adjustment has the

expected negative sign, it generally is not significantly different from zero.

         There are, however, several exceptions. For the auto and instruments

industries in Germany and for the stone, clay and glass industry in the United

States, inventory adjustment to a change in shipments is large and statistically

significant across all or most time horizons. For example, the simulations

suggest that a one percent increase in shipments would result in a 1 .98 percent

decrease in inventories in the contemporaneous quarter in the German auto

industry; a 1.21 percent decrease in inventories in the contemporaneous

quarter in the German instruments industry; and a 0.29 percent decrease in

inventories in the contemporaneous quarter in the U.S. stone, clay and glass

                                       27
industry. These rather large inventories elasticities are noteworthy, of course,

only if inventories represent a sizable fraction of shipments in these industries.

Based on a separate set of simulations in which the shock to shipments was

evaluated at the mean of the industry's shipments, only an estimated 6 percent

share of an increase in shipments in the German auto industry would be

absorbed by lower inventory stocks in the quarter contemporaneous to the

shock to shipments. In the German instruments industry and in the U.S.

stone, clay and glass industry inventories appear to play a more important role

in buffering production. In the German instruments industry, an increase in

shipments is estimated to be more than matched by a fall in inventories in the

contemporaneous quarter and in the U.S. stone, clay and glass industry 19

percent of an increase in shipments would be absorbed by a decrease in

inventories in the contemporaneous quarter.

         These exceptions aside, the main conclusion to be drawn from Table

2 is that inventories do not appear to play a significant role in smoothing over

fluctuations in demand in either Germany or the United States. The results

concerning.U.S. inventory adjustment presented in Table 2 are Consistent with

other research, which has found little evidence of a buffer role for finished

goods inventories in the United States.26 Even in estimates of the inter-

related factor demand model that includes inventories run over the 1973-90

period (not reported here) we find no evidence to suggest that inventories play



                                       28
a substantial role in smoothing over fluctuations in demand in the United

States.

          Ideally, we would like to have estimated these inventory adjustment

equations over a longer time horizon for Germany. German manufacturing

experienced little cyclical fluctuation during the 1980s, and it is possible that

the imprecise estimates we obtain are partly due to the lack of variation in the

data.     Still, our basic finding that inventories do not appear to play a

significant buffer role in Germany is consistent with our findings concerning

employment and hours adjustment. We hypothesized that if the costs of labor

adjustment were higher in Germany than in the United States so that German

firms adjusted labor input more slowly to demand changes than did U.S.

firms, German firms would have a greater incentive to use inventories to

buffer fluctuations in demand. However, we find that, although German firms

adjust employment more slowly than do U.S. firms, there is little difference

in the adjustment of total labor input.



VI.       Conclusion

          Concerns about the potential impacts of job security legislation often

are based upon the perception that such legislation slows or prevents needed

labor market adjustment. Taken as a whole, our results suggest that the

primary difference between German and U.S. labor adjustment lies not in the

adjustment of total labor input, but rather in its division between adjustments

                                       29
to the number of workers employed and adjustments to hours per worker.

German companies rely much more on the adjustment of average hours,

including the use of short-time work, to reduce labor input during downturns;

American companies make greater use of employment adjustment, and by

implication layoffs. At least in the German manufacturing sector, adjustment

of hours per worker serves as a short-run substitute for the adjustment of

employment levels.

         Likely reasons for the very different composition of labor adjustments

in the two countries are easy to identify. German job security laws and

prevailing German practice discourage the adjustment of employment to

changes in the demand for labor that may not prove to be permanent and make

rapid employment adjustment difficult, while the German unemployment

insurance system encourages reductions in hours during periods of slack

demand and the relatively low overtime premium may encourage adjustment

of overtime hours. In the United States, in contrast, there are no legal barriers

to layoffs, the unemployment insurance system offers positive incentives to lay

workers off rather than reduce their weekly hours, and the relatively high

mandatory overtime premium may discourage adjustment through variation in

overtime hours. Our results suggest that the higher costs of adjusting

employment levels in Germany are offset, in most cases, by lower costs of

adjusting average hours, so that the adjustment of total labor input in the two

countries is similar. Our findings concerning theadjustment of inventories in

                                       30
response to demand changes supports this conclusion, albeit indirectly. If the

costs of adjusting labor input were significantly greater in Germany, we might

expect that employers would use stocks of finished goods inventories to buffer

fluctuations in demand to a greater degree than in the United States. In fact,

we find little evidence to suggest that inventories are used for this purpose in

either country.

         Taken as a whole, the evidence reported in this paper casts doubt on

allegations that dismissal legislation in West Germany has seriously hampered

German firms' ability to adjust their labor input in response to changing

demand conditions.      Our findings suggest that, given the presence of

appropriate supporting institutions, strong worker job security can be
compatible with employers' need for flexibility in staffing levels.




                                      31
                               Data Appendix



         The German production employment, hours and shipments data come

from a monthly employer survey conducted by the Statistisches Bundesamt.

These data are published monthly in Fachserie 4: Produzierendes Gewerbe,

Reihe 4.1 .1:      Beschaeftigung, Umsatz und Energieversorgung der

Unternehmen und Betriebe im Bergbau und im Verarbeitenden Gewerbe,

issued by the Statistisches Bundesamt. Complete post-1985 shipments data are

not available for the German paper industry. For that reason, we have not

estimated models for the 1980-90 period for paper. The German shipments

data were deflated by a producer price index for basic industries, capital

goods, consumer goods or food and tobacco, as appropriate. Because of a

break in the German industry series, we do not use data prior to 1970.

German finished goods inventory data come from a survey by IFO-Institute für

Wirtschaftsforschung. This survey is conducted four times a year during the

months of February, May, August, and November.

         U.S. employment and hours data come from the Bureau of Labor

Statistics' monthly Employment, Payroll and Hours survey, as published

monthly in Employment and Earnings. U.S. shipments and finished goods

inventory data were obtained from the Bureau of the Census's Manufacturers'

Shipments, Inventories and Orders data set; these data are published in Current



                                      32
Industrial Reports: Manufacturers' Shipments, Inventories and Orders, which

appears annually. Finished goods inventory data are not available for the U.S.

auto industry. In addition, as explained below, complete inventory series were

not available for all industries on a consistent basis. The U.S. shipments and

inventory data were deflated using either the durable goods or the nondurable

goods producer price index.

         With the exception of the producer price deflators, all series used in

the analysis were obtained on magnetic media in unadjusted form and

seasonally adjusted using the X-11 procedure in SAS. Because production

employment was measured at the end of the month in Germany, but at mid-

month in the United States, we transformed the German production

employment numbers, defining:


 (Al)                         E'      (E + E1)
                                           2



These transformed numbers were used in all analyses.

        The industries included in our analysis were matched using a bridge

between the German SYPRO industry codes and the 1972 U.S. SIC industry

codes developed by Hideki Yamawaki. Except for the automobile industry,

all correspond to 2-digit SIC classifications. The U.S. SIC system was revised

in 1987. All of the U.S. employment and hours adjustment equations

summarized in Table 1 were estimated using data on a 1972 SIC basis. The

                                      33
1987 SIC revisions resulted in major changes in the composition of SIC 36,

electrical equipment, and SIC 38, instruments. We were unable to obtain

recent finished goods inventory data on a 1972 basis and pre-1988 employment

and hours data for these industries are not available on a 1987 basis. They

therefore are excluded from our analysis of employment, hours and inventories

adjustment. The 1987 revisions also affected the composition of SIC 32,

stone, clay and glass, and SIC 35, nonelectrical machinery, though in a much

less significant way. For these industries we estimate the employment, hours

and inventories models summarized in Table 2 using data on a 1987 SIC basis.

         All of the U.S. series are constructed using a "link relative"

approach, meaning that the percentage change in the series value between

period t and period t-l is first calculated using data from those establishments

filing returns in both periods, and the period t value then determined by

applying this percentage change to the period t-1 value. The German series

are not constructed in this way. Whether for this or some other reason, the

German shipments series were considerably noisier than the corresponding

U.S. series even after they had been seasonally adjusted. For that reason and

because German inventory data are only available on a quarterly basis, we

averaged the monthly data for both countries to construct quarterly

observations, which have been used in the reported analysis. Again, however,

making this adjustment had no important effect on any of our findings.



                                      34
         Neither country's data series are adjusted for the effect of strikes.

We have added strike dummies to our estimating equations for the German

automobile, primary metals and printing industries in those quarters affected

by large strikes.   This has the effect of slightly reducing the estimated

adjustment of hours worked to changes in output.

        The data used in the preparation of Figure 2 makes use of monthly

data on the number of manufacturing workers collecting short-time payments.

These numbers were taken from Amtliche Nachrichten der Bundesanstalt für

Arbeit - Jahreszahlen (various issues).




                                     35
                          Endnotes




1. For summaries of recent changes to employment protection
laws in Western Europe, see Maury (1985), Vranken (1986)
and Houseman (1990).

2. For an elaboration of these arguments, see OECD (1986)
and Soltwedel (1988).

3. Wall Street Journal, October 12, 1993.

4. Required notice periods can be circumvented through
voluntary severance agreements under which workers quit in
return for some monetary compensation. Such agreements
have been common. A 1990 division of the Federal
Constitutional Court declared the disparate treatment of blue-
collar and white-collar workers in advance notice law to be
unconstitutional and ordered parliament to pass new legislation
providing for equal notice.

5. German dismissal law and the role of the works council in
the event of a collective dismissal are discussed by Bruche and
Reissert (1984), Sengenberger (1985) and Weiss (1985).

6. The German short-time system is discussed by Flechsenhar
(1980) and Grais (1983).

7. See General Accounting Office (1986) for survey results
on the incidence of advance notice and severance pay.

8. At least 50 workers must be affected, and therefore small
establishments are exempted from any notice requirement.
The requirements of advance notice also apply if 500 or more
workers are laid off, even if they do not constitute at least
one-third of the work force.

9. Unemployment Insurance Financial Data, published by the
U.S. Department of Labor, contains data on weekly benefit
amounts, weekly wages in covered employment, and the


                             3 (-)
duration of benefit receipt.       Vroman (1989) discusses
alternative estimates of the degree of experience rating.

 10. Formal models of the effects of employment adjustment
costs on both employment and hours are surveyed by Nickell
(1986) and Harnermesh (1993). Burdett and Wright (1989)
model the effect of access to short-time compensation through
the UI system. In their model, the short-time compensation
subsidy associated with imperfect experience rating increases
employers' reliance on hours adjustments and raises the
volatility of average hours relative to the volatility of
employment. Even in a perfectly experience rated UI system,
giving liquidity-constrained employers access to short-time
benefits for their workers may produce the same result.
1-lamermesh (1993) discusses the effects of overtime prernia on
the choice between hours and employment adjustments.

11. The model we use here to estimate employment and hours
adjustment differs from those employed in our earlier work.
In Abraham and Houseman (1993) we use a finite distributed
lag model to describe the response of employment and total
hours to changes in shipments. In Abraham and Houseman
(forthcoming) we use Koyck models to separately estimate the
adjustment of employment and the adjustment of total hours to
demand changes. Neither model allowed the adjustment of
employment and average hours to be interrelated. In addition,
neither model allowed for the direct comparison of
employment and average hours adjustment.

 12. We also estimated models with data that had not been
seasonally adjusted. In general, the results are quite similar
to those reported in this paper.

13. The automobile industry is the only industry included for
which the German and U.S. definitions are not wholly
comparable; the German classification includes bicycles, while
the U.S. classification does not.

14. We estimate standard errors associated with the simulated
adjustment paths using "boot-strap" methods. Specifically, we
use Monte Carlo simulation techniques to randomly perturb
the estimated coefficients in equations (la) and (ib), and
generate new simulated paths of adjustment for employment

                            37
and hours. The reported standard errors are calculated as the
standard deviation of the values at the associated lag lengths
of 100 Monte Carlo simulations.

15. As noted above, the German street vehicles industry
includes bicycles whereas the U.S. auto industry does not.

16. Houseman (1988) did report slower total hours adjustment
in the German than in the U.S. steel industry using a finite
distributed lag model. In Abraham and Houseman (1993), in
which we used a model similar to that in Houseman (1988),
we found that once differences in demand conditions were
taken into account, differences in total hours adjustment in the
German and U.S. primary metals industry largely disappeared.

17. These results are available upon request.

18. Figure 2 in Katz and Meyer (1990) indicates that the
aggregate new job hazard, a measure of the instantaneous
probability that an unemployed person will take a new job, is
about 0.025, while the results in their Table 6 suggest that, all
else the same, the new job hazard is roughly 40 percent lower
for persons who initially expect to be recalled to their previous
job. Given that about 75 percent of their sample begins their
layoff spell expecting to be recalled, a reasonable estimate of
the new job hazard for this group is about 0.021. This is the
hazard assumed in arriving at the numbers in the text.

19. There also would be some voluntary attrition during an
extended period of short-time work, but quit rates are typically
far below the loss rates from temporary layoff status implied
by Katz and Meyer's figures.

20. Katz and Meyer (1990, p. 981).

21. Katz and Meyer's figure 2 indicates that the aggregate
recall hazard, a measure of the instantaneous probability that
an unemployed person will be recalled to the previous job,
averages about 0.050 during the first fifteen weeks following
a layoff, then drops to about 0.0 10. The results in their Table
6 suggest that the recall hazard is about ten times greater for
persons who initially expect to be recalled than for persons
who do not. A reasonable estimate of the recall hazard for

                              38
persons who begin their spell expecting to be recalled is 0.065
during the first fifteen weeks of a layoff spell and about 0.0 13
thereafter. These are the hazards used to compute the
numbers in the text.

22. Podgursky and Swaim (1987, p. 216).

23. Seitchik and Zornitsky (1989, P. 67).

24. One key difference between our approach and that in
Topel (1982) is in the modelling of demand. Topel attempts
to distinguish between anticipated and unanticipated demand
shocks. While this issue is of theoretical interest, whether one
can disentangle anticipated from unanticipated demand shocks
econometrically is highly questionable.

25. We also have estimated equations (la) and (ib) over the
1980-90 period for Germany and the United States. Estimated
employment and hours adjustment is very similar to that in the
model including inventories fit for the same time period.

26. See Blinder and Maccini (1991) for a review of this
literature.




                             39
                                References



Abraham, Katharine G. and      Susan    N. Houseman, "Does Employment

        Protection Inhibit Labor Market Flexibility? Lessons from Germany,

        France and Belgium," in Rebecca Blank, ed., Social Protection

        Versus Economic Fl&ibility:      Is There a Tradeoff?     Chicago:

        Chicago University Press, forthcoming.

__________ Job Security in America: Lessons from Germany, Washington,

        DC: Brookings Institution, 1993.

Blinder, Alan S. and Louis J. Maccini, "Taking Stock: A Critical Assessment

        of Recent Research on Inventories," The Journal of Economic

        Perspectives, 5, 1, 1991, pp. 73-98.

Bruche, Gert and Bernd Reissert, "Manpower and Regional Adjustment

        Policies: The Case of West Germany," mimeo, November 1984.

Burdett, Kenneth, and Randall Wright, "Unemployment Insurance and Short-

        Time Compensation: The Effects on Layoffs, Hours per Worker and

        Wages," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 97, no. 6, pp. 1479-

        1496.

Flechsenhar, Hans Roif, Kurzarbeit als Massnahme der betriebliche

        Anpassung, Frankfurt am Main: Ham Deutsch, 1980.




                                   40
General Accounting Office, Dislocated Workers: Extent of Business Closures,

        Layoffs and the Public and Private Response, Briefing Report to the

        Honorable Lloyd Bentsen, United States Senate, July 1, 1986.

               "Dislocated Workers:      Implementation of the Worker

        Adjustment and Retraining Notification Act (WARN), testimony by

        Linda 0. Morra before the Subcommittee on Labor and Human

        Resources of the U.S. Senate, February 23, 1993.

Grais, Bernard, Layoffs and Short-time Working in Selected OECD Countries,

        Paris: OECD, 1983.

1-lamermesh, Daniel, Labor Demand, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University

        Press, 1993.

Hemmer, Edmund, Sozialpraxis in der Bundesrepublik: Line Empirische

        Untersuchung, Koin: Deutscher Instituts-Verlag, 1988.

Houseman, Susan N., "Shorter Working Time and Job Security: Labor

        Adjustment in the European Steel Industry," in Robert Hart, ed.,

        Employment, Unemployment and Hours of Work, London: Unwin,

        1988, pp. 64-85.

__________    "The Equity and Efficiency of Job Security:       Contrasting

        Perspectives on Collective Dismissal Laws in Western Europe, " in

        K.G. Abraham and R.B. McKersie, eds., New Developments in the




                                   41
         Labor Market, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1990, pp.

         185-2 10.

 Katz, Lawrence F., and Bruce D. Meyer, "Unemployment Insurance, Recall

         Expectations, and Unemployment Outcomes," Quarterly Journal of

        Economics, 105 (November) 1990, pp. 973-1002.

Kohier, Christoph, and Werner Sengenberger, Konjunctur und Betriebliche

        Beschaeftingungspolitik in der deutschen und amerikanischen

        Automobilindustrie, Frankfurt: Campus, 1983.

Kraft, Kornelius, "Adjustment of Employment," mimeo, July 1990.

Maury, Jean-Michel, Labour Market Flexibility in the Member States of the

        Community.      Paris:   Centre for Research and Information on

        Technology, Economics and the Regions, 1985.

Nickell, Stephen J., "Dynamic Models of Labour Demand," in Orley

        Ashenfelter and Richard Layard, eds., Handbook of Labor
        Economics, Volume I, Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishing

        Company, Inc., 1986, pp. 473-522.

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Flexibility in the

        Labor Market: The Current Debate, 1986.

Podgursky, Michael J., and Paul Swaim, "Duration of Joblessness following

        Job Displacement," Industrial Relations, 26 (Fall) 1989, pp. 2 13-26.




                                    42
Seitchik, Adam, and Jeffrey Zornitsky, Fro,n One Job to the Next: Worker

        Adjustment in a Changing Labor Market, Kalamazoo, MI: W.E.

        Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 1989.

Sengenberger, Werner, "Employment Security: Redundancy Arrangements

        and Practices in West Germany," report prepared for the OECD,

        1985.

Soitwedel, Rudiger, "Employment Problems in West Germany: The Role of

        Institutions, Labor Law, and Government Intervention," Carnegie-

        Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 28 (1988), 153-220.

Topel, Robert H., "Inventories, Layoffs and the Short-run Demand for

        Labor," American Economic Review, vol. 72, no. 4, September 1982,

        pp. 769-787.

U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration,

        Unemployment Insurance Financial Data, Government Printing

       Office: Washington D.C., various years.

Vranken, Martin, "Deregulating the Employment Relationship:      Current

       Trends in Europe," Comparative Labor Law 7 (Winter), 1986, pp.

       143-65.

Vroman, Wayne, "Experience Rating in Unemployment Insurance: Some

       Current Issues," U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and




                                  43
       Training Administration, Unemployment Insurance Occasional Paper

       No. 89-6, 1989.

Weiss, Manfred, "The Law and Practice of Restructuring Labour in the

       Enterprise," mimeo, August 1985.




                                 44
</ref_section>
                                             Table I

                        Simulated Adjustment of Production Employment and
                          Production Hours to a Permanent One-Unit Shock
                     to Shipments in German and U.S. Manufacturing Industries,
                                              1973-90'


                        Emp1oymet:.               Average Hours                     Total Hours
   Indust.iy/Lag   Germany        US         Germany          US           Germany            US
 Manufacturing
Current Quarter
                     (.02)         (.04)         (.05)          (.03)            (.06)            (.05)
 1 Quarter             35*          .85           .38             .25              73*            1.11
                     (.04)         (.05)         (.06)          (.03)            (.07)            (.05)
2 Quarters            .49         1.02           .30             .22              •79*            1.24
                     (.06)        (.05)         (.06)           (.03)            (.07)            (.05)
4 Quarters            .69         l.li           .17             .12              .85*            1.24
                     (.08)         (.06)        (.07)           (.04)            (.07)            (.05)
6 Quarters            .81         1.11           .08             .07              .89*            1.18
                     (.10)        (.06)         (.07)           (.05)            (.08)            (.06)
Textiles
Current Quarter       .14          .27           .26              .23             .40              .49
                     (.02)        (.05)         (.05)           (.07)            (.05)            (.08)
1 Quarter             .28          .39           .31              .24             .60              .62

2 Quarters            .41          .42           .30             .21              .71              .64
                     (.05)        (.06)         (.06)           (.05)            (.08)            (.07)
4 Quarters            .62          .43           .21             .19              .83              .62
                     (.08)        (.07)         (.07)           (.05)            (.10)            (.08)
6 Quarters            •77*         .43           .13            .19               .90              .62
                     (.11)        (.07)         (.08)          (.06)             (.12)            (.08)
Apparel
Current Quarter       .17          .13           .15            .06               .32              .19
                     (.02)        (.04)         (.05)
1 Quarter            .35           .21           .15            .08               .50*             .29
                                                               (.03)             (.07)            (.06)
2 Quarters            .50*         .26           .10            .09               .60*             .35
                     (.05)        (.07)         (.06)          (.03)             (.09)            (.07)
4 Quarters            .72*         .31          -.01            .08               .71              .39
                     (.08)        (.09)         (.06)          (.04)             (.10)            (.08)
6 Quarters            .86*         .33          -.09            .07                77*             .39
                     (.10)        (.12)         (.06)          (.05)             (.12)            (.10)
                                              Table 1
                                            (Continued)




                       Employment                 Average Hours               Total Hours

    Industry/Lag   Germany     U.S.          Germany        U.S.         Germany        U.S.

Papei2
Current Quarter       .03            .25           .30*         06           .33             .31
                     (.04)          (.06)        (.06)        (.03)         (.07)           (.06)
1 Quarter             .11           .37           .33          .07           .44            .44
                     (.07)          (.07)        (.09)        (.04)         (.11)           (.08)

2   Quarters          .18           .42           .32             .06        .51             .48
                     (.11)          (.07)        (.10)        (.05)         (.15)           (.09)

4 Quarters            .31            .42          •3Ø*            .04        .60            .46
                     (.17)          (.07)        (.11)        (.06)         (.20)           (ii)
6 Quarters            .40           .41           .27             .03        .68             .44
                     (.22)          (.07)        (.11)        (.07)         (.24)           (.12)

Printing
Current Quarter       .20            .06          .16*            .04        .36*            .10
                     (.02)          (.02)        (.04)        (.02)         (.05)           (.02)
1   Quarter           .38*           .12          .10          .06           P49*            .18
                     (.04)          (.03)        (.03)        (.02)         (.05)           (.03)
2 Quarters            .52           .19           .05             .07        P57*            .26
                     (.05)          (.03)        (.03)        (.02)         (.05)           (.04)
4 Quarters            .72*          .30          -.03             .07        .69*           .36
                     (.05)          (.04)        (.03)        (.02)         (.05)           (.05)

6 Quarters            .84            .37                          .06        .76*           .44
                     (.06)          (.05)        (.03)        (.02)         (.05)           (.06)
Leather
Current Quarter       .19           .21           .28*         .09           .47             .31
                     (.03)          (.04)        (.06)        (.03)         (.07)           (.05)
I Quarter             .36            .35          .28*            . 11       .64             .46
                     (.04)          (.07)        (.07)        (.04)         (.08)           (.07)
2 Quarters            .49           .43           .21          .10           .70             .53
                     (.05)          (.10)        (.07)        (.04)         (.08)           (.10)
4 Quarters            .65            .51          .07          .06           .73             .57
                     (.06)          (.17)        (.06)        (.05)         (.08)           (.15)
6 Quarters            .74            .53         -.01             .04        .73             .57
                     (.07)          (.22)        (.06)        (.06)         (.08)           (.18)
                                                   Table 1
                                                 (Continued)




                            Employment                 Average Hours              Total Hours
    Industry/Lag   .:Gcrrnany...    U.S.           Germany       U.S.        Germany        u.s.
Stone,. Clay and Glass

Current Quarter           .12'            .32          .19
                         (.01)           (.04)        (.03)        (.02)        (.03)           (.04)
 1 Quarter                .23'            .54          .22             .17       45'             .71
                         (.02)           (.06)        (.03)        (.02)        (.03)           (.05)
2 Quarters                .32'        .68              .21             .17       53'             .85
                         (.03)       (.07)            (.03)        (.02)        (.04)           (.06)
4 Quarters                .46'           .83           .18          .12         .64'             .95
                         (.04)       (.08)            (.03)        (.03)        (.05)           (.06)
6 Quarters                .58'           .87          .14           .08         .72'             .96
                         (.05)       (.08)           (.03)         (.04)        (.06)           (.07)
Primary Metals
Current Quarter           .08'        .37             .43'             .15      .51              .52
                         (.02)       (.04)           (.05)         (.01)        (.05)           (.04)
1   Quarter               . 16'       .53             .34'             .15      .50'
                         (.04)       (.04)           (.05)
2 Quarters                .22'        .59             .32*             .11      .54'             .70
                         (.05)       (.04)           (.05)         (.02)       (.06)            (.04)
4 Quarters                .31'           .61          .28'          .06         .59              .67
                         (.08)       (.05)           (.06)         (.03)       (.08)            (.05)
6 Quarters                .36'           .61          .26'          .04         .62              .65
                         (.10)       (.06)           (.06)         (.04)       (.10)            (.04)
Nonelecthcal Machinery
Current Quarter           .01'           .52          .13           .16         .14'             .68
                         (.01)       (.07)           (.04)         (.03)       (.04)            (.08)
1 Quarter                 .03'        .84             .18          .21          .21'            1.05
                         (.03)       (.09)           (.06)        (.04)        (.06)            (.09)
2 Quarters                .05'       1.03             .21          .20          .26'            1.23
                         (.04)       (.09)           (.06)        (.05)        (.07)            (.09)
4 Quarters                .07'       1.18             .22          .11          .29'            1.29
                         (.07)       (.10)           (.07)        (.05)        (.09)            (.09)
6 Quarters                .09'       1.18             .21          .04          .31'            1.23
                         (.11)       (.10)           (.07)        (.06)        (.11)            (.08)
                                                      Table 1
                                                    (Continued)




                             Eznploynient                 Average Hours                    Total Hours

    Industry/Lag        Germany         U.S.          Germany          U.S.          Germany           U.S.

 Electrical Equipment
 Current Quarter            .13*             .37          .52*            .07             .65*            .44
                           (.03)            (.06)        (.06)           (.02)           (.06)            (06)
 1 Quarter                  .28              .63          .59             .09             .87              .72
                           (.07)            (.07)        (.07)           (.03)           (.09)            (.08)
 2 Quarters                 .40*             79            54             .09             .94             .88
                           (.11)            (.08)        (.08)           (.03)           (.11)           (.09)
 4 Quarters                 .54              .92          .41             .05             .95             .97
                           (.18)            (.10)        (.11)           (.04)           (.12)           (.10)
 6 Quarters                 .61               .93         .33             .02             .94              .95
                           (.25)            (.12)        (.15)           (.05)           (.13)            (.11)
 Autos
 Current Quarter            .13              .43          .48*            .19             .61              .62
                           (.01)            (.04)        (.05)           (.02)           (.06)            (.04)
 I Quarter                  .29              .60          .41             .18             .70             .79
                           (.03)            (.04)        (.06)           (.02)           (.07)           (.03)
 2 Quarters                 .42              .67          .35             .16             .77             .82
                           (.04)            (.04)        (.07)           (.02)           (.08)           (.03)
 4 Quarters                 .63              .71          .25             .11             .89             .82
                           (.05)            (.04)        (.07)           (.02)           (.10)           (.04)
 6 Quarters                 .78              .72          .19             .10             .97             .82
                           (.07)            (.05)        (.08)           (.02)           (.13)           (.04)
 Instruments

 Current Quarter            .13              .20          .13             .11             .26             .30
                           (.03)            (.05)        (.03)           (.03)           (.04)           (.06)
 1 Quarter                  .26              .38          .14             .17             .40             .56
                           (.05)            (.09)        (.04)           (.05)           (.06)           (.10)
 2 Quarters                 .36              .55          .12             .20             .48             .75
                           (.06)            (.12)        (.04)           (.06)           (.06)           (.14)
 4 Quarters                 .49              .78          .05*            .22             .54            1.00
                           (.07)            (.19)        (.04)           (.06)           (.07)           (.20)
 6 Quarters                 .55              .91          .01*            .20             .56            1.11
                           (.09)            (.25)        (.05)           (.07)           (.08)           (.25)

  Standard errors are in parentheses. An asterisk denotes that German-U.S. difference is significant at .05
level, two-tailed test.
2
  German paper industry results are for the 1973-85 period.
                                                   Table 2

                               Simulated Adjustment of Production Employment,
                   Production Hours and Finished Goods Inventories to a Permanent One-Unit
                       Shock to Shipments in German and U.S. Manufacturing Industries,
                                                  1980-90'


                     Employment           :AveragCffours             Totaj1ouj                  Inventories
  Industiy/Lag    Germany      US        Germany       US       Germany       US        Germany          US
Manufacturing
Current Quarter     .16         .47         .48*        21          .63         .68          -.05        -.26
                   (.03)       (.04)       (.06)       (.03)       (.07)      (.05)          (.29)       (.23)
1 Quarter           .34         .74         .42         .25         .76         .98          -.06        -.32
                   (.05)       (.05)       (.08)       (.04)       (.09)      (.06)          (.45)       (.33)
2 Quarters          .50         .88         .36        .22          .86       1.10           -.08        -.25
                   (.07)       (.07)       (.07)       (.05)       (.10)      (.07)          (.58)       (.40)
4 Quarters          .72         .96         .28         .13       1.00        1.09           -.16        -.01
                   (.10)       (.10)       (.08)       (.07)      (.11)       (.11)          (.77)       (.55)
6 Quarters          .88         .93         .22         .09       1.10        1.02           -.24         .26
                   (.12)       (.12)       (.08)       (.08)      (.13)       (.14)          (.95)       (.73)
Textiles
Current Quarter     .14         .25        .63*        .28         .76         .52           -.34        -.08
                   (.03)       (.05)      (.08)       (.06)       (.09)       (.09)          (.30)       (.09)
1 Quarter           .37         .39        .56*        .31         .93         .70           -.24        -.01
                   (.05)       (.06)      (.10)       (.06)       (.12)       (.08)          (.50)       (.16)
2 Quarters          .57         .47        .52         .27        1.09         .74           -.19         .09
                   (.08)       (.06)      (.11)       (.07)       (.16)       (.08)          (.68)       (.22)
4 Quarters           93         .53        .45         .17        1.37*        .70           -.12         .25
                   (.15)       (.09)      (.18)       (.10)       (.26)       (.11)          (.97)       (.32)
6 Quarters         1.22*        .53        .39         .13        1.61*        .66        -.08            .33
                   (.23)       (.12)      (.24)       (.14)       (.38)       (.13)      (1.27)          (.42)
Apparel
Current Quarter     .13        .10         .24*        .06         .36*        .16            .19        .06
                   (.04)      (.05)       (.07)       (.05)       (.08)       (.06)          (.45)      (.18)
1 Quarter           .27        .17         .25         .09         .52         .26            .31        .22
                   (.07)      (.07)       (.08)       (.08)       (.11)       (.11)          (.54)      (.30)
2 Quarters          .41        .21         .23         .10         .64         .31            .13        .43
                   (.09)      (.10)       (.08)       (.09)       (.13)       (.14)          (.55)      (.39)
4 Quarters          .63        .22         .18         .08         .80         .31           -.35        .79
                   (.14)      (.13)       (.08)       (.11)       (.17)       (.18)          (.54)      (.53)
6 Quarters          77*        .19         .14         .07          90*        .26           -.74        .93
                   (.18)      (.15)       (.08)       (.11)       (.20)       (.20)          (.57)      (.64)
                                                      Table 2
                                                    (Continued)




                          Employmenx        Average Hoirs            Total Iloura            Inventories

  bdustiyfLag      Germany        U.S.    Germany        U.S.     Germany.    U.S.    Germany         U.S.

Printing
Current Quarter           .15      .08      .72'           .01      .87'       .10    -1.14            .74
                        (.06)     (.03)    (.12)          (.02)    (.14)      (.04)   (3.13)          (.21)
1 Quarter                 .26      .12      .55'           .02      .81'       .14     4.68            .93
                        (.13)     (.04)    (.15)          (.03)    (.19)      (.06)   (5.16)          (.2.5)

2 Quarters               .34       .15      .52'           .02      .86'       .16     6.18             .99
                        (.19)     (.06)    (.14)          (.04)    (.21)      (.08)   (5.77)          (.30)
4 Quarters               .45       .18      .47'           .01      .92'       .20     8.07           1.02
                        (.30)     (.10)    (.17)          (.04)    (.30)      (.13)   (6.68)          (.37)

6 Quarters               .52       .20      .4.4'          .01      .97        .21     9.20           1.04
                        (.39)     (.13)    (.20)         (.05)     (.39)      (.16)   (7.75)          (.43)
Leather
                                                                                       .
Current Quarter          .14       .13      .32'           .04      .46'       .16         .57          .07
                        (04)      (.05)    (.07)         (.04)     (.08)      (.06)    (.42)          (.13)
1 Quarter                .28       .19      .30'           .04      .58'       .23      .76            .11
                        (.07)     (.08)    (.07)         (.05)     (.09)      (.09)    (.65)          (.19)
2 Quarters               .40       .22      .27'           .03      .67'       .25      .70             .15
                        (.09)     (.10)    (.08)         (.07)     (.11)      (.12)    (.81)          (.26)
4 Quarters               .56       .24      .18            .01      .74'       .25         .18          .20
                        (.13)     (.17)    (.09)         (.10)     (.16)      (.18)   (1.02)          (.46)
6 Quarters               .62       .24      .10           .00       .73        .24      .51            .21
                        (.17)     (.29)    (.11)         (.15)     (.19)      (.29)   (1.19)          (.88)
                                                                                                           .
Stone. Clay and Glass

Current Quarter          .08'      .20      .26'          .12       .34         .33    -.15           -.29
                        (.03)     (.04)    (.04)         (.02)     (.05)      (.05)    (.26)          (.09)
1 Quarter                .12'      .43      .29'          .17       .42        .60     -.21           -.42
                        (.05)     (.06)    (.05)         (.03)     (.07)      (.07)    (.36)          (.13)
2 Quarters               .15'      .60      .30'          .16       .47'       .76     -.17           .45
                        (.07)     (.07)    (.06)         (.03)     (.09)      (.09)    (.44)          (.15)
4 Quarters               .19'      .70      .31'          .10       .50        .80     -.06           -.38
                        (.11)     (.08)    (.07)         (.04)     (.14)      (.09)    (.55)          (.19)
6 Quarters               .22'       .66     .31'          .07       .53        .73         .01        -.34
                        (.15)     (.09)    (.08)         (.05)     (.19)      (.10)    (.64)          (.23)
                                                      Table 2
                                                    (Continued)




                           Employment        Average Hours            Total Hours            lnventorje
     IndustryfLag   Germany        U.S.    Germany:      U.S.     Germany     U.S.     Germany       u.s.
Primary Metals

Current Quarter           .09       .38      .37k          .12       .46        .50       -.12        .15
                         (.02)     (.06)    (.06)         (.02)    (.07)       (.06)     (.29)       (08)
 1   Quarter               .19*     .53      .30           .11      .48         .64      -.35             33
                         (.05)     (.07)    (.06)         (.03)    (.08)       (.07)     (.33)       (.13)
2 Quarters                 .26*     .59      .28*          .06      .54        .65       -.43          .56
                         (.07)     (.09)    (.05)        (.04)     (.09)      (.08)      (.41)       (.21)
4 Quarters                .37        .60     .25         -.01       .62         .60      .46*        1.13
                         (.14)     (.15)    (.06)        (.06)     (.15)      (.13)      (.56)       (.44)
6 Quarters                .44       .61       .23        -.06       .67        .55       -.44        L75
                         (.24)     (.22)    (.07)        (.11)     (.24)      (.19)      (.71)       (.8!)
Non-Electrical Machinery
Current Quarter           .02       .53       .10         .16       .12        .69        .36        -.35
                         (.02)     (.10)    (.05)        (.03)     (.05)      (.10)      (.19)       (.29)
1 Quarter                 .04       .79      .10          .18       .13        .97        .49        -.30
                         (04)      (.10)    (.06)        (.04)     (.07)      (.09)      (35)        (.34)
2 Quarters                .05       .89      .09          .15       •j3*      1.04        .61        -.12
                         (.06)     (.09)    (.07)        (.05)     (.09)      (.08)      (.51)       (.38)
4 Quarters                .05       .89      .06          .06       .11        .96        .85          .26
                         (.10)     (.11)    (.09)        (.07)     (.14)      (.09)      (.8!)       (.51)
6 Quarters                •Ø3*     .84       .05          .01       .08        .85       1.07         .47
                         (.14)    (.13)     (.10)        (.09)     (.19)      (.1!)     (1.07)       (.78)
Electrical' Equipment

Current Quarter            .07     NA        .49         NA         .57       NA         -.12        NA
                         (.05)              (.09)                  (.09)                 (.50)
I Quarter                  .16               .46                    .62                  -.13
                         (.10)              (.12)                  (.13)                 (.91)
2 Quarters                .23                .43                    .66                  -.49
                         (.18)              (.12)                  (.17)                (1.55)
4 Quarters                .33                .38                   .71                   -.56
                         (.46)              (.17)                  (.37)                (5.23)
6 Quarters                .39                .35                    .74                  -.59
                        (1.15)              (.31)                  (.91)               (22.94)
                                                           Table 2
                                                         (Continued)




                          Employment              Average Hours              Total Houxs               Inventories

   Indusuy/Lag       Germany         US        Germany        US        Germany        US        Germany         US

 Autos
 Current Quarter         .10         NA           .61          NA           .71         NA         -1.98         NA
                        (M2)                     (.11)                    (.11)                     (.90)
 1 Quarter               .20                      .63                      .82                     -3.59
                        (.04)                    (.16)                    (.16)                    (1.58)
 2 Quarters              .28                      .62                      .90                     -4.82
                        (.06)                    (.18)                    (.19)                    (2.09)
 4 Quarters              .42                      .60                     1.02                     -6.53
                        (.11)                    (.20)                    (.23)                    (2.79)
 6 Quarters              .52                      .58                     1.11                     -7.66
                        (.15)                    (.22)                    (.27)                    (3.29)


 Current Quarter         .18         NA           .17          NA          .35          NA         -121          NA
                        (.03)                    (06)                     (.07)                     (.35)
 I Quarter               .37                      .14                      .51                     -1.30
                        (.04)                    (M4)                     (.07)                     (.34)
 2 Quarters              .51                      .08                      .58                     -1.04
                        (.05)                    (.04)                    (.07)                     (.34)
 4 Quarters              .65                     -.01                      .64                      -.56
                        (.06)                    (M4)                     (.07)                     (.36)
 6 Quarters              .70                     -.04                       66                      -.34
                        (.06)                    (.04)                    (.07)                     (.40)

  Standard errors are in parentheses. An asterisk denotes that the German-U.S. difference is significant at .05 level,
two-tailed test.
                                           Table 1A

                          Production Employment and Hours Adjustment
                                  Selected Coefficient Estirnales
                            from an Interrelated Factor Demand Model


                           a11           12        I              21        I   a22       I

                                           Germany

Manufacturing                0.831       0.075         0.172      -0.443        0.158          0.396
                            (0.030)     (0.029)        (0.026)    (0.060)       (0.084)       (0.050)
Textiles                     0.884       0.058          0.143     -0.269         0.372         0.256
                            (0.032)     (0.038)        (0.023)    (0.052)       (0.089)       (0.048)
Apparel                      0.868        0.166         0.173     -0.278        0.343          0.149
                            (0.027)      (0.048)       (0.023)    (0.056)       (0.100)       (0.049)
Paper                        0.912       0.154          0.033     -0.176         0.128        0.299
                            (0.062)     (0.068)        (0.035)    (0.157)       (0.188)       (0.062)
Printing                     0.817       0.086          0.202     -0.306         0.056        0.160
                            (0.032)     (0.053)        (0.024)    (0.055)       (0.107)       (0.041)
Leather                     0.776        0.067          0.192     -0.413         0.296         0.276
                           (0.034)      (0.048)        (0.031)    (0.064)       (0.090)       (0.058)
Stone, Clay and Glass       0.870        0.001          0.120     -0.180         0.312         0.185
                           (0.024)      (0.049)        (0.015)    (0.042)       (0.085)       (0.025)
Primaiy Metals              0.806        0.035          0.080     -0.395        -0.139         0.432
                           (0.064)      (0.031)        (0.016)    (0.163)       (0.082)       (0.043)
Nonelectrical Machinery     0.839        0.037          0.014     -0.218         0.489         0.125
                           (0.183)      (0.043)        (0.014)    (0.061)       (0.097)       (0.040)
Electrical Equipment        0.767        0.094          0.128     -0.485         0.265         0.517
                           (0.120)      (0.039)        (0.036)    (0.056)       (0.073)       (0.059)
Autos                       0.883        0.103          0.127     -0.402        -0.040         0.482
                           (0.020)      (0.023)        (0.014)    (0.117)       (0.097)       (0.061)
Instruments                 0.785        0.194          0.131     -0.242         0.362         0.126
                           (0.063)      (0.06!)        (0.029)    (0.057)       (0.101)       (0.033)
                                             Table IA
                                           (Continued)




                          F—   Il         l2                         U2        a22        $2

                                           United States

Manufacturing                   0.493      0.241            0.536    -0.182     0.629     0.216
                               (0.040)    (0.106)          (0.037)   (0.021)   (0.068)   (0.028)
Textiles                        0.297      0.185           0.265     -0.211    0.289      0.226
                               (0.116)    (0.109)          (0.055)   (0.081)   (0.221)   (0.063)
Apparel                         0.605     0.085            0.127     -0110     0.567     0.061
                               (0.156)    (0.145)          (0.041)   (0.041)   (0.107)   (0.018)
Paper                           0.344     0.648            0.245     -0.132     0.635    0.063
                               (0.096)    (0.174)          (0.055)   (0.043)   (0.206)   (0.030)
Printing                        0.861      0.348           0.059     -0.049     0.596    0.039
                               (0.033)    (0.173)          (0.017)   (0.020)   (0.184)   (0.014)
Leather                         0.600      0.086           0.212     -0.152    0.521      0.094
                               (0.132)    (0.159)          (0.041)   (0.030)   (0.093)   (0.027)
Stone, Clay and Glass           0.631     0.165            0.315     -0.127    0.627     0.129
                               (0.052)    (0.171)          (0.042)   (0.016)   (0.065)   (0.016)

Primary Metals                  0.380     0.113            0.372     .0.215    0.512     0.150
                               (0.062)    (0.173)          (0.032)   (0.022)   (0.072)   (0.013)
Nonelectrical Machinery          0.545    0.286            0.515     -0.148    0.749     0.164
                               (0.053 )   (0.182)          (0.071)   (0.020)   (0.068)   (0.030)
Electrical Equipment            0.573      0.615            0.374    -0.080     0.719    0.070
                               (0.076)    (0.228)          (0.059)   (0.017)   (0.085)   (0.021)
Autos                           0.397     -0.004          0.433      -0.186     0.416     0.189
                               (0.056)    (0.126)        (0.032)     (0.021)   (0.080)   (0.020)
Instruments                     0.720     0.452            0.195     -0.062    0.695     0.108
                               (0.129)    (0.201)        (0.057)     (0.014)   (0.084)   (0.034)
                                                                     Table 2A

                                           Production Employment, Hours and Inventories Adjustment;
                                    Selected Coefficient Estimates from an Inter-related Factor Demand Model



                                                        J              2I     I      a22       a23       02     I     a31        a32                 3
                                                                     Germany
Manufacturing              0.860     0.098     0.003     0.159      -0.316        -0.010    .0.004     0.475        -0.076     0.086     0.765    -0.048
                          (0.036)   (0.039)   (0.013)   (0.025)     (0.088)       (0.094)   (0.031)   (0.060)       (0.318)   (0.442)   (0.136)   (0.256)
Textiles                   0.944     0.146    -0.021        0.138   -0.197        -0.053     0.007     0.625         0.120     0.455     0.606    -0.339
                          (0.031)   (0.042)   (0.011)   (0.029)     (0.198)       (0.106)   (0.035)   (0.087)       (0.365)   (0.492)   (0.128)   (0.336)
Apparel                    0.896     0.141     0.020        0.125   -0.142         0.104     0.029     0.235        -1.424     1.112     0.177     0.194
                          (0.053)   (0.077)   (0.014)   (0.04!)     (0.091)       (0.132)   (0.023)   (0.069)       (0.632)   (0.916)   (0.161)   (0.479)
Printing                   0.788    -0,013    -0.001        0.148   -0.302        -0.181    -0.005     0.718        11.443     6.102     0.222    -1.137
                          (0.089)   (0.071)   (0.003)   (0.06!)     (0.297)       (0.136)   (0.007)   (0.140)       (4.268)   (3.403)   (0.154)   (2.947)
Leather                    0.808     0.028     0.036     0.138      -0.335        -0.023     0.064     0.320        -1.503    -0.212     0.819     0.567
                          (0.057)   (0.066)   (0.010)   (0.037)     (0.112)       (0.128)   (0.020)   (0.072)       (0.559)   (0.768)   (0.113)   (0.427)
Stone, Clay and Glass      0.798    -0.091    -0.014     0.080       0.136         0.074    -0.033     0.259         1.757    -0.639     0.204    -0.150
                          (0.119)   (0.065)   (0.016)   (0.024)     (0.199)       (0.109)   (0.026)   (0.040)       (1.223)   (0.673)   (0.162)   (0.246)
Primary Metals             0.839     0.063     0.014     0.090      -0,260        -0.135     0.005     0.368        0.05!     -0.476     0.518    -0.116
                          (0.114)   (0.040)   (0.010)   (0.022)     (0.143)       (0.126)   (0.023)   (0.059)       (0.573)   (0.693)   (0.129)   (0.283)
Nonelectrical Machinery    0.875     0.118    -0.032     0.019      -0.286         0.222    -0.051     0.099         0.394    -1.746     0.815     0.363
                          (0.080)   (0.060)   (0.012)   (0.019)     (0.093)       (0.206)   (0.024)   (0.050)       (0.327)   (0.625)   (0.087)   (0.209)
Electrical Equipment       0700     0.057     -0.020     0.071      -0.403        -0.010    -0.007    0.493         -0.368    -0.416     0.323    -0.116
                          (0372)    (0.05!)   (0.016)   (0.047)     (0.068)       (0.103)   (0.027)   (0.08!)       (0.593)   (0.611)   (0.656)   (0.484)
Autos                      0.949     0.029     0.0006    0.098      -0.183         0.043    -0.005     0.607        -2.819    -0.308     0.583    -1.978
                          (0.046)   (0.026)   (00003)   (0.022)     (0.29!)       (0.176)   (0.019)   (0.113)       (1.796)   (1.030)   (0.125)   (0.849)
Instruments                0.773    0.283      0.001   0.183        .0.287         0.200     0.008     0.166         1.290    -1.155     0.119    -1.205
_____________________—    (0.044)   (0090)    (0.013) (0.028)       (0.083)       (0.242)   (0.022)   (0.056)       (0.555)   (1.127)   (0.162)   (0.357)
                                                                               Table 2A
                                                                              (Continued)




                            I3      I     at2     I     a13               I     a21     I     '22     I             I     2       I     a31     I     a32       a33

                                                                          United States

Manufacturing              0.497         0.039        -0.101     0.470        -0.187         0.569 -0.028                0.208         0.448        -0.237     0.840    -0.260
                          (0.040)       (0.145)       (0.027)   (0.040)       (0.031)       (0.126) (0.021)             (0.036)       (0.193)       (0.780)   (0.132)   (0.219)

Textiles                   0.604        -0.050        -0.107     0.248        -0.407         0.488 -0.003                0.275        0.317         0.164      0.725    -0.077
                          (0.093)       (0,070)       (0.043)   (0.042)       (0.072)       (0.149) (0.043)             (0.061)       (0.20!) (0.194)         (0.162)   (0.090)

Apparel                    0.728         0.117        -0.076     0.095        -0.076         0.541        -0.020         0.063         1.441        -0.117     0.658     0.055
                          (0.141)       (0.156)       (0.032)   (0.043)       (0.102)       (0.185)       (0.029)       (0.049)       (0.530)       (0.559)   (0.175)   (0.167)

Printing                   0.851         0.524        -0.049     0.082        -0.040         0.698        -0.004         0.013         0.193        -2.034     0.270     0.742
                          (0.041)       (0.149)       (0.016)   (0.025)       (0.037)       (0.135)       (0.015)       (0.023)       (0.501)       (1.235)   (0.228)   (0.210)

Leather                    0.638        -0.120        -0200      0.127        -0.116         0.461        -0.048         0.037        0.187         -0.239     0.504     0.066
                          (0.173)       (0.208)       (0.059)   (0.043)       (0.050)       (0.237)       (0043)        (0.037)       (OilS)        (0.556)   (0.432)   (0.147)

Stone, Clay and Glass      0.505        0556          -0.196    0201          -0.160         0.595        -0.015        0A24           0.298         0.266     0.777    -0291
                          (0.066)       (0.202)       (0.055)   (0.042)       (0.036)       (0.110)       (0.030)       (0.023)       (0.142)       (0.435)   (0.118)   (0090)

Primary Metals             0.335         0.189         0.022     0.379        -0.169         0.430        -0.047         0.123         0.324        -0.735     0.958     0.152
                          (0.109)       (0.310)       (0.069)   (0.060)       (0.031)       (0.113)       (0.022)       (0.020)       (0.131)       (0.586)   (0.098)   (0.087)

Nonelectrical Machinery    0.383         0.197        -0.070     0.531        -0.193         0.763        -0.014        0i59           0.686        -0.686     0.616    -0.345
                          (0.082)       (0.302)       (0.055)   (0.101)       (0.020)       (0.082)       (0.012)       (0.028)       (0.260)       (1.194)   (0.305)   (0.296)
                             Figure 1
 Simulated Adjustment of Production Employment
  and Average Production Hours to a Permanent
     One-Unit Negative Shock to Shipments

German Manufacturing
   0

 -0.2

-0.4

-0.6

-0.8

       1



 1.2

-1.4
           -1   0        1       2      3     4      5         6
                    Shints Emp!.ment Averae Hours

U.S. Manufacturing
   0

-0.2

-0.4

-0.6

-0.8

   1



1.2

-1.4
           -1   0        1       2      3    4      5         6
                    Shints Empment Averaqe Hours
                                                    SRl-FGDRW 1.93
                                 Figure 2
                Percent of German Manufacturing Workers
                         on Short Time, 1973-90
Percent
20




15




10




 5




 0
     73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90
                                                          ST-F!G.DRW 10/93
