NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN JOB
CHARACTERISTICS AND RETIREMENT

Michael Hurd
Kathleen McCiany

Working Paper No. 4558

NATiONAL BUREAU OP ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December, 1993

Financial support from the University of Michigan and the National Institute on Aging is
gratefully acknowledged. Many thanks to Nancy Cole for research assistance. This paper is part
of NBER's research program in Aging. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4558
December 1993

ThE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN JOB
CHARACTERISTICS AND RETIREMENT

ABSTRACT
We study the influence of job characteristics on prospective retirement as measured by

the probability of working past age 62 or 65. The characteristics fall into three broad classes:
physical and mental requirements, job flexibility including employer accommodation to older
workers, and financial aspects such as pensions and health care insurance. Using data from the
Health and Retirement Survey, we find that physical and mental job requirements have a rather

small influence on prospective retirement, whereas measures of job fledbility and financial
aspects of the job are important determinants.

Michael Hurd
Department of Economics
SUNY, Stony Brook
Stony Brook, NY 11794
and NBER

Kathleen McGany
Department of Econumics
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90024÷1477
and NBER

1. Introduction
Empirical studies of retirement behavior have generally focused on the influence of

financial variables such as pensions, Social Security, wealth and wages. In a broader framework,
however, the decision to retire will involve weighing the utility of leisure against the utility from

working, including the utility from an increase in wealth. From this point of view workers will

retire from unpleasant, difficult jobs at a different rate than from pleasant, easy jobs. Besides
eliminating the estimation problems that will follow if working conditions are correlated with

financial variables, a complete investigation of job characteristics on retirement behavior should
improve our understanding of the retirement process.
An even broader perspective would want to account for the entire choice set facing the

worker. There are many aspects of the choice set. Here we focus on two. The first has to do
with the ability of a worker to vary the volume of work without changing jobs. There is
considerable empirical evidence that workers have little flexibility with respect to hours per day,

days per week or weeks per year (Iturd, 1993). If a worker is constrained to work more or
fewer hours than is desired, he may choose to retire at a different age than in the absence of a

constraint. For example, a worker who wants gradually to reduce hours per week as he ages but
is constrained, may retire earlier than he would were the constraint removed.
A second aspect of the choice set is the availability of alternative other jobs with different

hours and wage combinations. Past studies typically find that an older worker who leaves a
career job will suffer a wage cut of 35%-50% (Gustman and Steinmeier, 1985. Jams, 1987).'
But these studies are based on observations in panel data: we only know the outcomes of those
who remain in the labor force, not those who leave completely. Those who leave completely
perhaps face even less desirable alternatives.
The Health and Retirement Survey (HRS) has a number of questions about job

characteristics of a rather conventional nature. In addition, however, there are questions about
the ability and desire of a worker to vary hours, and a few questions about the prospects of other
employment. In cross-section, these questions would he of liule use in understanding retirement

because they are only asked of workers; however, in the HItS there are several questions about
the prospects of retirement. In particular, workers are asked about retirement plans, including
the expected age of retirement. This measure of the expected age at retirement is quite

1See Hind, 1993, fori discussion of this literature.

conventional, and has been of limited use in other data sets because the answer is hard to

interpret. Is the response the most likely retirement age, the mathematical expectation, the mode,
or what? However, in addition to this question, the LIRS has innovative questions about the

probability of working past the age of 62 and of 65. These questions show considerable promise,
not just for understanding retirement but other aspects of individual decision making.

This paper has several goals. The first is to analyze the data about job characteristics in

the first wave of the HRS, and to find their variation and correlates. The second is to analyze
the data on other aspects of the job, in particular hours constraints. The last goal is to find the
influence of job characteristics and other variables on the measures of anticipated retirement.
Because of the innovative nature of the probability questions, most of our work will use them;
we will, however, compare the conventional expected retirement age with the probabilities so that
we may understand both better.

2. Previous findings about job characteristics
It is often but not universally found that more physically demanding occupations are

associated with early retirement. In the New Beneficiary Survey, workers in physically
demanding jobs are less likely to work after the initial receipt of Social Security benefits than

other workers (Holden, 1988). In the Retirement History Survey (RHS) (iustman and Steinmeier
(1986) found a smaller proportion of workers in more physically demanding occupations as age
increases, suggesting that such workers leave the labor force at younger ages.
Filer and Petri (1988) argued that job characteristics determine an appropriate retirement

age for a specific job and that the retirement age in turn determines the structure of the pension
program. They found that many job characteristics are significant predictors of early retirement,
Including heavy physical demands and stress. Flexibility of employment, as measured by the
possibility of self-employment or part-time employment, increased the retirement age.

Hayward, Grady, Hardy and Sommers (1989) used factor analysis to derive four job
characteristic groupings; substantive complexity, manipulative skill, physical demands and social
skill. In a hazard model they found that substantive complexity and physical demands are both
significant predictors of retirement: complexity lowers the retirement probability and physical

demands increases it. Other variables such as compulsory retirement, age, health and pension
eligibility operate in the expected direction.

Not all studies have found a relationship between job characteristics and retirement. For
2

example, Bartel (1982) used the National Longitudinal Survey of Older Men to compare the
relaLive importance of specific job characteristics in predicting quit probabilities. She found that

repetitive work has little effect on the quit rate of older men. Furthermore, other job
characteristics such as whether the job requires strength, involves bad working conditions, or is
stressful are not significant predictors of the quit probability of older men.
Quinn (1977) examined labor force status as a function of personal and financial
characteristics, labor market characteristics, and job characteristics. Financial characteristics such
as wealth, Social Security and pension eligibility are important predictors of labor force

participation for 58-63 year old men in the RHS. but low autonomy on the job. siress and bad
working conditions are not significant predictors of participation.

Although these studies have mixed results on the magnitude of the influence of job
characteristics on retirement, they have at least established that they should be considered further.

Hours of work restrictions.
If there were no constraints on the choice of hours of work, we would expect that as
workers age and tastes shift toward leisure, they would desire to withdraw gradually from the

labor force. Although there is some shift to part-time work following a separation Irom a lulltime career job, a substantial majority leave full-time work for full-time leisure (Rust, 1990;

Berkovic and Stern, 1991; Quinn. Burkhauser, and Myers (1990). Among those who reduce
hours, all but a small fraction change jobs, often to another occupation and industry (Ruhm
1990), and earn much less per hour. it is unlikely that workers would make such a change, with
the accompanying income reduction, if their career employer allowed them to reduce hours on

their current job.
The conclusion is that hours constraints are an important aspect of the employment

environment, and that it is likely they help determine the age of retirement.

3. Data
The FIRS is a nationally representative sample of individuals born in the years 193 1-

1941.2 Almost all the interviews were done in 1992, so we wilt refer to 51-61 year-olds as the

2See Thster mu Suaman (1993) for a description of the HRS.

3

age-eligible population even though not all were in that age range at the Lime they were

interviewed. The spouse of an age-eligible individual was interviewed, and data from that

interview is included in the HitS data set even if the spouse was not age-eligible. The HRS is
projected to be a panel survey of two-year periodicity that will last for at least 10 years.
We use data only on full-time workers (35 hours or more per week) because our main

measure of anticipated retirement in the HRS refers to full-time work after the age of 62. 1 that
there is very little movement from part-time work to full-time work in the age range of the HRS,
we do not wanL our analyses to be influenced by the tastes and perceptions of part-time workers,
For population comparisons, our sample is restricted to the age range 51-61, and we use

sampling weights to account for oversampling of blacks, Hispanics and Floridians. We do not
use weights in regreasiona because we have no reason to believe the regression function varies

with the sampling frequency.3
For analysis we use a sample of men aged 51-61 and women aged 46-61; below the age
ranges the sample sizes are small; people above the age range will not be useful in studying

retirement at age 62 because they are already that age or older. We realize that outside of the
age range 5 1-61, the sample is not representative of the population because a respondent must be

a spouse of an age-eligible person. However, about 23% of the sample is outside the age range
51-61, which is a large fraction to drop in the absence of a compelling reason.4
We include only wage and salary workers because we want to study the effects of

restrictions on hours of work; yet the question about hours restrictions was not asked of the selfemployed. These selection criteria along with several other rather minor selection rules produced
a sample of 3383 full-time wage and salary workers.5

4. Measures of retirement

3tf we thought that the coefficients in a regression function vaned in the population and that the
coeffictenta were systematically different in the eubpopulalion that is oversampled, we would use sampling
weights to yield regression coefficients that are the avenge of the coefficients in the poputation. w5 have no
reason to think that the eoeffleienta vary in such away. Furthermore, if we dirt, it woutd be better to
estimate over the subaamplea separately rather than weighting.
4For analysis we often would like to know if a model seems to hold for any population provided the
populatton was not chosen either to favor or disfavor the model. Based on this reasoning we imagine that
most analysts will want to use the part of the HR5 outside of the age range 5t-fll.

tWe delete those in the military, and proxy responses, as well as workers who do not receive
compensation in the form of a wage or salary

4

In the initial wave of the MRS we only observe job characteristics and job-related
financial variables of those who are still working, so we cannot study actual retirement.

However, the HRS has several variables that measure retirement prospectively. We will

use

several of these. Our main variables are responses to the questions: (On a scale of zero to 10
where 0 means absolutely no chance and 10 equals absolute certainty).
Thinking about work generally and not just your present job, what do you think
are the chances that you will be working full-time after you reach age 62 (65)?"
We resealed the responses to the interval (0,1] and we will treat them as probabilities. Generally

we think of them as conditional probabilities, the probabilities of working full-time at 62 or 65

given full-time work at age t. It should be apparent, however, that the question is ambiguous. It
could refer to anytime after the 62nd birthday or it could refer to sometime after the respondent
is no longer 62. As we will see, some respondents seem to have had the first interpretation and

some the second.
We call the probabilities P62 and P65. We will refer to them as if they were probabilities

of working, and to 1 —P62 and 1 —P65 as probabilities of retiring. They are notexactly that, of
course, because they refer to full-time work, not employment.
We want to use these probabilities as variables to be explained by job characteristics and
financial variables just as if they were actual retirement probabilities. Before we do that,

however, we will give some descriptive statistics that we hope will increase confidence that they

are predictive of actual retirement.6
As a way

of validating their use, we compare P62 and P65 with

population averages. We

estimated the fraction of the population 55-59 working full-time and the fraction aged 63 working
full-time from estimates of the fraction of full-time workers among all workers by age, and from

labor force participation rates by age. According to this calculation the probability of working
full-time at age 63 conditional on working full-time at ages 55-59 is 0.457. The average of P62
over the 55-59 year-old full-time workers in the MRS is 0.478.

We can make an additional comparison based on the MRS data by using the observations
of 62 and 63year-old males who were interviewed but are not in the age-eligible population.

5See

the HRS.

Uurd and MeGarry (l993a) fori more detailed analysis of these and other probability vanables in

They are husbands of age-eligible wives, and while they are not exactly representative of the 62
and 63 year-old male population (having to be married to younger women to be in the survey) we
imagine they are sufficiently representative to give good estimates of the conditional probability

of working ftill-time. We estimated the probability of working

full-time at age 62 conditional on

working full-time at I from the fm-Lion of the MRS married males aged 62 who are working fulltime and the fraction of the MRS married males working full-time at ages. We estimated in a
similar way the probability of working to age 63 conditional on working at age r.
According to our estimates the average conditional probability

of working to 62 is 072

(averaged over 55-61 year-olds), and the average conditional probability of working to 63 is

0.44. The average of P62 over 55-61 married males is 0.50. Furthermore, at each age from 55
to 61 the average of P62 is bounded by our estimates of the conditional probabilities of working
to 62 and to 63.

We conclude that the average of P62 is reasonably close to population averages and to

conditional probabilities calculated from the frequencies of full-time work in our sample. This
should increase our confidence that they are good measures of prospective retirement.
Other measures of anticipated retirement

The MRS asked workers if they had made plans or thought about retirement, and if so at
what age did they plan to retire completely, change jobs, reduce hours, or become self-employed.
If P62 and P65 are informed probabilities, we expect that they would vary according to whether
someone has thought about retirement.

Table I has the means of P62 and P65 by work plans. Most of these workers (alt 61 or
younger) have not thought about retirement or have no plans (43 percent). Among those who

have thought about retirement, about it percent plan never to stop working. Among the
remainder about 44 percent say they will leave the labor force completely. This is a much
smaller percentage than was observed to retire completely from full-time career jobs in the

Retirement l4istory Survey (RHS), The comparable percentage in the RHS would be about 73
percent.7 If this holds in the MRS panel, it will show a trend to more job switching and hours
reduction following departure from a full-time career-type job than has been observed in the past.

There are large differences in P62 varying from 0.31 to 0,63 as the type of retirement

7Our caleulatiun based on data in Quinn, Burkisauser and Myers, 1990.

6

planning varies. It should be noted that the responses of those who plan never to stop working
are not necessarily inconsistent with their averages of P62 and P65. Most who continue to work
after the normal retirement age switch to pan-time work: someone with a definite plan to reduce
hours at age 60, and then work for many more years might answer never stopw and correctly
report zero for P62. since P62 asks about full-time work.

The variation in P65 is even greater than in P62: among those who plan to stop working
altogether the average probability of working hall-time at age 65 is only 0.087.

If a respondent reports that he plans to reduce hours, retire completely, change jobs, or
work for himself, he is asked a follow-up question about the age at which he plans to change his

labor force status, We use these answers to define an expected retirement age (ERET). It is the
age at which someone expects to reduce hours or retire completely. We define ERET in this way
to make comparisons with P62 and P65 which refer to full-time work. ERET is an alternative
measure of retirement anticipations.
We have 1401 observations on ERET from which we calculated a kind of retirement

hazard rate. It is the number who expect to retire at age t divided by the number who expect to
be working at age t—1. We say that someone who gives ERET =

t expects to retire at t, so thaI

the number who expect to work at age t—l is the number working at all ages less than t, minus

the number with ERET less than t. This would be the same as an actual retirement hazard rate if
workers actually do retire at the age given by ERET.
Figure t shows retirement hazard rates calculated in this way over 51 year-olds and over

54 year-olds.' The hazard rate of the 51 yesr-olds has a rather large spike at age 55. A similar
but smaller spike is found in actual hazards in the population. However, we imagine that these
workers have begun to think about retirement at this early age at least partly because they are in
jobs that have incentives to retire at 55. Therefore, more in this group will actually retire at 55

than in the population. The hazards of both St and 54 year-olds have spikes at 62 and 65. but
they are much larger than what is found in panel data such as the RHS.9
Almost none of the workers in their early 50's who have plans for retirement expects to

work past 65 and few past 62. Thus the retirement hazard rates are very large at those ages.

511e hazard rate of workem older than 54 look very similar to the hazard rates of the 54 ycar-olds, so
we do not present them.

5There is no obvious explanation for why the hazard of 54 year-olds has no spike at 55: the hard races
of 52 and 53 year-otds have spikes aS 55 similar to those of the St year'olda.

7

We speculate that this is partly caused by their having thought about retirement, meaning they

plan to retire earlier than in the population. It may also be an uninformed response: in their
early SOs most workers probably give usual or standard retirement ages. Thus, few would have

ERET greater than 65, and, indeed, in our sample of 1401, just 26 or 1.8 percent have ERET
greater than 65. A different kind of explanation is that ERET is the most probable retirement
age. Few would have a most probable age later than 65 even though substantial numbers could

end up retiring after 65. This shows a weakness of a measure like ERET.
We expect that P62 and P65 will vary systematically with FRET. For example, someone

with FRET less than 62 should have a small value of P62 whereas someone with ERET greater
than 62 should have a large value. Figure 2 shows averages of P62 and P65 by FRET, and they

support our expectation. For example, the average P62 among workers with ERET 56 is just
Ol. The average remains small until at age 61 when it increases from 0.14 to 0.23 and then to
0.67 at age 63. We interpret the increase in two steps (61-62 and 62-63) to be further evidence

that the question about the probability of working after reaching age 62 is ambiguous. If lhe
question meant 'after the 62nd birthday,' everyone with ERET =62 should have P62 1.0. The
rather small value (0.23) leads us to believe that most respondents interpreted the question to

mean working while 62' or 'most of the time while 62' or possible 'at the 63rd birthday.'
The fact that P62 does not reach 1.0 at ages greater than 63 shows that ERET should not be

taken to the age of retirement with probability one.
P65 has a similar pattern with age, and except for age 55 it is always less than P62.'°

We conclude from this comparison that P62, P65 and ERET show internal consistcncy

and that it is reasonable to consider P62 and P65 to be conditional probabilities of full-time work.
Whether the age is 62 or 63 for P62, or 65 or 66 for P65 is ambiguous.

5. Job Characteristics data in the HRS.
Past research has generally concentrated on physical and mental demands

of the job.

Therefore, we first study the effects of these kinds of characteristics on prospective retirement.
In section 5.2 we will consider a larger class of job characteristics such as hours constraints.

5.1. Physical and mental job requirements.

15The

large value of P65 at age 55 is based on just five observations.
2

The HRS asked a number of questions of workers about the characteristics of their jobs.
The questions were meant to measure the physical and mental demands of the job, the

pleasantness of the working environment, and so forth. The questions were in two formats. The
first format is
112. ...'Thinking of yQig job, please telt how often these statements are true. • Choices

are (1) all or almost all of the time, (2) most of the time, (3) some of the time, (4) none
or almost none of the time.
The particular questione we will use are

F82a. '(My job requires) lots of physical effort. (PHYSICAL)

b. ...
C.

...

lifting heavy loads. (LIFTING)
stooping, kneeling, or crouching. (BENDING)

d. ...

good eyesight. (EYES)

e. ,,

intense concentration or attention. (ATTENTtON)

f. ...
g. ...

skill in dealing with other people. (PEOPLE)
me to work with computers. (COMPUTERS)

h. ...
j. ...

me to analyze data or information. (DATA)

k. ...
m. ...

me to do the same things over and over. (REPETITtON)

me to keep up with the pace of others. (PACE)

that I learn new things. (LEARN)

n. I have a lot of freedom to decide how I do my own work, (FREEDOM)
p. The people I work with are helpful and friendly.' (COWORKERS)
The second format is

F83. 'Here are some more statements that are true for some people's jobs
hut noL for others. Again thinking of your job, this time please indicate how much

you agree or disagree with each statement." Possible answers are (1) strongly
agree, (2) agree, (3) disagree, (4) strongly disagree.
The questions we will use from F83 are
9

'b. My job requires me to do more difficult things than it used to. (DIFFICULT)
c. My job requires a very good memory. (MEMORY)
d. My job involves a lot of sutss. (STRESS)
In the first format the questions ask for objective descriptions of the job, not the attitude of the

worker toward the job characteristics. (For example, the worker is not asked if he likes lifting
heavy loads). We would expect, however, that over time workers would sort themselves
according to job characteristics. Thus the objective duty of lifting a 15 pound load might not be
called heavy lifting by someone who does lift 15 pounds, whereas it would be by someone else.

Of course, if the objective is to explain retirement behavior, it is important to understand how the
worker views the job. The self-reported nature of these variables should be kept in mind when
comparing the estimates presented here to those of previous studies.
The questions in the second format seem to be less objective because it would be difficult

to find objective measurements of difficulty and stress. Furthermore, the second format asks for
agreement or disagreement, not whether something happens some of the time or all of the time.

These seems to be no natural scaling of the answers; in particular, without further
investigation we would not want to convert the answers to a scaler. The most important reason
is that many of the behavioral responses to variation in the characteristics are probably not

monotonie. For example, most people would probably prefer some repetition on a job, rather
than doing repetitive work either all or none of the time. Similarly, a good job probably requires
intense concentration some of the time; a boring job requires it none of the time and an overly

difficult job requires t all of the time. Similar arguments can be made about most of the job
characteristics.

The job characteristics define 64 categorical variables. We reduce these to 54 by
combining some of the responses with very low frequencies. For example, we combine EYES3
and EYES4 (job requires good eyesight some of the time or none of the time) because the

response rates were 7 percent and 3 percent respectively. Furthermore, we judge that some of
the response categories are not meaningfully different for some of the job characteristics." We
have, therefore, 54 categorical variables for 16 job characteristics, giving us 38 degrees of
freedom after normalization.

"We combine categories I and 2 for LIFtING and categories 3 and 4 for EYES, ATTENTION,
PEOPLE, REPETITION, LEARNING, COWORKERS, MEMORY, STRESS and DIFFICULT.

10

Our main focus in this section is the effect of job characteristics on retiremenL. Our
analysis of the last section leads us to conclude that P62 and P65 are good proxies for actual

retirement probabilities; in this section we will use them in place of actual retirement. For our
rIrSL set of results we estimated the linear regression of P62 and P65 on the 38 dummy variables

that define our measures of job characteristics to find if simple data description showed any

patterns.'5 The regression of P62 is significant at the 5% level but not at the 1% level; the
F

regression of P65 is significant at the 1 percent level.

Table 2 has selected coefficients. Our selection criterion for reporting coefficients is to
include all the coefficients from any job characteristic that had at least one categorical variable

for either P62 or P65 significant at the 10 percent level.
The pattern of the signs of the coefficients in the P62 equation is consistent with the
panern of the P65 coefficients, indicating that except for scaling, moat respondents gave similar

responses to the questions about P62 and P65. Although most of the findings are what we would
expect, those about the physical demands of the job are not. The literature suggests that physical
demands are important predictors of early retirement, Yet both PHYSICAL and BENDING had
small, insignificant coefficients (not shown in the table). Only LIFTING has a significant

coefficient, but relative to the literature, it has the wrong sign: LIFTING4 (job never requires
heavy lifting) reduces P62 by 0.054 compared with a job where heavy lifting is required always
or most of time.
P62 and P65 are not monotonic in two of the job characteristics, EYES and STRESS.
Jobs that require moderate use of the eyes and jobs with moderate stress are associated with

higher P62 and P65 than jobs at the extremes. Jobs that require intensive use of the eyes or that
involve a lot of stress are unattractive because of the obvious physical and mental demands. Jobs
that require little use of the eyes or have little stress may be jobs that are boring and
uninteresting.
The other job characteristics have the pattern of signs that we would expect: constant

repetition, no freedom and increased difficulty lead to smaller P62 and P65. Furthermore the
effects are about the same: both for P62 and P65 the difference in the probability between the

first category and the last category is 0.05 for REPETITION, 0.06 for FREEDOM and 0.06 for

DIFFIcuLT.

'Tbis regression is similar to Filer and Petri (1988). I..ater in this paper we will give revults from
regressiorts that include a number of financial and personal explanatory variables.

it

It is hard LO judge whether these

are important effects. From estimates of the conditional

probabilities of working to ages 61, 62 and 63 in the population, we estimate that an increase in
P62 of 0.10 is roughly equivalent to an increase in worklife of one year for someone working at

age 55 (Hurd and McGarry, 1993b). Therefore, we would judge that a change in P62 of 0.05 is
a small to moderate change.
We conclude that although not many of the coefficients are significant even at the 10

percent level (11 out of 76) the ones that are significant for the most part have the expected
signs; the exceptions being the job characteristics associated with physical demands. A final

conclusion is that, in general, the characteristics cannot be reduced to scalers: the probabilities
arc not monotonic in two of the six characteristics.

5.2. Other job characteristics.
In this section we discuss several other kinds of job characteristict The first we roughly
characterize as measures of attitudes toward older workers. Table 3 has the distribution of
responses to two questions that may represent age discrimination. About 17-18 percent agree or
strongly agree with the statements.'3 It is difficult to judge whether this is a large percentage:

perhaps the optimistic way to view the distributions is that 82-83 percent disagree In results
which we do not report here, we found no evidence that these distributions change with age of
the respondent.

The last question shows that most employers will not accommodate a desire fur job

flexibility: about two-thirds of the sample cannot move to less demanding work even with a

wage reduction Yet, in surveys most workers say they would like job flexibility. For example,
many would like to reduce hours gradually as they age rather an retiring abruptly (Jondrow,
Brechling and Marcus, 1987). We imagine this lack of flexibility will induce many to retire.
An additional measure of job flexibility is the ability to vary hours per day, days per
week, or weeks per month. The FIRS asked workers about flexibility as follows 'Could you

increase the number of hours in your regular work schedule?' Those who answered

' were

then asked "Would you like to do so if your earnings were increased in the same proportion?'
Notice that the questions are somewhat deficient in that the first question made no reference to a

proportionate increase in earnings. Workers were also asked "Could you re4nt the hours in

latii later work we combine the first two categories because of the low frequency in the first.
12

your regular work schedule?t If no" they were asked 1would you like to do so even if your
earnings were reduced in the same proportion? Obviously the aim of the followup questions
was to keep the wage rate constant.
The importance of the question comes from considerable evidence in panel data that few

workers reduce hours on their main, career jobs: most workers leave full-time jobs to retire
completely. Those who do not leave the labor force change jobs to a different occupation andlor
industry, and that the wage rate falls considerably at the change in jobs.'4

Table 4 has the distributions of responses to the hours flexibility questions. Just 12.9
percent have complete flexibility either to increase or decrease hours. A greater percentage can
increase (36 percent) than can decrease (24 percent) but this may be caused by the question's

failure to refer to a change in compensation in response to a change in hours: if respondents
interpreted the question to mean a change in hours with no change in earnings, many might well

think their employers would not bar them from working more, but would prevent them from

working."
Apparently a substantial fraction of workers face hours constraints; yet the constraint is
not binding in the sense that they do not desire to break the constraint. For example, 32.7
percent say they are completely constrained (can neither increase nor decrease hours); yet they
neither want to increase nor want to decrease. An additional 26.4 percent (18.1+ 8.3) are

constrained on one side or the other, but the constraint is not binding. Taken at face value these
high percentages show that people accommodate to their constraints, and after the accommodation

they prefer the new constrained point. For example, if workers form car pools or make child
care arrangements based on their known work schedule, it would be inconvenient to change

hours. They may therefore prefer the complete package of constrained hours and their other
arrangements to a hypothetical change in hours. Fourteen percent cannot reduce hours and the
constraint is binding, and 15 percent cannot increase but would like to.

Table S offers some explanations for these responses. Those with hours flexibility in
either direction work the most hours, have the highest wage rates, the most education and mostly

14

Gustesan and Steinmeier (1984, 1985), Be&ovic and Stern (1991), Rust (1990), Quinn and
Burkbauser (1990), Hurd (1993), Rubm (1990) and tama (1987).

5The percentage that can reduce hours can be compared with the responses in Table S where 34
percent agreed that their employers would let them move to a less demanding job. These are, of course, two
dimensions to job tlexibility.The difference in the response rate may well be due to the difference in the
questions: one made reference to a job change whereas the other did not.
13

have white collar jobs. Apparently job flexibility is another dimension of a well-paying job.
Those who want to increase hours but are constrained from doing so work fewer hours than those

who do not want to, and they have less household wealth."
Among workers who cannot decrease hours, those who want to decrease hours work

more than those who do not want to: L8 hours more per week, which is a statistically
significant difference. Their other characteristics are similar with the notable exception of

household wealth: it is $84 thousand greater, the highest of any group.'7 Apparently the
constraint is binding both because hours were constrained to be higher, and because a wealth
effect caused desired hours to be lower.
.loh flexibility influences prospective retirement: P62 and P65 vary with hours constraints

as we would expect (Table 6). There is liule difference between those who can increase and
those who can decrease. The interesting differences are among those who are constrained.
Those who want to increase hours have larger values of P62 and P65 and the difference is
statistically significant. Apparently they respond to the hours constraint by working more years.
Those who want to reduce hours but are constrained, have lower probabilities of working than

those who do not want to reduce hours. Again the differences are significant. Especially at age
65, the difference will lead to a considerably lower participation rate, about one-third lower.

6. Determinants of probabilities of working.
In that job characteristics are correlated with other aspects of a job such as pay and
pension availability, we estimated the regression of P62 and P65 on job characteristics and a

much larger set of variables. We made the regression of P62 a linear function of age, the 38
categorical variables relating to the 16 physical and mental job characteristics that we discussed in

section 5.1, a number of other job characteristics and individual characteristics. Because P62 is a
conditional probability, the regression is related to a particular specification of a retirement

hazard function. In particular, we estimate P62 = P(working hill-time after 62 I working fulltime at age r; 7) which is, in general, a function of a number of job characteristics, financial

variables and other variables, and:. It also depends on T, the tastes of those working at:. The

'6Houaehold wealth includes housing equity and financial wealth, but not pension or Social Security
wealth.
t7Their median wealth is $50 thousand higher, also the highest of any group.

14

hazard of leaving hill-time work at 62 given hill-time work at (is just 1—P62. Our particular
functional form makes this hazard linear in age and imposes the restriction that the effect of the

explanatory variables on P62 is independent of age. For example, our functional form says that
the effect on P62 of having a pension is the same for someone of age 51 as someone of age 61

This is a substantial restriction that probably should be relaxed in future work. Similarly the
effects of changes in T as a population ages (and those with greater tastes for leisure retire) can

only enter through age. However, even with a more general functional form we could not
separate in cross-section interactions between age and the explanatory variables from interactions
between taste changes and the explanatory variables.

In addition to age and the 38 categorical variables, our specification for P62 has 13
categorical variables for industry, 16 for occupation, pension and health insurance variables, job
flexibility variables, wage and income variables and personal characteristics including education,

health status, and household wealth. Our strategy is to use hypothesis testing to reduce the
number of right-hand variables. For a time we will concentrate on a discussion of the equation
for P62, and later outline the differences with the equation for P65.
The following table shows the sequence of tests and the outcomes.

Outcomes of tests of hypotheses
Variables

Hypothesis

Outcome

Decision

16 Occupation

All coefficients

Failed to
reject

Do not consider further

are zero
All coefficients

Reject

Include in regressions

Failed to
reject

Test subset of job characteristics
interacted with health status

All coefficients

Failed to

are zero

reject

Test subset of principal
components

13 Industry

are zero
38 job characteristics

All coefficients

are zero
SI interactions between
job characteristics and
health status

Even though in the final test we could not reject the null hypothesis that all the
coefficients on the categorical job characteristics variables are zero, we considered that physical

job demands might only affect the retirement plans of those in poor or fair health. Therefore, we
interacted PHYSICAL, LIFTING, BENDING, EYES, PACE, REPETITION, and DIFFICULT

15

with indicators of self-assessed health status.tt None of the 51 estimated coefficient-s was
statistically significant, and we could not reject the null hypothesis that all the coefficients are
zero.

We next considered that although the job characteristics as a group are not significant,

some combination of a subset may be. That is, the characteristics probably operate together in a
complicated way to produce overall satisfaction from a job: if we knew how to combine them
we might find that a subset does influence P62.
Our method will be to use the principal components of the job tharacteristics to reduce
the dimensionality of the job description, while retaining their variation. We anticipate that the
characteristics would reduce to just a few principal components that we could interpret. For
example, a principal component for 'plsysicaV would have large coefficients (loadings) on

physical effort, lifting and bending. We would use it (and others) to explain retirement, so as to
be able to see if physically demanding jobs induce retirement.
Using nested hypothesis testing, we tested subsets of the principal components as follows:

Tests of the null hypothesis that the coefficients on principal
components are zero
Degrees of
freedom

Estimated Fstatistic

F(5 %)

components

20-38

19

1.25

1.59

11-19

9

0.67

1.88

6-10

5

0.87

2.21

1-5

5

2.75

2.21

principal

We could not reject the first three null hypotheses when taken in the order shown in the table,
We do reject the null hypothesis that the coefficients are zero on the largest five principal
components. Our basic specification will therefore include the five largest principal
components.59 We will give a description of the components when we discuss our regression
results below.

The heslth categories were excellent or very good, good, and fair or poor.
The five largest components accounted for 33% of the variation in the moment matrix of the job
characteristics.

16

The result of the nested hypothesis testing is a regression of P62 on 67 variables. We
estimated the regression over 2938 observations on full-time wage and salary workers aged 46-61

(women) or 51-61 (men). The estimated coefficients are in Table 7, parts A-E.

Part A has the coefficients on a set of variables that we call personal characteristics. The
positive coefficient on age shows that P62 behaves like a conditional probability: it increases by

0.11 over ten years. We interpret the earnings effect to be mostly a wage effect:2° although
there is some variation in hours among these full-time workers, because they all work at least 35

hours a week, most of the variation is in the wage rate. The positive effect could, of course, be
partly due to tastes both for long hours and a long work-life. The effect is moderate, although
for large changes in earnings (but within the observed data) the would be substantial. For
example, an income gain of $100 thousand will increase P62 by 0.16, which we estimate to be a
gain in worklife of about one and one-half years. Household income is the combined income of

both the respondent and spouse. We interpret the negative coefficient and the coefficient on
wealth to show that leisure is a normal good. The coefficients on education and self-assessed
health status have the expected signs.
The last two variables are responses to questions about the probability of living to 75 and

to 85. Even holding health status constant we would expect that people who expect to live longer
will want longer worklives to finance more years of retirement. Although the coefficients have
the expected sign they are estimated to be small and they are not significant.2'

Table 7, part B, has the estimate coefficients on financial incentives to work. Although
we have already discussed the effects of earnings it is repeated here for comparison. To model
the complex incentives of defined benefit pension plans (DB) we used responses to questions

about features of the plans: workers with DB plans were asked the earliest age of eligibility for
reduced benefits and the earliest age of eligibility for full benefits! From these responses we
constructed five categorical variables to describe the structure of a plan. D2 is 1 if the age for
early benefits is less than or equal to 62 and the age for full benefits is greater than 62. We
would expect that 1)2 would increase P62 compared with someone who could get full benefits at

ssTbe variable is yearly earnings of the full-time worker.

The rsnge of PUVE7S and PUVE8S is from 0 to t.O. See Hued and MeGarry (1993a) for a
discussion of these variables

We only used information about the pension plan on their current job.
17

62 or younger, and possibly even compared with someone with no pension. Thus, a defined
benefit plan does not necessarily increase the retirement probability at all ages; at some ages the

structure of the plan may decrease the probability of retiring. We defined 03 through 06 as
indicated in the table. The reference group among those with Dl) plans has both full and partial

benefits at age 62 or less.
About half of our sample has a Dl) plan on the current job and 62 percent of them say
they arc eligible for flaIl benefits at 62 or earlier. Early availability of benefits reduces P62
considerably. 0.12 (out of an average of 0.47) compared with a worker who has no pension plan.

If the age for full benefits is greater than 62 (D2 = 1) P62 increases by 0.16. For this group the
net effect of the plan is to increase P62 by —0.12 +0.16 = 0.04 compared with workers with no

plan. Apparently workers want to remain on the job until they can get full benefits. If early
benefits are not available until after age 62 (03=1), P62 increases by an additional 0.04 so that
P62 is about 0.08 higher than for workers with no pension. If AGEFtJLL or AGE-EARLY is
missing P62 is even higher, but if both are missing, P62 is about the same as among those with
no pension plan: possibly the respondent knows so little about the plan that its features cannot
inform the determination of P62.
The DC eligibility variable comes from a question about the youngest age a worker could

leave the employer and start receiving a monthly pension from the plan.a The estimated results
are qualitatively about the same as with the Dl) plans, but smaller. This is to be expected
because the DC plans do not have the sharp accruals and actuarial adjustments that DB plans

have. Besides a wealth effect, they apparently influence retirement through a liquidity effect:

otherwise, there would be no reason for availability after 62 to affect retirement at 62. In a
similar way a liquidity constraint may be responsible for Social Security causing a retirement
spike at 62.

Having health insurance on the job increases P62, although the effect is not large. Much
larger effects come from having health insurance available to retirees. This is important, of
course, because Medicare is not available until age 65. The effects are monotonic according to

how muth the employer pays for the health insurance. This may represent a pure wealth effect,
hut it probably also reflects some uncertainty about the longer-mn continuation of health

insurance: an employer who pays for the insurance probably has a greater commitment to
keeping the retiree in the employer's risk pool.

nTbia question is asked only if the poision can be received as monthly benefits.

is

Table 7, part C, has the coefficients related to job characteristics. Of the principal
components only number 3 has a significant coefficient, and even in that case the effect is small:
the change in component 3 from the 25 percentile to the 75 percentile is 2.41, which increases

P62 by 0.02. The loadings on component 3 show that it is associated with jobs that have some

physical requirements at the level of 'some of the time' or 'most of the time' but not 'all of the
time. • The jobs are not especially demanding mentally, yet by a measure of mental

requirements that we developed, It has the highest rank of the five largest components. Along

other dimensions component 3 has demands some of the time, and it is at a maximum when

requirements are moderate rather than 'all the time' or 'not at all.'
Principal component 2 has practically no effect even though the loadings show that the
jobs associated with large values of principal component 2 are physically demanding,

Furthermore, it has by far the largest value in our index of physical requirements? The
prediction from other studies in the literature (Holden. 198X) would be that component 2 will

have a strongly positive association with retirement; yet that is not what our results show.
Component 1 is associated with jobs that seem to have few requirements of any kind,

The jobs are not demanding, either physically or mentally; they do not require much alsention
and they are not particularly stressful. Therefore, it would seem that component 1 would not
have much association with retirement. Its negative effect may well be the result of boredom on

the job.
The coefficient on component 4 is almost as large as the coefficient on component 3. and

it is almost significant at the 5 percent level (P=0.066). The loadings on component 4 show
fewer physical demands than component 3, and it has the smallest value in our index of physical

demands, and almost the lowest index of blue collar occupations. This component generally

takes large values when job demands are moderate rather than intense or not at all. If workers
value jobs that are somewhat but not overly challenging, this component should delay retirement.

Component 4 has less variation than 3 (ill from the 25th percentile to the 75th percentile), so
its effect on P62 Is smaller than the effect of 3.
The loadings on principal component 5 are small so that we have not attempted an
Interpretation.
In a variation on our basic specification, we added interactions between the five principal

See [turd and MeGarry (1993b), which is an expanded version of this paper, for information about the
pcincipd eomponeats

19

components and three categorical health variables (excellent or very good, good, and fair or

poor). The interactions were significant at the 5% level (P0.031), mostly due toan interaction
between principal component 4 and health of fair or poor. The following table gives the
coefficients on component 4 and standard errors.

Estimated effects of principal component 4 on £62 by health status
Health status

Nonnslizaitas,

Excellent or very good

Good

Fair or poor

0.007
(0.010)

S

(1046
(0.015)

The eafflcjer ii -0001

(0.008)

Our interpretation of component 4 was that it is associated with jobs that are only

moderately demanding. Furthermore, it has by far the lowest score on our index of physical
demands, and, along with component 5, has the lowest index of blue collar jobs. It has
practically no effect on prospective retirement of those with good, very good or excellent health.
Among those in fair or poor health an increase from the 25th percentile to the 75th percentile
(2.11) is associated with an increase in P62 of 0.097.
We conclude that moderate job requirements increase the likelthood of working past age

62. In general, physical requirements do not lead to earlier retirement. However, there is some
suggestion that physical job demands interact with health: those in poor health who have jobs

that are not physically demanding have higber probabilities of working pasL 62. Even so,
compared with the effects of DR plans and other aspects of the environment, the effects of job
characteristics are rather small.

A blue collar occupation has practically no effect, and union status, while statistically

significant, is not very large (Table 7, part C). Apparently aspects of jobs that are typically
unionized such as the availability and structure of DR plans cause early retirement, not union
status itaclf.

The next two sets of variables are our measures of age discrimination on the job, and
their coefficients have the expected pattern of signs. For example, if the respondent disagrees

strongly with the statement that younger workers are preferred to older workers in promotion,

20

P62 is greater by 0.03. If the respondent disagrees that his co-workers think that older workers
ought to retire before age 65, P62 is greater by 0.06 (significant at the 5 percent level). This

difference is larger than that associated with a unionized job or a DC pension plan
The next two variables are associated with job flexibility aimed particularly at older

workers: respondents were asked if older workers can move with the same employer to a job
!q

that is Less demanding and pays less. Although the coefficients are not significant, they show that

when they cannot make such ajob change, P62 is lower by 0.02 to 0.04.
The last variables are constructed from a question about whether there is a normal

retirement age for co-workers or for this kind of job. The normalization is on the age range 63

to 65. The effects are large: when the usual retirement age is 62 or less, P62 is 0.19 lower than
when it is 63 to 65. This is about as large as the variation induced by DB plans. in that 40
•

percent of the sample has a usual retirement age of 62 or less, RAGE62 is responsible for
•

•

reducing the mean of P62 by about 0.076. The other variables have reasonable coefficients:
when the nonnal retirement age is missing we get a mix of the first category and the

normalization; when it is greater than 65. P62 is increased,
We conclude that the usual physical and mental measures of job characteristics are not

very important in determining anticipate retirement probabilities. Undoubtedly this is partly due
to sorting across jobs and partly to compensations in demanding jobs that make it easier to retire.
For example, DB plans may be structured to allow early retirement in physically demanding jobs.
However, there are physically demanding jobs that do not have pensions, so we would expect to

find some effect anyway. We do not.
There is modest evidence that an employer who allows older workers to change to an

easier job will retain them as shown by the coefficients on O_DEMT3 and O_DEMT4. By far
the most important effect in the table is related to usual retirement age. Of course, usual
•

retirement age is not static either over time or aãoss jobs, and it is probably partly caused by job
requirements. To the extent that we have included those job requirements, however, the results
show the importance of convention in decision making.
We presented in Table 6 the cross-tabulations of P62 by our measure of hours flexibility.

Table 7, part D, has comparable results from the regression, and therefore, takes into account job
and personal variables that may be correlated with hours restrictions. Generally the effects are
attenuated. For example, in Table 6 the difference in P62 between those who can increase hours

and those who cannot but do not want to is 0.07. In Table 7, part 0, the difference is 0.048
(HRSUPOK). But even that difference disappears with age: by age 60 there is practically none.
21

Among those who cannot Increase hours, P62

is greater by 0.077 when the constraint is binding

(HRSUP). Our interpretation is that these workers will substitute for the binding hours constraint

by working more years. The difference falls with age so that by

age 60 it is just 0.026. This

reduction may reflect the fact that the constraint, while still binding, becomes less important with
age as tastes shift toward leisure.

Among those who cannot reduce hours, the most interesting comparison is between thosc
who want to reduce hours and those who do not want to. When the constraint is binding, P62 is
lower by 0.06 (HRSDWN), That is, those who must work more hours than they would like to
anticipate retiring by age 62 with a greater probability. We saw in Table 5 thai people in these

jobs work more hours and have greater wealth; but the estimated effect of the hours constraint is
greater than of the wealth effect. The difference in wealth is $84 thu uand, which, according to
our estimates in Table 7, part A, reduces P62 by about 0.01 whereas the constraint reduces it by

0.06.

The final two variables in Table 7, part D, are also related to the choice set broadly
speaking. The first is the subjective probability the respondent will lose his or her job during the
year. An interpretation of the negative coefficient is that P62 takes into account a number of
contingencies: for example, someone who is certain to be laid off would have low probabilities
of P62 because most who are laid off during their 50's eventually retire rather than take another

job, On the other side, if the respondent thinks the probability of finding another job is high,
P62 will be increased. In that PFINDJOB varies from zero to one, the predicted change in P62
can be as large as 0.08.

Table 7, part E, has the coefficients on the categorical variables representing the industry

of the job. We will not discuss them as they are not the focus of this paper, but we note that
there are some rather large differences: 0.12 between public administration and retail.
It is beyond the scope of this paper to investigate systematically the joint retirement
decision of husbands and wives. Nonetheless, to check the robustness of our results we added to
an asixiliary regression a number of variables that prior research has shown to influence the
retirement decision of a spouse!5 They included the spouse's employment status, the spouse's

probability of working past 62, and the difference in the ages of the husband and wife. Although
these variables themselves influence P62, their inclusion had practically no effect on any of the
estimated coefficients on job characteristics, including pensions, health insurance, hours

25See Foul, 1990.

22

;

restrictions and so forth. We concluded that for the goal of this paper we did not need to
investigate further the joint retirement decision of husbands and wives.

The rather odd structure of DB plans has led to the idea that they were designed to allow
workers to leave physically demanding jobs at about the age when the jobs became too
demanding. if that were the case, the coefficients on job characteristics should be rather srnafl
when the DB variables are included in the P62 equation because the structure of the DR plan
would adequately account for variation in P62. Conversely, if the DR plan variables are
excluded, the coefficients on job characteristics should become large. However, in estimates not
shown, there is almost no change in the coefficients on the five principal components when we
•

leave the DO variables out of the P62 equation,
We repeated all the calculations we have been discussing but using P65 as the left-hand

variable. However, our hypothesis testing strategy led to a different outcome. With respect to
P65 we could not reject the null hypothesis that all the coefficients on the occupation variables

are zero nor the null hypothesis that all the coefficients on the industry variables are zero. When
we imposed these restrictions and tested the coefficients on the 19 smallest principal components

we rejected the null hypothesis that the coefficients are jointly equal to zero. Therefore we were
left with a different model. In the results we report, P65 depends on all 38 principal components
(which is the same as dependance on all the job characteristics), but not on the industry or
occupation variables. We also excluded the variables that differentiate the ages for full and
partial benefits under DR and DC plans since almost everyone has both full and partial

availability at 65 or earlier. Any variation in the age for benefit qualification should have no
effect on P65 as long as the age is 65 or less. We will not describe the results in the same detail
we did with P62 because there are far fewer large or significant estimated coefficients. Rather
we will discuss novel or important findings.

The earnings and wealth effects are significant and similar to those for P62. The
coefficient on PL1VE85 is estimated to be 0.10 (with standard error of 0.03). This is a rather
•

•

large fraction of the average of P65 (0.23). Because the health variables are included and have
the expected signs, this is evidence that those with greater life expectancy plan longer worklives.

As discussed above, in our main results we excluded D2 through D6 and DCAGEE
because they should not matter for P65. To satisfy ourselves that they do not matter, and,
incidentally, to provide additional evidence that their operation in the P62 equation comes from
the structure of the DO plans and not from some unexplained correlation with other job or

personal characteristics, we temporarily added them back into the P65 equation. Table 8 has the
23

coefficients from that regression and for purposes of comparison the corresponding coefficients

from the regression of P62.
The first line shows the effects of having a DR plan with full benefits available at 62 or

younger compared with not having a DR plan. Both P62 and P65 are considerably smaller. The
interesting comparison is in lines 2 and 3. When full benefits are available after age 62, P62
increases by 0.16, but P65 is almost not affected. (Almost all can get full benefits at 65 or
younger.) This is good evidence that the respondents know the details of the pension plans and
adjust their subjective probabilities to take account of the plans. When partial benefits are

available only after age 62, P62 increases by 0.20 compared with the base ease- P65 also
increases. This may be due to the ambiguity of the questions on the probabilities of working:
someone who plans to retire while 65 because DR benefits are not available until age 65 • may

give a high value of P65, In any event the coefficient in the P65 equation is substantially smaller
than in the P62 equation.
The effects of the availability of health insurance on P65 are smaller than on P62 (Table

9). This should be expected because of the availability of Medicare at 65. Health insurance on
the job increases P65 by 0.054 which just balances having fully paid retiree health insurance: in
that it is available whether working or not, it should not influence the retirement choice.
Among the job characteristics only four of the 32 are significant at the 5% level, and
none of the physical characteristics is significant. The only coefficient that is substantially

different from the corresponding coefficient in the P62 equations is that on freedom in work

decisions. This is consistent with some findings in the literature: according to surveys of
managers the main negative characteristic of older workers is that they become rigid (Hurd,
1993).

As was the case in the P62 equation, the usual retirement age among co-workers or on

the job had a large effect (Table 10). What is particularly interesting is the difference in the
coefficients between the two equations. As discussed earlier a usual retirement age of 62 or less

has a large effect on P62 but it has little effect if it is greater than 65. In the P65 equation,
however, the difference between jobs with a usual retirement age of 62 or less and those with a
usual retirement age of 63-65 should be small, although probably not zero because of the

ambiguity in the question about P65. Finally, P65 should be much higher in jobs in which the
usual retirement age is greaser than 65.
These patterns are exactly what is found in Table 10. The effects are large: the variation

in P65 is 0.32 a.c the normal retirement age varies from 62 or less to 66 or over. This variation

24

is larger than the mean of P65.
The effects of having flexibility in the choice of hours of work are similar in the P65
equation to the effects in the P62 equation. Table 20 includes the coefficients from the P62
equation for comparison, and it shows the results from evaluating the age-interactions terms.26

As before, those who would like to increase hours plan to work more years, but the effect is
smaller than in the P62 equation. Those who would like to reduce hours give lower probabilities

of working past 65, and the effect increases with age. This is compatible with the idea that as
workers age, what was a good job match at a younger age becomes increasingly a bad match.

and their response in the face of hours rigidity is to retire. By age 60 the difference (0.063) is a
large fraction of the mean (0.228).
A result not shown in the cable is that someone who is optimistic about finding a job

should he or she be laid off (PFINDJOB) reports higher values of P65, about 0.07 higher
(significant).

6. Conclusion
We have studied the influence of a number of job characteristics on the probability of

working past 62 or 65. The physicaJ or mental demands of the job seem to have only a modest
influence on prospective retirement. We imagine this happens because of interactions between
the actual job demands and personal capabilities. People choose jobs that are in consonance with

their abilities. Thus, a job that objectively requires lifting will attract workers capable of lifting,
and that job requirement will not necessarily lead to labor force withdrawal. If capabilities
change with age, mismatches will develop between job requirements and capabilities. But if the
change in capabilities is even, job characteristics will not appear to influence retirement: the
uniformly increasing mismatch between capabilities and jobs will just appear as an increase in the
baseline retirement hazard rate as people age.
If capabilities change differentially with age, job characteristics can have an observable

influence on retirement. For example, if all workers lose their physical capabilities sooner than
their mental capabilities, a mismatch will develop between workers in physically demanding jobs,

even though there was no mismatch earlier in the work career. Then, workers in physically
demanding jobs will tend to retire earlier, Similarly, if some workers fall into (physically) worse

2& ige effects on increasing hours ire very emalt, ao we do not show them.

25

health, they will tend to retire earlier if they work in physically demanding jobs. We found some
modest evidence for such an effect among those In fair or poor health: the principal component

that is associated with the least physically demanding jobs is associated with a longer workllfe.
Our results Indicate that a number of seemingly negative job characteristics are at an

optimum when they are moderate. For example, having some stress on the job seems to be

better than never having stress or always having stress. Of course, this could be due to
correlations between the job characteristic and other unmeasured job attributes.

It could also be

due to a human desire not to be bored. Whatever the explanation, the results imply that often a
set of categorical job characteristic variables cannot be reduced to a scaler.
Even though the physical and mental job characteristics are not important determinants of

P62 and P65, other nonfinancial aspects of the job are Important. For example, if the usual
retirement age in a particular type of work is less than or equal to 62. P65 is predicted to be 0.12
by our regression; yet if the usual retirement age is greater than 65, P65 is predicted to be 0.44.
This change is even greater than changes associated with changing the stricture of DB pension
ptans.

The ability to change hours of work or so move to a less demanding job with the same
employer increase the prospective retirement age. This is in accord with the stated desire of
workers to reduce work effort gradually, rather than moving from 6.111-time work to complete

retirement (Jondrow, Brechling and Marcus, 1987).
Pensions have a strong influence on prospective retirement, which agrees with previous

findings about the relationship between pensions and actual retirement. A more novel finding is

the effect of the availability of health insurance, both for employees and for retirees. Workrelated health insurance is, of course, a financial reward from working, but it is also a job
characteristic: it provides access to a risk pool; iL reduces or even eliminates the importance of
prior conditions; and it eliminates the risk of losing Insurance following large medical expenses.
It is difficult, if not impossible, for an individual to purchase these characteristics.
Its summary, we found that job characteristics are important determinants of prospective
retirement, but not those which have been traditionally studied such as physical requirements.

Taken as a whole, however, they do show the importance of nonmonetary aspects of the work

environment on the labor force behavior of older workers. We base this conclusion on the
relationship between job characteristics and prospective retirement which, of course, leaves open
the possibility that actual retirement will depend on different job characteristics.

26

Figure 1

Retirement hazard rates
1.2

0.8

0.6 —

0.4

0.2

50

I
52

54

I
56

58

60

Age
51 year-aIds —34E— 54 year-aIds

62

64

66

Figure 2

Prob. of working past 62 or 65
U

x

0.9
0.8

—

0.7

P62

rI\

0.5

:
0.3

P65

:

0.2
0.1
0
45

so

do

do

Expected retirement age

Probabiflty 62 -*— Probability 65

70

Table 1
Probability of Working Full-lime
Distribution

Work plans
Stop altogether

Never stop

Not thought, no plan

P62

P65

24.3

.311

.087

6.0

.627

.437

(percent)

43.4

.555

.293

Work fewer hours

18.2

.441

.214

Change kind, work for self

12.7

.420

.188

104.&

.468

.227

All

Source: Authors' calculations from HRS.
More than 100% because multiple answers given.

Table 2
Probability of working after age 62 or 65: Effects of job characteristics
Job characteristic

After 62

After 65

Explanation

-

-

all or most

LIFTING
1,2

3
4

-0.018

0.010

some

M054t

-0.006

none

1

-0.032

2

-

-0.032'
-

most

-0.012

some or none
all
most

EYES

3,4

all

REPETITION

I

o.ol9t

2

-

-0.04C
-

34

0033t

0.007

some or none

I

O.O3P

all

2

-

0.062'
-

most

3

-0.005

0.018

some

-0.033

-0.009

none

-0.017

-0.014

strongly agree

2

-

agree

3,4

0.039

0.051

disagree

-0.027
2

-0.012
-

strongly agree

-

3,4

-0.039'

-0.017

disagree

FREEDOM

4

DIFFICULTt
1

STRESS

Source: Authors' calculations from HRS.
Note: Significant at 5% level. tsjgnificarit at 10% level.
tlob requires more difficult things than it used to

agree

Table 3
Distribution of responses (percent):
"Again thinking of your job, this time please indicate how much you agree or disagree
with each statement"

Number

Strongly

Agree

Disagree

agree

Strongly
disagree

P85c; In decisions about
promotion my employer gives
younger people preference
over older people

3325

4

14

67

16

F85d: My co-workers make
older workers feet that they
ought to retire before age 65

3336

3

14

66

18

F85e: My employer would
let older workers move to a
less demanding job with less
pay if they wanted to

3276

3

31

55

12

Source: Authors' calculations from HRS.

Table 4
Distribution of Workers: Hours Flexibility (percent)
Can you increase hours?
Can you decrease
hours?

Yes

No, don't want to

No. want to

All

Yes

12.9

8.3

2.8

24.1

No, don't want to

18.1

32.7

11.5

62.3

No, want to

5.0

7.9

0.8

13.6

All

36.0

48.9

15.1

100,0

Source: Authors' calculations from HRS.

Table S
Hours Restrictions: Job and Personal Characteristics
Education

BLUEC
(percent)

HH

Weekly
hours

Wage
rate

Annual
earnings
(thous.)

45.3

14.45

34.2

13,1

24

2.33

Do not want to

42.3

12.69

28.0

12.8

28

1.98

Want to

40.6

10.97

23.2

11.8

42

1.19

45.2

13.52

31.9

13.0

19

2.36

42.1

13.11

28.8

12.6

32

1.72

12.8

29

2.56

Hours flexibility

Can increase hours

wealth
(100k)

Cannot increase hOiiI

Cart decrease hQun
Cannot decrease hours

Do not want to
Want to

43.9

12.68

Source: Authors' calculations from FIRS.

28.9

Table 6
Average Probability of Working Full-time: Hours Flexibility
Hours constraint

After age 62

After age 65

0.50

0.26

Do not want to

0.43

0.20

Want to

0.51

0.25

Can increase hours
Can net

increase hours

-.08

.05

(0.02)

(0.02)

0.51

0.27

Do not want to

0.48

0.23

Want to

0.37

0.15

0.11
(0.02)

(0.01)

(Difference)

Caa_decrease

Cannot

hours

decrease hours

(Difference)

Source: Authors' calculations from HRS.
Note: Standard errors in parentheses.

0.05

Table 7, Part A
Probability of working past 62: personal characteristics
Coefficient

Standard err.

AGE

0.0109'

0.0029

Age-SO

EARNINGS

O.0016

0.0004

individ earnings (1k)

INC}{H

-0.0012'

0.0003

household income (1k)

WEALTH

-0.0106'

0.0026

household wealth (100k)

WHITE

0.0434

0.0172

1 if white

SEX

0.0398'

0.0161

1 if male

NSSEXP

0.0389

0.0271

expects Soc. Sec. income

EDUC1

0.0038

0.0193

Less than ES,

EDUC3

0.0483'

0.0162

More than RS.

HLTH2

-0.0165

0.0170

health very good

HLTH3

-0.0482'

0.0182

health good

Variable

Explanation

HLTH4

-0.0666'

0.0262

health fair

HLTH5

0.0003

0.0513

health poor

PLIVE75

0.0383

0.0350

probability live to 75

PLIVE8S

0.0467

0.03 10

probability live to 55

(coefficients continued in Part B)
Source: Authors' calculations from the MRS.

Note: Mean of P62=0.47.
Note: Significant at 5% level.

Table 7, Part B
Probability of working past 62 Financial Incenlives
Variable

Coefficient

Standard err.

Explanation

(continued from Part A)
EARNINGS

0.0016'

0.0004

kdiv Earnings (1k) (sect N)

DII

-0.1181'

0.0199

1 if defined benefit

D2 (DB)

0.1637

0.0235

1 if agefull>62 & age-early 62

D3 (DB)

0.199W

0.0363

1 if agefull>62 & age-early >62

D4 (DII)

0.2474

0.0666

1 if agefull>62 & age-early

D5 (DII)

0.2197

0.0576

D6 (DII)

0.1048'

0.0472

1 if agefull= & age-early
1 if agefull= & age-early =

DC

-0.0533'

0.0235

1 if defined contribution

DC_AGEE

0.0739

0.0496

1 if do & age-early >

DC_AGEEM

0.0357

0M27l

1 if dc & age-early =

HEATHINS

0.0324

0.0273

1 if health ins, on job

DHEALT}f 1

-0.0270

0.0195

1 if retiree hlthins avail, not paid

DHEALTH2

-00843'

0.0209

1 if retiree hlthins avail, some paid

DI{EALTH3

-0.1132'

0.0243

1 if retiree hithins avail, alt paid

DHEALTH6

-0.0024

0.0230

1 if retiree hlthins

62

62

(coefficients continued in Part C)

Source: Authors' calculations from the HItS.
Note: agefull = earliest age for full benefits under DII plan; age-early = earliest
age
for any benefits under DII or DC plan.
means the datum is missing.
Note: 'Significant at 5% level.

Table 7, Part C
Probability of working past 62: Job characteristics
Variable

Coefficient

Standard err.

Explanation

(continued from Part B)

PRINI

-0.0050

0.0033

principle component 1

PR1N2

0.0008

0.0037

principle component 2

PR1143

0.0085

0.0039

principle component 3

PRIN4

0.0080

0.0043

principle component 4

PlUMS

-0.0072

0.0044

BLUEC

0.0101

0.0207

principle component 5
blue collar occupation

UNION

-0.0450

0.0t65

union job

O_PRMT3

0.0066

0.0187

F85C: younger preferred: disagree

O_PRMT4

0.0348

0.0269

O_RET3

0.0641

0.0196

younger preferred: strongly disagree
F85D: older ought to retire: disagree

ORET4

0.05S0

0.0270

older ought to retire; strong'y disagree

ODEMT3

-0.02 14

0.0148

F8SE: can move to less demanding job: disagree

O_DEMT4

-0.0419

0.0242

can move to less demanding job: strongly disagree

R_AGE62

-0. 1889

0.0159

P90: usual retirement age on this job <= 62

R_AGE66

0.0717

0.0507

usual retirement age on this job > = 66

-0.0662

0.0514

usual retirement age on this job =

M_R_AGE

(coefficients continued in Part U)

Source: Authors calculations from the FIRS.
Note: Significant at 5% level.

Table 7, Part ID
Probability of working past 62: hours restrictions
Variable

Coefficient

Standard

err. Explanation

(continual from Part C)
HRSUPOK

0.0483'

0.0240

Could increase hrs: 1 =ycs

A_UPOK

-0.0039

0.0040

AGE*HRSIJPOK

HRSUP

0.0768

0.0326

Would you like to increase; 1 =yes

AGE_UP

-0.0052

0.0055

AGE9{RSEJP

HIRSDWNOK

0.003 1

0.0264

Could you reduce hrs: 1 =yes

A_DWNOK

-0.0021

0.0044

AGET{RSDWNOK

HRSDWN

-0.0600

0.0320

Would you like to reduce: l=yes

AGE_DWN

0.0002

0.0053

AGEtHRSDWN

PLAYOFF

-0.0357

0.0274

PFINDJOB

0.0817

0.0 187

Prob. lose job during year
Prob. find new job

(coefficients continued in Part E)

Source: Authors' calculations from the HRS.
Note: Signiftcant at 5% level.

Table 7, Part E
Probability of working past 62: Industry
Variable

Coefficient

Standard err. Explanation

(continued from Part D)
IND 1

-0.0189

0.0594

Agriculture/Forestry/Fishing

IND2

-0.0002

0.0346

Mining and Construction

IND3

-0.0152

0.0273

Manuf: Non-durable

INnS

-0.0585

0.0291

Transportation

IND6

0.0 168

0.0374

Wholesale

[ND7

-0.0759'

0,0309

Retail

11ND8

-0.0712

0.0328

FIRE

IND9

-0.0099

0.0396

Business/Repair Serv

IND1O

-0.0713

0.0483

Personal Services

IND11

-0.0364

0.0582

Entertainment/Rec

INDI2

-0.0109

0.0246

Professional Scrviccs

IND13

0.0556

0.0329

Public Aclmin

Source: Authors calculations from the HRS.
Note: Industry 4, durable manufacturing, is reference.
Note: Sign.ificant at 5% level.
Note: R'=0.22

Table 8
Defined Benefit Plans: Comparison of Effects on P62 and P65
Structure o f DB plan

Coefficients on

Distribution of

Youngest age for
reduced benefits

Youngest age
for full benefits

less than 63

less than 63

0.62

less than 63

greater than 62

greater than 62
(missing)

P62

P65

-.12
0.16'

-.10'

0.21

greater than 62

0.07

0.20'

0.08

respondents

0.04

greater than 62

0-02

(missing)

0.03

0.25'
0.22'

020'

less than 63
(missing)

(missing)

0.04

0.10'

0.14'

0.08

Source: Authors' calculations from the HRS.
Note: Significant at 5% level.

Table 9
Effects of availability of health insurance on P62 and P65

Structure of health insurance

P62

P65

0.032

0.054'

Notpaid

-.026

-.001

Partially paid

-.084'

-.053'

Fully paid

-.113'

-.055'

-.002

0.040'

Health insurance on job
Retiree insurance available

Availability missing

Source: Authors' calculations from HRS.
Note: 'Significant at 5% level.

table 10
Effect of tfsuai Retirement Age on Probability of Working Past Age 62 or 65
62

65

-.19'

-.tr

-

-

Greater than 65

-.07

0.21'

(missing)

-.07

0.01

Usual retirement age

Lessthanorequai to62
Greater than 62 and less than 66

Source: Authors' calculations from HRS,

Note; Significant at 5% level.

Table 11
Effect of Hours Flexibility on Probability of Working Past Age 62 or 65
Hours flexibility

62

65

Cannot increase hours

Don't want to

0.078'

0.045

Don't want to

-

-

Want to

-

-

Want to
Cannot decrease hours

Age=50
Age=60
Source: Authors' calculations from HRS.
Note: 'Significant at 5% level.
Note: Results for P62 are from Table 7, part C

-.060

.O46

-.058

-.063

References
Bartel, Ann (1982) "Wages, Nonwage Job Characteristics and Labor Mobility" Industrial

and Labor Relations Review. 35(4) pp. 578-589.

Berkovee, James and Steven Stem, 1991, "Job Exit Behavior of Older Men,"
Econometrica, 59 (1) pp. 189-210.
Brown, Charlie (1980) "Equalizing differences in the Labor Market' Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 94(1) pp. 113-133.

Filer, Randall and Peter A. Petri (1988) "AJob-Chcwristics Theory of Retirement,"
Review of Economics ar4 Statistics, Vol. 70(1) ppl23-l29.
Gustman, Alan L. and Thomas L Steinmeler. "Partial Retirement and the Analysis of
Retirement Behavior," Industrial and Labor Relations Review. April 1984, Vol. 37, No. 3,
pp. 403-415.
Gustman, Alan L. and Thomas L. Steinmeier. "The Effect of Partial Retirement on the
Wage Profiles of Older Workers," Industrial Relations. Spring 1985, Vol.24, No.2,
pp.2S7-265.
Gustman and Steinmeict (1986) "A Disaggregated Structural Analysis of Retirement by
Race, Difficulty of Work and Health," Review of Economics and Statistics, V.68(3) pp

509-513.

Hayward, Mark D., William R. Grady, Melissa A. Hardy, and David Sommers (1989),
'Occupational Influences on Retirement, Disability, and Death." Demography, Vol. 26 (3)
pp. 393-409.
Holden, Karen (1988) "Physically Demanding Occupations, Health, and Work After
Retirement: Findings from the New Beneficiary Survey' Social Security Bulletin, Vol.
51(11) pp3-15.

Hurd, Michael D., 1990, 'The Joint Retirement Decision of Husbands and Wives,' in
Issues in the Economics of Aging, D. Wise (editor), The University of Chicago Press, pp.
231-254.

Ilurd, Michael D., 1993, "The Effect of Labor Market Rigidities on the Labor Force
Behavior of Older Workers," NBER Working Paper 4462.
Hurd. Michael D. and Kathleen McGarrv, 1993a, "Evaluation of Siihjective Probability
Distributions," presented at the HRS Early Results Workshop, Ann Arbor, September.

Hurd, Michael D. and Kathleen McGarry, l993b, "The Relationship Between Job
Characteristics and Retirement," presented at the HRS Early Results Workshop, Ann

Arbor, September.
lams, Howard, 1987, "lobs of Persons Working After Receiving Retired-Worker

Benefits," Social Security Bulletin, 50, (11).
Jondrow, Jim, Frank Brcchling and Alan Marcus, 1987, "Older Workers in the Market

for Part-Time Employment," in The Problem Isn'tAge, Ed: Steven I-f. Sandell, New York:
Praeger, Pp. 84-99.
Mitchell, Olivia S. 1982, "Fringe benefits and labor mobility" Journal of Human
Resources, XVII (2) pp.286-298.

Mitchell, Olivia 5., 1983, "Fringe Benefits and the Cost of Changing Jobs," I'rdustrial and
Labor Relations Review, 37, 1, (October) pp. 70-78.
Quinn, Joseph F. (1977) "Microeconomic Determinants of Early Retirement: A CrossSectional View" Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 12(3) pp. 329-346.
Quinn, Joseph, Richard Burkhauser, and Daniel Myers, 1990, Passing the Torch: The
Influence of Economic Incentives on Work and Retirement, Kalamazoo; The Upjohn
Institute.

Ruhm, Christopher, 1990, "Bridge Jobs and Partial Retirement," Journal of Labor
Economics, 8 (4), pp. 482-501.
Rust, John P., 1990, "Behavior of Male Workers at the End of the Life Cycle; an

Empirical Analysis of States and Controls," in Issues in the Economics of Aging, Ed:
David A. Wise, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, Pp. 317-378.

Sum, Andrew and W. Neal Fogg, 1990, "Profile of the Labor Market for Older Workers,"
in Bridges to Ret irement, Ed: Peter B. Doeringer, Ithic.a: ILR Press, Cornell University,
pp. 33-63.

