NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ENTRY AND EXIT, PRODUCT
VARIETY AND ThE BUSINESS CYCLE

Satyajit Chatterjee
Russell W. Cooper

Working Paper No. 4562

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December, 1993
We are grateful to Paul Beaudry, Jean-Pascal Benassy, John Fender, John Haltiwanger, Andreas
Hornstein, Sam Kortum, Richard Rogerson and Avi Simbony as well as participants at seminars
at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the 1992 Econometric Society

Meeting, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Hebrew University, the NBER

Macroeconomics Lunch, the 1993 NBER Summer Institute, New York University, Tel Aviv
University, the University of Pennsylvania and the University of Warwick for helpfuldiscussions
about this research. We are grateful to Alok John for research assistance. The secondauthor
thanks the National Science Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are
solely those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Philadelphia, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. This
paper is part of NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations.

NBER Working Paper #4562
December 1993

ENTRY AND EXIT, PRODUCt
VARIETY AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE

ABSTRACT

We study the stochastic behavior of a dynamic general equilibrium model with
monopolistic competition. Each seller sells his product in the consumption goods as well as the

investment goods market and has market power in both. Consumers derive utility from a CES
aggregate of all the consumption goods and augment their capital stock by a CES aggregate of

all the investment goods. We analyze the equilibrium of this economy allowing for an
endogenous determination of the number of firms and therefore of products. The principal effect

we highlight is the endogenous propagation and magnification of technology and preference
disturbances through product space variations.

Satyajit Chatterjee
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Philadelphia, PA 19106

Russell W. Cooper
Department of Economics
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER

'Entry and Exit, Product Variety and the Business Cycle"

I. Introduction
Microeconomic measurements provide evidence of substantial markups of price over

marginal cost in many industries (see Dornowitz, Hubbard and Peterson [1988] and Hall

[1988]). It is not uncommon to find estimates of markups that are in excess of 2.0. In
contrast, macroeconomic models typically assume perfect competition. Is this disparity
between facts and theoretical modelling quantitatively important? The purpose of this project
is to assess this question in the context of a numerically specified neoclassical growth model

modified to include monopolistic competition. We focus on two issues: first, how the
existence of imperfect competition magnifies disturbances to technology and preferences and

second, how it affects the propagation of these disturbances over time.

Our main finding can be summarized as follows. When we allow the number of
firms to vary in response to exogenous disturbances, i.e. allow the entry and exit of firms,
then the effects of markups can be very significant. In particular, there is considerable
magnification and propagation of exogenous disturbances. This interaction between entry
and exit and markups comes from the fact that markups exist because firms produce goods

that are imperfect substitutes for each other. Therefore, as the number of firms increases the
diversity of the product space increases as well and that encourages agents to work harder

and accumulate more capital. In other words, more entry encourages more effort and
accumulation which in turn encourages more entry in the current and future periods. This
positive feedback in entry decisions underlies the magnification and propagation of exogenous

shocks. Without entry and exit, the product diversity effects implicit in industry markups is

1

left unrealized. While our analysis mainly focuses on the propagation of technology shocks,
the mechanism of product variation that we highlight could be operative in environments in
which the initial impulse is from other sources, such as credit market conditions.

Therefore, in addition to markups our framework also emphasizes the role of entry

and exit of firms in business fluctuations. This emphasis is not misplaced. Figure 1 plots
detrended real gross national product and detrended net business formation at the quarterly

frequency from 1955:1 to 1983:4.' The contemporaneous correlation between these two

variables is about .54. Generally, net business formation is quite low during economic
downturns due to the increase in business failures. This was certainly true during the period

of the Great Depression years. The number of firms in all industries fell about 10% from
1929 to 1933. In manufacturing, the fall was in excess of 33% and the number of
manufacturing firms did not return to its 1929 level until 1945.2
Related to this evidence on the cyclical properties of net business formation are the

findings on job creation and job destruction due to the births and deaths of plants. This is
important in that the net business formation data reported above concerns the births and

deaths of firms not jobs. Davis-Haltiwanger [1992] find that deaths constituted about 25% of
overall job destruction while births contributed about 20% of job creation for the 1972-86

period. While these are not cyclical numbers, they do point to the role of variations in the
number of firms for understanding overall job creation and job destruction. Over the cycle

A linear trend was removed from both of these series, both of which are available in the Fconornic
Reyort of the President. The series end in 1983 due to a change in methodology for computing the net business
formation index.
2

This evidence is from Dun & Bradstreet Reference Book and Falure Statistics reported in U.S.
Department of Commerce [1975].

10

- .05

.00

.05

.10

.15

-.

I

11

r TYTT[

'I

II

II

resgnp

IA

'I

1

I,1

I.'

70

7]

resbus

71,

79

III,

net business formation and gnp,Iineanly detrended

Figure

92

'A

V

-.100

-.075

- .050

- .025

gnp

.000

.02S

.050

075

3

we find that plant deaths are an important component of job destruction. For example, from
1980 to 1983 overall job destruction rates rose from 8.1 to 13.6% while job destruction

rates from plant deaths rose by much more, from .9 to 3.6%. The contribution of deaths to
job destruction appears across sectors of the economy.

Linking variations in the number of firms to product space variations is much more

difficult as we have no direct measures of the size of the product space. Instead we use
variations in the number of firms as a proxy. To the extent that there are product space
variations without changes in the number of firms, due to multi-product firms, this will

understate product space variations. For example, Jovanovic [1993] studies product
diversification by firms and argues that firm size and product diversification move together
empirically, leading to product space expansions during upturns. Second, new entrants might
be producing products which are substitutes for existing products so that entry creates no

apparent product space variation at all. However, we consider location to be an important
element in the definition of a product, as well as a source of market power, so that new
firms must be providing a differentiated product. The extent of that differentiation will be
measured once we calibrate our model.

Our paper contributes to the recent literature on the quantitative importance of
imperfect competition in macroeconomic fluctuations. Rotemberg and Woodford
[1990, 1991,1992] analyze the role of variations in markups as a cyclical shift variable in

labor demand functions. They abstract from entry and exit of firms and focus on the

These calculations use aggregated two-digit data on job creation and job destruction supplied by John
Haltiwanger for the 1973-88 period. The growth rates are calculated as the ratio of a flow (e.g. total job losses)
over the stock of jobs in the previous period.

4

strategic interactions between existing firms producing the same product. In contrast, we
abstract from strategic interactions by assuming that each product is made by a single firm

but focus on the impact of entry and exit of firms. An important difference entailed by this
shift in emphasis is that in our model markups are constant while in Rotemberg and
Woodford they are countercyclical. While Rotemberg and Woodford provide some time
series evidence in support of countercyclical markups, there is counter evidence contained in
other studies, such as Domowit.z, Hubbard and Peterson [1988] and Ga.leotti and Schiantarelli

[19911. Thus, there is value to examining mechanisms that link markups to macroeconomic
fluctuations without requiring them to vary over the cycle.
The assessment of the quantitative importance of imperfect competition and increasing

returns has also been attempted in the real business cycle literature. Hornstein [1992] and
Devereux, Head and Lapham [19921 analyze to what extent the calculation of the importance
of technology shocks in GNP fluctuations is affected by the recognition of markups and

different forms of increasing returns to scale. Hornstein analyzes a model similar to ours but
abstracts from entry and exit and finds that the joint hypothesis of imperfect competition and
increasing returns to scale does not alter the contribution of technology shocks very much.

Devereux, Head and Lapham allow for entry and exit and the product diversity affect and
find that technology shocks could account for even more fluctuations in GNP than the
competitive model or the imperfect competition model with no entry.4 The latter paper is
closest in spirit to ours, although there are considerable differences in modelling details and

focus. In particular, our main interest is in understanding the dynamic response of the

In their terminology, the product diversity effect is increasing returns to specialization.

5

economy to different type of exogenous shocks rather than in evaluating the importance of
technology shocks in GNP fluctuations.

The element of positive feedback in entry decisions makes our model similar to
macroeconomic models with strategic complementarity arising through production

externalities. Baxter-King [1991] and Klenow [1990] develop quantitative business cycle
models in which a positive production externality is assumed as in the theoretical formulation

of Bryant [1983]. In contrast, in our framework the analog of these technological spillovers
arise endogenously as a natural consequence of the primitives of the model. As a result, the
strength of the feedback is determined indirectly through the calibration of the model to
micro-observation on markups (since they reveal the substitutability of goods and hence the
magnitude of the product variation effect) rather than through estimates based on aggregate
observations (on inputs and output) as in Baxter-King.

The paper is organized as follows. The basic model is presented in Section II and the
role of the interaction between markups and entry decisions is clearly brought out. In
Section III we calibrate the model and study its behavior by examining its moment properties

and impulse response dynamics. We find that it can generate quantitatively significant
magnification and propagation effects.

Section IV concludes.

Ii. Model
This section describes the decision problems for the many firms and the single
representative consumer who populate our economy. The section provides a set of necessary
and sufficient conditions that an equilibrium of the economy must satisfy and uses these to

6

understand how markups and entry decisions affect the marginal return to work effort and

capital accumulation.

II.A The Consumer
There is a single infinitely-lived representative consumer. There are many firms in the
economy, each capable of producing a unique good which can be soldeither as a
consumption or an investment good.5 Let N1 denote the number of producing firms in period

with p and p, as the consumption and investment price of the jth good, j
measured

c

(l,2,..Nj,

in some abstract unit of account. The consumer derives utility from leisure and the

consumption of each of the produced goods and earns income from renting labor and capital

to firms. The rental price of a unit of labor time is w1 and the rental price of a unit of

capital is q. He is also the sole owner of all existing and potential firms so that the sum of
all residual profits, denoted

reverts to him as well. Using standard notation, his

optimization problem is given as:

As noted earlier, our formal model associates the number of firms with the number of investment and
consumptions products. Our anaiysis can accommodate multi-product firms as long as these divisions of the
fIrm operate independently. So, for example, a glass product that could either be used as a consumption good
or used in the investment process would be treated as the output of a single firm.

7

max

3'u(c,-B,,1,)
t'.O

N,

N,

N,

+ pif w,(1 -1,)

s.t.

qk, +

+

f-i

f-I

f-i

k,,1 = (1—)k,+i,
N,

c=

"

N,
,

i-I

i,=

c,—B 0, if 0,

0

f-i

,

v>1, 0>1

1 I, a 0

Note that the consumption of each of the produced goods enters the utility function through a
symmetric CES aggregator with elasticity of substitution given by v/(1-).6 In addition to
leisure, utility in period t is affected by disturbance term B, which affects the marginal utility
of consumption relative to leisure positively.

Following Kiyotaki [1988], investment in period t is assumed to be a symmetric CES
aggregate

with elasticity of substitution 01(1-0). This assumption along with the assumption

that accumulation is done by the consumer rather than firms ensures that the number of firms

in period t (N,) does not appear as a state variable in the following period: the only

' This specification of preferences is the same as that used in the Section 1 model of Dixit-Stiglitz [19771
though our utility function includes leisure and their specification included a numeraire good. Logically,
imperfect substitutability is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for there to be a benefit from product
diversity. For instance, if the CES aggregate for consumption is normalized by N°" where x is the elasticity
of substitution (e.g., Blanchard and Fisher [1989J, Chpt.8), the influence of N is removed from the indices.
Benassy [1993] discusses an alternative specification of preferences for these models which parameterizes the
'love of variety effect and presents new results on the welfare properties of decentralized equilibria However,
economic intuition suggests that imperfect substitutability and benefit from diversity are related. As a concrete
example, consider the impact of a larger number of gas stations in a city. If the advertised prices are not very
different across stations, drivers would tend to go into the nearest available station to fill up when the indicator
turns low. In such a situation, the average distance people have to travel to fill up is lowered when there are a
larger number of stations around.

8

endogenous state variable in the model is the beginning-of-period capital stock (kJ. Also,
since the consumption price of a good is allowed to be different from its investment price, it
is assumed that the consumer cannot transform consumption goods into investment goods or

vice versa. This implies the non-negativity constraint on the purchase of investment goods in
the above problem.

The use of these two separate aggregators is meant to capture the importance of
diversity for consumers as well as producers without straying too far from the traditional one
sector model.7 This specification allows us to capture imperfect substitutability within

consumer goods as distinct from the degree of substitutability of inputs into the investment

process. From the consumer's side, the CES function represents a home production function
in which consumption goods purchased in period are used to produce a consumption

aggregate, c. Similarly, the consumer purchases a variety of investment goods which are
combined to produce additional capital in the following period. In the process of producing
capital, an increase in product variety increases the marginal efficiency of investment of each
good available in the economy. As shown below, for both of these production processes, the
cost of producing a unit of output (consumption or investment) falls as the number of

products available to the consumer increases. Of course, the magnitudes of these "benelit of
variety" effects are governed by the parameters v and 0.
Given ; and i, the consumption and investment demand for good j in period t is

given by:

Our model can be viewed as an aggregate model in which the degree of substitutability between products
in different sectors is the same for every pair of sectors. An alternative would model the interaction between
firms within sectors in a multi-sector economy and thus allow for richer substitutability across goods.

9

J
C,

V

=

,
PC,

j

jO10
P
t,

(1)

Pit

where p, and p, are price indices given by:
i—v

N

N,

=

,

1—8

(2)

= ((PJ)T]

These price indices show the benefit from variety effects: if the price of all types of

consumption (investment) goods is the same, then, since v and 0 exceed 1, the consumption

(investment) price index is a decreasing function of N,. Therefore, an increase in the number
of products lowers the cost of consumption and investment relative to leisure. If v

0, an

increase in N also alters the cost of the consumption good relative to the investment good; in

particular it falls if v<0. Intuitively, these effects arise because the produced goods are
imperfect substitutes for each other. As more of them become available it becomes easier

(i.e. cheaper) to satisfy a given level of demand. Note that the strength of these effects

depend on the degree to which or 0 depart from 1; the number of firms has no effect on
the price indices when i. and 0 are 1, i.e, the goods are perfect substitutes for each other.

The "love of variety" effect emphasized here also appears in models of location (e.g.
Ciccone-Hall [1993] and the references therein) assuming that some goods are not costlessly

transportable. Further, as in Shea [1993], these same effects can underlie the linkages that
create positive comovement in output and employment across industries. A good example
concerns automobile plants and their upstream suppliers, as described in Cooper-Haltiwanger

[1993]. During the interwar years, there were sizable seasonal variations in the production

10

of automobile plants. The upstream suppliers of these plants, who were located quite close
by, had dramatic seasonal fluctuations as well. Further, the business failures that occured
during this period led to a reduction in suppliers and, from our perspective, a contraction of
the product space. So, the product space variations that we emphasize here are just one
manifestation of the forces that underlie temporal and spatial agglomeration.

Using the price indices noted in (2), the budget constraint in the consumer's problem
can be compactly written as:
N,

pc,

+

w,(1—1,) +

qk,

(3)

+

J..i

Thus, ignoring non-negativity constraints, the intratemporal and intertemporal efficiency
conditions are:

u(c,,l,)

(4)

u(c,, 1,) p
= u(c,1
PC:

+

pc:*I

(1

PC:,!
_o)')

(5)

The Euler equation, given by (5), says that the consumer's loss from reducing the

consumption index by a unit in period t, purchasing some of the investment index equals the
gain obtained by consuming the proceeds from first renting the capital and then selling the
undepreciated capital in the following period. In addition, the u-ansversality condition on
capital stock is satisfied if:

11

(6)

1im_ 13'u(c,,l,)k,.1 = 0

II.B Firms
Each of the N firms active in the economy in period t produces a single, unique

good. Good j, produced by seller j,

can

either be sold to consumers as a consumption good

(at a price p) or as an investment good (at a price pd). Thus, we assume that the firm can
price discriminate between consumption and investment goods markets.'

Since the capital accumulation decision is made by the consumer, each firm needs to

solve a static profit maximization problem. Each firm takes factor prices as given but
recognizes its market power in the commodity market; i.e., on the output side it takes the

demand curve (rather than price) as given. Production proceeds up to the point where the
marginal cost of producing a unit of the good is equal to the marginal revenue in each

market. Any profit from this endeavor is distributed to the consumer.

Formally, each firm solves:

max
s.t.

=

+ p1sj

- qk/

—

w,n/

AF(n/-n,k'-k)

where s and sj are the jth firm's sale of consumption and investment goods. The production
function F(.,.) is characterized by overhead labor (ñ) and overhead capital (k). The overhead
costs are important to our analysis because we wish to reconcile the existence of market

Gali [1992]. in contrast, assumes that such price discrimination is impossible. Thus the optimal price of
a setter reflects a weighted average of the degree of substitutability between consumption goods and the degree
of substitutability between investment goods. Thus variations in the markup arise from changes in the
composition of output between consumption and investment. These compositional effects on the markup are
absent here.

12

power with no excessive profits on average.9 The technology parameter A, (along with the

preference parameter B,) will be a source of fluctuations in the economy)°
The demand functions in (1) can be inverted to give the inverse demand functions
facing firm j in the consumption and investment markets:

Sg

1—0

1—v

a

'

Sue

j

U

t

It

7
it

t

is assumed that N, is large so that each firm takes the aggregate consumption and

investment (c1 and i,) and the price indices (p and pa) as given. In other words, these
economy-wide variables determine the position of each firm's demand functions. It follows
that the marginal revenue in each of these markets is simply p',/s' and pIO. Therefore, the
first-order necessary conditions for the jth firm's optimization problem can be compactly
written as:

______
V

=

pj(Af(nf-n,k/-k)

-

Ct)

(8)

0

A I F(,ç'-n,k-k)

(9)
J

PC:

Roemberg and Woodford 119901 use a similar motivation for the introduction of overhead labor.
JO
Here we abstract from deterministic growth. As in King,Plosser and Rebelo (19881, deterministic labor
augmenting progress could be added to the model. The economy would then be made stationary by 'dividing
through by the state of labor productivity without any influence on the results we report here. One implication
of allowing this type of growth would be that the overhead labor and capital costs would also increase overtime
at the same rate as labor productivity. As a consequence, there would be no variation in the number of
products produced, though as in Stokey (1988], the spectrum of products produced might change over time.

13

A

Fk(ni-i,k-k)
V

=

(10)

I

PC:

Condition (8) implies that the marginal revenue from the sale of output as a consumption

good equals that from the sale of output as investment. Conditions (9) and (10) are the usual
markup equations when output is sold as consumption. Using (8), these can be rewritten for
the case of output being sold as investment. These conditions are used in the calibration of
the model as they provide the link between the markups and the degree of substitutability

across consumption and investment goods. Using these conditions, the jth firm's profits in

period t is:

=

+

(F

-

s )- A(f)n

+

(11)

At the optimum, it is required that ir 0.
II. C Equilibrium Conditions
Since the output of each active firm appears symmetrically in the consumption and
investment aggregate, the equilibrium quantity and price of each good will be the same.

Also, since prices are in an abstract unit of account, we can set pj to 1 for all t (and j)

without any loss of generality. Then, a set of sequences {cj', {n1}, {k}, {N}, {pj,
{w}, and {qj constitutes a perfect foresight, synunerric, and monopolistically competitive
equilibrium if they satisfy (3)-(6) and the sequences {s, = c/N}, {s, = (k11-(1-)kJ/Nfl,

{n =

n/Nj, and (k = k/N1} satisfy (8) - (10) with j in (11) equal to zero.
The conditions for consumer and firm optimization can be used to eliminate the price,

14

wage and capital-rental terms. Also, homogeneity of degree 1 implies that F(n,/N-n, k/N-

') is identical to F(n1-Nn, k1-N1k) and F(n/N1-n, 1ç/N-k) = F(n-N1n, lç-Nk) for x =
n,k. Therefore, the conditions of equilibrium reduce to the following five equations:

uIc1.1—n) =
u(c,,l —n,)

u(c,, 1

A,N1(ttit)
v

V

—

(13)

—

Fk(n,,l -N1n ,k, N:+i k)

u(c,1, 1

(12)

+

-)

(14)

c, +N"° {k,1 —(1 —o)kj = AjNv_iF(n, —N,n,k, —N,k)

c, +

V

(k,1 -(1 -)k1}
._

=

A1N{''

—

—

-N:,k, —Nk)

1im,...I3'u(c,,rz,)k,,1

,,

+

Fk(n, -N,n,k

(15)

_N(k)k}

= 0

(16)

The first two are the familiar intratemporal and intertemporal efficiency conditions.

The third equation is the resource balance condition for the firm (i.e., the constraint in the
optimization problem of the firm) expressed in terms of economy-wide variables. The fourth
condition is the zero profit condition of firms also expressed in terms of economy-wide

variables. The final equation is the transversality condition.

lI.D The Role of Markups and Entry and Exit

15

The objective of our study is to examine how the existence of market power in
product markets affects the economy's response to exogenous variation in preferences and

technology. Equations (12)-(15) give us qualitative insight into this question. Here we
discuss these themes and return to them in our discussion of the quantitative properties of the
model.

To begin with, a useful feature of these equations is that they nest the basic perfectly
competitive neoclassical macroeconomic model analyzed in King, Plosser and Rebelo [19881.

This basic model corresponds to the case where y=O=l arid n=k=O. If we assume, for
the moment that v=8, then the model with imperfect competition differs in three important
respects from the basic neoclassical model.

First, the total factor productivity term A1 in the basic model is replaced by the

composite term A1N' on the right hand side of (12)-(15). Since N is an endogenous
variable, the effective total factor productivity in our model is endogenous and positively
related to N1 since v> 1.

Intuitively, we would expect an increase in A1 to increase the equilibrium number of

firms in period t so that a given exogenous shock to productivity would be larger in the
imperfectly competitive model than in the competitive model; i.e, the imperfectly competitive

model magnqfies the impact of productivity disturbances. In fact, if this was a static
economy, the condition for intratemporal optimization, (12), indicates that employment

would respond to the variations in AIN' through the usual static labor supply response.
So, the static response to changes in A1 would depend on the response of the number of firms

to A1, the degree of product substitutability (v) and the elasticity of labor supply. In a

16

dynamic setting, the relevant part of the employment response is the degree of intertemporal
substitution so that the magnification effect should be larger the more elastic is labor supply

and the less permanent is the shock.
An increase in total effective factor productivity in period t would also encourage

more accumulation of capital which in turn increases the number of firms in future periods.
Therefore, even if the original shock to A, is purely temporary, effective factor productivity
will be serially correlated; i.e., the imperfectly competitive model provides additional
propagation of productivity disturbances.
Variations in B1 increase the desire for consumption relative to leisure and thus

increase the demand for the consumption relative to investment. With a fixed product space,

this leads to a negative correlation between investment and consumption. However, if the
overall effect of this taste shock is to increase the number of firms, the economy could
generate a correlated increase in effective productivity leading to a positive correlation in

consumption and investment. Similar effects are described by Baxter-King [19911 in a
model with production externalities.

A second important aspect of introducing imperfect competition is that the presence of
overhead labor and overhead capital influences the responsiveness of the economy to

underlying shocks. As discussed in Hornstein [1992] as well, the key to understanding the
effects of monopolistic competition (leaving aside product space variations through entry and

exit) concerns the introduction of overhead costs, which are needed to absorb the profits

from markups. To see this, consider a static model in which the production function for a

firm is A(n—n), where A represents the current state of technology. It is easy to show that

17

the elasticity of labor demand with respect to A, holding the real wage constant, is a

decreasing function of the ratio of overhead to non-overhead labor. Therefore, the presence
of overhead labor implied by the markups leads to a dampening of the response of labor
demand to variations in the state of technology. This, in turn, implies that productivity is

more volatile since there is less movement along (relative to shifts of) the production
function.

Third, the overhead costs also have implications for the cyclical behavior of

employment and capital per firm. To see this, consider the case in which O=p and assume,
as we will below, that the production function is Cobb-Douglas where the coefficient for

labor is a. In this case, the zero profit condition can be rewritten as:

(v-i) =

-+

(n,/N,) - n

(k,/N,) — k

(19)

Hence, changes in A1 or BimpIy that capital per firm and the hours per firm must vary in
opposite directions. If there was no overhead capital, then zero profits would imply that the

number of labor hours per firm would be constant. With two types of overhead factors,
labor hours per firm can vary with the state of technology. When a shock occurs which
leads to the expansion of the number of products, (19) implies that the number of workers

per firm must increase as well. However, as we shall see in our quantitative analysis, the
correlation of GNP with labor hours per firm will depend on the persistence of the shock
since over time there are variations in the capital stock.

To be precise, the elasticity of labor demand with respect to A is (1-&n)/(l-cr).

18

III. Quantitative Properties
III.A. Approach
Our goal in this section is understand the effects of net business formation, acting

through product variation, on aggregate fluctuations. While the workings of this model is
transparent in simple static settings, we need a numerical approach to better evaluate its

dynamics. To this end, we adopt the approach of King,Plosser and Rebelo [1988] and
consider a log linear approximation of the system given by (12)-(16) around the steady

state.'2 Since our approach mimics that of King, Plosser and Rebelo, the reader is referred
to that paper for detailed discussion of the procedure. Solving the dynamical system gives
alues for the state variable (ic) and the co-state variable as a function of the exogenously
given path of the technology and preference parameters.'3 Moving from this system to the
stochastic economy requires a certainty equivalence assumption. That is, as in King, Plosser
and Rebelo, the values of {A1} and B1} in the dynamical system are replaced by conditional
expectations and A1 and B1 are added as state variables. Otherwise, all equations remain
unchanged.

To perform the numerical analysis, we need to specify functional forms. Again,

2 In the experiments we have conducted so far, saddle path stability holds. Recent work by BenhabibFarmer [19921 does indicate that for some parameterizations of models of monopolistic competition, the steady
state may become a sink admitting the possibility of sunspot equilibria, as explored by Farmer-Guo (1992],
Further, there is the possibility of multiple steady state equilibria in this economy, as indicated by Gali [1993]
for a closely related environment. Our analysis focuses on the behavior of the economy in the neighborhood of
a steady state and does not allow for variations of the economy from the neighborhood of one steady state to
another.
While our analysis has emphasized the behavior of capital in excess of the aggregate stock of overhead
capital, it is important to remember that the state variable for the system is the aggregate stock of capital, some
of which is used as overhead capital. The predetermined nature of the capital stock thus limits entry,
particularly when overhead capital requirements are large.

19

following the arguments of King,Plosser and Rebelo [1988], the functions are chosen to be

consistent with lower frequency evidence on factor shares and the lack of a trend in either

per capita labor hours or real interest rates. In particular, we adopt a Cobb-Douglas
specification for the production function (where the inputs are labor and capital in excess of
the overhead levels) and assume initially that preferences over consumption and leisure are

given by log(cJ + log(lJ. This specification of preferences, as noted above, implies that
permanent changes in the real wage will have no effect on labor supply. Variations in hours
worked thus emerge solely from intertemporal substitution in response to temporary changes

in the real wage (brought about by technology shocks that influence both the marginal
product of labor and the spectrum of goods offered in equilibrium) or preference parameters.
In keeping with our goal, we experiment with different magnitudes of markups and
overhead costs to understand the effects of these parameter variations on the magnification

and propagation of temporary shocks to the system. In addition, we relate the magnitude of
the movement in net business formation in the model to that observed in the U.S. data so that
there is an empirical assessment of the model along this key dimension.

We evaluate three different economies. One, termed 'perfect competition", is an
economy close to that studied in King,Plosser and Rebelo.'4 This is a standard real business
cycle model with perfect competition.
Our second economy introduces monopolistic competition without allowing for

'

Specifically, j3=.988, delta=.025 and labor's share=.64. In addition, we impose constant returns to
scale for these simulations. Finally, the serial correlation in the technology shock,'', was set at .9 unless stated
otherwise.This is basically the parameterization that King, Plosser and Rebelo cail their baseline though we do
not have the underlying 4% growth in labor augmenting technological progress that they assume and their labor
share is only .58.

20

product space variations through net business formation. For this exercise, called "no
entry", we retain the parameterizations of the basic model but introduce markups by

assuming that goods are not perfect substitutes. To parameterize the model, we set the
markups and the overhead labor requirement and then solve for the overhead capital from the

zero profit condition. Drawing upon Hall [1988], we set both O=v=2

so

that the markup of

price over cost is 100%. Since we have no direct evidence that markups are very different
between investment and consumption goods, we initially assume that these markups are

equa1) Later, as we begin to explore some of the properties of the model, we allow the
markups to differ across goods. We set the ratio of production to non-production workers (a
proxy for the overhead labor ratio) at 1 implying that there is one non-production worker for
each production worker.

This choice of the overhead labor ratio might seem relatively high, compared to the
Davis-Haltiwanger [1991] estimate of approximately •5•16 Further, one might think that a

100% markup is too high as well, compared to other estimates in the literature. If we
adopted a more conservative estimate by reducing the markup to 30%, then with an overhead
labor ratio of 1, the overhead capital ratio would be negative, which is not feasible.

There do not appear to be any systematic differences in Hall [1988] across sectors depending on the
durability of the product. For example, the markup on durables is smaller than that for non-durables but the
markup on services is even less than that for durables. The characterization of sunspot equilibria in Gali
[1992], in contrast, requires differences between v and 8. A markup of 100% is certainly well within the range
estimated by Hall and is considered by Rotemberg-Woodford [1991) as well.
Note though that this estimate is obtained from the ratio of production worker hours to total hours and
does not include any corrections for the possibility that non-production workers could be more productive than
the production workers. I.e., these aie not ratios of efficiency units. Once we adjust for differences across
workers in the data using the data on wage differentials given in Davis-Haltiwanger [1991] the ratio of
production to non-production workers is approximately .72. This adjustment seems appropnate given that our
model assumes homogenous labor.
6

21

Reducing the overhead labor ratio to the Davis-Haltiwanger estimate of .5 and maintaining a

markup of 30% implies an overhead capital ratio of only .05, which also seems too low. We
thus chose the parameter values of a 100% markup and an overhead labor ratio of 1 as a
compromise which implies an overhead capital ratio of 1."

The final economy, "entry, allows for both market power and entry and exit. The
procyclical nature of profits in the no-entry treatment translates here into a positive
correlation between entry and real output. This is consistent with the evidence discussed

earlier that net business formation is procyclical. As noted earlier, since the evidence on the
cyclical variation in markups is mixed, we focus exclusively on the effects of entry on the

number of products offered in the market. For this treatment we retain the same parameter
values as in the no-entry case.
The values of important parameters for these three treatments are given in Table 1.

We now turn to an analysis of the properties of our model and then to an evaluation of its
ability to match observations on net business formation in the U.S. economy.

III. B. Ouantitative Properties of the Model
As mentioned already, we are interested in the magnification and propagation effects

of entry and exit acting through product space variations. Impulse response dynamics
provide a simple way to distinguish these two aspects.

In Figure 2, we display the path of the capital stock for the three economies when

The overhead capital requirement is determined in our model from the steady state zero profit
condition, (19), once we have set the markups and the overhead labor ratio. The overhead capital ratio thus
increases when, cezeris paribus, we raise markups. Note that we are calibrating the overhead capital and labor
ratios and not the overhead capital and labor requirements directly.

FIgure 2

Impulse Response: Capital
0.1

0.08

0.06

0.04
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

no entry -- perf comp

entry

Figure 3

Impulse Response: Capital
0.1

0.08
9-.

0.06

9.

-9

0.04

0

2

4

r°- entry

6

6

10

12

14

-+- no entry -- per-f' comp 1

16

1)
there is a ten percent increase of the stock from its steady state value. These dynamics are

critical to the types of correlations produced by these economies since the speed with which
the capital stock decays to its steady state controls the strength of the internal propagation

mechanism of the model (see King, Plosser and Rebelo [19881 for details). Note that the
propagation mechanism is strongest for the model with imperfect competition and entry and

exit. In contrast, the strength of the propagation mechanism in the perfectly competitive
model and the model without entry and exit are very similar with slightly more persistence in

the perfectly competitive economy. In the entry treatment, an increase in the capita] stock

above steady state creates an incentive to entry do to the lower rental rates on capital. This
product space expansion sustains a higher level of investment and hence a slower transition
to the steady state.

Figure 3 shows the dynamic path of capital stock for a more conservative estimate of

the markup with an elastic labor supply. In principle, the reduction in the markup should
reduce the added propagation from variations in product variety while the more elastic labor
supply will create additional propagation. Overall, the figure indicates that the propagation
mechanism is now weaker but it is still significantly stronger than in the pure competitive
case. Note too that here the internal propagation in the perfect competition and monopolistic

competition without entry treatments is exactly the same. This is due to the elastic labor
supply assumption.

We turn now to the response of the key flow variables of the model to an temporary
ten percent deviation in total factor productivity. The impulse response dynamics for the
In this case, the markup is reduced to 1.5, the overhead capital and labor ratios are both .5 and

preferences are linear in leisure, i.e. =O.

23

number of firms, output, consumption, investment, hours worked, productivity, and real

wages are shown in Figures 4-lO.' Related correlations produced in an economy with
transitory technology shocks are reported in Table 2. Throughout, C is the total amount of
real consumption, Emp is the total level of employment (including overhead labor), mv is the

total amount of investment and Prod is average labor productivity. Hence neither C nor mv
conform to the CES indices used in the theoretical analysis as these indices are not measured.
Instead, these measures are calculated from our model as in the National Income and Product
Accounts.

As is apparent from each of the impulse responses, the imperfectly competitive model

with entry and exit is substantially more responsive than either the model without entry and

exit or the competitive model. These responses can be explained by relating them to the

impulse response of the number of firms in the economy, indicated in Figure 4. As
conjectured in the previous section, the number of firms responds positively to the

productivity shock and remains elevated for a considerable length of time. Through this
product diversity effect, the productivity of labor time is enhanced and output and hours

worked is higher than in the competitive model. Because there is a greater variety of goods
available in the economy, the consumption index can increase even though overall
expenditure on consumption goods is lower.

As a result, investment responds much more

in our model than in the competitive one. Indeed, the greater response of investment,
coupled with the slower decay of the capital stock noted earlier, provides the resources

'

Note that the real wage as measured here is nominal wage deflated by producer's consumption goods

prices. There is another measure of the real wage which is relevant for consumers which deflates the nominal
wage by the CES price index.

F.9ut*1

*901. 5

Number of Fwrn,

Or4put

_______ —

02

015

-Q1
H
p

S

S

005

0

I

I

-005

I

7 9 9 10 II 12 13 * IS

I 2 3 4 5 a 7 9 9 10 II 12 IS 7W

15

-

QUWtt

a-— —no.145

—-—

flour. I
consumptIon

I

Ilgurl
investment

I

1.1

015'

09

WI
WI

I0

0.7

05
S

•0

-r rr------.----—---.----o
0.1

—055

II I
I 23456799101112131415
StalIn

1*fl1

•fllW

______

.—
I

I

oH

I

I 3 3 4 5 9 7 a 9 10 II 12 13 14 IS

I

fIge,.I

total hOurs

productivity
0 15

3?

0 15

01
71

Ott
S

1 305

A

-005

7 3 4 0 6 7 8 9 1011 12 13 1415

I

quarters

—noe.d:6pc

flq.n. 10

real wage
006

/

I
12315678 9 lOll 12131415
I

—"° 1

0

Pfl IX K Xtvf'f4

1 2 3 1 5 6 7 8 9 1011 12131415
quart.!.

—noent.rp

24

needed to support the elevated number of firms.

A comparison of the dynamic path of real wages and productivity across the three

models is also instructive. First, as noted in the previous section, the overhead capital and

labor tend to make the marginal productivity of factors more responsive to factor use. As a
result, average labor productivity will be more volatile in imperfectly competitive models

than in competitive ones. Second, unlike the competitive model, the real wage (the marginal

product of labor) does not mirror the behavior of the average productivity of labor. Given
the capital stock, an increase in total factor productivity will lead to both the entry of new

firms and an increase in the number of workers per firm. This latter effect is sufficiently
strong that the marginal product of labor falls at the time of the shock. The average product
of labor increases due to the increase in the ratio of production workers to total employment.
Further quantification of these properties are reported in Table 2 where we focus on
the standard deviations of aggregate variables, correlations of these variables with respect to

output and other properties of the output series. It is important to note that the model with
perfect competition has many features that we normally associate with aggregate fluctuations:

consumption is less volatile than output, investment is more volatile that output and there are
posiive contemporaneous correlations between key macroeconomic variables and output.

However, as the technology shocks which drive the economy are transitory, there is little
serial correlation in output fluctuations.

The addition of monopolistic competition without allowing for entry and exit over the
business cycle increases the volatility of consumption and its correlation with output and

reduces both the volatility of investment and its correlation with output. More importantly,

25

employment fluctuations appear to be dampened by the introduction of monopolistic

competition as the standard deviation of hours is reduced by almost 50%. Since the analysis
is conducted using an approximation around the steady state, one might think initially that

adding in market power through markups would have little impact on the time series

properties. Table 2 indicates that this is certainly not the case.
One possible explanation for the effects of market power concerns the method of

calibration. The parameters of the Cobb-Douglas technology are inferred from observed
factor shares. In this economy, the technological parameters depend on the size of the
markup and the relative importance of the overhead inputs. However, when the markups on
consumption and investment are 2 and the overhead labor ratio is 1, as in our economy, then
even in the presence of monopolistic competition, labor's share of national income is the

same as the exponent on the labor input in the Cobb-Douglas technology. Thus, the effects
of monopolistic competition are not due to different estimates of parameters in the Cobb-

Douglas technology. In fact, as explained earlier, the existence of markups implies the
presence of overhead labor and capital which dampens the response of firms to variations in
the state of technology.

While not described in Table 2, in the no entry treatment, profits of firms are highly
procyclical. The entry treatment allows potential entrants to respond to profit opportunities
in their participation decisions. The propagation effects of the monopolistically competitive
environment with entry and exit are evident from the fact that the serial correlation of output
is . 11, about 7 times that produced by the competitive economy. This increased serial

correlation comes from the fact that investment is more responsive to technology shocks as

26
well the slower transition to the steady state.
One seemingly "odd" feature of the monopolistically competitive economy is the

apparent negative correlation between consumption and output. Note that consumption is

measured here as the total amount of consumption goods produced, ns the consumption
index that appears in an agent's utility function. The correlation between output and the
consumption index for this treatment is .46.
Table 3 describes the outcomes of experiments in which the labor supply elasticity is

set to 0 (=O) so that intertemporal effects are larger, as in Hansen [1985). For these
treatments, the serial correlation in the technology shock was set at 0 (=O). Overall, the
increase in the elasticity of labor supply magnifies the response of the economy to shocks in

all three treatments. Relative to the results reported in Table 2, increasing the elasticity of
labor supply increases the standard deviation of employment from 1.4 to 3.1 under

monopolistic competition with entry. Further, the standard deviation of consumption

increases from .97 to 2. Finally, there is additional serial correlation in output due to the
increased responsiveness of net business formation to the technology shocks. As in the case
of the treatments in Table 2, the negative correlation between consumption and output is due
to the fact that this variable represents the total amount of consumption, not the consumption

index. As before, the correlation between the consumption index and output is positive.
Table 4 explores variations in the magnitude of the markups in the consumption and

investment goods markets. These treatments were undertaken in the case of 40 so that the
full effects of intertemporal substitution would be evident, For these variations, we adjust
the overhead labor ratio so that the overhead capital ratio and labor's coefficient in the

27

technology (cr) are reasonable. The values of these variables are reported in the table as
well. Other parameters are the same as in the baseline treatment, For these treatments we
allow the markups to increase to 3, still within the range estimated by Hall. We also explore

asymmetries in markups.2°

At u03, we set the overhead labor ratio to 2 as otherwise the overhead capital
ratio was 26 and labor's technology coefficient (Cr) was .96. Here markups are extremely
high so that product variation effects are quite strong. As a consequence, the correlation

between the number of firms and output is near one leading to very strong magnification

effects. Further, there are persistent variations in the number of products yielding strong
propagation effects as well . That is, in this case, the serial correlation in output is .39.

At the other extreme, when u=O=1.5, we reduced the overhead labor ratio to .5 as
suggested

by Davis-Haltiwanger [1991] yielding an overhead capital ratio of .5. In this case,

there is some additional persistence through product variation but this effect is much smaller
than

in the case of u=0=2. When u=2 and 0=1, so that the only product variety effects

occur in consumption goods, then there is almost no persistence in output movements.

The set of treatments summarized in Table 5 investigate the effects of serially

correlated taste shocks to this economy in the elastic labor supply case. As reported

in

Baxter-King [1991] as well, the first row of Table 5 indicates the response of consumption
and investment to a variation in the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and

leisure in the competitive economy. Under perfect competition, we see that investment is

The case of &'= 2 and 0=3 lead to both eigenvalues being less than one and thus the loss of saddlepath
stability. lii this case, as in Farmer-Quo [1992], there may be sunspot equilibria. As discussed by Gall [19921

in a model without price discrimination between Investment and consumption goods, when
some interesting implications for cyclical variations In the share of investment in output.

u 0 the model has

28

negatively correlated with output while consumption is positively correlated with output.

This negative correlation between investment and output is also observed in the treatment of

monopolistic competition with no entry. However, once entry is introduced, the product
space variations become important enough to produce a positive correlation between
investment and output, as found in Baxter-King [19911.21 Note further that investment is

more volatile than consumption but that productivity is countercyclical..
Finally, we consider the more traditional case of serially correlated technology shocks

in Tables 6a and 6b along with related U.S. data.22 For Table 6a, the correlations are
generated from a model in which the elasticity of the marginal utility of leisure () equals

I.

-

In Table 6b, the elasticity of the marginal utility of leisure is set at 0 (the discrete

employment case) while all other parameters remain unchanged. For all of these treatments,
we retain the same standard deviation of the technology shock.23

As is well understood, the perfectly competitive real business cycle model does a
good job of mimicking the basic pattern of the relative variances found in U.S. data.24

Further, as indicated in Table 6a, the basic model produces the serial correlation observed in
actual time series, largely due to the fact that in the baseline model the autoregressive

coefficient on the technology shock is .9 Finally, the basic correlation pattern is consistent

21

One must be careful in comparing results as

their results pertain to data that was Hodrick-Prescott

filtered.

The U.S. data corresponds with that reported in King, Plosser, Rebeto [1988].

n As argued in Hall [1988) and Hornstein [1992], there is a need to adjust the Solow residual to account
for the monopolistic competition. We have not yet made that adjustment as our goal is to document the effects
of changes in market sti-ucture and not to match U.S. data.

'

Basicaliy, due to consumption smoothing in response to technology shocks, consumption is less volatile
than output and mvestment is more volatile.

29

with U.S. data except for the correlation of employment with output, which is much too high
in the baseline model.23

For the case of =-1, both models with monopolistic competition also perform
reasonably well. In particular, consumption smoothing is evident and the standard deviation

of investment relative to output exceeds 1 in both economies, as in U.S. data. As noted
earlier, tLre is considerable employment dampening due to monopolistic competition and
this is a movement toward the observed correlation between output and employment though

the standard deviation of employment relative to output is quite low. Once entry and exit is
possible, this dampening of employment fluctuations is somewhat offset by allowing product

space variations over the cycle. In this sense, product space variations magnify shocks.

We also set =O and thus allow for the discrete employment case, see Hansen
[1985], in which the representative agent has a more elastic labor supply curve. As
expected, relative to Table 6a, the model with monopolistic competition is closer to U.S.
data since this change in parameterization increases the relative standard deviation of
employment. The correlation of employment with output remains too high arid consumption
remains too volatile.

Since we have introduced a new channel of interactions into the basic real business

cycle model, we should also introduce some new observations. In this regard, we note that
for U.S. quarterly data, the correlation between linearly detrended GNP and detrended net

business formation is .54. The corresponding correlation produced in the model with =-l

This correlation is also too high for all other parameterizations of labor supply presented in King,Plosser
and Rebelo, including the extremes of the inelastic labor supply from labor studies and the infinite elasticity
from the discrete employment model.

30

is .94 which is a bit high. Once =O, this correlation increases to .96. Thus the model
predicts too much action in net business formation. Further, as the model does not include
any idiosyncratic disturbances it is unable to account for any of the widespread heterogeneity
observed in the job creation and destniction process described in Davis-Haltiwanger [1990].
One problem in our model is the predicted negative correlation between employment

per firm and output when there are correlated technology shocks. For =-l, the predicted
correlation between the number of workers per firm and output is -.50. Empirically,
adjustments occur in both the intensive and extensive margins in the same basic direction.26

This correlation is positive when shocks are temporary but then the model does not generate

enough persistence in output. As discussed earlier, at the time of a technology shock, both
the number of firms and the number of workers per firm increases along with output.

However, the burst in investment activity that occurs at the time of the shock leads to an
increase in the capital stock per firm and, through (19), a reduction in workers per firm
along the transition path. It is this latter effect which produces the negative correlation
between the number of workers per firm and output in our model.

IV. Conclusions
We first note that the models of monopolistic competition are not obviously

inconsistent with observations of U.S. data. In particular, the relative standard deviations are
qualitatively consistent and both models exhibit the requisite serial correlation in important
Using two-digit data on job creation and job destruction supplied by John Haltiwanger, we find that there
is a positive correlation between net job creation on the intensive margin (expansions and contractions of
existing tiims) and net job creation on the extensive margin (births less deaths of tirms) over the 1973-88
period.

31

aggregate variables.

As predicted by our theory model, we do see that the entry and exit process can

create added serial correlation in the data. These effects are particularly pronounced when
technology shocks are not very serially correlated since then intertemporal substitution is

more active. Further, these effects are more important when labor is more elastically
supplied.

One point that bears considerable attention is the nature of the entry/exit process

modeled in this paper. In our model, the entry decision was entirely static and did not
involve any lags. One extension of the model would be to add a lag in the entry process.2'
In this way, the immediate response of the economy to variations in technology would be

variations in the size of firms but not in their numbers. Over time, the adjustments in the
number of firms would arise. In this case, we might be better able to match observations on
the interactions between adjustments on the intensive and extensive margins.2 Further, one
could consider another specification in which there is a fixed cost of entry separate from the

fixed costs of production associated with overhead labor and capital. This would add the
number of firms as another aggregate state variable to the model and might create additional
endogenous persistence as well as a reduced immediate response to shocks.
A further extension of interest would be to introduce more reasonable "demand

shocks" into our model. Our results indicate that the model is capable of transforming taste

27

One possibility is to follow Hopenhayn-Rogerson [1991] and assume that potential entrants in period
do not know the realized values of period t shocks.

On this point, we need to further understand the dynamics associated with variations in production and
non-production workers in U.S. data.

32

shocks into endogenous movements in effective total factor productivity through product

space variations, thus magnifying and propagating these shocks. One avenue for further
research would be to couple this mechanism for magnification and propagation with other,
more interesting, sources of impulses.

33

References

Baxter, M. and R. King, "Productive Externalities and Business Cycles," Institute for
Eipirical Macroeconomics, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Discussion Paper
#53, November 1991.

Beaudry, P. and A. Guay, "What Do Interest Rates Reveal about the Functioning of Real
Business Cycle Models?" mimeo, Universite de Montreal, December 1992.
Benassy, J.P., "Taste for Variety and Optimum Production Patterns in Monopolistic
Competition," CEPREMAP, July 1993.

Benhabib, J. and R. Farmer, "Indeterminacy and Increasing Returns," UCLA Working Paper
#646, January 1992.

Blanchard, 0. and S. Fischer, Lectures on Macroeconomics, Cambridge: MIT Press, 1989.
Bryant, J. "A Simple Rational Expectations Keynes-Type Model," quarterly Journal of
Economics, 97 (1983), 525-29.
Chatterjee, S. and R. Cooper, "Multiplicity of Equilibria and Fluctuations in Dynamic
Imperfectly Competitive Economies," American Economic Review; Papers and
Proceedings, (1988b).
Chatterjee, S., R. Cooper and B. Ravikumar, "Strategic Complementarity in Business
Formation: Aggregate Fluctuations and Sunspot Equilibria," Review of
Economic Studies, 60 (1993), 795-812.
Christiano, L. and M. Eichenbaum, "Current Real Business Cycle Theories and Aggregate
Labor Market Fluctuations," American Economic Review, 82 (1992), 430-50.

Ciccone, A. and R. Hall, "Productivity and the Density of Economic Activity," NBER
Working Paper #4313, April 1993.
Cooper, R. and J. Haltiwanger, "Automobiles and the National Industrial Recovery Act:
Evidence on Industry Complementarities," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108
(1993), 1043-71.

Davis, S. and J. Haltiwanger, "Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction and Employment
Reallocation," Ouarterly Journal of Economics, 107 (1992), 819-64.
_____________________________ "Gross Job Creation and Destruction: Microeconomic
Evidence and Macroeconomic Implications," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1990,
123-186.

34

__________________________ ,"Wage Dispersion Between and Within U.S. Manufacturing
Plants, 1963-1986," Brookings Papers: Microeconomics, 1991, 115-200.

Devereux, M., A. Head and B. Lapham, "Exit and Entry, Increasing Returns to
Specialization and Business Cycles," mimeo, University of British Columbia, October
1992.

Dixit, A. and I. Stiglitz, "Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product Diversity,"
American Economic Review, 67 (1977), 297-308.

Domowitz,I., G. Hubbard and B. Peterson, "Market Structure and Cyclical Fluctuations in
U.S. Manufacturing," Review of Economics and Statistics, 70 (1988), 55-66.

Farmer, R. and J.T. Guo, "Real Business Cycles and the Animal Spirits Hypothesis,"
mimeo, UCLA, October 1992.
Galeotti, M and F. Schiantarelii, "Variable Markups in a Model with Adjustment Costs:
Econometric Evidence for U.S. Industry," mimeo, Boston University, July 1991.
Gali, J. "Monopolistic Competition, Business Cycles, and the Composition of Aggregate
Demand," mimeo, Columbia University, August 1992, forthcoming Journal of
Economic Theory.
________ "Product Diversity, Endogenous Markups and Development Traps," mimeo,

Columbia University, June 1993.

Hall, R. "The Relation Between Price and Marginal Cost in U.S. Industry," Journal of
Political Economy, 96 (1988), 921-47.
Hall, R. "Invariance Properties of Solow's Productivity Residual," NBER Working Paper
#3034, 1989.
Hammour, M., "Overhead Costs and Economic Fluctuations," mirneo, Columbia University,
May 1991.

Hansen, G. "Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle," Journal of Monetary Economics, 16
(1985), 309-27.

Hopenhayn, H. and R. Rogerson, "Job Turnover and Policy Evaluation in a Model of
Industry Equilibrium," mimeo, Stanford University, 1991.
Hornstein, A., "Monopolistic Competition, Increasing Returns to Scale and the Importance of
Productivity Shocks," mimeo, University of Western Ontario, 1992.

35

Jovanovic, B. "The Diversification of Production," Brookings Papers: Microeconomics,
(1993), 197-247.

King, R., C. Plosser and S. Rebelo, "Production, Growth and Business Cycles: I. The Basic
Neoclassical Model," Journal of Monetary Economics, 21(1988), 195-232.
Kiyotaki, N. "Multiple Expectational Equilibria under Monopolistic Competition," Ouarterly
Journal of Economics, 103 (1988), 695-714.

Kienow, P., "Externalities and Economic Fluctuations," mimeo, Stanford University, 1990.

Murphy, K., Shleifer, A. and R. Vishny, "Building Blocks of Market Clearing Business
Cycle Models," in NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1989, ed. by 0. Blanchard and S.
Fisher.

Rotemberg, J. and G. Saloner, 'A Supergame-Theoretic Model of Price Wars during
Booms," American Economic Review, 76 (1986), 390-407.
Rotemberg, J. and M. Woodford, "Markups and the Business Cycle," paper presented at the
NBER Sixth Annual Conference on Macroeconomics, March 1991.
"Cyclical Markups: Theory and Evidence," NBER
Working Paper # 3534, December 1990.
"Oligopolistic Pricing and the Effects of Aggregate
Demand on Economic Activity," Journal of Political Economy, 100 (1992), 11531207.

Shea, J., "Complementarities and Comovements" mimeo, University of Wisconsin, 1993.

Stokey, N. "Learning by Doing and the Introduction of New Goods," Journal of Political
Economy, 96 (1988), 701-717.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Historical Statistics of the United States, Washington:
USGPO, 1975

36
Table 1

Baseline Parameter Values

TREATMENT

9

p

overhead

labor ratio
BASELINE

1

1

0

Mono. Comp
no entry

2

2

1

Mono. Comp.
with entry

2

2

1

Table 2
Experiments with Zero Serial Correlation in Technology Shock
(4'=O)

Statistics for Y

Standard Deviation

Corr. with Y

TREATMENT

Contemporaneous
Prod

C[

mv

Prod

1.1

5.75

.42

1.45

.017

.45

.63

5.94

.97

1.55

.05

.97

1.4

9.02

.43

1.73

.11

C

Hrs

mv [

Perf. Comp.

.36

.98

.99

.88

.26

Mono. Comp.
No Entry

.44

.96

.98

.98

Mono. Comp.
With Entry

-.48

.98

.95

.72

- Actual standard deviations x 102

I

37
Table 3

Experiments with Elastic Labor Supply: (=°. ('=0)
Corr. with Y

TREATMENT

mv

Hrs

C

Statistics for Y

Standard Deviation

C

Prod

Hrs

mv

Prod

enal

sd

con.
Perf. Comp.

.36

.99

.99

.36

.31

1.81

7.5

.31

1.9

.018

Mono. Cocip.
No Entry

.43

.96

.98

.97

.49

.82

6.9

1.0

1.8

.042

Mono. Comp.

-.54

.97

.94

-.23

2.0

3.1

16.1

.7

2.9

.13

Entry

Actual standard deviations x l0
Table 4
Experiments with Alternative Markups

Monopolistic Competition with Entry; (-1,4'=0)

Con, with Y

TREATMENT

Statistics
for Y

Standard Deviatiou

Contemporaneous

u= 2 , 8=2.

C

Hrs

mv

Prod

C

Hrs

mv

Prod

-.48

.98

.95

.72

.97

1.4

9.02

.43

1.73

.11

-.04

.96

.77

.71

2.55

1.8

12.5

.74

2.3

.391

-.40

.98

.98

.28

.5

1.3

7.3

.41

1.6

.05

.39

.99

.99

.96

.3

1.0

5.8

.46

1.5

.01

a.64, nover=l,
kover= 1

3 , 0=3,
a= .64, nover=2,
kover= 2

u= 1.5,8=1.5,

a .64

nover=.5, kover=.5

u= 2, 8=1, a=.69
nover= .5,
kover= .85

Actual standard deviations x 10

38

Table 5

Preference Shocks:B,1 = O.9B + e. E(eJ

0, Var(eJ = O.0072,

=0

Corr. with Y

Standard Deviation Relative

Statistics for

Contemporaneous

to Y

Y

sd j

C

Emp

mv

Prod

C

Einp

mv j

Prod

Perf. Comp.

.99

.99

-0.94

-0.96

0.99

1.70

1.39

0.72

.0071

.900

Mono Comp
No Entry

.99

.99

-0.96

.78

1.57

.21

0.83

.19

.0075

.88

Mono Comp

.95

.95

.79

-0.37

.99

1.21

1.49

.42

.013

.944

with Entry

Sc

39

Table 6a
Serially Correlated Technology Shocks and U.S. Data

TREATMENT

Cou. with Y

Standard Deviation

Statistics for

Contemporaneous

Relative to Y

Y

Emp

mv

Prod

C Emp

mv

serial

Perf. Comp.

.80

.81

.91

.90

.62

.50

2.82

.67

.032

.92

Mono.Comp.

.91

.57

.85

.99

.83

.18

2.05

.91

.031

.93

Mono. Comp.
With Entry

.85

.96

.80

.98

.84

.38

2.35

.64

.035

.95

U.S. Data

.85

.07

.6

.76

.69

.52

1.35

1.14

.056

.96

No Entry

(Quarterly)

Table 6b
Serially Correlated Technology Shocks and U.S. Data: Elastic Labor Supply

u=0
Corr. with Y

TREATMENT

C

Emp

!.rw

Statistics for
Y

Standard Deviation
Relative to Y

Contemporaneous
Prod

C

Emp

mv

Prod

sd

serial

con.

Perf. Comp.

.78

.83

.92

.78

.58

.65

2.94

.58

.037

.906

Mono.Comp.
No Entry

.91

.60

.86

.98

.82

.21

2.11

.89

.033

.927

Mono. Comp.
With Entry

.84

.95

.78

.97

.86

.48

2.39

.56

.042

.953

U.S. Data

.85

.07

.6

.76

.69

.52

1.35

1.14

.056

.96

(Quarterly)

