                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            IMMIGRATION, INVESTMENT,
                                AND REAL WAGES




                                      Elise S. Brezis
                                      Paul Krugman




                                 Working Paper No. 4563




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 December, 1993



This paper is part of NBER's research program in International Trade and InvestmenL Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4563
                                                                                 December 1993


                              IMMIGRATION, INVESTMENT,
                                  AND REAL WAGES


                                         ABSTRACT


       When a country is the recipient of large-scale, politically motivated immigration -- as has
been the case for Israel in recent years -- the initial impact is to reduce real wages. Over the
longer term, however, the endogenous response of investment, together with increasing returns,
may well actually increase real earnings. If immigration itself is not wholly exogenous, but
responds to real wages, there may be multiple equilibria. That is, optimism or pessimism about
the success of the economy at absorbing immigrants may constitute a self-fulfilling prophecy.




Elise S. Brezis                                             Paul Krugman
Department of Economics                                     Department of Economics
B ar-Ilan University                                        Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Ramat-Gan                                                   Cambridge, MA 02139
ISRAEL                                                      and NBER
     Since World War II, a number of countries have experienced
surges of politically motivated immigration. Examples include West
Germany during the early postwar years, which was the destination
of millions of refugees from the East; Portugal, faced during the
xnid—1970s with the return of several hundred thousand citizens from

its newly independent African colonies; and Israel, which absorbed

a massive wave of immigrants in the years following independence
and has recently received a new surge of immigration from the
former Soviet Union.
     Such waves of immigration often present considerable short-run
economic difficulties, leading to some mix of upward pressure on
unemployment and downward pressure on real wages. Nonetheless, over

the longer run it is arguable that immigration not only brings
considerable benefits, it may well tend to raise real wages. The

problem is one of getting through the transition.
     The purpose of this paper is to offer a simple model that is

suggestive of the mix of difficulties and opportunity presented by
large—scale immigration. It shows why immigration may well have a
negative effect on real wages in the short run but a positive
effect in the long run. It also suggests the possibility that the
outcome of waves of immigration is not predetermined: the question
of whether the immigrants are successfully absorbed may depend
crucially on both policy and expectations.



1. A simple theoretical model


      The essence of our story is the distinction between a short
                                     2

run   in   which the capital stock is predetermined, and in which there

are as a result diminishing returns to labor; and a long run in
which the capital stock adjusts, and in which increasing returns at

the level of the economy give rise to what is in effect an upward-

sloping demand curve for labor.
      To tell this story as clearly as possible, we offer a
stripped—down model that makes no pretense of realism. It is
intended only to offer a minimalist and partial account.
       Consider, then, an open economy in which there are two factors

of production, capital and labor. We assume that these factors can
be combined to produce a generic "input" that can in turn be used
in the production of both final and intermediate goods; for
simplicity we let the production function for this general input be

Cobb-Douglas:

                                X=   AKL'                         (1)

      We are going to suppose that there are increasing returns to

the employment of this input. Rather than simply assume external
economies at the level of the economy, however, we derive these
increasing returns from a production structure in which "input" is
used to produce nontraded intermediate goods, each of which is
subject to internal economies of scale; the effect of market size

on the monopolistically competitive intermediate goods sector gives
rise to de facto external economies at the level of the economy as
                                        3


a whole.1
    We assume, then, that final output of a single traded good is

produced using a part of the general input and a nontraded
composite intermediate good:

                                    —
                               Vi   —




where Q1 is a composite of many symmetric differentiated products,

                            Or =                               (3)
                                    {E. z]"°


     Each of these differentiated products is produced from the
general input, subject to economies of scale:

                             x.=cz                              (4)




     The total supply of input will be divided between that portion

used directly in the final good sector and that part used to
assemble nontraded intermediates:

                       X = X,, +            =
                                                Xl, + X1        (5)




     We assume that the final output can be sold on world markets at

a fixed price. We also assume that this country is able to borrow

or lend freely on world capital markets at a real interest rate in


     1This general story, and much of the formal structure of this
model, are originally due to Ethier (1982).
                                   4

terms of traded goods of r. We will, however, assume that there is

costly adjustment of the physical capital stock, giving rise to an
investment function that depends on the price of capital in place

("Tobin's q") . We write this investment function as


                                  = 1(q)                       (6)
                              -

where we assume I'>O and define 1(1) = 0, that is, assume that the
capital stock is constant when q=l.


2. Determination of output and factor prices


     Before we turn to the effects of immigration, we must first
show how output and factor prices are determined for given supplies

of capital and labor.
     We begin asking how the value-added of the economy will be
divided between the direct input into the final good XF and the
intermediate composite Q. Given the assumed Cobb-Douglas form,
this is straightforward: a share y of the value—added will be
accounted for by direct inputs, l-y by the composite.
    But now we note that under a monopolistically competitive
market structure (which we will describe in a moment), profits are

zero. Thus all value—added accrues to the input X, implying in turn

that X is allocated between the two activities in the same
proportions as value-added:
                                   5

                                                             (7)


                          =            = (l—y)X              (8)



    Next we turn to the market structure within the intermediate
goods sector. This is simply the one made familiar by Dixit and
Stiglitz (1977), in which there are many small firms, each
producing a differentiated product. The price of each firm is a

markup on marginal cost. If entry takes place until profits are
eliminated, there is a unique zero—profit size of firm:

                                                              (9)

    The input per good is therefore also fixed:

                                   =                         (10)

     It follows that the number of differentiated products is
simply proportional to the input to the sector:

                              =
                                  x1(i-O)/a                  (11)




      From (3), (9), and (11) we find that there are increasing
returns in the production of the intermediate good, with output of

the composite Q1 taking the form

                                  =                          (12)



The increasing returns arise because larger input allows the
                                        6

production     of a greater variety of products.
     Increasing returns in the production of the intermediate good

translate into increasing returns at the level of the economy as a

whole. Suppressing the constant terms, we find first that


                                                                 (13)
                                Q. -—   XXr


which   in turn implies that

                                          (1'                    (14)
                                =
                                    [KL''J' 8 /

        It   may be worth pointing out two things about the increasing
returns at the level of the economy shown in (14). First, although
these increasing returns apply at the level of the economy and thus

look like a pure external economy, in fact they arise from the
interaction of economies of scale at the level of the firm with
market—size effects. Second, such market-size effects may arise
even if the economy appears very open by normal measures -— an
important consideration when we are considering the effects of
immigration in small countries like Israel, where exports are 45
percent of GOP. The reason is that in this particular model the
market size that matters is that for nontraded intermediate goods,

not that for final goods. Indeed, in this economy it would be
possible to have all final goods exported, which would show up as

exports equal to 100 percent of GOP, and still have significant
market—size effects giving rise to increasing returns to the
                                         7


economy as a whole.
     Returning to the model, it is now straightforward to determine

factor prices. Given competitive markets for capital and labor, a

share     of value-added will show up as the income of capital, a
share l— as labor income. Thus the rental rate on capital is

                                  R =                             (15)



or

                                                                  (16)
                           R =               (i_)(..!)




and, similarly,

                                 w =   (l-p.)Q/L                   (17)




 implying

                                                                   (18)
                           w =   K1    ')L (i_&)(Y.-1)-1




        provided   that (l-y)/6 is not too big, that is, that increasing

 returns at the level of the economy are not too powerful, the
 demand curve for either factor will be downward sloping if the
 supply of the other factor is held constant; that is,

                                              aw/aL I<o            (19)
                           aR/aK IL < o




        Before leaving the subject of factor prices, we should note
                                               8

that what is determined by (16) is the rental rate on capital;
because the price of capital in place, q, may vary, this is not the
same thing as the rate of return. In fact, given our assumption of

perfect capital mobility, the expected rate of return must always
equal the international rate r. The capital—pricing equation is

                                       rq=R+'                     (20)




which can be interpreted as a dynamic equation for q,

                                           =   r   -
                                                       Rig        (21)




       We are now prepared to analyze the economic impacts of
immigration.


3. The dynamics of exogenous immigration


       We first consider the effects of an exogenous increase in L.

This may be thought of as representing a situation in which
potential immigrants are relatively unresponsive to economic
incentives, and will come regardless of the real wages they expect
to receive.

       In the short run, with K predetermined, an increase in L will

drive down real wages. Over time, however, the capital stock will
rise. Since the capital stock will grow as long as q>1, in the long
run we must have q=l. This in turn implies that in the long run

R=r.
                                       9

   Two   points   may now be noted. First, because of increasing
returns, the percentage rise in the capital stock following an
increase in the labor force will be more than proportional: because

of the increase in final output per unit of input, the capital-
labor ratio must actually rise in order to prevent a rise in R. By

substituting R=r into (16), we find that

                                    (1— )
                        —=—                           >   —                   (22)
                        K       L                             L
                                              0



     Second, in the long run the wage rate will rise, both because
of the, direct effect of increasing returns and because of the
induced rise in the capital-labor ratio. We can show that once the

capital stock has fully adjusted,

                            =         (l-y)   (1—0)       >                   (23)
                                L 0-.t(1—y(1—O))



     To reach this long-run favorable outcome, however, the economy

must go through a possibly difficult transition. Figure 1
illustrates the dynamics of the economy with an exogenous labor

force. The schedule dK/dt = 0 is a horizontal line at q =
                                                          1. The

schedule dq/dt =    0   is the locus of points along which R=r. The

basic picture is the familiar one of saddle-path instability, with

a unique path to the long-run equilibrium.
      suppose that the economy experiences                        a sudden one-time

 increase in the labor force L. We know that this will initially
                                   10

reduce the real wage rate. Let dq/dt=O in Figure 1 refer to the
situation following the labor force increase, so that the initial
position is at point 1 and the final position at point 3. Then it
is clear that the impact effect of the rise in the labor force is

to push the economy to point 2: the price of capital in place
jumps, and there is a resulting rise in the investment rate. As the

capital stock rises, real wages will rise as well, eventually
surpassing their original level.
     We see, then, that an exogenous increase in the labor force
leads first to a drop in real wages, but then to a surge in
investment which gradually raises wages again. In our model, the
eventual impact on real wages is actually positive: because the
enlargement of the domestic economy allows production of a wider
range of nontraded inputs, the real wage in the end rises by more

than the initial drop. Increasing returns could, of course, take a
variety of other forms as well (for example, in nontraded consumer

goods; or for that matter growth in the domestic market might allow

efficient substitution of domestic production for imports).
Whatever the nature of the increasing returns, however, they make

it likely that exogenous immigration which poses short—run
difficulties will be beneficial to all workers in the long run.
                                11

4. EndogenoUS immigration


      In reality, immigration is rarely completely exogenous to
economic factors. Migrants may choose to stay home, or to seek
alternative destinations, and these choices will depend on the

economic opportunities they perceive. But the long—run economic
opportunities depend on the increase in the labor supply and in the

stock of capital.
      This endogeneity in the amount of migration raises some

important possibilities      the economy may exhibit multiple
equilibria, with a possible role for government policies to
stimulate investment or even the possibility of sheer self—

fulfilling expectations.
      To analyze these possibilities, we introduce a very simple and

extreme endogeneity of migration. We assume that there is an
initial labor force L0, with an initial wage w0. There is a pool of
potential immigrants of size M. All of these migrants are willing

to come if and only if they receive a wage rate greater than w >

wo.
                                               assumption that one
       It is immediately apparent from this
 possibility is zero immigration: as long as L=L, the wage rate is

 too low to attract the immigrants and there is no incentive to
 invest. There may, however, also be a steady state in which all of

 the immigrants come. As we saw in the previous section, if L rises

 the long-run real wage will also rise, Suppose that with a labor
                                                            that Rr
 force L0 + M and with the capital stock large enough so
                                     12

the real wage exceeds WM. Then it is clear that if all of the
migrants can be persuaded to come and equipped with their long-run

capital stock, they will be paid enough to persuade them to stay.
     But will the economy get there from here? To answer that, we
need to look at the dynamics.
    Figure 2 illustrates the relationship between R and K when
there is endogenous immigration. The shape of the curve may be
understood as follows. First, point 0 represents the initial
equilibrium of the economy. For K in the vicinity of this initial
level, the wage rate is too low to attract immigrants, and thus the
labor force is fixed at L0. Given a fixed labor force, R is a
decreasing function of K.

     For some sufficiently large K, however, the wage rate equals
wM. At this point, shown as K1 any rise in K will be accompanied by

a rise in L rather than a rise in w. If we assume that the labor
force rises so as to keep W=WM, we find that



                      —L = —K _________________ —K              (24)
                                 l_(l_i)(?+-jX)

     The    combination of a rising ratio of labor to capital and
increasing returns will imply a rising rental rate on capital:

                     dR       dK   (l-y) (1—0)     >0
                          =                                     (25)
                     R        K -('-i) (l-y (1-0))


     This   upward-sloping segment of the curve does not, however, go
                                        13

on indefinitely. At some level of capital, shown as K3, the pool of

potential immigrants is exhausted. Any further increase in capital
will drive w up and R down, so that the schedule is now downward-

sloping again, reaching R=r at K4.
     There are several potential dynamic pictures associated with
a schedule of this shape, each with                           a   clear economic
interpretation. We show them in Figures 3, 4, and 5.
     To understand these figures, we first consider the dynamics of

the system in the vicinity of the three equilibrium points 0, 1 and

2. Points 0 and 2 are evidently saddle-path-unstable. In the
vicinity of point 1, the linearized dynamic system takes the form

                               k   =   I'(q—l)                              (26)

                        =
                            R'K1(K—K,)
                                                 —
                                                     r(q—l)                 (27)


     The roots of this system are


                        A1 =
                               r + [—4R'I'K                                 (28)
                                             2




                        A2 =
                                       - [i-4R'I'K1                         (29)
                                             2




     If R'I'K1 is not too large --           that       is, if increasing returns

are weak and/or investment is not too responsive to incentives --

then both roots are positive and real. In that case, we get Figure
                                14

3. There is a unique value of q for each K; if K exceeds K1, the

economy will end up attracting and holding all of the potential
migrants, but if K starts smaller than K1 the potential iminigratns

will fail to come.
    If increasing returns are large and/or the adjustment of the
capital stock fast, the roots for the system in the vicinity of K1

are complex. This gives us either Figure 4 or, in an extreme case,

Figure 5. In Figure 4 there is a range of initial capital stocks
from which self-fulfilling expectations can lead the economy to
either steady state. In Figure 5 this range expands to fill the
whole space. (For a discussion of similar dynamics, see Matsuyarna

(1991)).
     What is the economic interpretation of these cases? Consider

the two extreme cases as represented by Figures 3 and 5.
    In the case shown in Figure 3, the market left to itself will

shut out the possibility of large immigration. Potential migrants
will not have any incentive to come given the low wage; investors

will not put in more capital given the absence of any increase in
the labor force. The only possible way to attract migrants would be

through deliberate government policy. In particular, if some policy
such as an investment subsidy could raise K to the level K2 or
higher, the economy would continue to grow until all potential

immigrants had come.

     In the case shown in Figure 5, by contrast, optimism about the

economy's prospects can be self-fulfilling: if investors believe
that other investors will also put capital into the country in
                                15

sufficient quantities, they will put in enough to draw in the
potential migrants. The gains from having a larger economy then
justify this investment.
     The intermediate case in Figure 4 is one in which the critical

level of capital necessary to achieve the high-level equilibrium is
itself a little fuzzy; there is a range of capital stocks from
which the economy could manage to attract and hold the potential
immigrants, but only above the top end of that range is this
outcome necessary.


5. Conclusions


     When political disruptions lead to large-scale immigration,
the inflow of labor inevitably seems at first like a major economic

burden. The economic difficulties experienced by initial waves of
migrants may even serve as a deterrent to subsequent waves, as has

apparently been the case for former Soviet residents considering a

move to Israel. Yet if there are significant increasing returns in
the economy, as there may well be even in nations with high shares

of trade in GDP, the long run impact of immigration will often be
to raise rather than lower real wages.
    In this paper we have offered a simple formalization of the
contrast between a difficult short run and a benign long.run for
countries experiencing large-scale immigration. We have also shown

that when immigration is itself affected by the state of the host

economy, success in the transition to that long run is not assured.
                                16

Investor confidence, and possibly an active government program to
promote investment, may be crucial if a potential destination for

large immigration is to fulfil that potential.



REFERENCES


Dixit, A. and Stiglitz, J. (1977), "Monopolistic competition and
optimum product diversity", American Economic REview 67: 297—308.


Ethier, W. (1982), "National and international returns to scale in

the modern theory of international trade", American Economic Review

72:389—405.



Matsuyaina, K. (1991), "Increasing returns, industrialization, and
indeterminacy of equilibrium", Quarterly Journal of Economics
106:617—50.
</ref_section>
ci




                3    d K/d t= 0
          1




                    d q/d t= 0
                            K




     FIGURE 1
R




            K        K       K        K
             0           1
                             3   K4




    F IG U R E   2
Q




                    d K /d           0

    0




                   da/dt         0
                             K




        flGURE 3
q




         0
    \d q / d t = 0




                           dK/dt= 0



                           2   K



                FIGURE 4
q




                 dK/dt= 0




                   q /d t= 0

                    K




    FIG U RE 5
