NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ROLE OF MACROECONOMIC
FACFORS IN GROWTH

Stanley Fischer

Working Paper No. 4565

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December, 1993

I am grateful to Michael Bruno, Jose de Gregorio, Robe King, Ken Rogoff and Sweder van
Wijnbergen for helpful suggestions and comments, to participants in a Hebrew University
seminar, especially Michael Beenstock and Giora Hanoch, for suggesLions, and to Ruth Judson
for excellent research assistance. This paper is part of NBER's research programs in Economic
fluctuations and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4565
December 1993

THE ROLE OF MACROECONOMIC
FACTORS IN GROWTH

ABSTRACT

Using a regression analog of growth accounting, I present cross-sectional and panel
regressions showing that growth is negatively associated with inflation, large budget deficits, and

distorted foreign exchange markets. Supplementary evidence suggests that the causation runs
from macroeconomic policy to growth. The framework makes it possible to identify the channels
of these effects: inflation reduces growth by reducing investment and productivity growth; budget

deficits also reduce both capital accumulation and productivity growth. Examination of
exceptional cases shows that while low inflation and small deficits are not necessary for high
growth even over long periods, high inflation is not consistent with sustained growth.

Stanley Fischer
Department of Economics, E52-373
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER

THE ROLE OF MACROECONOMIC FACTORS IN GROWTH
Stanley Fischer'

It is now widely accepted that a stable macroeconomic framework is necessary though not sufficient for

sustainable economic growth! In this paper I present international cross-sectional regression evidence that
supports the view that growth is negatively associated with inflation, and positively associated with good fiscal
performance and undistorted foreign exchange markets- I also present evidence suggesting that the causation
runs in part from good macroeconomic policy to growth.
The view that a stable macroeconomic framework is conducive to growthis also supported by much

striking non-regression evidence, In Latin America, the recovery of economic growth in Chile and Mexico vas
preceded by the restoration of budget discipline and the reduction of inflation.1 By contrast, the ongoing growth
crisis in Brazil coincides with high inflation punctuated by stabilization attempts and continued macroecononiic

instability. The fast growing countries of East Asia have generally maintained single or tow double-digit
inflation, have for the most part avoided balance of payments crises, and when they have had them --as for
instance in Korea in 1980 -- moved swiftly to deal with them. The lessons of the case study evidence amassed
in the major World Bank research project headed by Little, Cooper, Corden and Rajapatirana (1992),
summarized in Corden (1991), support the conventional view. The notion that macroeconomic stabiliiy is iIoi
sufficient for growth is supported by evidence from Africa, where most of the countries of the franc zone have

grown slowly since 1980 despite low inflation.

This paper considerably extends and strengthens results presented in Fischer (1991). En that paper. I

1Departmcnt of Economics, MIT. and Research Associate, NBER. This paper is part of the World Bank's Growth
Project. I am grateful to Michael Bnino, Jose de Gregorio. Robert King, Ken Rogoff and Swedcr van Wijnbcrgco for helpful
susseslon. and comments, to participants in a Hebrew University seminar, espcciatly Michael Beenslo-ek and Giora Hanoch, for
sugseslioos, and to Ruth Judson for excellent research assistance.
2See World Bank (1989, 1990, 1992).

3however in both cases ii look several years to reduce intlation 10 the moderate, t5-30 percent. range.

used the conventional approach of adding macroeconomic variables to the basic growth regression. In this

paper, in Sections III through V, I develop an alternative approach due to Victor Elias (1992). a regression
analog of growth accounting. I present both pure cross-sectional regressions as well as panel regressions, which

exploit the time series as welt as cr033-sectional variation in the data. I also explore non-lincarities in the

relationship between inflation and growth. In Section VI I discuss the issue of the causality bctwcen inflation
and economic growth. Then in Section VII I identify and discuss some apparent exceptions, countries where
high growth took place despite high inflation andlor large deficits, and conclude that the statement that
macroeconomic stability is necessary for sustainable growth is too strong, but that the statement that
macroeconomic stability is conducive to sustained growth remains accurate.

The paper opens with a discussion in Section I of the notion of a stable macroeconomic framework, and of ihe

theoretical considerations linking growth to macroeconomic policies. In Section II I briefly review recent
evidence on the link between macroeconomic conditions and growth, most of it based on the standard mixed
regression which includes among its regressors the rate of investment.

1.

DEFINITIONS AND THEORETICAL CONSIDERATIONS
In practice the concept of a stable macroeconomic framework is used to mean a macroeconomic policy

environment that is conducive to growth. The macroeconomic framework can be described as stable when

inflation is low and predictable, real interest rates are appropriate, fiscal policy is stable and sustainable, the real
exchange rate is competitive and predictable, and the balance of payments situation is perceived as viable.3 This

definition goes beyond the stability of macroeconomic policy variables to include also the criterion that policyrelated variables are at levels conducive to growth.

Of the live criteria specified in the preceding definition, only low and stable inflation is readily
quantifiable.' None of the specified variables is directly controllable by policy, and each should optimally vary

4Non-linearities in the inflation-growth relationship have also been explored by Levine and Zervos (1992).

5Tbis definition is based on World Bank (t990a), p4.
6With regard to quantification of the other four variables; Measures of the fiscal deficit provide sonic information about
fiscal policy; however it is difficult to characterize fiscal policy by a single variable (Mackenzie, 1989), and international fiscal
dais at, poor. Estimates of sustainable deficits could in principle be calculated along the lines oiHamilton and Flavin (1986),

but that level of deisil would require a much more exlensive study than can be carried out in the current project. The

in response to shocks. Given the practical difficulty of defining and measuring the stability of the

macroeconomic framework, or the optimat or appropriate inflation rate, teal interest rate, teat cxchange rate, and
so

forth, I instead proceed by specifying indicators of macroeconomic policy.
The basic indicators of macroeconomic policy are the inflation rate, the budget surplus or deficit, and

the black market exchange premium. I shall use the inflation rate as the best single indicator of the
conduciveness of macroeconomic policies to growth,' and the budget surplus as the second basic indicator.
In essence, the inflation rate serves as an indicator of the overall ability of the government to manage

the economy. Since there are no good arguments for very high rates of inflation, a government that is

producing high inflation is a government that has lost control. All governments announce that they aim for low
inflation, and the macroeconomic situation in any medium or high inflation economy can therefore be expected

to change. While there arc economies in which inflation remains at moderate levels for prolonged periods
(Dornbusch and Fischer, 1993), economic agents in a high or medium inflation economy have to expect an

attack -- typically many attacks -- on inflation at some point.
Countries may for a long time succeed in maintaining low and stable inflation through policies that are
not ultimately sustainable. Such countries, for instance those in the franc zone, may face fiscal or balance of
payments crises that could necessitate sharp changes in macroeconomic policy and that certainty increase

macroeconomic uncertainty. The fiscal deficit is a good, though imperfect, indicator of such an unsustainable

situation. In addition, as discussed below, the deficit is likely to affect growth through its effects on capital
accumulation.

I use the black market premium on foreign exchange as an indicator of the sustainability and
appropriateness of the exchange rate. The black market premium is a good indicator of a distorted or controlled
market for foreign exchange, but is less good as an indicator of the unsustainability of the exchange rate, since
an exchange rate may be overvalued nnd unsustainable even when there is no block market prcniium,

Most developing countries experienced major terms of trade shocks during the period over which the

competitiveness of the real exchange rate could in principle be estimated by its implications for current and future levcls of thc
current account, white the appropriateness of the real interest rate is difficult to specify.

'The potential links between inflation and growth arc discussed and developed in Fischer (1983) and by implication
in Fischer and Modigliani (197*). and are taken up below.

regressions in this paper are estimated. The terms of trade are included as a separate exogenous determinant of
macroeconomic performance.'

The usual emphasis on the stability of the macroeconomic framework (rather than its conduciveness to
growth) suggests that the main reason macroeconomic factors matter for growth is through uncertainty. There

are two main channels through which uncertainty could affect growth. First, policy-induced macroeconomic
uncertainty reduces the efficiency of the price mechanism, as in the classic Lucas (1973) contribution. This
uncertainty, associated with high inflation or instability of the budget or current account, can be expected to
reduce the

of productivity, and, in contexts where the reallocation of factors is part of the growth process,

also the rSs[increase of productivity. Second, temporary uncertainty about the macroeconomy tends to
reduce the rate of investment, as potential investors wait for the resolution of the uncertainty before committing
themselves (Pindyck and Solimano, 1993). This channel suggests that investment would be lower at times when
uncertainty is high, and its presence should therefore be more noticeable in the time series than cross-sectional

data.' Capital flight, which is likely to increase with domestic instability provides another mechanism through
which macroeconomic uncertainty reduces investment in the domestic economy.

The variability of inflation might serve as a more direct indicator of the uncertainty of the
macroeconomic environment. However, the inflation rate and the variance of the inflation rate arc highly
correlated in the cross-section, making it difficult to disentangle the et'fects on growth of the level of inflation

from the effects of uncertainty about inflation. By adding a time series measure of inflation variability to the
panel regressions, I attempt in this paper to to bring further evidence to bear on the level-uncertainty distinction

but with limited success.'°
The 1950s and 1960s growth theory Itterature on inflation and growth emphasized the positive impact

of inflation on capital accumulation that occurs as a result of the portfolio shift away from money when the rate

8Dat. sources are described in the appendix.
9Sotimano (1989) pie.cnts lime series evidence supporting this relationship.

lcAcnm,, and Marion (1991) attempt to quantify policy uncertainty by estimating sutorcgressivc processes for policy
variables and using the standard deviations olpoticy surprises as a measure of uncertainty. This isa promising approach, vliich
however does not distinguish contemporaneous variability caused by rcsponses to exogenous shocks from purely random
variability.

of return on money falls, the Mundell-Tobin effect. Subsequcnt contributions noting various coruplementarities
between real balances and capital -- whether through the production function or because of a cash-in-advance

constraint -- predicted that higher inflation would reduce capital accumulation." Similarly all the costs of

inflation detailed in Fischer and Modigliani (1978) -- including the impact of inflation on the taxation of capital
-- would imply a negative association between the level of income and inflation, and through the new growth

theory mechanisms, between inflation and growth. It is also possible that the relationship between inflation and
growth is non-linear.

Turning to the other macroeconomic indicators: The budget surplus should be positively associated with

capita] accumulation. There are again two reasons, The first is crowding out. The second is that, like thc
inflation rate, the deficit serves as an indicator of a government that is losing control of its actions.
An increase in the black market exchange premium is an indicator of expectations of depreciation of the
exchange rate and foreign exchange rationing. This suggests that capital accumulation and the black marLet

premium are likely to be negatively related. One influence in the opposite direction arises from the fact that
when foreign exchange access is controlled, there is frequently preferential treatment for the import of
investment goods.

Of course, each of these indicators has its shortcomings as a policy measure. In the short run, neither
the inflation rate nor the budget deficit is unaffected by the growth rate. For instance, a supply shock will both
reduce the growth rate and raise the inflation rate; and given government spending, a reduction in growth will

increase the deficit. Two main types of regressions are reported in this paper. In the cross-sectional regressions,
the period average (usually 196 1-88) growth rate or other dependent variable for each country is regressed on

period average values of such right hand side variables as inflation and the budget deficit. lit the panel
regressions, similar regressions are run using both the time series variation within each country and the cross-

sectional variation. The problem of reverse causation is more likely to arise in the panel regressions. In
principle, the use of instrumental variables can deal with the endogeneity problem, but in practice appropriate
instruments are difficult to find. The endogeneity problem is less severc in the cross-sectional regressions,

11For references to the literature through 1983. see Fischer (1983).

where the length of period is more than 25 years. Over such tong periods, the average rates of inflation and the
deficit are more likely to be determined by the government's basic policy stance than by the short-run

association between shocks and the endogenous policy indicators. In addition, I use prior knowledge, the timins
of the 1973 oil shock, to break the period down into one in which demand shocks predominated (pre-1973), and
one in which there were many supply shocks, and show that the results based on the pre-1973 data also support
the basic contention of this paper.

II. EXISTING EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE

Beyond the evidence of the examples presented in the introduction, the simple statistical evidence
supports the basic proposition that macroeconomic stability is conducive to growth. Inflation in fast-growing

Asia is well below the rates of price increase in slower-growing Africa and Latin America (Table I), and across

the three periods shown in Table I, inflation in each area has moved inversely with growth)' Levine and
Renelt (1992) show that high growth countries are also lower inflation countries, have smalter governments, and
lower black market exchange rate premia--the tatter reflecting disequitibria in the official foreign exchange
markets.

The large volume of empirical work inspired by the new growth theory consists largely of cross-country

regressions, typically using the Summers-Heston (1988) ICP data.° Levine and Renelt (1992), list forty cross-

sectional growth studies published between 1980 and 1990.' Their paper starts from a basic regression in
which per capita real income growth (GYP, from the World Bank data base) is regressed on Summers-I-lesion

12The World Bank SAVEM tables from which Table us derived present more regional detail than dots Table I. For
both South Asia and East Asia, growth and inflation change in the same direction between 1965-73 and 1973-80. For the Middle

East and North Aflica, growth and inflation exhibit the sante general correlation as is seen in Table I. that is, they move in
opposite directions from period to period. (I should also note that. table similar to Table I is presented in Fischer (1991). The
inflation rate forAsia in that table (for which the first period is 1960-73) is shown as increasing from period to period, with an
average of only 2 percent for 1960-13. Both tables are taken from the same source, and lam unable to account for the different
patterns of Asian intlation, though they may arise from changes in country coverage and data revisions or possibly a transcription
crier.)

t3For examples, see Barro (1991) and the many studies lisled in Levine and Renelt (1992).

14Their list is necessarily incomplete; in particular, it does not include the comparative cross-country analysis hy
Adelman and Moms (1988), which is based on work dating back to the 1960s. Several other earlier cross-country studies are
listed by Chenery,(Chapter2 in Chenery, Robinson and Syrquin (1986), (p.27)). Reynolds (1986, plOl) also prcscrtts a crosssectional growth regression, despite his general preference for time-series studies.

initial real income (RGDP6O), population growth (ON), the 1960 rate of secondary school enrollment (SEC) and

the share of investment in GOP (INV), The regression is estimated on a sample of 101 countries, over the
period 1960-89:

(l)GYP = -0.83 - 0.35 RGDP6O -0.38 ON + 3.17 SEC + 17.5 NV
(-0.98) (-2.50)

(-1.73)

= 0.46;

(2.46)

(6.53)

t-statistics in parentheses

Growth is robustly (in the Learner sense) related to initial income and to investment, but not to the ocher

variables.

When Levine and Renelt extend the analysis to include a variety of other variables, they find, first, that
several measures of economic policy are related to long-run growth; and second, that the relationship between
growth and almost every particular macroeconomic indicator other than the investment ratio is fragile. The

strongest results are that investment in physical capital, and either the level or the rate of change of human
capital, increase the rate of growth.
In Fischer (1991), 1 extended the basic Levine-Renelt growth equation to include macroeconomic

indicators. Per capita growth is negatively associated with inflation and positively associated with the budget
surplus as a share of GNP. While the coefficients on iuflation and the budget surplus are statistically
significant, the negative coefficient on external debt is not, in a sample that includes all countries for which data
were available."
As discussed in Section 1, these macroeconomic indicators cannot be regarded as truly exogenous.

Instruments are difficult to find; for instance, such candidates as measures of political instability not only cause

but also are caused by inflation.'6 Given the difficulties of choosing instruments, I do not pursue instrumental
variables regressions in the remainder of this paper, but address the issue of endogeneity in Section VI.
The negative relationship between inflation and economic growth has been found also in other papers,

lt can be argued that the developing countocs arc sufficiently and systematically different from the iiidustrialii.cd
countries that the Caner should be excluded from the regressions. While it is easy to agree with tins view at the extremes, it is
hard to know where to draw the line, and I therefore worked rosily with all countries for which ihcre were data. For sonic
regressions (not reported here), I excluded all countries that in 1970 had an
income level above Italy's; if anything, this gave stronger results with respcct to nsacroec000snic variables, particularly the debt.
16Results obtained using different sets of instruments are prescnicd in Fischer (1991).

for instance in Fischer (1983), de Gregorio (1993), and Gylfason (1991). To deal with the endogeneity of
inflation, Cukierman etal (1992) use measures of central bank independence as an instrument for inflation.
They conclude that, even after instrumenting with the better indicators of central bank independence, there
remains a significant negative relationship between inflation and economic growth. De Long and Summers
(1992) likewise implicitly use the degree of central bank independence as an instument for inflation and argue
that lower inflation is associated with higher growth.
Levine and Zervos (1992), returning to the questions examined by Levine and Rencit, show that an

inflation variable has a significant coefficient when added to the basic growth equation, but that therelationship
is not robust, and can be traced to several high inflation countries. They also examine possible non]inearilies in
the relationship between inflation and growth. Their final innovation is to create an index of macroeconomic
policy, a function of the rate of inflation and the budget deficit, and to show that growth is positively associated
with better (low inflation, larger budget surplus) macroeconomic policy indicators. Easterly and Rebelo (1992)
find a consistent negative relationship between growth and budget deficits.

The simple correlations suggested by Table I, and the more detailed empirical work that buildson
equation (I), thus support the view that a stable macroeconomic framework is conducive to growth.

III. INTERPRETING TUE EVIDENCE
The basic growth regression (I) includes the investment rate as a regressor. The effects of

macroeconomic policy variables are usually studied by adding them as right hand side variables to the basic
regression. The resultant regression therefore presents severe difficulties of interpretation when used to examine

the role of policy variables or other indicators in the growth process. Presumably the interpretation of such
equations is that, conditional on the rate of investment, other variables affect growth. But it is hard to conceive
of variables that would not affect growth through their effect on investment as well as through other routes,

mostly the rate of productivity increase -- and this is especially true

of macroeconomic variables.

Recognizing this, Barro (1991) also presents investment equations, as does Fischer (1991).

Nonetheless, since some of the same variables explain both growth and investment, the policy variableaugmented growth regression has no straighforward interpretation. Rather these seem to be mongrel regressions,

born out of a legitimate study of convergence and the desire to study the effects of policy on growth."
In this section I use a simple alternative to the mixed regression, a production function-based approach

pioneered by Victor Elias (1992). The approach is a regression analog of growth accounting, which helps

identify the channels through which macroeconomic variables affect economic growth. As a matter of
accounting, growth can be attributed to increases In supplies of factors, and to a residual productivity category,
reflecting changes in the efficiency with which factors are used. The approach is to examine the relationships
between growth and macroeconomic variables, and then between the macroeconomic variables and changes in

both the supplies of factors, and the residual, or productivity.
Consider the production function

(2)Y, = FOCI, L4, H A.,)
where K, L and H are physical capital, raw labor, and human capital respectively, and A, is an overall efficiency
factor, including not only the level of technology, but also for example representing the quality of goverment
management of the economy, or institutional factors. Differentiating (2), we obtain the conventional growth
accounting equation:

t7Somc of the more recent papers, for instance Cukierman ctsl (1992). and Levine md Zervos (1992). do lot include
investment in the equation that also includes inflation, but do include other conditioning variablcs such as initial real iiicoiiie.

(3) Y/Y
where

01

(K/K) + U (L/L) + Q3 (H/fl) + n, (A/A)

0 is the elasticity with respect to argument i in ccjuation

(2). The product u4(AJA) will be referred to as the productivity residual.

Macroeconomic factors can in principle affect economic growth through all four factors on the right

hand side of the growth accounting equation (3). The standard procedure of adding macroeconomic variables to
a growth regression that already includes some of the rtghL-hand side variables thus implicitly assumes that that

policy variable does not affect the other included variables, and affects growth only through its impact on the
right-hand side variables in (3) not explicitly included in the regression, typically the productivity residual.

Productivity Residuals.
Three alternate estimates of productivity residuals were made. Rhalla residuals start from an estimated

panel regression equation like (3), with the three factor inputs included explicitly. The data are those provided

by Surjit Rhalla through the Bank's 1991 World Development Rctort (WDR) database. The l3halla panel
regression implies productivity residuals for each country for each year; the mean productivity residual for each

country, plus the dummy for its region, is an estimate of the average rate of productivity increase for that
country, on the
productivity

assumption that the production function for each country is

the same up to the

variable)

Two
(4)

(maintained)

other sets of

residuals were

calculated for each

RES .ZGDP -0.4 ZKAP, -0.6 ZLABIL, i = I

country. Solow residuals are calculated as

68

1961 to 1988
Mankiw-Roriier-Weil residuals are calculated as

(5) REMRWF = ZGDP,,

-

= I
Calculation of the Solow

capital

0.333 ZKAPÜ - 0.333 ZLA8,, - 0.333
68; t

= 1961

ZED

to 1988.

residuals imposes a common Cobb-Douglas production function in which the share of

is somewhat higher than in the industrialized countries, as it generally is estimated to be in developing

countries. Mankiw-Romer-Weil residuals are calculated

imposing coeflicients used in their 1992 papei-.

The productivity residuals constructed by these three methods are very highly correlated in the time

series for each country (with pairwise R3s all exceeding 0.98), and we therefore use the Sokw residuals in the
remainder of the paper.

Table 2 presents the minima and maxima of the mean rates of Solow productivity growth calculated for

1tThe Bhalla production function estimated on the full panel by OLS is

(Fl) 101)? — 0.398 1KM' + 0.4-40 ZLAB + 0.012 ZED + RD
(14.25)
(3.53)
(0.38)
N — 1912; t-statistic. in parentheses.
lOOP is the growth rate of real ODP (in 1980 prices); ZKAP is the growth rate of capital; ZLAB is the growth rate of the Labor
force; and lED is the growth rate of the educational stock in the labor force (calculated as the product of the average years of
education of the adult population and the labor force). Regional dummies (RD are included for the five World Bank regions
as of 1991 and the OECD. Coefficients are: EMENA (Europe, Middle East and North Africa), 0.011; LACAR (Latin America
and Caribbean) 0.002; AFRIC, —0.004; EASIA 0.006; SASIA 0.001; and OECD 0.007. These coefficients are small in absolute
value and only those on EMENA and OECD ate significantly different from zero.

each of the five 1991 World Bank regions and the OECD. These estimates raise obvious questions about the
underlying Summers and Heston data, or perhaps the input data. When similar calculations were made using

World Bank income data, the productivity residuals looked more plausible. For instance Pakistan had the
highest rate of productivity growth in South Asia, and Congo had the highest in Africa. However since the
Swnmers-l-Jeston income data are widely used, I chose to work with those, leaving the investigation of the

apparent anomalies in Table 2 for later research. The difference between the maximum (Brazil) and minimum
(Haiti) rates of productivity increase is very large, 6.7 percent per annum. Even the range across regions
percent

2 19

is large.

IV. RESULTS IN THE GROWTH ACCOUNTING FRAMEWORK

Cross-sectional regressions for the largest possible number of countries on single macroeconomic

tadicator variables are presented in Table 3)9 These are regressions in which there are no regional dummies,
and only a constant in addition to the variable indicated. However, the coefficients change very little when
regional dununies are added. The inflation rate, budget surplus, black market exchange premium, and the
standard deviation of inflation, are each individually significantly correlated with the growth rate.2°
Regression (11) is included for completeness, though there is only a small number of countries for

which the full set of data is available.'1 The coefficients on the budget surplus and the black marketexchange
premium are strongly significant.2'

This first cross-sectional look at correlations between growth and macroeconomic variables is broadly

ttDifferences in data coverage raise the issue of whether all regressions should be rim on the maximal possible conunoll
set of countries, or on as many countries as possible for the particular regression. Since the intersection of the data sets covers
only 32 countries, I have chosen the latter approach. I have also excluded any data sene, that includes less than ID observations.
201n Fischer (1992), in a similar table, only the inflation rate and the budget surplus were significantly correlated with
the growth rats. The change is a result of the increase iii sample sizes since that paper was written. I have also substituted the
moving average measure of inflation for the standard deviation of the inflation rate over the entire period (SINFLAT) in equation
(10). for comparability with the panel regressions. The coefficient on SINFLAT in the analog of equation (t0)is -0.026, with

a t-statistic of '234.

2tThey are: Ghana, Cow dIvoire, Kenya, Malawi, Morocco, Zambia, Dominican Republic )amaica, Mexico, Argentina
Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Paraguay, Venezuela, India, Indonesia, Korea Pakistan, Thailand, Greece, Turkey.

22As noted above, the high correlation between the inflation rate and its standard deviation preclude the inclusion of
both variable, in the regressions.

consistent with prior expectations. However, in using only period averages, the cross-sectional regressions
discard the information in the time series for individual countries. The results of similar panel regressions arc

presented in Table 4.
The simple panel regressions in Table 4 (equations (12) to (16)) confirm the relationships between

inflation and inflation variability." and growth, and also between the budget surplus and growth, seen in Table
3. In the time series, the black market exchange premium correlation with growth is lower than in thc cross
section, while the correlation between changes in the terms of trade and growth is increased; improvements in

the terms of trade are associated with higher growth. The numerical value of the coefficient on inflation in
equation (12) is a bit higher than that in equation (6), while the coefficient on the standard deviation of inflation
falls between the cross-section and the time series. The coefficient on the budget surplus in equation (13) is
almost double that in equation (7), possibly a result of reverse causation between growth and the budget within
the time series for individual countries.

Regresston (17) includes all the regressors except inflation uncertainty. All the coefficients are
sigrnftcantly different from zero. They imply that a country that has an inflation rate 100 percentage points
higher than another (e.g. 110 percent per annum rather than 10 percent per annum) will have a growth rate that
is 3.9 percent lower; and that a country with a budget surplus that is higher by 1 percent of GD?, will have a
growth rate that is 0.23 percent larger. Countries with higher black market exchange premia grow more slowly.
The units21 imply that the black market premium in the country where it was largest, Mozambiquc, would be

associated with a reduction in the growth rate of 2.5 percent. Adverse changes in the terms of trade reduce
growth, though the coefficient is small relative to the range of the change in the terms of trade. Similur
regressions that include regional dummies give almost identical coefficients on the macroeconomic variables.

The regressions reported in Table 4 reinforce the evidence in favor of the view that macroeconomic
stability, as measured by the (inverse of the) inflation rate, and indicators of macroeconomtc policy like the
budget surplus and the black market exchange premium, are associated with higher growth and are on average

23Values of SMAPI in this sample range from 1.8 (Soulh Africa) to 44.5 (Bolivia). The regression implies that the
high inflation variability in Bolivia would reduce its growth 2.7 percentage points relative to South Africa.
24Tbc black market exchange premium enters the equation in the form ln(i+EXCFIPREM).

good for growth. We turn now to the mechanisms through which the macroeconomic variables affect growth.
Capital Accumulation
Pursuing the approach described in Section III, we start with equations in which the rate of capital

accumulation is regressed on the same macroeconomic variables as in Tables 3 and 4. The results presented iii

Table 5 are all for panel regressions estimated by fIlLS. (Results for the corresponding cross-section regressions

will be discussed below.) In the simple regressions (18) through (22) all the coefficients are significantly
different from zero, and all have the expected sign.
In regression (23). the coefficients on the inflation rate and the black market exchange premium are

significantly different from zero while surprisingly the budget surplus and the terms of trade coefficients lose

their significance. The coefficient on inflation implies chat an increase in the inflation rate by 00 percentage
points (e.g. from 10 to 110 percent per annum) reduces the growth rate of the capital stock by 3.7 percentage

points. This is a large effect: if the investment rate is about 20 percent of GDP, and the capital output ratio is
2.5, then the growth rate of capital is 8 percent. According to the regression, capital in such a country would
stop growing when the inflation rate reaches about 210 percent per annum. The point estimate of the coefficient

on the budget surplus implies that an increase in the budget deficit of I percent of QDP would reduce the
growth rate of capital by 0.08 percentage points. Again assuming a capital output ratio of 2.5, the investment
share in GNP would decline by 0.2 percentage points. This estimate implies a relatively low level of crowding

out on averaga The effect implied in the one variable regression (19) is above 0.5 percentage points. The
coefficient on the black market premium again suggests that it has quite large effects on investment and capital
accumulation.

In single-variable cross-sectional regressions corresponding to those in Table 5, the coefficients on all

variables except the terms of trade are significantly different from zero, and all are of the same sign as in Table

5. However, the coefficient.s are generally larger than in Table 5 In the overall cross-sectional regression,
corresponding to equation (23). the coefficient on the inflation rate is insignificant, while that on the deficit
becomes larger (0.50) and strongly significant
These results suggest that one important route through which inflation affects growth is by reducing capital

accumulation;" similarly, an increase in the black market exchange premium, which reflects foreign exchange
controls and expectations of devaluation, reduces capital accumulation. An increase in the budget surplus is

associated with more capital accumulation, but the effect is not significant even at the 10 percent level. The
numerical values of the coefficients are plausible, even though these cannot be thought of as structural
regressions.

productivity Growth

The impacts of the macroeconomic variables on productivity growth estimated by the Solow residual

are presented in Table 6. The inflation rate is significantly negatively correlated with the rate of productivity
growth, with a coefficient which implies that an increase in the inflation rate by 100 percent is associated with a
decline in the rate of productivity growth of 1.8 percent per annum. Increases in the budget surplus, and
improvements in the tenns of trade, are associated with improvements in productivity growth. The effect of
inflation is robust to the inclusion of other variables. The black market exchange rate premium is significantly
negatively correlated with the rate of productivity growth, but the coefficient on the black market premium loses
its significance in the multiple regression.

Theories in which inflation distorts price signals suggest that uncertainty about inflation should have an

impact on productivity. The negative coefficient on the standard deviation of inflation (SMAPI) in equation
(29) is consistent with this view, but the coefficient is not statistically significant.
In the cross-sectional regressions equivalent to (24) to (28). none of the coefficients in any of the single
variable regressions were significantly different from zero. This implies that the significant correlations in Table

6 are mainly a result of the time series variation between the regressors and productivity growth. In the overall
regression equivalent to (29). the coefficients on inflation and the budget surplus were similar to those in (29),
but again not statistically significant.

Gregorio (1993) also finds strong effects of inflation on investment.

Labor EnOrowth
For the sake of completeness, Table 7 presents estimates of the panel equations for labor force growth.
It would be surprising

if the macroeconomic variables had

a major impact on the growth of the labor force. In

fact, the regressions in Table 7 show no coefficients to be significantly different from zero in the overall
regression (35), and only the correlations with the exchange premium and inflation variablity to be significant in

the one-independent-variable regressions.
Summary

The strongest result that comes out of the rcgressions reported in Tables 5 through 8 is the consistent

negative correlation between inflation and growth. Inflation is negatively associated with both capital
accumulation, and productivity growth. There is a strong positive correlation between the budget surplus and
growth, with the evidence suggesting some influence of the surplus on capital accumulation, and a stronger

effect on the rate of growth of productivity. Adverse changes in the terms of trade reduce growth, mainly
through their effect on productivity growth. The black market exchange premium is negatively related to
growth, mainly through lower capital accumulation. The macroeconomic variables are not significantly
associated with labor force grosvth.

V. INFLATION NON-LINEARITIES AND OTHER VARIATIONS

'While it is easy to believe that triple digit inflation has adverse effects on economic grovth through the
mechanisms discussed in Section I, and reflected in the regressions for capital accumulation and productivity

growth, it is possible that there is a range of low inflation rates in which variations in inflation have very little
effect on growth. Thus, in testing for non-Linear effects of inflation, I expect to find more significant effects of
inflation at high than at tow inflation rates.
To allow for posstble non-linearities in the effects of inflation, the basic regressions for growth, capital
accumulation and productivity were estimated using a spline function, with breaks at 15 and 40
Table 8, the inflation variables enter as:

INFLL is the value of the inflation rate if it is 15 percent or less

Greene (1993), pp. 235-23a for spline regressions.

In

INFLM is the value of the inflation rate if it is between 15 percent and 40 percent
INFLH is the value of the inflation rate if it is above 40 percent
Table S shows the variants of panel regressions (17), (23), and (29), with the inflation rate broken into

three categories. The results show that the effects of inflation are non-linear, but that, per percentage point of
inflation, the association between inflation and growth and its determinants on average weakens as inflation

rises." It is thus not the case, as I had expected, that it is the high inflation outliers that are responsible for the
overall negative correlations between inflation and gro.Th, capital accumulation, and productivity growth, seen

in Tables 5 through 7. Rather the association between inflation and growth, and inflation and capital
accumulation, is stronger at the low and moderate inflation levels than at high inflation. When inflation is
decomposed as in Table 8, none of the inflation components in equation (38), the equaLion for productivity
growth, is significant, even though inflation enters significantly in the corresponding linear equation (23).

Note also that when the inflation rate is decomposed in this way, the coefficient on the budget surplus
in the capital accumulation equation becomes statislically signtficantly different from zero. An increase in the
budget deficit is statistically significantly associated in lable g with lower growth through both tower capital
accumulation and lower productivity growth.

The results in Table 8 suggest that the basic nonlinearity in the relationship between inflation and

growth could be captured by a function in which Iog(1+i-) appears. When regressions like (17). (23) and (29)
are run with Iog(l-+—jr) replacing the inflation rate, the t-statistic on the inflation variable rises in each case, and

the remaining coefficients are little affected.
Inflation Uncertaintv:Grier and Tullock (1989) report a significant negative association between inflation

variability and growth, and a relationship between inflation and growth that varies across regions. Tables 3-6
show the simple relationship between the moving standard deviation of inflation (SMAPI) and the dependent

variables. In all eases, the direction of the relationship Is the same as that between inflation and the dependent
variable.

Both the inflation rate and SMAPI have been included in several regressions, to try to separate out the

27Levinc and Zervos (1992) obtain similar results.

effects of high from uncertain inflation. No consistent pattern of results emerged. In the panel regressions, both
with and without the other variables in the regression, the coefficient on the inflation rate was almost always
negative, and that on the standard deviation measures was sometimes negative and more often positive,
sometimes significantly so.

lltStandard Variablys: In Table 9 1 report the results of adding the standard cross-country variables to
regressions (17). (23) and (29). These all enter as period averages or initial values, Initial real C'NP per capita
enters the growth and capital accumulation equations significantly and negatively; a measure of tariff protection
openness, defined as the product of the volume of trade relative to GNP and the tariff rate, affects productivity
growth negatively; and the human capital measure is estimated to increase capital accumulation. The measure
of financial intermediation does not enter any of the equations significantly.

The most important result in Table 9 is that the addition of these variables leaves the basic relationships
between the dependent and macro-policy variables unchanged.
VI. CAUSALITY

While inflation is negatively associated with growth and with its production function dcthrmiuants, it is

not clear -- especially in the panel regressions -- which way the causation runs, If supply shocks predominate,
then possibly adverse supply shocks cause both inflation and slower growth, and the regressionsmay mcre]y be
reflecting that association.

The inclusion of changes in the terms of trade as a regressor goes a long way towards dealing with this
problem. For most of the developing countries, changes in the terms of trade are a major source of supply
shocks, and these have been taken into account in the multi-variable regressions in Sections IV and V. The use
of measures of central bank independence as instruments for inflation in the cross-sectional regressions, as in
Cukierinan

(1992) provides another method of dealing with the endogeneity of inflation, Their results

suggest that the causation runs significantly, but not exclusively, from inflation to growth.
Sub-tieriod Rearessions:In addition, I have split the period up into two parts, from 1960 to 1972, and from 1973

to l988, Demand shocks probably predominated in the first period, and supply shocks in the second, It'

28MicbscI Bnino suggested this approach.

supply shocks are primarily responsible for the negative association between inflation and growth, we should

expect the negative association to be stronger in the second period than in the first, where we might even expect
to rind a positive association.

Table 10 shows the resu]ts of this breakdown presenting only the coefficient on intlation from the
multiple regressions corresponding to
(17).

(23) and (29). In the simple regressions, (42) to (47), the coefficient on inflation is always negative, and

absolutely larger in the first period than in the second. The t-statistics are always lower for the first period.

Similarly, in the multiple regressions, the absolute value of the coefficients is larger in the first period than in
the second, but there are much fewer degrees of freedom and the t-statistics are smaller.

The breakdown into sub-periods thus strengthens the view that the relationship between inflation and

growth is not merely a result of supply shocks.

VII. SOME RESERVATIONS
The results so far support the conclusions that high inflation, large budget deficits, and exchange market

distortions, are associated with lower growth. Most of the results suggest also that these relationships are to
some extent causal. The positive association between the budget surplus and growth appears particularly robust,

and that between the black market exchange premium and growth is also strong. Thus, the evidence from the
regressions and from ease studies is consistent with the view that the causation is not fully from low growth to
high inflation, and therefore that countries that are able to reduce the inflation rate in a sustainable way can on

average expect higher growth to follow. There is nothing in the results to contradict the view that inflation is
merely a symptom of a government out of control -- but there is nothing in that argument that contradicts the

view that controlling inflation will help restore growth.
While the regressions provide suggestive evidence, it is also useful to look at the exceptions. Table 11

shows that some countries have experienced rapid growth at high inflation rates. During the period t961-88, at
least fourteen countries in the World Bank database experienced an annual inflation rate greater than 50 percent

In at least one year. Growth in some of these countries exceeded 5 percent during a year or more of the 50

percent or more inflation. Table 11 lists those cases, as vell as information about growth and inflation during

the entire period of high inflation of which the high growth period is a part.

Similarly, treating the budget deficit as a macroeconomic indicator, the IS countries in Tab]e 12 have
experienced deficits in excess of 10 percent of GDP during the periods shown." Some of them, including Brazil
and Israel, are also listed in Table 10. Others listed in Table 12, include rapid growers such as Morocco during
the period 1976-79?°

The data presented in Tables II and 12 raise the question of the circumstances under which countries
can continue to grow fast when such standard indicators of the macroeconomic situation as the deficit and

inflation are exceptionally high. Every country that appears in Table II ran into severe trouble at somc later

stage. Thus Table II seems to show only that rapid growth is possible for a time even with high inflation. In
some cases, such as Peru, the period of rapid growth is associated with a rapidly accelerating inflntion and
situation that is heading rapidly for disaster.

By drawing the line in Table II at 50 percent inflation, I omit those countries that have succeeded in
growing over sustained periods with inflation that persisted in the moderate range of 15-30 percent. typically
with the assistance of extensive indexation.3' Such situations are sustainable, provided the government takes

action to prevent inflation rising above the 30 percent range. The explosive situations appear to be those in
which governments believe the inflation rate is of no major consequence, and permit it to continue rising even
after it leaves the moderate range.

The data in Table 12 provide a much less clear lesson. For most of the countries in the table, growth
rates were low during the periods of high deficits, buL Morocco grew fast during the high deficit period, as did

Italy in the 1980s. It is clearly possible to sustain large deficits for some time, with the assistance of high
saving rates and financial repression. Notice though that inflation rates are low for almost all the non-Latin

Amertcan high deficit countries. The lesson seems to be that a high deficit by itself is not a certain indicator of
later trouble. It may be sustainable for a while, and it may be consistent with low inflation. It would take
supplementary studies of the budgetary situation and debt dynamics to determine whether a large deticit is

For countries for which the Easterly fiscal data are available, the data listed in Table 12 are from that source; for
other countries for which IMF deficit data are •vailable (indicated by an ), that is the source.
30lndusuialized countries such as Italy are not included in the database front which Table 12 is drawn.

31See Dombusch and Fischer (1993),

sustainable -- and therefore consistent with macroeconomic stability -- or unsustainable, and therefore a

harbinger of macroeconomic instability.

V!IJ. CONCLUDING COMMENTS

The broad range of evidence reviewed and presented in this paper supports the conventional viev that a
stable macroeconomic environment, meaning a reasonably low rate of inflation and a small budget deficit, is

conducive to sustained economic growth. The growth accounting framework makes it possible to identify the
main channels through which inflation reduces growth. As a great deal of prior theory predicts, the results
presented here imply that inflation reduces growth by reducing investment, and by reducing the rate of

productivity growth. Larger budget surpluses are also strongly associated with more rapid grovth, through
greater capital accumulation and greater productivity growth. An undistorted foreign exchange market is also

conducive to growth.
The cross-sectional regression methodology that is associated with the new growth theory has been

extended in this paper to include panel regressions, whose results typically reinforce those of the simple cross-

sections. The endogeneity issue is difficult to deal with formally, but the weight of the evidence implies that
the relationship between inflation and growth is not purely a result of low growth producing high inflation. The
evidence that small deficits are good for growth is strong, as is the support for the view that distorted foreign
exchange markets, as reflected in a large foreign exchange market premium, are bad for growth.

The examples presented in Tables II and 12 show that low inflation and small deficits are not

necessary for high growth, over even quite long periods. They do imply that very high inflation is not
consistent with sustained growth. The results also suggest that the sustainability of the budget deficit has to be
investigated in more detail than is possible in the aggregative approach that has been taken in this paper.
To make further progress in defining a stable and sustainable macroeconomic framework, and in

clarifying the channels through which macroeconomic variables affect growth, it will be necessary to undertake
more detailed case studies of individual countries, based on structural models. A good start on this approach

has already been made in some of the contributions in Little eta], and in many studies of individual countries.
The conlusions of those studies agree with the conclusions in this paper.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Aizennian, Joshua, and Nancy Marion (1991). 'Macrocconomic Uncertainty) Persistence and Growth', rnimco,
Dartmouth College December.

Barro, Robert J- (1991). 'Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries', Ouarterly Journal of Economics,
106, 2 (May). 407-444.

Chenery, HolEs B., Sherman Robinson and Moshe Syrquin (1986). Industrialization Growth. Ne' York:
Oxford University Press.

Corden, Max (1990). "Macroeconomic Policy and Growth: Some Lessons of Experience', Proceedings fth
World Bank Anaual Conference Qfl.Developrnent Economics, 59-84.

Cukierman, Alex, Pantelis Kalaitzidakis, Lawrence F!. Summers and Steven B. Webb (1992). 'Central Bank

Indpendence, Growth, Investment, and Real Rates', presented at Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public

Policy, November.

Dc Oregorio, Jose (1993). 'Inflation taxation, and long-mn growtW, Journal Qf.Monetary Economics, 31,
(June), 271-298.

Dellas, Harris (1990). 'Stabilization Policy and Long Term Growth: Are They Related? A Darvinian
Perspective', mimeo, University of Maryland.

Dc Long, 1 Bradford and Lawrence Fl. Summers (1991). 'Equipment Investment and Economic Growth',
Ouarterlv Journal QfEcongmics. 106, 2 (May), 369-406.

3

(1992). "Macroeconomic Policy and Long-Run Growth", Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic

Review. 77, 4 (fourth quarter), 5-30.

Dombusch, Rudiger and Stanley Fischer (1993). 'Moderate Inflation', World flank Economic Observer, 7, I
(Jan), 1—44.

Easterly, William and Sergio Rebelo (1992). 'Fiscal Policy and Growth: An Empirical Investigation', miineo,
World Bank.

El]as, Victor J. (1992). Sources of Growth. San Francisco: ICS Press.

Fischer. Stanley (1983). 'Inflacion y Crecimiento,' (Inflation and Growth), Cuadernos de Economia, 20, (Dcc),
267-278. (Sidrauslci Memorial Lecture, in English as NBER Working Paper #1235.)

(1991). 'Macroeconomics, Development, and Growth", NBER Macroeconomics Anntial .329-364.

(1992). 'Growth: The Role of Macroeconomic Factors', minico, MJT

and Franco Modigliani (1978). 'Towards an Understanding of the Real Effects and Costs of Inflation',
Weltwjrtschaftliches Archiv, 810-832. (Reprinted in S. Fischer, Indexing. Inflation. 4.Economic Growth, MI'I'
Press, 1986).

Greene, William II. (1993). Econometric Analysis. New York: Macmillan.

Gner, Kevin B. and Gordon Tullock (2989). 'An Empirical Analysis of Cross-National Economic Growth, 195 I80', Journal of Monetary Economics, 24, 2 (Sept), 259-276.

Gylfason, Thorvaldur (1991). 'Inflation, Growth, and External Debt: A View of the Landscape',

d

Economy, 14, 3 (Sept). 279-298.

Hamilton, James D. and Marjorie A. Flavrn (1986). 'On the Limitations of Government Borrowing: A
Framework for Empirical Testing', American Economic Review, 76,4 (Sept). 808-8 19.

Kormendi, Roger C. and Philip 0. Meguire (1985). 'Macroeconomic Determinants of Growth:Cross-Country
Evidence', Journal of Monetary Economics. 16, 2 (Sept), 141-64.

Levine, Ross and David Renelt (1992). 'A Sensitivity Analysis of Cross-Country Growth Regressions",
American Economic Review, 82, 4 (Sept), 942-963.

and S. Zervos (1992). 'Looking at the Facts: What We Know about Policy and Growth from CrossCountry Analysis', mimeo, World Bank (October).

Little, Ian, Richard Cooper, Max Corden, and Sarath Rajapatirana (1992). Boom. Crisis and Adjustment: Th
Macroeconomic Experience of Develooinu Countries, mimeo.

Lucas, Robert B. (1973). 'Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation Tradeoffs', American Economic
Review, 63 (June), 326-334.

Mackenzie, GA. (1989). 'Are All Summary Indicators of the Stance of Fiscal Policy Misleading?', IMF Stall
Papers, 36, 4 (Dec), 743-770.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer, and David N. Weil (1992). 'A Contribution to the Empirics of Economic
Growth', Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, 2 (May), 407-438.

Morris, Cynthia T. and Irma Adetman (1988). Comparative Patterns of Economic Development 1850-1914
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.

Pindyck, Robcrt and Andres Solimano (1993). Title to be provided, NBLR fcrpecononiics Annual,
forthcoming.

Romer, Paul M. (1989). "Human Capital and Growth: Theory and Evidence", NUER Working Paper 3173.

Solimano, Andres (1989). "How Private Investment Reacts to Changing Macroeconomic Conditions: The Case

of Chile in the Eighties", World Bank Working Paper WPS 212.

World Bank (1989). "Adjustment Lending: An Evaluation of Ten Years or Experience", Policy and Research

Series Paper I.

World Bank (1990). "Adjustment Lending Policies for Sustainable Growth", Policy and Research Series Paper

l4.
(1991). World DeveloDmenc Report.

(1992). "The Third Report on Adjustment Lending: Private and Public Resource for Growth", March.

TABLES
Table 1: INFLATION AND ECONaCC GROWTH (% per annum)
Africa
65—73

Asia

73—80 80—90

Latin America

65—73 73—80 80—90

2.1

65—73 73—80

80—90

growth
GD? per cap.
growth

3.7
1.1

3.4

0.4

—1.0

5.8
3.2

5.8
3.7

6.9
4.9

6.0
3.3

5.0
2.5

—0.9

Inflation

5.2

15.8

18.9

14.8

8.9

6.9

22

53

249

GD?

Source: World Bank

Table 2: ZSTDaTED PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH, 1961—1980 (%
Region

Number of
Countries

mean

Country
EMENA

7

0.55

LACAR

21

AFRICA

per

Maximum

Regional

Rate

annum)

Minimum

Country

Rate

Malta

1.72

Iraq

—1.70

—0.24

Brazil

1.90

Haiti

—4.81

21

—1.51

Tanzania 1.64

Madagascar —4.64

SASIA

5

—0.72

Burma

1.47

Bangladesh —3.63

EASIA

8

0.22

Taiwan

1.69

Singapore -2.82

24

0.68

Greece

1.63

Newzealand —1.01

OECD

Source: Calculations of Solow residuals (equation (4)), based on
Sumrners—Heston income data, and World Bank input data (see appendix
for data descriptions). Maximum data period is 1961—88.

1.1

Table 3: CBOSS—SZCTIONP.L GROWTH RZGRXS$10N3

Equation

—

INFLAT

—0.037
(—2. 13)

(6)

(7)
(8)

SURRAT

ZTOT1

EXCH?REM

SMAPI

ft

80

0.133
(2.07)

40

0.113

80

(0. 83)

(9)

—0.022
(—2.95)

(10)
(11)

—0. 026

(—1.34)

of obs.

0.277
(3.36)

—0.040
(—0.20)

—0.041
(—3.32)

94
—0.093
(—2. 98)

80
22

t—statistics are in parentheses. Dependent variable is ZGDP, growth
rate of real GD?. Other variable definitions are: INFLAT —— inflation
rate; SURRAT —— ratio of budget surplus to GD?; ZTOT1 -— change in
terms of trade; EXCH?REM —— black market exchange premium; SMAPI =

mean

of the standard deviation of the inflation rate around its mean

for overlapping

seven year periods.

(Variable definitions are in the

appendix).

Table 4: PANZI. GROWTH BEGRESSIONS'

Equation
(12)

INFLAT SURRAT

ZTOT1

EXCHPREM

SMAPI

—0.046
(—7.43)

(13)

(14)

U cbs.
1998

0.226
(6.30)

714
0.057

1732

(5.93)

—0.026

(15)

(16)
(17)

2088

(—1. 48)
—0.039

0.228

0.043

—0.017

(—4.65)

(4,49)

(2.71)

(—2.76)

—0.064
(—4.54)

1685
351

t—statistics in parentheses. Variables are as defined in Table 3.
Regressions are run using using GLS (seemingly unrelated regressions)

Table 5: PMIZL PZGRZZSIONS, CAPITAL ACCUMULATION'
Equation
(18)

INFLAT

SURRAT

ZTOT1

EXCHPREM

SMAPI

if

—0.046

obs.
1626

(—11.05)

0.222

(19)

716

(7.11)
(20)

0.028

1300

(3.54)
(21)

—0.027

1653

(—12.01)
(22)
(23)

—0.094

1340

(-9. 46)

—0.037

0.075

0.008

—0.019

(—4.77)

(1.61)

(0.62)

(—3.56)

352

Dependent variable is ZKAP, the growth rate of the real capital stock.
Variable definitions are as in Table 3. Regressions are estimated by GLS.

Table 6: PMaL RZGRZSSIONS, PBDDUCTIVITt
-

Equation
(24)

INFLAT

StJRRAT

ZTOT1

EXCI-iPREM

SMAPI

—0.016

ft

obs.
1598

(—2. 88)

0.125

(25)

(4.57)
(26)

714

0.039
(3. 85)

(27)

1251
—0.014

1566

(—4.46)
(28)
(29)

—0.022

1327

(—1.89)

—0.018

0.137

0.038

—0.006

(—2.49)

(3.23)

(2.60)

(—1.17)

Dependent variable is RES, the Solow residual, calculated as in
equation (4). Other variable definitions are as in Table 3.
Regressions are estimated by GLS.

351
—

Table 7: PANEL
Equation

REGRESSIONS, LABOR FORCE GROWTH

INFLAT

SURRAT

ZTOT1

EXOMPREM

SMAPI

0.001

(30)

ob.
2021

(1.75)

(31)

—0.0015

716

(—0.14)

—0.0007

(32)

1666

(—0.64)
(33)

0.0009

2020

(2.60)
(34)

0.003

(35)

—0.002

—0.007

(—1.14)

(—0.53)

1669

(2.57)

0.0009
(0.29)

0.0003

352

(0.22)

Dependent variable is ZLAB, the growth rate of the labor force.
Regressions are estimated by GLS.

Table

8: NON-LINEAR EFFECTS OF fl4rL&TI0N

Equation
Dependent variable

(36)

(37)

(38)

ZGDP

ZKAP

RES

Variable:
INFLL
INFLM

—0.127

—0.008

(—1.99)

(—0. 15)

—0.079
(—1. 37)

—0.075

84)

—0.115
(—3. 23)

—0.029
(—0. 77)

—0.019
(—1.43)

(—1.46)

(—1.

INFLI-i

SURRAT

ZTOT1

EXCEPREM

—0.017

—0.009
(—0,76)

0.230

0.115

0.141

(4.66)

(2.50)

(3.24)

0.048

0.009

0.041

(2.97)

(0.70)

(2.80)

—0.014

—0.018

—0.004

(—2. 19)

(—3.28)

(—0. 69)

N = 351
See variable definitions in the appendix. Regressions are estimated by GLS.

Table 9: ADDITION OF STANDARD VARIABLES

Equation
Dependent variable

(39)

(40)

ZGDP

ZKAP

(41)

RES

Variable:

INFLAT
SURRAT
ZTOT1

—0.031

—0.032

—0.017

(—2.72)

(—4.21)

(—1.59)

0.241

0.038

0.146

(3.00)

(0.61)

(2.04)

0.066

0.002

(3.39)

(0.13)

(3.41)

EXCMPREM

—0.015
(—1.94)

—0.014
(—2.72)

—0.007
(—1.08)

ln(GNPO)

—0.021
(—2.18)

—0.035
(—2.55)

—0.007
(—0.82)

OPENTAR

—0.003
(—1.27)

—0.0002
(—0.06)

—0.003
(—2.13)

0.005
(1.44)

0.013
(2.72)

—0.020
(—0.36)

—0.039
(—0.50)

BHKAVG

LLY

N

206

0.063

0.0001
0.03)
—0.016
(—0.35)

GNPO is Sununers—Heston 1960 per capita GNP; OPENTAR is a measure of

tariff protection, equal to ((X+M)/2GDP)ln(1+tar) where X and H are
exports and imports, and tar is the WDR measure of tariffs and other
surcharges on imports; BHKAVG is the Barro—Lee measure of human
capital; and LLY (from Levine and Zervos, 1992) is the average ratio
of liquid liabilities to GDP for the period 1960—89.

Table 10: INFLATIoN-GROWTH CORPELATIONS, SUB-PERIODS

Dependent variable

ZGDP

Period
Equation
Simple

ZKAP

61—72

73—88

(42)

(43)

61—72

73—88

61—72

(45)

(44)

73—88

(46)

(47)

regression:

INFLAT

—0.072

—0.033

—0.052

(—3. 74) —(4. 67) —(3. 46)

of obs.

773

Equation

(46)

—0.026
(—6. 30)

—0.032

—0.013

(—1. 47)

(—2.16)

1225

631

995

640

958

(49)

(50)

(51)

(52)

(53)

Multiple regression:
INFLAT

—0.200

—0. 031

—0.029

—0.173

—0.019

(—3.37) —(4.04) —(0.69)

(—3.40)

(—3.09)

(—2.33)

ii of obs.

44

—0. 039

306

306

44

44

306

See variable definitions in the appendix. Regressions are estimated by GLS.

Table 11: HIGH INFLATION M ZCONaCIC GROWTH (% per annum)
Country

Entire spell

High growth period

Period Inflation GNP growth

Argentina 1977
1979
1986

101.5
95.4
64.5

6.2
6.8

1980

60.3

1984—86 105.3
Chile

1977

Ghana

Period Inflation GNP growth
1975—87

112

0.5

8.7
7.1

1980—87

90

3.5

65.2

9.4

1972—77

115

—1.2

1978

54.9

9.4

1977—78

66

5.6

Israel

1979—Ba

70.3

6.0

1979—85

95

3.8

Peru

1979
1986—87

51.1
59.8

5.6
7.9

1979
1983—87

51
73

5.6
2.4

Uganda

1981
1988

73.6
104.3

8.0
6.3

1985—88

74
102

8.0
0.1

Brazil

*

5.3

1981

Inflation data from IMF; growth data are from World Bank.

A spell is a period in which the annual inflation rate year exceeds

50 percent each year.

Table 12: LARfl DEFICITS, nJrIaTIoN nw owm
Country

Period

Deficit/GDP

Growth rate

Inflation

1975—76
1981—84

13.4
13.9

—0.3
—1.8

131
124

1973

19.0

—5.7

153

1976
1979—83

12.4
12.3

10.9
0.7

11

1975

13.2

—14.3

26

1981

10.9
12.7

0.0

1984—88

22

2.1

17

Israel

1974—84

19.4

3.6

64

Jamaica

1977—85

17.6

—1.2

21

Argentina
Chile
Cote d'Ivoire

Ghana

Greece

11

Mauritius

1979—82

11.6

2.2

16

Malawi

1979—82

13.4

0.1

11

Mexico

1981—82

13.5

3.9

36

Morocco

1976—79

13.8
13.6
11.5

6.2
—1.3
2.3

12

1981
1983

9
6

1981—86

20.8

—0.4

70

1978
1980

10.6
11.9

2.8
—0.7

37

Zambia

1977—87

16.1

—1.6

20

Zimbabwe

1981—87

13.3

1.6

18

Nicaragua'

Turkey

74

Source: Deficit data from Easterly, except for countries indicated by
where the deficit data are from the IMF. Other variables are from
the WDR Database.
',

DATA SOURCES

All time series that have less than ten observations have been excluded from regressions.

ZOD? is the log-difference of real GDP, as estimated by Heston and Summers.

ZKAP as the growth of the capital stock, using the World Bank (Nehru) data set. The data sLart with an

assumed capital stock of zero in 1950, which leads to very rapid rates of growth of the capital stock in early

years. Further, some estimates are based on an assumed stock of zero in 1960. All observations for which the
capital stock grows by more than 30 percent per annum have been excluded.

ZLAB is the log difference of the labor force, from the WDR dataset.

ZED is the log difference of the product of LABOR, the size of the labor force, and BHK, the Barro-Lee (I 993

measure of the average years of educational attainment of the labor force. It is an estimate of the growth rate of
human capital.

INFLAT is the inflation rate, computed from the CPI series in International Financial Statistics. CIDP detlator

data from the World Bank were used to euend inflation series for the Central African Republic, Malawi, and
Chad.

SINFLAT is the standard deviation of the inflation rate over all the observations on inflation for a given
country.

SMAPI is a time series estimate of inflation uncertainty, calculated as the standard deviation of the inflation rate

around its mean for overlapping seven year periods.

EXCI-WREM is the black market cxchange rate premium from the 3QR dataset. The variablc used in

regressions is ln(l+EXCHPRM).

ZTOTI is the log difference of the terms of trade from the J2Rdataset.

SURRAT is the budget surplus (+) or deficit (-) provided by William Easterly.

AFRICA, ASIA, EASIA, LACAR, OECD, and SASIA are regional dummies.

