NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT MOVES THE DISCOUNT ON
COUNTRY EQUITY FUNDS?

Gikas A. Hardouvelis
Rafael La Porta
Thieny A. Wizinan

Working Paper No. 4571

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December, 1993

The authors wish to thank the Ford Foundation, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for
research support, and Maria Varvatsoulis and Stuart Schweidel for rescaith assistance. Special
thanks go to Andrci Schleifer, Robert Vishny, and Judy Chevalier. Jeffrey Frankel, Vihang
Errunza, Rob Neal. Michael Boldin, David Laster, Peter Gray, and participants at the NBER
conference on the Internationalization of Equity Markets provided helpful comments. The views

expressed in this article, however, are our own and do not reflect the views of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, its staff, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. This paper is part of NBER's research program in International Finance and
Macroeconomics.

NBER Working Paper #4571
December 1993

WHAT MOVES THE DISCOUNT ON
COUNTRY EQUITY FUNDS?
ABSTRACT

The paper characterizes several empirical regularities of closed-end fund prices and
examines the extent to which a sentiment" model of asset prices is consistent with the empirical
regularities. We find that after controlling for the effect of cross-border investment restrictions,

country funds trade at an average discount Discounts vary substantially and contribute to a
variance in country fund weekly returns which is generally three times greater than the returns
on the net asset value (NAy). Regression analysis suggests that discounts have predictive power

for fund returns but not for NAV returns, suggesting that investor "sentiment" is a component
of the price of a fund and not its NAy. Estimation of an unobserved components model on the
discounts of the funds reveals a significant and strongly persistent common component across

fund discounts. Regressions of fund and NAV returns on financial variables reveal that fund

prices are 'sticky" with respect to movements in the host country's stock market and overly
sensitive to variation in the U.S. and world stock markets. This relation is unaffected when we
consider separately funds whose host countries restrict cross-border investment and funds which
invest in emerging stock markets.

Gikas A. Hardouvelis
Department of Finance
Rutgers University
Avenue D and Rockafeller Road
New Brunswick, NJ 08903

Thieriy A. Wizman
Domestic Financial Studies
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045

Rafael La Porta
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138

Introduction

Country funds are publicly traded investment companies (closed-end funds) that trade on the open
market and, unlike domestic—equity funds, hold and manage portfolios concentrating in the equity markets of

particular foreign countries. Throughout the late 1980s and into the l990s, country funds were the fastest

growing segment of the public fund universe, and a minor sensation on Wall Street. In December 1984 only

four U.S-listed country funds existed. By December 1992, forty-one funds traded in New York, each
specializing in one of twenty-six countries, and all together representing $4.3 billion in market value of equity)
Figure I illustrates the recent growth in the number of U,S.-based country funds by charting the dollar

volume of initial public offerings (IPOs) by fund and by year from 1981 to 1992. The rise in country fund IPOs
parallels the growth in capitalization and liquidity in foreign stock markets. As of 1993, there were some forty
foreign equity markets in the world, and non-U.S. equity market capitalization was twice as great as US.
capitalization. The country funds allow U.S-based investors to participate in the expansion of foreign markets
by providing a managed and diversified portfolio at a minimal transaction cost, and without the use of foreign
currencies to make settlements.1'3

Country funds have exhibited periods of high returns as well as high volatility. Like most publicly
traded funds, country funds typically trade at substantial discounts to the underlying value of the portfolio they

hold (the fund's net asset value or NAy). The discount, however, is not constant, and varies substantially over
time. Anecdotal evidence suggests that the unusual volatility in country fund prices can be attributed to volatility
in the discounts. Consider the changes in the discount/premium of the Mexico Fund from 1986 to 1993, shown

in Figure 2a. The fund typically traded at a discount in the range of 0% to 40%. 'The discount varies
substantially from week to week, occasionally turning into a premium. Variation in the Mexico Fund's discount
is typical of many country funds and cannot be easily attributed to identifiable news events.
In addition to high volatility, some country funds have also experienced crash-like episodes unrelated to

the state of the foreign stock market. Figure 2b shows the behavior in the discount of the Germany Fund- This
country fund was subject to especially volatile swings in the winter of 1989-90 as the premium rose to 100%

2

after the fall of the Berlin Wail. Popular accounts of the episode attributed it to speculation on the part of
individual investors, both American and Japanese. waiting to cash in on new investment opportunities in
Germany. What made the behavior doubly impressive was that it seemed to cany a cross-border contagion.

Between November 9 and January 26, the Austria (AUS), the First Iberian (FIB), the Italy (ITL), the Swiss
(Helvetia) (SWFI), and the far-flung Malaysia (ML?), Thai (THA), and Taiwan (TAW) funds experienced
dramatic but short-lived increases (decreases) in the premium (discOunt),' Figure 2b suggests that the events of
1989 have not yet dissipated for the Germany Fund. Whereas the fund traded at a discount between 20% and

0% prior to November 1989, on a typical day following October 3, 1990, the fund traded at a premium.
Discounts contradict the value-additivity principle of efficient and frictionless capitai markets. However,
as Rozeff [1991) notes. truly frictionless markets do not exist. Inefficient and frictionless markets, investment
companies would not arise because they could not offer diversification services at a lower cost than zero, and no
benefit could accrue to professional managers. Therefore, because the funds exist, they should be expected to

trade at prices different than NAy. Intriguing issues, of course, relate to the source of the frictions and
inefficiencies that give rise to the existence, persistence, and time-variation in discounts (Brauer [1992)).
The behavior of country fund discounts may reflect items that preclude costless cross-border

transactions: official and unofficial barriers to capital movements, transaction costs, time mismatch in trading

hours, or risk arising from the time recluired to complete a full arbitrage transaction. Barriers to capital
movements, for example, could potentially explain the variability of the discount: in a segmented market, the
price of a U.S-based country fund is determined by the diversification needs of U.S. investors, whereas the NAV

of the fund is determined by the diversification needs of the investors in the fund's host country. Put differently,
the relevant (priced) systematic risks of the fund and its net assets are based on different benchmark portfolios in
segmented markets. Weekly changes in the gap between price and net asset value could be generated by time
variation in the difference between these risk measures.

Alternatively, discounts may be caused not by market frictions but rather by the mechanism of public

trading. This explanation emphasizes the role of irrational investors, called "noise traders" or 'ordinary
Investors," who interact in the market with rational investors (Delong, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldman

3

(DSSW) [l9901. Shiller [1984], Zweig [1973]). Lee. Shleiffer, and Thaler [1991], henceforth LST, evaluate
empirically this explanation of the behavior of fund discounts using data on domestic-equity funds An
important feature of this model is the variation in the demand of noise traders caused by shifts in 'sentiment' or

by misperceptions of fundamental value. 055W. for example, characterize sentiment as the excess

of investor

return expectations over the mathematical expectations. While variation in sentiment potentially explains
variation in country fund discounts, DSSW add additional structure to their model by introducing the idea of
noise-trader risk. If variation in investor sentiment or misperceptions on individual assets vary systematically,
then assets subject to sentiment will be riskier and underpriced. on average, relative to fundamentals.

The tim aim of the present paper is to characterize some basic empirical regularities of couwn' fund

prices. Owing to the recent emergence of country funds, relatively little empirical work has been conducted on
their pricing; much of the evidence remains anecdotal. In contrast, there is a large empirical literature on the

behavior of prices of domestic-equity funds. This paper fills the gap in the existing literature by examining the
behavior of country fund prices. A second aim is to examine whether the sentiment model is consistent with
closed-end fund pricing.5 Accordingly, the paper relies on the noise-trader model to motivate and guide the

empirical relationships that we examine using the country funds, The empirical regularities we uncover present a
challenge to asset pricing models that assume investor rationality and market efticiepcy, but this challenge is left
to future research.

Country funds have a number of distinct advantages over domestic-equity ftjnds in determining the

validity of models based on investor sentiment. First, country fund discounts are better suited to detect
movements in sentiment than domestic-equity fund discounts. As noted by Chopra. Lee, Shleifer, and Thaler

(1993), the discounts of domestic-equity funds may not fully capture swings in sentiment because the same U.S.
investor sentiment affects both the price of the fund and its underlying assets, so that swings in investor

sentiment leave the discount largely intact. 115.-based country funds, on the other hand, may not suffer from

this problem: while their prices would be subject to U.S. investor sentiment, prices of their underlying assets
(which determine the NAV) will be determined largely on foreign equity markets, which, presumably, are not
subject to U.S. investor sentiment. Variation in the discounts of the country funds would, therefore, reflect any

4
thiferences in sentiment between U.S. and foreign-based investors, resulting in both more volatility in discounts
and greater statistical power.

Second, compared with domestic-equity closed-end funds. the co-movement of country fund discounts

provides a stronger indication of common variation in sentiment than of common variation in fundamentals The
underlying assels of domestic-equity funds are U.S. stocks, and thus a large component of their prices or NAV5

is due to common Variation in U.S. fundamentals. On the other hand, the underlying assets of different country
funds are equities of different countries, and thus common cross-country variation in fundamentals represents a

much smaller fraction of the total variation in country fund discounts. Finding a strong common component in
discounts across country funds is, therefore, more likely to be the result of common variation in U.S. investor
sentiment than the result of common cross-country variation in fundamentals.

Finally, compared with domestic-equity funds, country funds enable us to analyze a richer anay of
factors that may potentially drive the movement of investor sentiment and misperceptions over time. Such
factors can be changes in foreign exchange rates, host country stock prices, world stock prices, and U.S. stock
prices.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 1 reviews the stylized facts regarding the pricing

of publicly traded funds. The same section extends the model of DSSW in a multi-asset context. The
predictions of the model subsequently serve as a heuristic guide for our empirical work. Section 11 discusses our

data and its sources and provides some additional institutional facts about country funds. Section HI focuses on
the ttnie-series behavior of country fund prices. Section IV explores the determinants of the returns on country

funds. In panicular. the section examines the response of the fund returns and discounts to financial variables
such as foreign stock market returns, exchangc rates, and U.S. stock returns. Section V summarizes our main
conclusions.

5

J.

The Closed-End Fund Puzzle and the Noise Trader Model

LI The Puzzle
Unlike an open-end mutual fund, the shares of a publicly-traded fund cannot be redeemed at net asset
value and thus the link between the marker value of the fund shares and the market value of the fund's

NAy is

tenuous, The "closed-end fund puzzle refers to the finding that publicly-waded funds always trade either at a
discount or at a premium to their respective NAys, The empirical literature finds that discounts are the norrnf

The existence and persistence of discounts seems to contradict the value-additivity principle of

frictionless efficient capital markets, Moreover, no generally accepted explanation for the existence of premia

and discounts exists. Explanations of this puzzle consistent with market efficiency and frictionless capital
markets emphasize that

the fund's net asset value may be mismeasured. For example, the reported NAy does

not correctly account for: management fees. illiquid "letter stock" in the portfolios, or the implicit capital-gains
tax liability on unrealized price appreciation (see Bourdeaux [1973] and Roenfelt and Tuttle [1973]). However,
the above sources of NAy mismeasurement can only partially explain the existence of persistent discounts on

domestic- equity funds (Malkiel [1977]. LST [1991]). Moreover, anecdotal evidence and academic research
suggests that the mismeasuremcnt hypotheses are unable to explain the variation in discounts across funds,'

In light of the problems in explaining the discounts, both generally and for country funds, Brauer [1992]
stresses that further insights might be derived from research into the behavior of discounts through rime. In this
regard. 1ST summarize four stylized facts concerning the time-series properties of domestic-equity closed-end
funds, which cannot be explained by the mismeasurement hypothesis.' LST assert that any theory purporting to
explain the extstence of discounts must also be consistent with the stylized facts. However, the standard
explanations cannot, separately or together, explain the ancillary pieces of the puzzle represented by'the stylized

facts. LST demonstrate that the noise-trader model of DSSW is not only consistent with the stylized facts, but

implies them as well. Using a sample of primarily domestic-equity funds, LST test those implications of the
model which had not been derived or tested in the context of other theories of discounts.

6
1.2

A Model of Investor Sentiment

We now present -a general multi-asset version of a model with both rational (informed) investors and
noise traders in order to motivate the implications of the sentiment model for country fund data.

Readers familiar with the intuitive predictions of the model may skip to Section II.
The economy contains one riskiess asset, which earns a gross rate of return I+r. and K risky assets.

which we interpret as equities. The risky assets are in fixed supply which we denote by the K-dimensional vector

t. The number of shares of each risky asset is normalized to equal one, so that I. is a vector of ones. We let
P and U1 denote the K-dimensional vectors of the prices and dividends paid on the K risky assets, respectively.

Thef element of I', and D, represents the price and dividend of thet asset, respectively. As in DSSW (1990]
and Shiller (1984], we postulate the existence two representative agents: a rational (informed) investor and an
ordinary investor (noise trader). Informed investors are present in the market in measure 1-p; noise traders are
present in measure M

The informed agent chooses his portfolio to maximize his perceived expected utility given his own
beliefs about the mean of the normally-distributed with-dividend price vector (P,,1 + fl,÷,).

(l.la)

A,'

O,'[E,(P,,, + D,_,) - (l+r)PjIy

Here A,' is a K-dimensional vector representing the demand for shares by the informed investor, while U is the

variance-covariance matrix of (P141 + 0,.,), andy is the coefficient of absolute risk aversion. Thejth element in
A,' represents the number of shares of risky asset] demanded by the representative informed agent.
Whereas informed agents respond only to expected returns optimally forecast, noise traders respond to

another factor denoted by Pr P. is assumed to enter the demand of noise-traders in linear fashion and
represents either an over- or under-reaction to news about fundamentals or represents a 'fad". For now, we adopt
DSSW's [1990] assumption that p, captures the noise—trader's misperception of the expected with-dividend price

vector of the risky assets. Specifically, the demand of the noise trader is given by:

7

(l.lb)

That

Lz'IE,(P,, + D,,1) + p, - (l+r)Pj/y.

is, if the rationai expectation of P., + D,, is given by JP,_1 + 0+,). then the noise trader's expectation is

given by (P,,, + D,,,) + Pr The two investors' problems are similar except for the term pin (I.lb). "When

the

noise trader is "bullish" on risky assetj, thef element of the vector p is large, and he will nominally demand
more shares of that asset than the rational investor. The demand functions reflect a crucial assumption made by
DSSW: that investors' horizons are short, so that they care only about their wealth, one period henceY

Market clearing requires: (l-pi)A,' +

= t. Substituting the demand functions into the equilibrium

condition yields required excess returns:

(Il)

Elk,.,) gIp,., + 0.,) - (l+r)P1 = )O,t - pp,.

Equation (12) suggests that equilibrium returns are relatively high when noise-traders are bearish. In other

words, ordinary investors systematically mis-tinie" the market. The limit of (1.2) as the measure of noise
traders, p. goes to zero is the ordinary efficient markets model.
To derive useful closed-form solutions, we assume that both dividends and sentiment follow first-order

auto-regressive processes Thus, for any assetj,j = I ....,K, that earns dividends or is subject to sentiment:

)

- l—E
—A'
— Vi ,.,

j.i—L

P,... = ',PJ + U1.1

' v,,,1 —_.,d
'—

+

d

Ut,' = $,.j +

The disturbance terms. v and it. are assumed to be normally-distributed, white noise processes. Each ermr term

contains two componenti The systematic component, denoted by " for fundamentals, and by 9 for sentiment.
is a white noise, normally distributed shock common to all assets.

and 9 may be correlated

contemporaneously. The idiosyncratic terms, denoted by gd for fundamentals and by t° for sentiment. are while
noise, normally-distributed errors that are contemporaneously uncorrelated across assets and between sentiment

8
and kndamentals Equations (1.3) embody DSSW's assumption that noise traders' sentiment is stochastic and
cannot be perfectly forecasted by rational investors. Closed-form steady-state solutions for prices and expected

returns on any risky asset) are given by:

(I .4a)
J3$.
____

____

cç, - ____L')

____

(b)

E,(R)JI)

-

_____

I -Ø

+

y!3w/

- MPJ.J

I -13w,

where the a terms represent the steady-state covariances of the error terms from (L3) with aggregate wealth W,

where W = X (p1+d) and 1 = (l+r.
If variation in sentiment for asset) is nor idiosyncratic, but instead reflects systematic variation in noise
trader sentiment which affects other assets, or is positively correlated with innovations in fundamentals, then the

covariance term a in (I.4a.b) will be positive. By raising systematic risk, variation in noise trader sentiment
lowers the price of the risky assetj. and correspondingly raises the expected return. Note that the expected
return on asset) wilt be higher even if noise traders are neither currently bullish nor bearish (p,, = 0), because
the systematic risk attached to noise trader activity in asset) remains.

The second terms in (I .4a,b) capture the price pressure' effect of sentiment on prices. As soon as
fundamental (or non-Fundamental) news gives rise to an increase in sentiment, the price of the stock will jump to

reflect not only what rational investors think the announcement means for future dividends but also what they
think the announcement means for current and future demand by ordinary investors. From (1.4b), the model has

the property that any variables dated ; or earlier which are known to reflect current noise-trader sentiment will
also help predict returns.

9
13 Fund Discounts and The Noise Trader Model

A crucial assumption needed to apply the sentiment model to the pricing ol publicly-traded funds is that
publicly-traded funds and their underlying assets are not subject to the same variation in noise trader sentiment.
One way to rationalize this is to assume that the fund and its underlying assets have different investor clienteles.

and that one clientele is subject to swings in sentiment and misperceptions while the other is nor. in the context
of the model presented above, we can think of assets not subject to noise-trader sentiment as falling

within a non-trivial subset of all risky assets, call it K'. where K'
whose

c K.

Now consider a risky assetj'c K'.

dividend stream is identical to the dividend stream of another risky asset] c K-K', but, being in K is not

subject to sentiment. Assuming that the fund itself is subject to noise-trader sentiment, but the underlying assets

are not, we can think of asset] as a stylized publicly-traded fund, and asset]' as the fund's underlying portfolio.
From (1.4) we derive the price

off as:

(1.5)
=

C

0

___ a.-

r

I—0

Subtracting p' from PL.t yields an expression for the discount:

(1.6)
I

''

y3 ( C,,
—n — ____

"

I

—t r )-

l—w,

pp"

Taking the unconditional mean we are able to express the average discount:
(1,7)
v13

I—)
r

10
Equations 1.6 and 1.7 embody all "answer' to the closed-end fund puzzle: discounts will vary inversely with

sentiment- Assuming that the underlying assets of the fund are not subject to the same variation in sentiment.

the discount on the hind will shrink when noise traders are bullish on the lund. If the innovation in noise-trader
sentiment covaries positively with the innovation in total wealth, the covariance terms in equations 1,6 and 1.7
will be positive. Thus, discounts on the fund may prevail even when noise traders are neither currently bearish

nor bullish, In section ffl.l below, we examine the average discount of counuy funds.
Because sentiment is not directly observable, the sentiment model per se does not generally establish

any readily testable implications. However, in the context of publicly-aded fund pricing, the difference between
the price of a fund and its NAy can serve as this proxy. Eq'iation (1.6) suggests that the sentiment attached to

each fund j will be perfectly correlated with its discount. Under the hypothesis that sentiment is attached only to
the price of the fund, any testable implication that applies to the level of sentiment equally applies to the

discount. With this in mind, one implication can be derived from rearranging (1.6) and substituting into (l.4b):
(1.8)

-

+

1-fly,

y — p)

The expected return on the fund is a function of its discount. The relationship is positive, so long as 'F, is less
than one. i.e.. as long as sentiment is mean-reverting. If sentiment for a fund drives the discount, then the
discount will predict future risk-adjusted returns. These issues are examined in sections 111.2 and 111.3, below.

The difference in the unconditional variance of the fund and the net asset returns is given by

VanR)) — Va,(R,)

P

+

1

l- l-%

The model predicts that the fund will exhibit more variability than the underlying assets so long as the shock to
fundamentals does not covary excessively negatively with the shock to investor sentiment. We look at this in
section 111.4.

From (I .4a). the innovation in wealth is given as a weighted average of the innovations to fundamentals

11
and sentiment:

(1.9)
I

—

&CK

v. Z ____

Using (1.9). we can express the coyariance term in (1.6) as:
(1.10)

(K l$ a

)+(n

& )+(
-

lBt

)'& ' +(

)22
l-Pw1

/

For the sentiment attached to any risky assetj to covary appreciably with wealth when K is large, one of two

conditions must be imposed on the behavior of noise-traders. Specifically, either some component of the
innovation in noise-trader sentiment on fund j covaries with the systematic variation in fundamentals, so that the

first term in (1.10) is non-thvial; or the set of assets subject to common variation in noise-trader sentiment, K'. is
large relative to K. so that the second term in equation (1.10) is non-trivial. Since publicly-traded funds make up
a small portion of all risky assets, for the second condition to hold, the systematic component in the innovation

in sentiment must also be present in other risky assets besides being present in the funds. These two conditions
lead to testable implications. First, the innovations in the discounts on funds will be correlated with innovations

in the systematic component of fundamentals. Second. the innovations in the discounts of country funds will
share a common component across the funds. Third. there will be other risky assets, besides the funds, whose

prices rise independently of fundamentals when discounts on the funds narrow. A nawral candidate for such an
asset is one whose clientele is the same as the funds. We examine these issues in sections 1115 and WA.
A specification for the innovations in fund discounts can be derived using the difference in returns
between the fund and the net assets:

—

°,.w -

;.)

—

PP1,

+

l$

12

Equation (1.11) says that the difference in realized returns between the fund and the net assets is due to shocks

to investor sentiment. Equation (1.11) isa useful analytic tool in the context of the model because it implies thai
any variables which help to explain (are correlated with) the contemporaneous difference between the return on

the fund and its assets, after controlling for the predictive power

of the discount, will be variables correlated with

either idiosyncratic or systematic variation in noise-trader misperceptions. Empirical versions of equation (1.11)
are examined in section IV,2.

IL Sample Data and Variable Definitions

ILl The Sample

The country funds used in our empirical work consist of the 35 single-country publicly-traded funds
which were covered in Barrons publicly-traded funds column from January 1985 through January 1993

inclusive, and for which at least nine months of price data exists within that period. Table I provides the names
of the country funds along with the date of their respective IPOs. Table 2 presents some summary statistics on
the sample of country funds, and compares them with similar statistics for a sample of publicly-traded domestic-

equity funds, as well as a random sample of firms with market capitalizations comparable to that of the country

funds. The sample of domestic-equity funds is taken frdm the list of 'general equity funds" in Barron's. It
includes the oldest and most well-known domestic-equity funds. The samples of operating linus are random

samples drawn from the third and founh market-capitalization quintiles of Finns in Standard & Poor's industrial
Compu.srat Tape (the first quintile being the smallest firms).

The market capitalization of the country funds is on average smaller than that of the domestic-equity

funds, This reflects, possibly, the older average age of the domestic-equity funds, Institutional ownership.
measured as the fraction of shares owned by inslitutions, is smaller for the domestic—equity funds than for the

country funds, However, both types of funds have much lower institutional ownership than operating firms with
comparable levels of market capitalization. A common explanation for the lower participation of institutions in

13
publicly-traded funds is that institutional portfolio managers would rather not have to worry about justifying why
they hold Mother managed fund and thus incur two management lees, one implicit and the other explicit. Table
2 suggests that individual investors are the clientele of country funds.

One difference between country funds and domestic-equity funds is that country funds may invest in
stock markets which otherwise restrict international investment.'0 A government contemplating opening its
markets to U.S. investors may choose to admit a US-based country fund as a means of limiting such an opening

to professional managers buying a fixed amount of shares. Typically, a fund is admitted prior to! or instead of,

the introduction of ADRs or a full opening. Table 2 shows that country funds investing in unrestricted foreign
markets tend to have smaller institutional ownership than funds investing in countries that restrict international

investment in their respective equity markets." Apparently, an institution can justify investing in particular
foreign markets, and incurring an additional management fcc, if the country fund is the only avenue by which
such diversiflcacion is possible.

11.2 Variable Deflnitions

Weekly daa on price and reported NAy of the funds was collected from Bat-ron's and the funds

theniselvesi With the exception of the India Growth Fund (ING), which is excluded from the regressions in
the empirical sections below, a complete time series of NAVs was obtained for each of the 35 funds. Barron's
reports either the Friday or Thursday closing price in New York. The funds compute their reported NAVs by
translating the local currency price of the assets at the Ioéal market close mt U.S. dollars. The translation to
dollars, however, is not uniform as some funds use the exchange rate at the local market close, whereas others

use an afternoon fix In New York. Since foreign markets close on a given day prior to the close in New York,
prices and NAVs will only be approximately synchronous. Constncted.financial returns were adjusted for splits
and in-kind distributions using the data in Standard

and Poor's Dividend Record,°

Table 3 provides a

description of the variables used in the later empirical analysis.

We compute fund L's "discount" as the natural logarithm of the ratio of the fund's net asset value per

14
share (NAV) to its price per share (FND). Specifically,

DISCL, ln(NA V/PNDJ.

The continuously compounded return on the fund itself, RFND,1. and on the net assets of the fund, RNAV,,1,

are defined as follows:

RFNQ1 ln(

FND. +DST
FND,,

L-t), RNAVM

ln(

NAY 1.DST.1
NAV,J

where FND1J1 and NAV•1 are the price and the net asset value (per share) of the I' fund at the end of week

r+J; and D37, is the distribution during week :+i. assumed to rake place at the end of the week. Cumulative
returns for horizons of four and thirteen weeks are defined by adding the individual weekly returns over the
relevant horizons.

Observe that if the dividend distribution is zero or very small, the change in the discount,

ADJSC,•1

DISC ,, - DISC,,, reflects the difference between the continuously compounded weekly return on net assets,
RNAV, and the continuously compounded weekly return on the fund itself. RFND: AD!SCLKI = RN.4VÜ,,I -

RFNQ,.1.

ilL The Time-Series Behavior of the Discount
This section investigates the time-series behavior of the discount or premium on country funds. We
begin with an examination of the average discount over the full sample, as well as its behavior during the first

six months after the initial public offering of the fund. We continue with standard non-siationarity tests of
country fund discounts, which lead us to examine the predictive power of the discounts. Finally, we present
evidence that, consistent with the predictions of the noise trading model, a large fraction of the variation in

'5
individual country lund discounts is common across the funds.

fiLl Average Discounts and Attennarket Performance of Country Funds
The first column of Table 4 presents the cross-sectional average of time-series means of the discount of

all 35 funds over the sample period. Although the average discount is riot significantly different than zero.
separating the funds into those pertaining to countries with resincied and unrestricted equity markets reveals a
difference between the two groups. The average discount on funds whose host markets are unrestricted is almost
seven percent and significantly different than zero Ct-statistic = 333), while the average discount on funds

associated with restricted host markets is not significant. This evidence is consistent with theoretical models
illustrating that international investment bathers can cause prices of assets of equal risk to differ across countries.

All else equal, a binding restriction will raise the price-NAV ratio above the level prevailing in the absence of
such restrictions (Errunta and Losq 119851. Eun and Janak.iramanan [l986l).'

Table 4 also examines the aftennarket peifor,nance of the country funds relative to their underlying
assets. One prediction of the noise-trading model is that a new fund will be issued only when sentiment for the

fund is high. After an IPO, the funds organizers invest the proceeds, net of underwriting fees, in accordance
with the funds investment objective. Because the amount of the offering cceeds the proceeds which constitute

the initial NAy of the fund, the fund is issued at a premium. This premium is a derivative of the underwriting
fees and sun-up costs. A successful offering implies that some investors are willing to pay a premium for the
cash that the fund is holding after the offering. The fact that some investors are willing to pay a premium can
also be taken as evidence of bullish noise-trader sentiment for a country. Naturally, organizers will try to time
issuance to coincide with this bullishness. If the noise-trading story is true and sentiment is mean-reverting,

following an IPO the original high premium ought to deteriorate. A deterioration would occur even if. with
cross-border restrictions, the average discount is small or if on average a premium prevails. Table 4 confirms
these predictions.

Table 4 shows that country funds are issued with an underwriter's premium of about 7.5 percent..

16
Market premia appear to be larger. however. Our first NAV data are available on avenge about two weeks after

the IPO. They show that funds associated with restricted markets trade, at that time, at premia of almost 25%.
whereas funds associated with unrestricted markets trade at a premium of roughly 7.4%. Followtng the first

pricc-NAV observation, the premia begin to erode. After 24 weeks, the premium on restricted funds falls to
6.8% from the original 24.4%. and the premium on unrestricted funds becomes -13.9% (a discount) from the
original 7.4%. Recall that the change in the premium can be approximately interpreted as the difference between

the cumulative returns on the fund and on the NAV. Accordingly. investors who buy a unrestricted country's
fund in the immediate aftermarker and sell it 24 weeks later experience a negative return of 21.3% relative to

NAy, while holders of a restricted country's fund experience a loss of 17.6% relative to NAV. Assuming crosssectional independence, both of these average cumulative returns are significantly different than zero. Moreover.
a non-parametric U-test does not reject the hypothesis that the average 24-week returns are the same across the

two groups of funds." Finally, the last column of Table 4 shows that if the first twenty-four weeks are omitted
from each fund's time series, the average discount for the full sample is almost 6% and significant. while the
average discount for the unrestricted sample is 9% and also significant. The evidence presented in Table 4
suggests that after taking account of the effects of cross-border restrictions, the aftermarket performance of

country funds adheres to the stylized lacts derived for the domestic equity funds: in the long run a discount
prevails.

111.2

Stationaritv Tests

If all publicly-traded funds are ultimately liquidated, discounts are in the long run stationary. Over short
time intervals, however, discounts could be non-stationary. Discount stationarity is relevant in the context of the
noise trader model because the discount reflects the sentiment attached to a particular country fund. If sentiment
is mean-reverting, and variation in sentiment drives the discount, then discounts should also be mean-reverting.

Alternatively, if under cross-border segmentation, variation in discounts is driven by changes in the ratio of the

domestic price of risk to the foreign price of risk, then the price of a fund might have no inherent tendency to

17

revert to the market price of the underlying assets, and the discount could be non-stationary.

To test the hypothesis of nort-stationarity. we employ Stock and Watson's [1988] unit root test Iwice, icr
the model with and without a time u'end. We also perform the Lest using either one or eight autoregressive lags.

Table 5 presents the results. The hypothesis of non-stationaty is rejected for most of the country funds. When
the number of autoregressive lags is one, the hypothesis is rejected at the 10% level for 23 funds in the model

with a time trend, and for 23 funds in the model without a time trend. When the number of autoregressive lags
is eight, the hypothesis was rejected for 20 funds in the model with a time trend, and for 16 funds in the model
without. Assuming independence across the funds, and using the normal approximation to the binomial
distribution, one can compute the probability that the above results were generated under the null hypothesis that

all fund discounts are non-stationary. In all four cases, rejections occur at the 1% significance leveL
In some funds, the hypothesis of non-stationarity is not rejected. In these exceptional cases, however.

changes in the ratio of foreign to domestic price of risk in the context of cross-border investment restrictions arc

unlikely to be responsible for the failure to reject non-stationarity. Examination of Table 5 reveals no special
pattern across the restricted and unrestricted funds. The Emerging Mexico (Sf0), FirM Philippine (FPH),

Indonesia fiND), Mexico (MEX), Mexico Income and Equity (ME!). Taiwan (TAW). RC)C Taiwan (ROC), Thai
fl-IA;. and Thai Capita! (THC) funds generally reject non-stationarity of discounts even though they are
associated with restricted capital markets. Meanwhile, the Austria (AIlS). Japan OTC (JPO), Singapore (SNU),
and Spain (SPN) funds fail to reject non-stationarity even though they invest in largely unrestricted markets.
The median first-order autoregressive coefficient across the 35 discounts of the country funds is 0.887,

implying that an innovation in the discount has a half-life of roughly five weeks. Similarly, the average
correlation between consecutive weekly discounts is approximately 0.854, implying that the (lest-order

autoregressive process can explain about 73% of discount variation. The correlation at four weeks is 0.57 (R =
0.32). and is substantially less than the one-month correlation (0.85) found by Pontiff 11991] using LST's
domestic-equity fund data.

18

ilL) Do Fund Returns Vary Excessively?

Sharpe and Sosin (1975], using quarterly data from 1966 to 1973 on eight domestic funds, find that the
unconditional variance of the median fund's return is 36% greater than the variance of its net asset value return.

Pontiff [19911, using LST's data set finds that return volatility is 73% greater than the volatility of the fund's
assets. The relative variance of returns on the funds is important because it addresses the issue of excess

volatility that noise traders, through the mechanism of public trading, may induce in the prices of traded assets.

The fund's return is excessively volatile if Var(RFND)> Var(RNAV).

or Var(D/SC) - 2Cov(ADJSC.RNA V) >0.

Following Pontiff (1991], to reduce skewness, we computed the log variance ratio on each of the 35 country

funds as the natural log of the ratio of the variance of the fund's return to the variance of the return on its assets.

This ratio will be zero if the variance of a fund's return is equal to the variance of its NAV return. For our
sample of funds we found the mean log variance to be 1.17 (s.c. = 0.57). The median ratio is 1.135, implying
that for the median fund CUKF). the variance of its return is more than three times greater than the variance of

its nets asset return. It is unlikely that a variance ratio of this magnitude could be attributable to bias in the
variance estimates deriving from bid-ask spread bias.

111.4 The Predictive Power of Discounts

Mean reversion in the discounts, as demonstrated above, implies that the discount of a given country
fund can predict a subsequent change in the discount. Moreover. since the change in a discount reflects
(approximately) the difference betwecn the returns on the fund and its assets, a larger premium predicts either: I)
a smaller subsequent cumulative return on the fund, or 2) a larger cumulative return on the fund's assets, or 3)

both a smaller return on the fund and a larger return on the NAy. In the context of the noise-trader model, the
first case occurs when sentiment affects only the price of the fund, and the fund premium is perfectly positively
correlated with that sentiment. In the second case, sentiment affects only the underlying assets, and the premium

on the fund price is perfectly negatively correlated with that sentiment. In the third case, both the fund and the

19

underlying assets are subject to sentiment,and the discount is a noisy measure of both sentiment on the fund and

sentiment on the underlying assets. Thus, although from the level of the discount, we can only infer the
differential in sentiment between the country-fund and foreign-market clienteles. the power of the discount in

predicting fund returns (relative to its predictive power for the NAy returns) can be taken as an indication of the
extent to which sentiment affects only the fund price.
The empirical literature on domestic-equity funds upholds that deep discounts are indicative of positive

risk-adjusted returns.' Although this empirical relation is well-established for domestic-equity funds and has
become popularized (Malkiel [1990], Fredman and Scott [1992j), to our knowledge no one has examined these

empirical relations for country funds.'7 To ea1nine the predictive power of counu'y fund discounts we ran
re2ressions of the form:
(3.1)

L RFND, a + WIDISCJJ 4 e'J

E RNAV., = a +

where the cx and

DISC +

are fund-specific intercepts and slope coefficients and N denotes the cumulative return

horizon. In Table 6. we report the estimates of ' and ( as well as the adjusted-R1, for regressions using
cumulative return horizons of 1,4, and 13 weeks. Panel A in Table 6 shows that an increase in the discount is
generally associated with a subsequent increase in the fund's return. As the return horizon increases from one
week to thirteen weeks, the reversal in the lund price becomes progressively stronger, generating a larger

regression coefficient between the cumulative return on the fund and the discount. Evidently, bid-ask bias or
other measurement errors cannot account for the price reversal." The average adjusted-k's of the regressions
are 0.053 for the one-week return horizon, 0.106 for the four-week horizon, and 0.179 for the thirteen-week

horizon. The strong predictability of fund returns supports the hypothesis that sentiment is a component of the
price of the fund.

High discountsare less successful at predicting low N/tV returns. Few regression coefficients are

20
negative and significant in Panel B of Table 6 and the R2s are much lower. on average, than in Pane] A. The
average adjusted-Rs are 0.007, 0.03!. and 0.084 for the one-, four-, and thirteen-week horizons, respectively.
Nonetheless, most regression coefficients in Panel B are negative, and in five funds (AUS.IND.JKG,ROC.TAW)
the regression coefficients are generally negative and significant. Occasionally, therefore, discounts contain some

information about future net asset value returns, implying that a small component of the discount reflects the

sentiment ot foreign investors which affects the price of the underlying assets. That is. the price of the fund
captures fundamental information not captured by the NAy.

1113

Is There a Common Component iii Country Fund Discounts?

So far. we have analyzed individual counu-v funds in isolation. We now examine cornovement in
country fund discounts. The noise-trader model suggests that persistent discounts across counuy funds imply

that fund discounts may be subject to a common Isystematic) source of risk. If U.S. investors act on general
bullish and bearish sentiment which affects all country funds, their behavior is likely to affect country fund
prices systematically, resulting in a common component across the fund discounts.'9
To capture a possible common component across the fund discounts, we estimate a parametric version

of the 'single index' models discussed by Sargent and Sims [1977]. Estimation of the unobserved component
mode! provides a succinct test of the presence of a common component across funds as well as a convenient tool

for analysts. The empirical model is as follows. Each discount DISC is hypothesized to move
contemporaneously with an unobserved scalar ('index'). 4 which is common to all funds, and an idiosyncratic
component c,. Doth the unobserved index and the idiosyncratic component of each fund's discount are modelled
as having linear stochastic structures. In addition. 1 is assumed to only enter each fund's discount
contemporaneously. The formulation is:

(3.2)

DISC,, = B,Z + U,,;
I

K

21

where a(L) and 8(L) are polynomials in the lag Operator L. e and v are white noise errors, and K represents the
number of assets. 'The main identifying assumption of the model expresses the notion that co-movements in the

multiple discounts arise from a single source Z. This is fonnaJized by assuming that the terms ui,. I

I

K. and

the term Z are mutually uncorrelated at all leads and lags.
Because estimation of the model requires exactly overlapping time-series of fund discounts, we choose

the estimation period in order to balance the need for a long weekly time series and the need to include many

and diverse funds. We restricted the sample to include the nine oldest funds (MEX, FAS, GER, SWJ-j, ITL,
KOR, MLY, TAW, and VICE) over the period January 1988 to January 1993. We estimate the model by first

casting it into a (vector) state-space form and then applying the Kalman filter to evaluate the likelihood

function!° To simplify estimation, we further assume that c4L) and 5(L) represent first-order polynomials. In
addition, we normalize the variance of the innovation in the common factor. i', to equal l!l
The results from estimating the unobserved components model are given in Table 7, Panel A. Several

features are worth noting. First, seven of the nine slope coefficients, B,, that relate the common factor to the
discount of each country fund, are significant, while two are marginally significant. Furthermore, the estimate or

the autoregressive coefficient of the common component, a. is 0.96 (s.c. = 0.03). This implies a level of
persistence of the common component (half-life = 17 weeks) considerably greater than the persistence of the

idiosyncratic components implied by the estimates of the 5, whose median value is 0.78 (half-life = 3 weeks). A

likelihood ratio test of the hypothesis that there is no common factor. i.e., that the B and a are all jointly zero,

strongly rejects: f(l0) = 131.4; p-value = 0.00. Based on the estimates of the slope coefficients (B). the
estimates of the autoregressive parameters (a and 53. and the estimates of the variances of the idiosyncratic

errors, we computed for each of the nine funds the fraction of the unconditional variance of the discount
aunbutable to the common factor. We found that on average, the variance in the common factor accounts for
roughly 20% of the variance in the discounts (last column. Panel A).
Inspection of the errors generated by the model estimated above reveals serial correlation in the

restduals. In other words, specifying AR(l) processes for the common and idiosyncratic components is not
general enough to fully capture the dynamic behavior of discounts. Checking the robustness of our results to a

22
higher-order dynamic specification could be done, in principle, by allowing more lags in the factor dynamic&

However, this turns out to be computationally costly. Instead, we applied the Kalman filter to pre-whitened
discounts for the nine counuy funds under consideration and tested for a common component in the innovation

in the country fund discounts. Formally, we replaced D(SC1, in the formulation above, with A(L)DISC1, (for =

K) and forced the z and u, to be white noise. A,(L) is a polynomial in the lag operator which 'whitens the
discounts.2:

Results from estimating the model using the pre-whitened data are in Panel B of Table 8. The estimates

of the B, the exposure of the fund discounts to the common innovation, are now highly significant for all nine
funds. The likelihood ratio test of the hypothesis that there is no common disturbance strongly rejects (f(9) =
140.6: p-value = 000). and simple diagnostic tests on the errors generated by the model reveal no evidence of

serial correlation. The average estimate of the contribution of the common factor to the variances of the country
fund discounts remains roughly 17%. Overall, the results presented in Table 7 provide strong evidence of
common variation across the fund discounts.

Further insight into the results can be gained by examining the behavior of the unobservable common

factor during the sample period. A plot of 4 generated from the first model, is presented in Figure 3. Because
the variance of the innovation in z is normalized to I, the reader should focus on relative changes instead of the

level. The most noticeable feature of the common factor is its behavior in late 1989 which coincides with the

fail of the Berlin Wall." Although the noise-trader model does not explicitly specify any one source of
investor misperception Or sentiment, Shiller [19841 discusses one characterization of sentiment as a change in

investors' attitude toward future returns which may occur as an arbitrary social reaction to some widely noted

events. In the introduction, we noted that the fall of the Berlin Wall might qualify as such an event. The
analysis of this sub-section seems to confirm that the event was associated with an innovation in the unobserved

common component in the discount across the country funds. Compared with the sentiment model, initial public
offerings of country funds shown in Figure I peaked in 1990.24

23

IV. Sources of Variation in Country Fund Discounts

Although widely noted events may aCCOUnt for some large coherent swings in sentiment, casual

observation suggests that they cannot account for all of the niation in the discounts of country funds. In this
section we examine the response of fund prices to specific aggregate financial variables such as the exchange

rate, the index of the host country's stock prices, an index of world stock prices, and indices of stock prices for
large- and small-capitalization U.S. Linus. Our aim is to explore potential sourtes of the variation in fund

discounts that we documented in earlier sections, and to examine whether or not the noise trader model can

accommodate some of the evidence we uncover. In order to shed some light on the ability of models with
rational agents and investment restrictions to explain the time-variation in discounts, we also perform the
empirical analysis separately for funds whose host countries restrict international investment from funds whose

host countries allow free capital movements. We also examine the differences between host countries with
developed stock markets and those with emerging stock markets and between Asian, European. and Latin
American funds.

IV.l Specification

For each country fund I we estimate basic regression equations of the form:

(4.1)

RET,,,

P., + P DISC, 4 I P(ZX,) + C,,,,

where RET denotes alternatively the weekly return on the country fund, REND, the
RNAV, and the excess return on the country fund. RFND-RNAV. DISC is

weekly return on the NAy.

the country fund discount, and is

observed at the beginning of the holding period prior to the realization of the cumulative return I/tEl'. Hence,

the equation is an extension of the earlier forecasting eiuations of Section m. flie X,s are weekly returns of

24
different financial variables observed simultaneously with the dependent variable. N denotes the holding period
horizon in weeks. As before, we show results for N = 1,4. and 13 weeks.
When the dependent variable is RFND-R.NA V. the above equarion becomes

the empirical counterpart of

equation (1.11) of the sentiment model. In this framework. DISC captures the level of sentiment in the

beginning of the holding period, while the remaining independent variables capture the influence of innovations

in sentiment during the holding period. Being financial rates of retw'n. the X variables are nearly serially
uncorrelated and thus may readily captwe innovations in sentiment.
The first financial variable that we use as an explanatory variable in the regression is fund-specilic and
represents the cumulative return on a broad index of stocks from fund i's host country, REST.

REST is included

to capture the component of returns that are attributed to local currency variation in the host country's stock

market. The second variable, REX. is the weekly dollar return on holding the foreign country's currency.
Changes in the value of the dollar relative to the foreign currency result in an unambiguous change in the dollar
value of the fundamental. While small exchange rate movements that are perceived by the market as temporary

may not affect the fund price and thus may move the discount/premium, large changes in the dollar value of
foreign currency ought to move the price of the fund sufficiently in order to leave the discount/premium
unaffected. Nonetheless, casual observation of the event of September 1992 suggest, otherwise. This month saw

an appreciation of the dollar as speculators bet against certain weak European currencies in anticipation of the

withdrawals from the ERM which did occur. The resultant appreciation of the dollar was associated with
significant drops in the premia of the European country funds: as the NAy (translated to dollars) fell, the price
of the funds generally did not.
Our earlier empirical analysis showed that country fund discounts shared a common component. We
now include three explanatory variables chat are common to all country funds in order to capture some of this

common variation. The first of these variables. RWRD. is the dollar return on a world stock market index. The
next variable, RSP, is the dollar return on an index of large U.S. stocks. The last variable RSML - RSP,
represents the excess return on an index of small-capitalization U.S. stocks over the return on the large stocks,
Under LST's 119911 assertion that noise trader sentiment is associated with individual investors, and thus targely

25
affects small-cap stocks, an index of large U.S. stocks is more apt to capture variation in U.S. fundamentals.

while the excess return on small caps will capture variation in noise trader sentiment Detailed definitions of all
variables are given in Table 3.

IV.2 Results

Table 8a presents the main results. In order to abstract from unnecessary details, the table presents only

summary results for all funds from stacLed regressions. The stacked regressions resuici the slope coefficients to

be the same across funds but allow individual fund intercepts. In addition to the multivariate regression
described above. Table Sa also provides results from univariate regressions in which the cumulative returns

LRFND. ZRNA V. and LRFND-LRNA V are regressed on each of the independent variables separately. Panel A
reports the results for the I-week holding-period horizon, Panel B the 4-week horizon, and Panel C the 13-week

horizon."
The fund discount has strong explanatory power for fund returns (RFND) in both the multivariate and
unjvariate regressions. As already noted in the earlier sections. high discounts are associated with positive future
returns on the fund but negative future returns on the net assets. As a result, the association with excess fund
returns. LRFND-ERN?4 V. is even stronger. Observe also that as the holding period horizon increases the

absolute size of the

coefficients also increases. There is strong reversion of the fund price toward the NAy.

as well as a smaller but statistically significant reversion of the NAy toward the fund price. A relative fall of
the fund price -- that is. an increase in the discount — by 100 basis points is followed by an increase in the fund

price and a decrease in the NAy. The multivariate regression shows thai after 13 weeks, the fund price has
increased by 37.5 basis points and the NAy has fallen by 6.4 basis points, thus 44 of the original 100 basis
points gap have been eliminated.

Turning to the response of country fund prices to local stock returns, LRFST, country fund returns

themselves have significantly lower betas that do the NAV returns. The avenge local market beta for the NAy
return (fund return) is 0.608 (0.428) for the I-week return horizon and 0.718 (0.600) for the 13-week horizon?i

26
These observed differences between the fund and NAY are significant at each horizon although the magnitude

of

the difference decreases with the return horizon. Country fund prices are apparently sticky with respect to

movements in the host country's stock market.
A similar stickiness is observed in the response of country fund prices to movements in the exchange
race. In the one-week horizon, fund prices show practically no reaction to changes in the exchange rate, when at
the same time the NAY shows a strong response: the fund return has a beta with REX

of 0.088, while the NAV

has a beta of 0.62l,2 The difference between the fund beta and NAY beta weakens at longer holding horizons.
As the horizon increases, fund price becomes statistically indistinguishable from the response of the NAy to
LREX.

Consistent with both the excess volatility of lund returns and the existence of a strong common
component among fund discounts. Table Sa shows that the fund returns are excessively sensitive to all three

financial returns that are common across the different country funds. In the mult.ivariate regressions, fund returns

have significantly higher betas with respect to the world stock index return (RWRD) than NAY returns at every
holding-period horizon?S In the univariate regression as well, we find that the beta of the fund with respect to

the world index is significantly larger than the beta of the NAY with the same world index, and that this
difference is not affected by the return horizon. Thus, if the world index were the appropriate benchmark for
measuring wealth, the result suggests that the country funds are systematically riskier than the underlying assets.
Excess sensitivity is also present in the response to U.S. stock returns." For the one-week holding-

period return, fund return betas with respect to RSP. the large-firm return index, are positive and statistically

significant after controlling for the return on the foreign (host country's) market (RFSI) and the world index

(RWRD). By comparison, the NAY return displays absolutely no exposure to fist'. Not surprisingly, the
difference between fund return and NAV return, RFND-RNA V. has a significant positive beta with fist'.

However, the difference between the exposures of the fund and the NAy to fiSt' is marginally statistically
significant only at the one-week horizon (t-stasistic = 7.22). At the four and thineen week horizons, the
difference is not statistically significant. By contrast, and more interesting perhaps, fund return betas with
respect to RSML-RSP, the excess return on small U.S. finns, an significantly higher that the corresponding NAY

27
betas at every holding period horizon, after controlling for the effects of the other financial variables.

lvi Is the Noise-Trader Interpretation Reasonable?
Table Sa suggests that country fund prices over-react to US and world financial returns, but under-react

to price innovations in the stock markets of the host countries and to currency revaluations. can the noise-trader

story accommodate these observations? Although the model does not explicitly specify the origin or source of
investor sentiment and misperceptions. Shiller 119841 discusses two characterizations of sentiment which may be

relevant for the pricing of country funds. In the first characterization, investors' misperceptions of returns are
the result of an over-reaction (or under-reaction) to news about fundamentals, In this case, news about future
dividends, for examplc. elicits an unwarranted change in the difference between noise traders' perception of

future dividends on an asset and the corresponding perception of rational investors. In the context of publiclytraded fund pricing, po itive domestic news that increases the level of the broad U.S. market and positive

'world' news that raises the level of the world market would unduly raise the fund price and decrease the
discount of country funds!41 Conversely, investors may not make immediate effective use of all available

information, and thus under-react to innovations in the host country's stock market and to innovations in the
exchange race.

An alternative characterization of sentiment is given by Shiller as follows: sentiment may be the result
of "fluctuations in attitudes which occur widely in the population and often appear without any apparent logical
reason." In this case, variations in discounts on the country funds would reflect widespread changes in noise-

trader sentiment unrelated to changes in fundamentals. A possible implication of this view is that the same
investor sentiment that affects discounts on country funds must affect other assets as well which have little to do

with the country funds. Recall from the theoretical discussion that if variation in sentiment in country funds is
not correlated with fundamentals, then the same component of sentiment must appear across a wide range of

assets. Although the theory does not specify which assets will be affected by the same widespread innovation in
sentiment, a natural candidate for such assets are small capitalization stocks since individuals, who are more

28
likely to trade on sentiment and to misperceive fundamental value, specialize in both smaller stocks and publicly-

waded hinds (LST[I991]).

The results in Table Sa suggest that both interpretations of the noise-wader model may have some
validity. The strong link between changes in the discount and the financial variables RFST, REX. RWRD. and
RSP.

suggest that investors over-react to fundamental revaluations that are closer to home and under-react to

those with which they are less familiar, supporting the first interpretation. Moreover, the explanatory of excess
small firm returns persists even when we control br variables such as RWRD. and RSP. This provides
substantial support for the second interpretation of the noise-trading hypothesis, assuming that the excess return
of small firms captures a sentiment factor independent of fundamentals.

IV.4 Two Extensions: The Influence of the Japanese Market and the Asymmetric Effect of News

The growth in country funds listed in New York has reflected more than jusL US investor demand. Just
as the funds may be easy sells to American individuals, they may also appeal to Japanese individuals seeking to
invest abroad. On February l9. 1990. near the market peak as measured by premia paid, market observers
estimated that Japanese investors owned as much as 80 percent of the Spain and Germany funds. Some sources

reported that major Japanese retail brokers were the buyers as prices rose and that they then sold the shares to

their clients near the market top on the (irrational) enthusiasm generated by the events in Europe. The resultant

sharp drop in the country fund premia. while reflecting the invariable dissipation of ordinary-investor sentiment
as modelled above, may have been accelerated by Japanese individuals selling country fund shares in New York

In order to meet margin calls on thetr portfolios as the Japanese equity market fell in the Spring of 1990.
Alternatively, as part of the general "panic" on the Tokyo market between January and April 1990. Japanese

individuals may have dumped international-linked assets, such as country funds, first. The fall in the prices of
the funds held predominantly by the Japanese generally exceeded the fall in the Japan Nikkei index."

The events described in the financial press raise iwo interesting issues. First, is there any validity to the
idea that prices of New York-traded funds representing Latin American. European. and Asian stocks can

29
ostensibly diverge from fundamental value on the basis of developments in Japanese equity markets? Second, to
what extent is investors' over-reaction documented in Table Ba asymmetric, in the sense that negative news about

world or US fundamentals has a stronger panic' effect on country fund prices, white positive news or noise
elicits a positive, albeit smaller, over-reaction.
To examine the first issue, we modified the behavioral excess return equation estimated in Table S to

include the current and I to 4 lagged returns of the Japanese stock market. We also divided the time series of
country fund returns into two sub-periods: one part pertaining to the period of supposedly heavy Japanese

involvement. i.e.. August 1989 to July 1990, and a second part penaining to all other weeks. The regression was
esumated separately for each of the 13 funds which spanned the period of heavy Japanese involvement." In
general, our results were unimpressive. We found little evidencethat events in the Japanese stock market had an
additional effect on country fund excess returns either for the whole sample or for the period of heavy Japanese
involvement. Moreover, including the current and lag values of Japanese market returns in the regression did not
affect the relationship between the other financial variables (DISC, RFST, REX, RWRD, RSP, RSML-RSP) and
the excess country fund returns (RFND - RNAV).
To examine asymmetries, we experimented with regressions of the form:

L (RFND,,,-RNAV,,,)

+ 3, DISC1J + t j) '5(tx

).•S +

frNG(tK )NG +

The variable (t XJ.J' takes on the value of the cumulative financial return, I X,,, is positive and takeson the
value O' if I X,,,,, is otherwise. Conversely. (t X1,,,)'° takes on the value oft XM,_ if S X,,,,, is negative and
takes on the value '0' if S X,, is otherwise. If the excess return on country funds responds in an asymmetric
fashion to innovation in the financial variable X, the coefficients 13? and

will differ.

Although we found little evidence of an asymmetric response of the funds' excess returns with regard to
the local stock market (REST) or exchange rate (REX) in both univariate and multivariase regressions, we did
find evtdence of asymmetry in the response to other financial variables. Table Sb presents the results of one

rnultivariate specification where we allow for asymmetric effects of RWRD, RSP, and RSML-RSP, for return

-

30
horizons

ofl,4, and 13 weeks. Two results stand out. First, at the i-week return horizon, but not at the 4- or

13-week horizon, we find a significant asymmetnc response of country fund excess returns to the excess small
firm return (RSML-RSP) The over-sensitivity to RSML-RSP exists exclusively in a down market. That is. when

negative sentiment unrelated to fundamentals affects individual investors, it (negatively) affects their demand for
country funds to a larger extent than positive sentiment would. Second, using the 4- and 13-week holding period

returns, we found evidence of a significant asymmetric exposure of fund excess returns to world stock returns
(RWRD). Specifically, the excess country fund returns are more greatly exposed to negative world stock returns

than they are to positive world stock returns. That the asymmetry is strongest ax long horizons suggests that
investors over.react much more strongly. over time, to negative news about world fundamentals than they do
about positive news about world fundamentals.

1V3 Time-varying Risk Premia and Cross-Border Restrictions

It is conceivable that the explanatory variables in the regressions in Table Sa capture the influence of
time-varying nsk premia in a model with rational investors and market frictions. For example. if markets are
segmented. innovations in the ratio of the domestic price of risk to the foreign market price of risk can affect the
discounts. Such variation can result from changes in the volatility of domestic relative to
foreign stock returns

(BBNW [l990jj. All else constant,

an

increase in the domestic price of risk will reduce the price of the fund

(and increase the discount), and ax the same rime reduce the

price of the domestic market index. An increase

in

the foreign price of risk will reduce the NAy (and lower the discount) while at the same
time lowering the
foreign masker index. Compared to the fund price, the effect of segmentation would be to make the NAy more
highly correlated with the local market index (REST). and less correlated with the domestic market indices (RSP.
RSML). Moreover, because the discount would reflect the ratio of the domestic price of risk to the
foreign
market price of risk, the discount would help predict the excess return on a fund.

To examine these issues, we divided our sample of funds according to whether their host
equity markets
are restricted or unrestricted. In each group of funds, we regressed the excess fund return (RFND-RNA
I') on the

31
earlier explanatory variables. If market segment.ation plays a role in the results in Table 8a, then RFND-RM4V
would be more sensitive to foreign stock returns and less sensitive to 11.5. (and world) stock returns for funds
whose host countries restrict capital movements.
Table 9 contains the results of these regressions as well as tests of coefficient differences across the two

groups of funds. In the one-week return horizon, the differences between the betas on the U.S. market indices
(RSP and RSML-RSP) are not statistically significant (p-values 0.99 and 0.63). Interestingly, the exposure of

RFND-RNA V of the restricted funds to the local market stock index (RFST) is significantly smaller than the
exposure of the unrestricted funds to the same variable (p-value = 0.07). At the four-week return horizon, the
differences in domestic market betas remain statistically insignificant, while the foreign market beta of the
res:flcred funds remains significantly lower than that of the unrestricted funds. At the thirteen-week horizon,
none of the observed betas differ significantly across the two groups.
The overall results show no strong evidence that market segmentation plays a role. Consequently,

models of time-varying risk premia may have a difficult time explaining the variability of excess fund returns.

Explicitly modelling the time-variation in the ratio of the foreign to domestic price of risk is left to future
research.

IV.6 Emerging Equity Markets Venus Developed Equity Markets

In the last few years, a number of foreign stock markets became increasingly liquid and have emerged

as vehicles for international investment. The Internalional Finance Corporation classifies the stock markets of
the following countries represented in our sample of country funds as 'emerging markets": Portugal, Turkey.
Mexico, Brazil, Chile, Philippines. India, Indonesia, Malaysia. Korea. Thailand, and Taiwan. Because these
markets are new to U.S. investors, information about fundamentals affecting asset prices in these countries may

be harder (or costlier) to collect and interpret. As a result, the country fund price may be sticky with respect to
developments in the emerging markets which affect fundamentals. Conversely, U.S. investors might place undue

reliance on information on 13.5. fundamentals as a substitute for fundamentals in the foreign market. To test for

32
differences between emerging and developed markets, we divided our sample of funds according to whether the
host market is developed or emerging arid for each group regressed the excess fund return RFND-RNAV on the

financial variables in multivariate regressions.

Table 10 contains the results of these regressions along with tests of coefficient differences across the
emerging and developed funds. The results for return horizons of one, four, and thirteen weeks are presented in
Panels

A, B, and C, respectively

In the one-, four, and thirteen-week horizon, the betas of excess returns

(RFND-RJ'lAV) of the emerging-markets hands are generally more highly exposed to U.S. and world risk than are
the excess returns of the developed-market funds. However, these differences ate far from statistically

significant. There is weak evidence, on the other hand, that the excess sensitivity of emerging markets funds to

the excess return on small-cap U.S. finns is greater than the cou-respànding exposure of the developed markets
(p-values

0.13 in Panel A. 0.05 in Panel B). Speculative bullishness by individuals for small firms may

coincide with small investor sentiment for small countries.

P/.7 Regionai Differences and Tnding Hours Mismatch

As noted in our data section, the period over which the fund return is computed does not exactly
overlap with the period over which the NAy return is computed. This mismatch arises because the local
currency net asset value of the coàntzy funds is computed on the basis of the market prices prevailing at the
close of stock trading in the host country. The fund's price in dollars. however, is computed on the basis of the

last market transaction closest to the close of trading on the New York or American Stock Exchanges. Thus,

fund prices and NAVs are only approximately synchronout
Non-synchronous returns data may introduce biases in the return-generating equations estimated above,

especially for the one-week horizon returns. For example, suppose that the U.S. and foreign fundainentais an
correlated, and a country fund's price observations are matched with the weekly close of the U.S. market, while

its NAy is matched with the weekly close of the local market Then both the correlation of the fund's return
with the foreign market and the correlation of the NAV return with the U.S. market will be biased downward.

33
As a result, the excess return on the fund may display an excess negative conctaijon with the foreign market and

an excess positive correlation with the U.S. market, even if both Fund and NAy reflect fundamental information.
These biases wilt be teast severe for funds whose host countries have trading hours most synchronous with the

U.S markets, and most severe for funds investing in countries whose trading hours are least synchronous.
To examine whether non-synchronous data can explain part of the correlations observed in Table Sa, we

partitioned our sample into three groups based on the geographical region of the host country: east Asian

(including Australia). European (including Turkey), and Latin American. The Latin American funds' NAy data
are the most synchronous with the actual price data from New York trading. The east Asian funds are the least
synchronous. For each geographic group, we regressed the nne-week excess fund return, RFND -RNA V, on the

explanatory variables, If non-synchronous trading accounts for part of the results in Table Ba, then RFND-RNAV
of the East Asian funds will have the greatest (positive) exposure to U.S. stock returns, and the greatest

(negative) exposure to local stock returns. Excess returns on Latin American would have the least exposure to
both U.S. and local stock returns.

Table II contains the results of the regressions for the one-week holding-period horizon (where biases
would be most important). The European funds have greater exposure to the local market stock returns (RFS7')

than either the Asian or Latin American funds. These differences are statistically significant in each case.
Meanwhile, there is no significant difference between the betas of the Asian and Latin American funds with
respect to the foreign stock returns. The excess returns of the Latin American funds have more exposure to the
U.S. return indices (RSP and RSML-RSP) than do the Asian or European funds, even though the Latin funds

suffer less from non-synchronous price/NAV observations. This difference is statistically significant for the beta

with the large U.S. firm index, RSP, although insignificant for RSP-RSML. Thus, the findings in Table II do
not support the hypothesis that non-synchronous data play a role in the findings of Table Ba.

V. Conclusion

This paper examined the weekly price behavior ci 35 country funds that traded on the New York and

34
American Stock Exchanges between 1985 and 1993. The aim of the paper was to characterize some basic

empirical regularities of country fund prices and to examine the extent to which the noise-trader mode] of asset
prices is consistent with the regularities.

Unlike domestic-equity funds, not all country funds tradeat an average discount. However, controlling

for the effect of cross-border restrictions, we find that country funds adhere to the stylized facts established for
domestic-equity funds: in the long run, discounts prevail for funds whose host countries allow free cross-border

capital movements. Like their domestic-equity counterparts, country funds are typically issued at a premium, and

this premium erodes by about 20% over the twenty four weeks that follow the IPO, the deterioration in the
premium is the same for funds invested in restricted markets and those invested in unrestricted markets.

The noise trading model of DSSW [1990J can easily explain the previous evidence. The average

discount for funds invested in countries with no restrictions on capital movements is attributable to noise-trader

risk, which depresses fund prices relative to their NAVs. The premium at the initiation of a country fund is
explained by the ability of fund organizers to time the issuance of country funds to coincide with positive
investor sentiment. The subsequent decline in the premium is explained by mean reversion in investor sentiment.

Discounts vary substantially over timc and contribute to a variance in country fund returns which is
generally three time greater than the variance of the return on the underlying assets. However, discounts are

largely stationary implying either: the NAy captures information about fundamental value not captured in the
fund price (that is. the fund is mispnced): the fund price contains information about the fundamental not captured
in the market value of the underlying assets or: both the fund price and the NAy carry fundamental information
not captured by the other. Regressions of fund returns and NAy returns on discounts suggest that the discount
has significant predictive power for the fund return. buu little predictive power for the NAy return. This
asymmetry suggests that mean-reverting sentiment is an important component of the price of the counuy funds

but not in the market value of the underlying assets, so that it is the fund which is primarily mispnced. This is
consistent with the idea that compared to the investor clienteles of country funds' underlying assets (presumably

foreign institutions and individuals), U$, individuals, the investor clientele of country funds. are prone to trade
on sentiment and to misperceive fundamental value.

35
Estimation

of an unobserved components model on the discounts of the nine oldest funds reveals a

common component which is strongly persistent. This common and persistent behavior is consistent with the
structure imposed on the noise trader model by DSSW (1990]. which requires that variation in sentiment be

systematic if it is to be priced in equilibrium. The common component we estimate accounts for roughly 20% of
the variance of weekly country fund discounts. Examination of the estimated common component reveals that

systematic variation in sentiment may be driven in part by widely noted world events such as the fall of the

Berlin Wall. During the aftermath of this event in 1990, country fund WOs peaked.
To capture the source of part of the variation in discounts over time, we ran regressions of the fund
return, NAV return, and their difference -- the excess fund return -- on returns of a number of aggregate

financial variables. We find that fund prices are 'sticky', that is. they do not move as much as their respective
NAVs, with respect to movements in the host country's aggregate stock market. Similarly, fund prices, which
are quoted in dollars. are sticky with respect to exchange rate revaluations, although this is largely a short-

horizon phenomenon. On the other hand, fund prices art overly sensitive to movements in world stock returns

and to U.S. stock returns as captured by the S&P 500. The oversensitivity to the world stock market index is
present for all holding-period horizons that we examine. Hence, if discounts reflect the sentiment and

misperceptions of the country funds' investor clientele, then this sentiment is partly driven by "world
fundamentals.

The excess return on U.S. small finns. which are predominantly traded by individual investors is another
significant factor in explaining contemporaneous country fund excess returns. Country fund prices are overly

sensitive to the small-/large-capitalization return differential. This regression result is robust to the inclusion of
other financial variables correlated with lund discounts, and is also robust to the return horizon. The finding
upholds LST's 119911 idea that sentiment, if it is systematic. will affect assets with little fundamental similarity

with country funds except that they share the same investor clientele, namely individual U.S. investors.
A model of rational traders could potentially explain the above correlations if the model is enriched by
introducing sufficient frictions. Although we leave a deeper examination of this question to future research, we
provide some evidence which casts doubt on the ability of rational models in the context of market imperfections

36
to explain variation in country fund discounts First, apart from the evidence on the average discounts, we find
no evidence that the discounts of funds whose host countries resuict cross-border equity investments behave

differently from the discounts of funds that invest in unrestricted markets. Moreover, we also find little evidence
in favor of market frictions caused by informational factors, or by non-synchronous data. For example, the
excess returns of funds invested in emerging markets, where information about fundamentals may be harder or

costlier to obtain, do not exhibit a higher correlation with the US market than the excess return of country funds
in developed markets, Similarly, the excess returns of funds whose price and NAy data suffer from the most
time-mismatch do not generally exhibit higher correlations with the U.S market. Overall, the facts we uncover
present a challenge to asset-pricing models based on fully-rational international investors.

37

References

Ammer. John M. (1990). 'Expenses, yields, and excess returns: new evidence on closed-end fund discounts from
the UK,'" London School of Economics. Financial Markets Group Discussion Paper #108.

Anderson. Seth Copeland (1986), "Closed-end funds versus market efficiency." Jousnoi of Porqoiio Management,

Fall. pp.63-65.
Bailey, Warren and Joseph tim (1992), "Evaluating the divcrsificañon benefits of the new countzy funds,"

Journal of Ponfolia Management, Spring, pp74-80
Barker, David (1991), 'Cross-sectional varialion in closed-end fund discounts," manuscript, University of
Chicago.

Bodurtha. James N.. Dong-Soo Kim, and Charles M.C. Lee (1993), "Closed-end counuy I1ands and U.S. market
sentiment," Working Paper. University of Michigan.

Bonser-Neal, Catherinc. Greggory Brauer. Robert Neal. and Simon Wheatley (1990), "International investment

restrictions and closed-end country fund prices." Journal of Finance, Vol.45, pp.523-547.
Boudreaux, Kenneth (1973). "Discounts and premiums on closed-end mutual funds:

a study in valuation,"

Journal of Finance, May. pp.S I5-522.
Brazier. Greggocy A. (1988), "Closed"end fund shares' abnormal returns and the information content of discounts

and premiums," Journal of Finance, Vol.43, No.1, pp.113-127.
Brickley. J.A. and 3.5. Schallheim (1985). Lifting the lid on closed-end investment companies: a case of
abnormal returns," Journal of Quantitative and Financial Analysis, Vol.20, pp.107-l 18.

Chopra. Navin, Charles MC. Lee, Andrei Shleiffer, and Richard Thaler (1993). 'Yes, discounts on closed-end
funds are a sentiment index." Journal of Finance. Vol 48, June, pp.801-SOS.

De Long. J. Bradford, Andrei Shleiffer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert Waldmann (1990), "Noise trader risk

in financial markets," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 98. no.4. pp.703-738.
Divecha, Arjun B.. Jaime Drach. and Dan Stefek (1992). "Emerging markets: A quantitative perspective,"

38
Journal of Ponfolio Management. Fall, ppA I-51.

Diwan. Ishac, and Santiago Galindez (1991), "County funds,' manuscript. Debt and International Finance
Division of the World Bank. washington DC.
Diwan, Ishac, Vihang Errunza, and Lemma Senbet (1992), "The pricing of country funds and their role in capital
mobilization for emerging economies," Working Paper 1058. Debt and International Finance Division of
the World Bank. December,
Emmza, Vihang, and Etienne Losq (1985). "International asset pricing under mild segmentation: theory and
tests," Journal of Finance, VoL4O, March. pp.105-124.
Eun, Cheol. and Janakiraznanan (1986), "A model of international asset pricing under mild segmentation: theory
and tests," Journal of Finance, Vol.41, pp.897-914.

Fredman, Albert J.. and George C. Scott (1991), Investing in Closed-End Funds: Finding Value and Building
Wealth, New York: New York Institute of Finance, Simon and Schuster.

Harvey A.E. (1981), Time Series Models, Oxford: Phillip Allan,
lotion. Phillipt, and Eduardo Schwartz (1986), "Integration vs. segmentation in the Canadian stock market."

Journal of Finance, Vol.41, NoJ. pp.603-615.
Lee, Charles M.C., Andrei Shleiffer, and Richard TInier (1991), "Investor sentiment and the closed-end fund

puzzle, Journal of Finance, Vol.46, No.1. pp.1$-l09.
Malkiel, Burton (3, (1977), "The valuation of closed-end investment company shares," Journal of Finance,
Vol.32. No.3, pp.847-860.

Malkiel. Burton (3. (1990). A Random Walk Down Wall Street. Norton: New York.
Newey. W. and K. West (1987), "A simple positive-definite heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent
covariance macrix,' Econornegrica, Vol.55. pp.703-708.

Peavey. lW. (1990). "Returns on initial offerings of closed-end funds," Review of Financial Studies, Vol.3,
pp.695-708.

Pontiff, Jeffrey (1991). "Closed-end fund premia and returns: implications for financial market equilibrium,"
Manuscript. William E. Simon Graduate School of Business Mminisuation, University of Rochester.

39

Rjchart, It. Malcolm. Don It. Fraser. and John C. Groth (1980), "Winning Strategies for closed-end funds.'
Journal of Portfolio Management, Fall. pp.50-55.

Roenfelt, Rodney L. and Donald Tuttle (1973), "An examination of the discounts and premiums of closed-end
investment companies." Journal of Business Research, Vol.1, pp.129-140.

Roll. Richard (1992), "Industrial structure and the competitive behavior of international stock market indexes,"
Jounzai of Finance, Vol. 47. March. pp.3-4 I.

Rozeff, MS. (1991). 'Closed-end fund discounts and premiums." Pacific Basin Capital Markers Research,
Vol.11. pp.503-522.

Sargent. Thomas J. and Christopher A. Sims (1977). "Business cycle modelling without pretending to have too
much a-priori economic theory." in C. Sims. ci al. eds.. New Methods Ui Business Cycle Research,
Minneapolis: Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Sharpe. William F. and Howard B. Sosin (1975). "Closed-end investment companies in the United States: risk

and return." in B. Jacquilat, S.. European Finance Association 1974 Proceedings, Amsterdam: North

Holland.
Shiller. Robert (1984). "Stock prices and social dynamics." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol.2,
pp.457-498.

Stock. James. and Mark Watson (1988). "Testing for common trends." Journal of the American Statistical
Association. Vol.83, No.404. pp.1097-1107.

Thompson. Rex (1978). "The information content of discounts and premiums on closed-end fund shares,"
Journal of Financial Economics. Vol.6, pp.15 1-186.
Weiss. Kathleen (1989). "The post-offering price performance of closed-end lunds," Financial Management,
Autumn. pp.57-67.

White. Halbez't (1980). "A heteroskedasticity-consistent covariance matrix estimator and direct test for
heteroskedasticity." Economenica. Vol.48. pp.817-838.

Zweig, Martin E. (1973). "An investor expectations stock price predictive model using closed-end fund
premiums." Journal of Finance. Vol.28. pp.67-87.

40
I. The precursors to the modem publicly-traded country funds were the intemationaily diversified investment

trusts first formed in Great Britain in the 1860s. They originally invested in foreign government bonds, and
eventually diversified into foreign industrial bonds, land mortgages, and American railroad debentures. Foreign

equity funds in the U.S. have a history dating back to 1951-52 with the Israel Development Corporation and the
Canadian Fund. During the 1980s, the London and Hong Kong Stock Exchanges also emerged as centers for
cowiu-y fund trading.
2. Recent work on international investment has stressed the role of foreign and emerging markets in effective

diversification (Divecha. Drach, and Stefak [1992]).
3. Although American Depository Receipts (ADRs) serve a similar purpose, they do not represent as broad a
spectrum of countries, nor can they be used to diversify as extensively and costlessly in one foreign country as

can be done with country funds.

4. The rise (fall) in the premiums (discounts) between Nov. 3. '89 and Jan. 26. '90 were as follows: AUS: 77%,

FIB: 54%. SWFI: 21%. ITL: 29%. MIS: 55%. ThA:

60%. TAW: 27%.

5. In this regard. the work presented in Bodurtha, Kim, and Lee (1993] is in the same spirit and has results
similar to ours.
6.1ST (1991). for example, examine a sample of 20 primarily domestic-equity stock funds and find that on
avenge. the value-weighted discount on a portfolio of these funds trades at 20 peitent lest than net asset value
over the period 1965-85.

7. Ammer [19901. for example, finds that the organizational expenses of British closed-end funds fail to play a
role in the time-series or cross-sectional variation in discounts.

8. The stylized facts are as follows. First, new funds are typically priced at a premium reflecting underwriting
and organizational costs. Subsequent to the IPO. Funds tend to underperfonn relative to other IPOs and returns

on the ne asset value (Peavey 11989) and Weiss [1990]). Six months following the IPO, the average fund trades
at a signiflcant discount. Second, Brauer 11984] and Brickley and Schallheim [1985) show that when funds
announce plans to open-end or liquidate (and distribute the proceeds to shareholders) the discounts move toward

zero and positive returns accrue to fund shareholders. Third. fund prices appear to be excessively volatile: the

41
variance of fund returns exceeds the variance of returns on the underlying assets (Sharpe and Sosin (l975])
Finally, portfolios of funds with large discounts subsequently generate excess risk-adjusted returns (Thompson

[1978]) and abnormal profits can be generated using the inlonnation content of publicly-disclosed discounts
(Richards. Fraser. and Groth [1980], and Anderson [1980]).
9. The demands of the two representative agents can be derived as the first-order condition of a problem in

which each agent maximizes the expected value of an exponential utility function in next-period wealth and
where asset prices are normally distributed (1)55W (1990)).

10. Another difference between country funds and domestic-equity funds is that a host government may
withhold taxes upon distributions to country fund shareholders. With reciprocal agreements between the host
government and the IfS, government, the U.S. shareholder will include the withheld taxes as a foreign tax credit
against U.S. taxes. In the absence of reciprocal agreements, however, the shareholder may be doubly taxed. The

latter may have the effect of depressing the fund's price below its NAY in the presence of cross-border
investment restrictions.

I 1 Our classifications, restricted and "unrestricted". are based on the classification given in the International
Finance Corporation's Emerging Markets Handbook. The IFC classifies countries into five categories according
to their degree of openness: "free", "relatively free", "authorized investors". "special classes of shares", and

"closed', We placed all countries represented in our sample which are not classified as emerging markets in the

"unrestricted" category, along with those classified as "free" by the IEC. All others were placed in the restricted
category.

12. The integrity of the data was ensured by checking all outliers and missing observations against the databases
kept at the offices of the fund managers or administrators,

13. Pursuant to the Investment Company Act, the funds make two kinds of distributions: an income distribution
based on portfolio earnings net of expenses, and a capital gains distribution based on realized portfolio

appreciation. The shareholder is taxed on capital gains distributions at his relevant capital gains tax rate,
Income distributions are taxed at the regular income tax rate Whereas the internal Revenue Code requires the
funds to distribute at least 98 percent of its income in order to avoid an excise tax, the funds may choose to

42
retain capital gains. Most funds elect to make capital gains distributions,

rather than retain them, because

corporate tax rates on capital gains exceed individual rates. If the fund does choose to retain portfolio capital
gains and pay taxes on them, the taxpaying shareholder can earn a tax credit equal to the proportionate amount
share of Federal taxes paid by the fund on the shareholder's behalf and then increase the
year-end cost basis of

the shares by the retained amount. This is because the shareholder is deemed to have re-invested the amount
retained by the fund net of tax (See Fredman and Scott (1992]).
14. Bonser-Neal, Brauer. Neal, and Wheatley [1991J demonstrate that a relation exists for all but one of the five
countries examined, between announcements of changes in investment restrictions and changes in discounts and

premia. BBNW confirm, however, that changes in cross-border restrictions are unable to account for much, if
not all, of the time-variation in discounts and premia.
15. Weiss (1990) examines aftermarket prices of both domestic- and foreign-equity fund IPOs. Although she
finds that the mean premium for a sample of foreign stock funds (country funds and internationally diversified

funds) is significantly negative (-11.42%) six months following an IPO, unlike the domestic equity funds
examined, the cumulative returns on the international funds over six months are not statistically different than
zero. Because Weiss evaluates an earlier period (1985-87). her sample of IS foreign funds is relatively small,
and this may explain her negative results. Peavey 11990) examines IPOs and aftermarket performance of

publicly-traded funds between 1986 and 1987. including five country funds. His tests miie no reference to fund
returns relative to NAy returns, yet he finds that T-bill-. and market-adjusted returns arc significantly negative in
the aftermarket.

16. Thompson [1978J, using a sample of 23 (primarily NYSE) domestic equity funds traded between 1940 and
1975 demonstrates that nsk-adjusted returns on portfolios of discounted fund shares, outperformed the market.

Richards, Fraser, and Groth 11980) and Anderson [1985]. using a sample of diversifled and specialized domesticequity funds derive optimal trading rules for earning excess rates of return.

17. Some commentators have argued that a country fund with a large premium may reflect underpricing of the
underlying assets due to unwarranted bearishness by the local investors. For example, see the discussion in

Fredman and Scott j1992) concerning the views of Jon Woronoff in the International Fund Monito,, June 1990.

43
IS. For the equations describing the 13-week cumulative returns on the country funds, we find that the
coefficient on the discount is positive and significant at the 10% level or less for 27 (79%) of the country funds.

Using the normal approximation to the binomial distribution, and assuming cross-sectional independence, this
result is associated with a p-value of less than 1% under the null hypothesis that no positive association exists

between discounts and future rewrns on the fund.
19. LST(1991] examine the comovements in discounts by computing the pairwise correlations across ten funds

using monthly data over a period of twenty years- They conclude that correlations are high enough to suggest
that the discounts of different domestic funds move together.

20. The Kalman filter is a well-known way to compute the Gaussian likelihood function. The filter recursively
constructs minimum mean-square error estimates of the unobserved state vector, given observations of the

measurable variables. This has two parts: the transition equation and the measurement equations. The transition
equation describes the evolution of the unobserved state variables, Z and u,. and their respective tags. The
measurement equation relates the observed variables to the state variable

21. A specification test for the model was also conducted (Sargent and Sims 11977]). Specifically, we test the
restriction that all comovements in the series arise from a single source against the alternative that they have an

unrestricted covariance matrix. The test examines the implication that the spectral density matrix of the vector

DISC,, constructed by arranging the fund discounts into a ((xl vector, has a factor sUucture. We perform the
lest by partitioning the cross-spectrum into five equally-spaced frequency bands. The f statistic has 275 degrees

of freedom and equals 130-65 with a p-value of 099 This provides little evidence against the restrictions.
21 To pit-whiten the discount data, autoregressions of order I through 12 were run. The order of the process
was selected so that it minimized the maximum deviation from the cumulative spectrum of a white noise process.
23- Excluding the Germany Fund from the above procedures does not lead to a significant change in the test
results or in the series plotted in Figure 3.

24. During the 1980s. offerings of domestic-equity funds peaked in 1986 and 1987, prior to the stock market
crash.

44
25. The Newey-West t-statistics of Panels B and C treat the stacked data as a single time-series, that

is. they do

not recognize the break in the stacked data between two separate funds. This fact is likely to bias the reported tstatistics slightly downward.

26. It is interesting to note that the beta of the underlying assets (NAy) with the local market is

significantly

less than one in the multivariate regressions that control for exchange-rate changes. This potentially reflects one

of two things. First, the foreign equity holdings of the funds may indeed be less risky" than the foreign market.
By holding a disproportionate amount of small firms, the fund reduces its exposure to a foreign market index

that may be dominated by two or three large firms (Mexico is a well-known example). Second. a country fund
is never 100% fully-invested in the foreign equity market it represents, especially if the fund is new and still

holds a large portion of the IN) proceeds as cash. In general, the fund's NAy may represent non-equity assets
such as: local and dollar-denominated time deposits and repurchase agreements, tax refunds, interest receivable,
and currency options.
27. The exchange rate, of course, is a component of the NAy computation (see section II).
28.

That the NAV retains exposure io both the world index and the U.S. index, after controlling for the local

market return. may reflect the choice of fund managers to invest in finns which are export-oriented and more

highly linked to the world and U.S. economies that the firms represented in the host country's stock market in
general.

29. This result may be implicit in Bailey and Lim 119921. They find that country fund price volatility is higher
during New York trading hours rather than during host country trading hours,

30. Evidence of such a phenomenon is found in Roll Il992J, who shows that international stock correlations for

finns within a given industry are "too low.' That country fund prices may over-react to innovations in the world
index, controlling for innovations in the domestic (U.S.) index, may be evidence that country fund investors have
some sophistication tn that they react (albeit excessively) to extra-national events. Alternatively, country fund
investor clienteles may include Japanese individuals who over-react to fundamental innovations in their own
country, which is given much weight in the value-weighted world stock market index.

45
31 To see how the popular press covered these events, see: Tatiana Pouschine, "How do you say 'manipuladon

in Japanese." itt Forbes. February 19, 1990; NiIthil Hutheesing, "What did in those country funds. Forbes. May
28, 1990; Deborah Hargreaves. "Korea Fund comes at difficult time,' Financial Tinter, April 24, 1990: and

Spain Fund Saga, in Barron's, September 25. 1989.
32. The funds are: BRZ,FAS,FIB,GER.SWH,flt,KOR,MLY,MEX.SPN.TAW.THA,UKF.

The

Table I
Sample of Closed-End Country Funds
Dates of Initial Public Offerings and Dates of Initial Time-Series Observations

Country Fund (CODE)

Austria (AUS)
Brazil (BRZ)
Brazil Equity (ERR)
Chile (CHL)
Emerging Germany (EMG)
Emerging Mexico (EMX)
First Australia (FAS)
First Iberian (FIB)
First Philippine (FPH)
France Growth (FRG)
Future Germany (FTG)
Germany (GER)

Growth Fund of Spain (GSP)
Helvetia (Swiss) (SWH)
India Growth (1MG)
Indonesia (IND)
Irish Investment (IRE)

Italy (ITL)
Jakarta Growth (1KG)
Japan OTC (JPO)
Korea (KOR)
Korean investment (KIN)

Malaysia (MLY)
Mexico Equity and Income (MEl)

Mexico (MEX)
New Germany (NOR)
Portugal (PTG)
ROC Taiwan (ROC)
Singapore (SNG)
Spain (5PM)

Date of
Initial Public
Offenng ([P0)
9-21-89
3-31-88
4-3-92
9-26-89
3-29-90
10-2-90
12-12-85

4-3-88
11-8-89
5-10-90

2-27-90
7-18-86
2-14-90
8-19-87
8-12-88
3-1-90
3-3-90
2-26-86
4-16-90
3-14-90
8-22-84
2-18-92
5-8-87
8-14-90
6-3-8!
1-24-90
11-1-89
5-19-89
7-24-90
6-21-88

Date of
Initial Time-Series
Observation
10-6-89

4-15-88
4-10-92
10-20-89

4-20-90
10-12-90
1-3-86

4-22-88
12-1-89

7-27-90
3-9-90
8-22-86
3-9-90

8-28-87
8-26-88
3-16-90
4-13-90
4-4-86
4-20-90
3-30-90
1-4-85
3-13-92
6-5-87

9-7-90
1-3-86

2-9-90
11-17-89

Taiwan (TAW;
Thai (THA)
Thai Capital (TFIC)

12-23-86
2-17-88

5-22-90

Turkish Investment (TRK)
United Kingdom (UKF)

5-19-89
8-3-90
7-15-88
2-13-87
2-26-88
6-8-90

12-5-89

12-15-89

8-6-87

8-7-87

Source: IPO dates arc from Moody's Financial Manual.

Table 2

Market Capitalization and Institutional Holdings of Country Funds

Summary statistics for the sample of 35 country funds are compared to a sample of domestic equity funds and to
a sample of operating finns whose average capitalization is comparable to the country funds. The sample of

domestic equity funds is taken from the list of 'general equity funds' in Barron's. The samples of operating
firms are random samples drawn from drawn from the third and fourth quintiles in Standard & Poors I,viwssrial
Compustar Tape, on the basis of total market capitalization (first quintile being the smallest firms). Ste the text
for a description of the classification of country funds into the unrestricted and restricted samples.

Number of
Firms/Funds
In Sample

Average
Market
Capitalization

Number of
Institutional

(S Million)

Owners

Average
Percent of
Shares Held by
Institutions

18

14

Average

Country Funds

35

110.92

Unrestricted
Restricted

21

87.13

16

II

14

146.6

21

18

Domestic Funds

19

402.4

23

6

Third Quintile C'ompustat Firms

40

57.13

22

25

Fourth Quintile Compusiar Firms

43

236.13

60

40

Source: Data on market capitalization and institutional holdings is from Standard & Poors Stock Guide for
December 1992.

Table 3

Variable Definitions and Construction

FND1,

Dollar price of county fund I at the end of week r. All prices are recorded at
Friday's market
close in New York with the following exceptions: the Brazil (BRZ), Brazil Equity (BRE)
Emerging Mexico (EMX), Mexico Equity and Income (MEl), Mexico (MEX). Singapore
(SNG), and Taiwan (TAW) fund prices are recorded at Thursday's market close; the India
Growth Fund (ING) prices are recorded at the Wednesday close. If the reporting day is a New
York holiday, the previous day's New York closing prices are used.

NAV,,

Dollar net asset value of fund i at the end of week:. The NAY is computed by the fund itse]f
using the local-cun-ency pnces of the underlying assets recorded at Friday's local market close

and the Fnday afternoon fix for exchange rates in New York with the fo]lowing exceptions:

the BRZ, BRE. EMX, MEl, MEX. SNG, and TAW funds construct the NAy using prices at
Thursday's local market close, and Thurcday afternoon's New York exchange rate. The ING
fund uses Wednesday's prices and exchange rates. If the reporting day is a New York holiday,
the previous day's local closing prices and exchange rates axe used.

REX,

ln(EX,,1/EX,,). the continuously compounded weekly dollar return on holding a unit of the

currency of the country represented by fund Ex, represents the exchange rate at 3:00 p.m. in
New York (expressed in dollars per loreign currency unit) at the end of week x. where the day
marking the end of the week matches the day on which ENDLI and NAy11 are recorded.

Source: Federal Reserve Bank of New York for the currencies of Australia, Austria. France,
Germany. Ireland, Italy, Japan. Spain. Switzerland, and UK (all bids). Remaining exchange
rates come from Banque de Generate through Data Resources (DRI), and reflect the middle of
the bid-ask spread.

Table 3 continued

RFST,,,

ln(EST,/FST,j, the weekly return (excluding dividends) on the host country's aggregate siock
market in local currency units. FST is the host country's aggregate stock market price index
in local currency at the end of week r. matching the day that FND and NAy are recorded.
Source: Morgan Stanley Capita] International (MSCI) through DRI.

RSP,

tn(SP500,.1/SP500J, the weekly return on the Standard and Poor's 500 (excluding dividends),

computed separately for each fund to match the same calendar horizon as RFND and RNAV.

Source: DRI.

RSML,,,

ln(R2000,,1/R20001). the weekly return on the Russet]-2000 index of small capitalization stocks

(excluding dividends), compuied separately br each fund to match the same calendar horizon

as RFND and RNAV. Source: DRI.

RWRD1,,1

ln(WORLD,/WORLD). the weekly return on the world stock market in dollars (excluding
dividends), computed separately for each fund to match the same calendar horizon as RFND

and RNAV. Source: MSCI through DRI.

of the pretniuniidiscount

Funds

on the first dale

of Country

for which

the fund reports a net asset value and at

-0.031
(0.025)
-0.067
(0.019)
0.020
(0.048)

Unrestricted
(21)

Restricted

(14)

(35)

Country Funds

Average
Premium]
Discount

0.0737

0.0767

(0.106)

(1.244

(0.034)

0.074

(0.049)

0.142

at First
Observation

Premium

0.0755

Mean

Prciiiurn

Mean

Underwriter's

0.180
(0.113)

-0.019
(0.037)

0.061
(0.053)

+4

0.112
(0.055)

(0fl41)

-0.023

(0.049)

0.031

÷8

(0.057)

Cl. 112

-0.047
(0.035)

-0.(E2
(0.038)

+ 12

(0.055)

0.081

(0.031)

-0.098

-0,044
(0.037)

+ 16

+20

0,058
(0.044)

-0.117
(0.022)

(0.047)

0.068

(0.021)

-0139

(0.045)

-0.070

+24

and restricted funds.

-0.061
(0.036)

of unrestricted

Mean Premiurtiat:

positive while discounts are denoted as negative. See the text for a description of the classification

(0.044)

0.(X)7

(0.019)

-0.091

(0.022)

-0.056

Average
Prein,/lDisc.
(Not md. weeks
0 to + 24)

in Table I, The first NAV observation date usually follows the IPO by two to three weeks. The table
applies the convention that premia are denoted as

subsequent four-week intervals, In all but two cases, (MEX and KOR) the firsL NAV observation date corresponds to the first sample observation
reported

The table reports the cross-secttonal means and standard errors

Post-Offering Price Performance and Average i'rerniunilDiscoun(-)

lahle 4

Table S

Tests of the Non-Stationarity of Country Fund Discounts

The table reports the results from applying Stock and Watson's [1988] unit-root test (for a univariate time-series)
io the country fund discount data. The test requires first transforming each fund's discount by laking first
differences. The flrst-diflerenced series are then passed through two separate filters. The first filter removes
autoregressive dependence of order I or 8 (the "autocorrelation correction) as well as a time trend. The second

filter makes the autocorrelation correction of order I or S but does not remove the time trend. Each liltered
series F3.D!SC is Lhen regressed on the lagged "aloe of the discount:

FaD/SC

- k D/SC

+

The table reports (for each fund) the test statistics associated with the null hypothesis that b is less than or equal

to zero (a unit root). The test statistics are distributed under the null according to the empirical distributions
given in Stock and Watson [1988].

Table S continued

Stock-Watson Test Statistic
Autoregressive Corrections = I

Time Series

Fund

Observations

AUS
BRZ
BRE

Time-Trend
Filtered

74

-2.37

251
43

-3.25
-3.05
-2.50

CHL
EMG

172

EMX
FAS

121

46

-4.48 "

337

-3.54

OS?

152

-3.35 *

SWU

284
323

-4.40 a.

151

-3.88 "

FRG
FTG
GER

ING

IND
IRE

lii

1KG

KOR

-4.25 "
-4.10
-3.33
-2.76
-2.69

MLY

MEl

126

MEX
NOR
PTG
ROC
SNO
SPN
TAW
THA

370
156
168

THC

-1.43
-3.00

4.27 "

-255

-3.00 "

-3,97"
-422

-3.25 "
-3.19

359 '
-2.93 **

-3.3! "

-3.61 "
-2.36

-120

-3.55 •*

-3.72 ••

-143

-2.36
-4.66

-4.36 '"
-2.22

-385 •
-3.14 *

349 4..
-2.93 "

-237

-2.38

-3.56 "
-100

-2.02
-1.82

-3.72 "
-3.72 "

-2.41

-409 "
-3,04

-1.81

-2.22
-3A3 **
-3.97

-2&4 *

-3.26 •

-3.07 **

-4.42 '"

-2.07
-1.73

-2.99
-2.40

238
312
258

-3.43 "

-1.82

-3.39 *

-5.12 "

-3.42 "

-3.70 "
-2.72

-42 I "

-3.49 "
-I 95

-234
-277

-3.42 "
-2.33
-2.54

-2.87 •
344 *5.
-3.60
-2.24
-2.30

-173 "

-4.18 "

-2.58 *

-3.28 *

—422 "

-2-27

-3.22 •

-3.22 •

-3.22 "

-1.55

-2.15

-1.23

-7.22 •.

—4.49 "

-3_go "

-2.66 *

.

23/34
68%

23/33

20)34

16/34

68%

59%

47%

Level

Note:

-3.00 "
-

-3.29 *

-2.43

-3.02 "

-2.33

-4.00 "

-2.93 "

-4.24 '"

287

-2.08

-3.35 *

-2.84

-3.53 a

IJKF

-L59

4.01 "

-187 **

94

TRK

-2.93

.4.97 "
-4.82 "

131

139
164

Number
Significant
at the 10%

-

147

422
47
296

KIN

4.46 "

357
145
148

JPO

-5.19 "

-2.70

Filtered

-2.21

-2.70

-171

I Not Time-Trend

-2.70 •

-4.28
-2.54

167
132
157

Time-Trend
Filtered
-2.04
-2.43

-297"

-4.37 "

FIB

-2.39
-2.05

-4.47 "

370
250

FPH

Not Time-Trend
Filtered

Autoregressive Corrections = 8

Test statistic is significant at the 10% level; " Test statistic is significant at the 5% level:
Test statistic is significant at the 1% level.

Table 6

The Predictive Power of Country Fund Discounts

Results from the following regressions are presented:
Panel A:

ERFNDJ,

&, + DJSCJ + C,)

Panel B:

RNA V

- a' t W,DISC,, + e

where RFND and RNAV, are the returns on fund and on the net assets of fund ,. respectively, DISC, is the
discount on the ' country fund at the end of week 1. CX, and 13, are fund-specific parameters. The regressions

are generated for cumulative return horizons of 1.4, and 13 weeks (N=1.4,13). Test statistics are based on

standard errors corrected for conditional heteroskedasticity (N=l) and for autocori-elation of order N-I (N=4,13)
using the methods in White (19801 and Newcy and West (1987j, respectively.

Table 6 continued

Panel A: Cumulative Return on the Fund is Regressed on the Discount

Fund

Return Horizon =
4 weeks

Return Horizon =
I week
13'

3'

adj. R2

0.063
0.033

-0.00
0.00

0.03 3

0.00

0.027

0.0!

BRE

0.249

CML
EGR
EMX
FAS
FIB

FPH
FRU
FTC
GER

0.129 •"

0.10
0.06

0.849

0.41

0.340

0.12

0.289

010

0.71!

010

0.117

0.09
0.04
0.02

0.592

0.04
0.28
0.13

0.237

0.0!

0.170

0.303 "

"
0.076 "'
0.057
0.584
0.330
0.064

"

asp

0.225 "

SWH

0.129

INC
IND

0.100 *

0.06

1.084

0.16
0.16

0.167
0088

-0.02
0.10

0.043

-0.02
0.03
0.14

0.090 *
0.030

0.288 ••

0.713 '

0.02

0.184

0.168

0-Il

0.497

0.081

0.03

0.231 "

ROC
SNO

0.057

0.0!

0.!36

0. 139

SPN

0.022

TAW
THA
THC
TRK
UKF

0.006
0.061

0.07
0.00
-0.00
0.02

0 366
0.079
0.027
0.149

0.06

0.615

0.00
0.10

0.036

AVG

0.135

0.247 "

(1400 *

012

0.242

0.01

0.05

•-

0.512 "
0336

0.08

0.26
0.03

0.01

0.012
0.077

0.029

0.47
0.36
0.34

1.140
1.107

0.03

-0.0 I

0.192 "

0.10

0.828 •-•

0.004

0.014
0.026 *

"

0.405

0.03
0.23
0.07
0.04
0.00
0.02

•

0.27
0.23

0.16

0.160

0.558 •"

••

••
0.5!?

0.03
0.16

ipo

PTG

0.853

•"

1.432

0.655

0.065

"

I.055"

0.07
0.13
0.40

0.0!
0.14

0.823
0.934
0.938

0.07

m.

0.298 "
0.077 "

0.214 •

0.11
0.06

0-01

0.283

JEG

ME!
MEX
NCR

••

0.173

0104

0.578 "

0.251 "
0.079 "

ML?

0.272

weeks

adj. R

0.08
0.05

IRE

KOR
KIN

13

adj. R2

AUS
B R2

'

Return Horizon =

•'

1.067 •'
0.570 •"
0.422
0.701

•

0197

0A16

0.07

0395

0.02
0.16
0.02

-0.00

0.530
0.778
0.400
0.179

0.14

0.305

1.323

0.737

0.16
0.09
0.25

0.34
0M7
-0.02

0.940

0.25
0.03
0.28

-0.0I
0.29

•

0.34
0,33
0.05
0.43

0.20
0.10

0.35

0.04

1.727

-0.00

0.025

015

1.09!

0.12
0.03
0.05
0.36
-0.01

0.21

0.667

0.18

Table 6 continued

Panel B: Cumulative Return on the Net Asset Value is Regressed on the Discount

Fund

Return Horizon =

Return Horizon =

Return Horizon =

I week

4 weeks

13 weeks

adj. R
AUS
BRZ
BRE
CML
EGR

-0.060"
-0.026
-0.002

auto

SWIM

-0.078
0.030
-0.037
0.005
-0.001
0.039
-0.027
-0.022
0.020
-0.016

ING
IND

-0.046 "

EMX
FAS

FIB
FPH
FRG

ErG
GER
GSP

IRE

Ifl.

.0.006
-0.017

1KG

-0.031

1PO

-0.054
-0.009
-0.063

KOR

KIN
MLY
MEl
MEX

0.001

0.054 -

ROC
SNG
SPN

-0.016
-0.028
-0.013
-0.053
0.002
-0.004

TAW

-0.04-4 "

THA
THC
TRK

-0.016
-0.050
-0.034

UKF

0.003

AVG

-0.017

NGR

PIG

0.06

-0.204 "

OA

-0.086
0.222
0.054
-0.036
0,080
-0.072
0.009
-0.006

-0.02
-0.00
0.01

-0.00
0.01

-0.00
-0.01

-0.00
-0.00
0.01
-0.01

-0.00

-

jY,

0.04
-0.01

0.00
0.02
0.03
0.00
0.02
-0.00
0.02
-0.00
0.00
-0.00
0.02
-0.01
-0.00
0.06
0.00
0.00
0.00
-0.00

0.01

0.222
-0.007
-0.052
0.074
-0.031
-

-0.202 "
0.026
-0.043
-0.109
-0.171
-0.020

-0.293 "
0.082 •
0.162 *
-0.063
-0.059
-0.057

-0.178 "
0.037
-0.0 13

-0.171 "

adj. R'
0.18

001
0.01

0.00
-0.01

-0.00
0.00
-0.00
-0.01
0.05
-0.01
0.01

-0.00
-0.00

0.14
-0.01

[1',

-0.444
-0.137
0.109
0.409
-0.128
0.680
-0.147
-0.047
0.080
0.248
-0.025
-0.07]
0.183
-0.054

-

-0.727 "
0.214

0.01

-0.137 *

0.08
0.08
0.00
0.19
0.03
0.04
0.00

-0134 *

I

'k level.

0.30
0.01
-0.03
0.10

0.00
0.05
0.01

0(X)
0.01

0.02
-0.01
0.01

0.00
-0.00
-

0.37
0.02
0.03
0.08

-0.189
-0.054

0.03

-1.090 "

0.82
0.21

0.05

0.363
0.507
-0.094
-0.054
-0.159
-0.437

-0.00
-0.00

0.104
-0.020

0.01

0.02

-0.440 '

0.01

0.09
-0.00
-0.00
0.04
0.09
0.00
-0.00

-0.035
-0.004
-0.111
0.003

0.00
-0.01
0.02
-0.00

0.602
-0.147
-0.386
0.387

0.35
0.08
0.02
0.09
0.07

-0.031

0.03

-0.039

0.08

0.18

Note: • indicates significance at the O% level: " indicates significance at the 5% level;
indicates significance at the

adj. R

Table 7

Estimation of an Unobserved Components Model of Country Fund Discounts

Results from estimating the following models am presented:
Panel A:

Panel B:

A(L)DlSBZ+u;24eu.jJ K
where e and c. are nomially-distributejj white noise errors. Z represents the common cornponeni in discount
variation. u.. is the idiosyncratic component of the discount of country fund I. L is the lag operator, and ci and 3
are autoregressive parameters to be estimated. Each of the two models is estimated with nine country funds
(K=9) using weekly discount data over the period January 1988 through January 1993. The models are estimated

by casting them in a vecwr suce-space fomi and applying the Kalman filter to evaluate the likelihood functions.
In the second model (Panel B), the discounts for the funds are each filtered through AJL). a polynomial in L, (0

pre-whiten" the data. The choice of .4, for i = I

K. is described in the text. In each case, the variance of e is

normalized Lu t. while cii',). (he siandard error of ,. is an estimable parameter.

Table 7 conunued

Panel A:

The estimate of a. the autoregressive parameter for the common factor 2. was estimated to be 096 (se. 0.03fl.
The parameters pertairung to the individual funds were estimated as follows:

Parameter

Contribution of
variance of Z to variance

Fund

of DISC

B,

FAS

0.0082

0.67

0.186

GER

0.0161

0.74

0.411

SWH

0.0081 *

0.57

0.286

ITL

0.0098 **

0.78

0.218

KOR

0.0059 •

0.98

0.077

NILY

0.0120

0.85

0.263

MEX

0.0080'

0.81

0.120

TAW

0.0069

0,95

0.056

UK.F

0.0048

0.64

0Db

AVG

J

0.0088

0.78

[

0.195

Table 7 continued
Panel B:

Parameter
Fund

Contribution of
of Z to variance
of A (L)D1SC,

variance

B

at v)

MS

0.027 "

0.056

0.155

GER

0.047 '"

0.072

0.298

SWU

0.028 "

0.045

0.274

Lii

0.024 "

0.063

0.129

KOR

0.019 "

0.075

0.06

NILY

0.033 "

0.070

0.185

NIEX

0.025

0.076

0.101

TAW

0.026 "

0.102

0.061

UKF

[

0.024

0.039

0.272

AVG

[

0.028

0.066

0.17!

Notes: * indiczues siniticance at the l02 level:
indicates sicntficance at the I

level.

indicates si2niflcance at the 5% level;

RETJ•
11

DISC +
£ RFST,n

N

+

N
n—I

E REX,J.
+

nI

N

of
1,4, and 13 weeks

methods in While

li,r conditional

+
116

£(RSMLI.n

N

-RSP,)

+

are the adjusted R2s.

(Panels B and C) using the

in square brackets

of order N-!

the independent variables to be the same across

heteroskedasticity (Panel A) autoctirrelation

cxlticients on

1980J and Newey and West 119871. respectively. In the univariate regressions, the nLIInbers

funds. Numbers in parentheses are t-slalistics corrected

n—I

L RSP,

N

form:

(N=I.4.13) and are presented in Panels A. 8. and C. respectively The

equations arc estimated by stacking the country funds returns data so as to restrict the slope

regressions arc estimated for cumulative return horizons

+

of the

of fund i (RNAVJ; or the dilference (RFNR-RNAV,). The

114£ RWFW,

where RET represents the de-meaned return on either; the fund itself (RFND); the NAV

nl

L

N

Results front inultivariate and univariate regressions are presented. The multivariate regression is

Country Fund Return-Generating Equations

Table Sa

ERNAV

LRFND

-0.074

(-2.51)
10.001

0.074

(0.04]

10.541

10.011

(12.23)

0.611
(23.5)

10,161

10.021

-0.021
(-5.35)

0.531
(24.5)

ERFST

. Slope

0.053
(8.93)

DISC

Univariate Regressions

LRFND-LRNAV

.

Dependent
Variable

-0.180

(-6.44)

0.069
(10.6)

£RFND-ZRNAV

0.344
(6.99)

0.153
(6.42)

0.500
(10.5)

LRWRD

0.394
(7.22)

10.021

-0.472
(-8.66)

10.051

10.031

0.484
(11.3)

0.608
(21.3)
0.111

0.491

10.041

(13.1)

0.591)

0.380
(12.1)
10041

10.111

10.141

(0,(X)J

(III))

0.969
(20.2)

1.092
(24.6)

0.019
(0.35)

LRSP

LRWRI)

LREX

R2

(0.1)4)

0.511
(12.4)

10.07)

0.429
(13,4)

10.131

0.941
(23, I)

IRSML

(3.79)

0.215

0.070
(2.51)

-0.017
(-0.75)

0285
(5.48)

.

ZRSML-ZRSP

0.377
(7.26)

ERSP

Coefficients. T-stati.'tir's. and Adjusted

-0.533
(-8.53)

0,62)
(13.0)

0.608
(24.9)

0.088
(1.96)

0.428
(21.3)

-0.009
(-2.89)

EREX

£RFST

ZRNAV

DISC

Muliivaña:e Regression - Slope Coefficients and T-sta:istics

Return Horizon is One Week (N=I)

0.059
(10.1)

Dependent
Variable

A: Cumulative

coniwued

LRFND

Pane)

TibIe Sa

0.11

0.63

0.26

adj. R

&69

6469

6469

Obs.

0.143
(8.03)

tREND

-0.230
(-4.13)

(IRK)

0.7(X)

0.470
(10.5)

0.473
(9.12)

0.111
(4.49)

0.584
(11.7)

0.097
(1.76)

0.020
(0.85)

0. 118
(2.19)

ERSP

T—stats vsu•s

LRWRD

oeJJkic'pu Lv and

ERFND-ZRNAV

(—Iil)
I0,(X)l

0.

l2

10.011

(—4.73)

0.255

-0.027

0.208

(l.i.K)

10.071

0.586
(13.4)

10.141

10.011

(—4.42)

(0.03(

10.241

(21,6)

1.331

LRWRI)

(5.0))

0.419

10(8)1

I). 64
(2.38)

LRLX

0.745
(14.0)

0.649
(24.2)
(0311

LRFST

0.675
(37.2)
(0.66(

-0.064

I0A)41

DISC

Dependent
Variable

LRNAV

-0.140
(-5.6K)

C

REX

.5lope

11)071

(lilt

l).5$K

ft III

111.071

0.115
(13.3)

0.121

(E488

(11$)
(11.0)

0.211

0.913
(19.7)

LkSAII.

0.316
(6.99)

0.031
(1.36)

0.347
(8.01)

LRSML-ZRSP

(1.656

10.201

I 214
(18.2)

ERSP

(./nitaria(e Regressions - Slope CoejJicie,iis, T-suniscius. and Adjusted R

(11.8)

0.183

(-3.46)

-0.028

ERNAV
0.697
(50.0)

0,557
(23.9)

0. 155
(10.9)

Dependent
Variable

ZRFND

Mu llivariite Reg res .sioI

Return Horizon is Four Weeks (N=4

ERFST

CUITIUIatIVC

DISC

Il;

ZREND-ZRNAV

Panel

l'able 8a co,,nnned

6367

6367

0.77

(1.19

6367

Ohs.

0.46

adj. R2

iii

0.375
(11.2)
-0.064
(-3.28)
0.439
(12.0)

tRFNI)
XRNAV

LRFND-tRNAV

(0.761

10.091

ERFND-ZRNAV

ERNAV

0.437
(4.61)

(1.26)

0.050

0.487
(5.34)

LRWRD

OAX)j

10.301

111.021

-1)263
(—5.66)

-01MM

(—0-Il)

10.031

10.641

11)1)21

0.528
(14.5)

1)319
(3.48)

0.056
(0.55)
(OiXfl

EREX

10.141

1)805
(11.3)

(0. 12(

(9.85)

0.701

10.171

0. 14j

10.111

0.397
(10.1)

10.151

1)482
(V.31)

[0.291

j0.32j
0.855
(8.44)

(16.1))

0.87%

LRSML

0.196
(7.35)

(-0.30)

-0.010

0.187
(3.05)

U?SML-Y_RSP
.

1.556
(17.3)

ZRSP

0,82K
(9.18)

10,321

1.633
(17,3)

tRWRI)

H1

0.104
(1.10)

0,089
(1.94)

0. 93
(2.14)

LRSP

Coefficients, T-sgutistic's, urn! Adjusted

(70.0)

(1,644

-0,106

(-III)

-0.172
(-3.16)

0.641)

(16.7)

0.396
(7.60)

[

ERENI)

LRFST

DISC

Dependent
Variable

-slope

-0.120
(-3.73)

0.751

(20.9)

(29.1)

0.645
(9.16)

TJ?EX

Slope Coefficients and T-statistics

(N 13)

1)71%

(15.8)

0.6(X)

tRyST

linwariage Regressions

DISC

Multi variate Regression

Return I Iuriron is Thirteen Weeks

Dependent
Variable

('ijiiiuliiti ye

8a ci ,n firm

Panel C:

'laMe

(1,36

0.82

0.59

adj. R2

(,06I

6061

64)6

Obs.

Sn as

.—I

N

t REX,,
+

"
N

N

n—i

—RSP)t'

+

(Z RWRD,,/5 + 13, (S RSP,,,Y' +

N'

p6 (E(RSML,,-RSP,,,))'

he

he Name across

with respect to the financial variables, ERWRI), LESt', and (ZRSML - LRSML).

respectively. The second to last column relxrts the p-value associated with the null hypothesis that the excess country fund returns display no asymmetries

119801 and Newey and West I 1987J.

funds. Nuititrs in parentheses are I-statistics corrected for

weeks (N=l 4,13) are presented. The equations are estimated by stacking the country funds returns

to restrict the skIN coethcjents on he independent variables to

I)

+

• II,"" (S RSP. t

ftI REST,,,,

pm; (S RWRD,,JM

horizons of 1,4. and

+

+

Z

''I

JDISC,

N

+

£ RNAV13,)
—

N

conditional heteroskedascicity (for N=l) and atitocorrelation of order N-I (for N=4,l3) using the methods in White

data

-

for cumulative return

REND,,,

Results

(L

M

Results from estimating multivariate regressions of the following form are presented:

Country Fund Return-Generating Equations
Tests of Asymmetric Response to Financial Variables

Table Sh

1

-0.183
(-11.8)
-0.442
(-12.1)

4 weeks
(N=4)

13 weeks

(N= 13)

(N=l)

-0.070
(-10.8)

DISC

CO?IIiPt

wcck

I

Return
Horizon

able 8b

-0.102
(-1.24)

(-5.71)

-0.141

-0.184
(-6.58)

LRFST

(-3.78)

-0.122

-0.224
(-4.00)

-0,532
(-8.48)

LREX

0.248
(2.08)

1)366
(4.99)

0.219
(3.29)

(+)
(—)

0.639
(4.62)

(6.50)

0.592

(4.74)

0.312

ERWED

-0.023
(-0.19)

0.085
(1.19)

0.472
(4.78)

(+)
(—)

0.124
(0.99)

(0.89)

0.087

(3.94)

0.350

LRSP

Slape Coefficients and T-staiis:ic.y

0.182
(1.73)

0.240
(3.16)

-0.141
(-1.55)

(+)

0.222
(2.18)

0.365
(4.20)

0.573
(5.10)

(—)

ZRSMLERSP

.

11,37

0.19

0.12

udj,R2
.

Testolno

0.01)

0.08

0.00

asymmetries
(p-value)

6061

6367

6469

.

Ohs.

RFND,.,.

ERNAV1.)

,
+

1OISC,

+

13IERFSTI

+

13)LREX,,.

of the following form are presented.

+

,ERWRD,,
+

D,ZRSPI,

+

DE(RSML,-RSP,.)+

of 1,4,
and

and

restricted and unrestricied funds.

restrict the slope coefficients on the independent variables to be the same across

(N=l,4.13) and are presented in Panels A. B. and C. respectively. The

the

two groups of funds.

See the text

hr a description of the classification into

in White 119801 and Newcy and West [19871. respectively. The last line in each panel reports the p-values

NunlbcN in parentheses are I-statistics coffected for conditional heteroskedasticity (Panel A) and autocurretation of order

C) using the methods

each group.

associated with the null hypothesis that the cottlicients are equal across

N-! (Panels B

country funds within

10

II weeks

equations are estimated by stacking the country funds returns data so as

regressions are estimated for cumulative return horizons

The sample of country funds is divided into two groups each representing funds investing in restricted and unrestricted equity markets, respectively. The

(L

Results tront inuttivariateregressions

Country Fund Return-GeneratingEquations
Results for Restricted and Unrestricted Markets

Table 9

(NI)

0.07

0.96

0.183
(8.48)

Unrestrictcd
(21)

Test of Subsample
Differences (p-value)

0,182
(9.61)

of Funds)

DISC

Restricted
(13)

(Number

Market Status

0.00

(-9.37)

-0.601

0.188
(1.13)

ZREX

0.01

-0.196
(-5.60)

-0.074
(-2.19)

LRFST

0.01

-0.290
(-4.90)

0.159
(0.93)

EREX

0.64

0.482
(7.36)

0.532
(6.19)

ZRWED

0.03

0.3)1
(4.86)

0.482
(6.19)

LRWRD

Slope C'oefficienis and T-s:asistics

Panel B: Cumulative Return Horizon is Four Weeks (N=4)

0.7$

0.069
(7.65)

Unrestricted
(21)

Test of Subsample
Differences (p-value)

(8.38)
-0.244
(-5.03)

-0.113

(-4.07)

0.069

Restricted
(13)

ERFST

DISC

Market Status
(Number of funds)

Slope Coefficients and T-siazistics

Panel A; Cumulative Return Horizon is One Week

Table 9 continued

0.31

0.064
(0.94)

0,180
(1.92)

LRSP

0.99

(5.68)

0.394

0.395
(4,57)

ERSP

0.43

0.277
(4,94)

0.351
(4.68)

LRSMI.-LRSP

0.63

(2.17)

0.160

0.345
(3.86)

ZRSML-ERSP

'

R'

-

(LI 8

0.22

adj.

.

0.12

0.12

adj. R2

.

4168

299

Obs.

.

4231

2238

Ohs.

0.482
(10.5)
0,409
(8.13)
0,29

Restricted
(13)

Unrestricicd

Test of Subsample
Differences (p-value)

(2!)

1)/SC

Market Status
(Number oI Funds)

0.41

-0.151
(-3.08)

-0.098
(-2.34)

£RFST

0.10

-0.157
(-1.73)

(I .08)

0.243

EREX

0.46

(3M))

0.414

0.555
(3.39)

LRWRI)

Slope &.wfJicietus and T-sujiisties

Panel C: Cumult,iive Return }luritun is Thirteen Weeks (N= 3,

-j a hit 9 (OH/ftPtied

0.81

(I. IS)

0.127

0,083
(0.45)

ERSP

0.46

0.138
(1.90)

0.236
(2.08)

ERSML-ZRSP

-

0.33

0.43

adJ. R2

-

3079

2082

Ohs.

S

us

130/SC,, +

L RFS1
+

N
n—I

[, LREX,
+
n—I

N

Iii ERWRD•,
+

35

N

£RSI'n
,—I

+

n—I

N

IS(kSMLRSP,.n)

+

I

4, and
I

3 weeks

(N

I

classification ol funds into the elnerginfl and develiipecl samples.

of funds.

See he text

tor

a

description of the

and Newey and West I 19871. respectively. The last line in each panel

(Pallet A) and

coefficients on the independent variables to

hr conditional lieteroskedasticity

reponls the p-values associated with the null hypothesis that he cod licients are equal 'cross the two groups

II 98(11

within each group. Numbers in parentheses are t-sIai sties corrected

autitorrelation of order N-I (Panels B and C) using the tiethixis in White

he the sautie across country Funds

sloe

4. I 3) and are presented in Panels A. B, and C,

respectively. The equations are estimated by stacking he country funds returns Wila SI) as to restrict the

of

divided into two groups each representing cii lien funds investing iii enlerging markets (Ii funds investing in developed

+

markets. The regressions are e.sitillated for cuinulatiye return horizons

The sample IIf country funds

(S RbND,n - L RNI%V,,) =

N

Results null estiinatrig r,Iultivariate regressions of the following ItIrill Lie presented:

F'u Lid Ret LI rn—C ei)C rating Eq U at ;on
Results For Emerging and Developed Equity Markets

U )U n try

Fable I

ralilt I ft con tin steci

Developed
(21)

Emerging
(13)

ol Funds)

Market Status

.

0.04

(IlK

0.05

-0.353
(-5.85)

-0.05')
(—0.90)

0.227

(-1.29;

(7.92)

-0.121

EREX

-0.152
(-5.82)

LRFST

11.21

0.408
(5.34)

0.542
(7.18)

LRWRI)

0.47

0.343
(4.94)

0.415
(5.83)

LRWRI)

and T-stati,,tic'.s'

1)03

0.161
(8.94)

1)/SC

Slope Coefficients

Cuniulative Relurn Horizon is Four Weeks (N=-l)

(Number

13:

Test of Subsample
Differences (p-value)

Panel

Test of Subsample
Differences (p-value)
0.31

(-5)9)

0.27

-0.661

(-10.6)

-0.222

(-2.51)

0.079
(7.17)

(IS)
Developed
(16)

-0.337

LREX

-0.167
(-5.06)

ERFST

0.064
(7,97)

of Funds)

DISC

Emerging

(Number

Market Status

Slope CoejJicie,:ts and T- statistics

Panel A: Cam aLiii ye Return Horizon is One Week (N= I)

•

11.16

(0 0)

1)18)7

1)86)

0.159

RSP

0.84

0.372
(5.36)

0.393
(4,72)

LRSP

0.05

0.187
(3.20)

0.366
(5.44)

ZRSML-ERSP

0.13

(2(X))

0.141

0.310
(3.52)

ZRSAIL-RSP

R2

-

0. 9

11.20

adj.

-

0. 14

0.10

adj. R2

-

3.30!

3066

Ohs.

-

3349

3120

Ok.

lIP

in,'in ue,I

-0.038
(-0.51)

0.538
(8.30)

Dvvclopcd
(16)
0.02

-0.159
(-4,58)

0.385
(8.85)

Emerging
(18)

0.05

tRyST

DISC

Market Slams
(Number of Funds)

Test of Subsample
Differences (p-value)

13)

0.33

,I
)

0.292
(2.60)

0.473
(3.09)

LRWRD

(-0.0)

-0.0(M

-0.177
(-1.57)

ZREX

Slope CoeJjh'ien,s and i'-su,ri.cries

I'iincl C Curitujati we Return Httrizin, is Thirteen Weeks (N

Ia hit

0.42

(0.23)

0026

0.184
(1.15)

IRS?

0.20

0.127
(1.87)

0.274
(2.98)

LRSML-LRSI'

.

(137

0.37

4, R1

-

3157

2904

Ohs.

II

N

of country

•
31D1SC

+

RFS'C,.
''—I

E

N

+

l
N
E

REX,

of the following finn are presented:

+
E

RWRD,,

N.

of I

-0.278
(-7.23)

0.073
(6.94)
0.064
(3.62)

European

l.atin American

(6)

-0.139
(-2(W))

-0.157
(-5.25)

0.068
(8.08)

East Asian Funds

ZRFST

DISC

Region
(Number of Funds)

1.1)7)

-0.327

(

(-11.0)

-1)671)

-0.438
(-5.77)

ZREX

(1.07)

0, 139

0.425
(5.88)

0.460
(5.77)

RtVk1)

Slope Coefficients and r-.vwnsncs

cotidiiion;al heteruskedasimeuty using the titeihisi in White (19801,

(IS)

+

respectively. Regressions

E(RSML.kRSP,,) +
—I

N'

l.thin America,

.i RSP

N
S

0.648
(3.49)

0,317
(4.29)

('1.34)

(1.358

LRSP

(1.75)

I). It) I

0.176
(2.39)

(2.54)

(1,23K

ZRSt%ILSRSP

Ntm tubers i is

R1

1)08

0.14

0.11

adj.
.

966

3097

2406

Ohs.

parenilteses arc (-SI al si cs

ciirrecicil for

week (N= I). The equations are esmimated hy slacking the country funds returns daia so as to restrict the

slope c.,c ificienis in he independent variables to be the suiie across cou lit ry funds within each group.

(13)

+

lunds is divided into three groups representing funds investing in the Far East, Europe. and

fl,,

are esiniared for cuinulmtive return horizons

The sample

(L RFNDJ• - Z RNAV•,)

N

Results iRon estiniating rnultivariaie regressions

Country Fund Return-Generating Equations
Results for East Asian, European, and Latin American Funds

Fable

List of Figures
Figure 1:

Title: Initial Public Offerings of Country Funds: 1981-1992
Offering Amount in Million Dollars
Source: Moody's Financial Handbook

Figure 2a:

Tide: eekLy Percentage Discount or Premium of The Mexico Fund
Figure 2b:

Title: Ueekl': Percentage Discount or Premium of The Germany Fund

-Figure 3: Common Component in Country Fund Premia/Discounts

0

500

1000

1500

MEX

KOA

ARG = Argentina
AUS = Austria
8HZ = Brazil
BIlE = Brazil Equity
CHL = Chile
CHN = China
EGR = Emerging Germany
EMX = Emerging Mexico
FAS = First Australia
FIB = First Iberian
FPI-4 = First Philippine
FTG = Future Germany
FRG = France Growth
FAA = France
GCH = Growth Fund or China
GER = Germany
GSP = Growth Fund ot Spain
SWH = Swiss Helvetia
INC = India Growth
END = Indonesia
IRE = Irish Investment

1

I

FAS

ITL

FAA

IGERI

I

TAW

SWH

I LJKF
I
I MLY
I
I

BRZ

FIB

INC

SPN

Tl-1A

JFC = Jardine Fleming China
JKG = Jakarta Growth
JPE = Japan Equity
JPO = Japan OTC Equity
NOR = Korea
KIN = Korea Investment
MLV = Malaysia
MEl = Mexico Equity and Income
MEX = Mexico
NGR = New Germany
PTG = Portugal
ROC = HOC Taiwan
SNG = Singapore
SPN = Spain
lAW = Taiwan
TI-IA = Thai
THC = Thai Capital
TRK = Turkish Investment
UKF = United Kingdom

ISA = First Israel
ITL = Italy

AUS

CHL

FPH

PTG

ROC

TRK

EGA

EMX

FG

FAG

GSP

IRE

JKG

Jpo

MEl

NCR

S NG

THC

[AAGH

BRE

r KIN

ISR

JPE

CHN

CCII

J FC

1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992

$ Millions

(,'J

0)
0)

I—

0)
0)
7-

C
0)
0)

0)
0)
7-

0)

NaD

0)

(0
cc
0)

r
C
C)

0

QC\J

C

0
cJ

0
¶

0
(0

c.'J

C)

r

0)

0)
0)

1
C
0)
0)

0)
03
0)
7—

03
03

a)

N03

a)
1•
4C

Ec
c c't o c o
Q)('.J Cc o O
a)

C\J

C'J

o
ct

c\J

C)
C)

1

0)
a)

1

0
C)
C)

1

C)
C)

0
0
C)
C

V)

0
(\j

0

0

0
r
I

0
04
I

