                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          ENERGY TAXES AND AGGREGATE
                               ECONOMIC ACtiVITY




                                    Julio J. Rotemberg
                                    Michael Woodforcl




                                 Working Paper No, 4576




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 December, 1993



We would like to thank Jim Costain for his nothing research assistance, Jim Poterba for his
comments and the NSF for research support. This paper is part of NBER's research programs
in Economic Fluctuations and Public Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National thueau of Economic Research.
                                                                  NBER Working Paper #4576
                                                                                December 1993


                           ENERGY TAXES AND AGGREGATE
                                ECONOMIC ACTIViTY


                                         ABSTRACT

       This paper shows that the output losses from energy taxes axe significantly larger than
usually computed when due account is taken of imperfect competition among energy using finns.
Even with perfect competition among these firms, the loss in GNP is of the same order of
magnitude as the revenue raised by these taxes. However, in the presence of imperfect
competition the output losses are much higher. There are particularly large transitory losses in
the immediate aftermath of energy price increases when firms act as implicitly colluding
oligopolists. These losses become considerably smaller if energy taxes are phased-in. We also
show that taxes that affect only household consumption of energy have much smaller effects.
In particular, for the empirically plausible parameter values we consider, such taxes have no
effect on employment or output in the non-energy sector.




Julio J. Rotemberg                                         Michael Woodford
Department of Economics, E52-432                           Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology                      University of Chicago
50 Memorial Drive                                          1126 E. 59th Street
Camhridge, MA 02139                                        Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                                   and NBER
   As part of his address to a joint session of Congress on February 17, 1993, President Clinton proposed
n broad-based energy tax, as a central part of his plan to reduce the size of the U.S. government budget

deficit. lied this "ETU tax" been enacted, crude oil would eventually have been subject to approximately

a 21% tax, coal to a 25.7% tax and natural gas to a 16% tax. Somewhat lower taxes would have applied

to hydroelectricity sad nuclear power. The political resistance to this energy tax was, however1 intense, and

when the dust settled, all that was enacted was about a 4% tsx on gasoline.

   One of the reasons advanced for resiatsnce to the energy tax was concern about its impact on production

and employment in U.S. industry. Indeed, existing studies of the effect of carbon taxes (Goulder (1992,

1993a, 1993b), Jorgenson and Wilcoxen (1993)) suggest that the reductions in GOP caused by these taxes

arc roiitparahle to the amount of revenue they raise. To demonstrate that this is more onerous than the

cases caused by other taxes, these authors show that GDP still falis substantially even if the revenues from

the carbon tax are used to reduce existing labor income taxes.                      That energy taxes are an deleterious may

seem surprising, siuce energy consumption is a relatively small fraction of GDP. But the shsre of energy

coats in total costs does not affect the analysis because the small share of spending on energy slso reduces

proportionally the revenue raised by a given sd aderesn tax rate. Neither does our analysis hinge on the

loct that, in practice, other inputs are used to produce energy. Thus the cost of energy taxes we discuss

is unrelated to Diamond sod Mirrleee' (1971) proor that it is inefficient to tax intermediate inputs; energy

is actually a raw material in our model since we neglect extraction costs. Rather the cost of inergy taxes

rcsults from the fact that, unlike other raw materials auth as labor, energy is relatively elastically supplied.

As a result, the quantity of the energy input falla substantially in respouse to a tax, instead of the factor

price simply being forced down.
    lii this paper, we argue that the contractionary effects of energy taxes on energy-using industries are even

larger rhan is usually computed, once due account is taken of imperfect competition in those
ii,dsatries. 2 The presence of imperfect competition implies that the price of outpst is above the marginal

tast of production. Thus the social benefit from increasing output by oue unit exceeds the social cost of
     'Of course, an appeopriaLely structured nser tax also has s bensitt that otha kieds of Lasss do net. whidc lathe prevision
 if a dini,,rrntioe for activities with harn,fuJ rst.ernal rffeeLn. This, rsslser than the ward, far additional souree. sI gevernnsnnt
                tin ntatn reason for recent discussion sr "ssxbnn tare.". Prom tl,is paLet or o,rw, a,, snerga Las C555 actually ilepreee
,Ilici'uicy. liecauce we do aoL here attempt an overall evaluation cC the welfare consequences oF en ener Lax, we do sot attwept
to r1teutify uoch ellects. Per an sstenspt Lu do so, ace Goulder (1293b)
    7Jsd,J (10931 nl,etcs that imperfect rompetition also affects the optisnal as on capital i,,cuule. lliuasalyeis dtiTe,s frsie ours
I,rcecre rapitat 5ood, see i,,terrnediate inputs whereas we tress esnrg' so a raw e,aterisl.
doing so. This wedge implies that   a   reduction in output has mote deleterious welfare consequences in the

presence of imperfect competition Thus the preexisting distortion due to the lack of perfect competition
raises the welfare costs of any particular output reduction whatever its origin. Wehlarr costs are not out
main focus here, however. We study instead the degree to which output fails and show that this too is larger

with imperfect competition.
   The reason is twofold. First of all, imperfect competition implies that the marginal product of any factor,
including energy, exceeds its price. This means that the reductions io energy snd other inputs that result
from energy taxes reduce ONF by more than one would estimate simply based upon these inputs' measured

rust shares.
   Secondly, if the tax diange increases the degree of market power of firms in their product markets, they

increase the extent to which they mark up their prises relative tu their marginal costs, whirls results in a
contraction of the equilibrium level of production, just as if a tax on inputs had increased those marginal

rosts. We show that even a very small increase in market power can have a large effect upon the predicted
output decline, because the markup increase is like a tax on all inputs, and not just enargy. We also show

that a pastirular model oF endogenoua markup determination (the model of oligopoliutic pricing previously
used in hIotemberg and Woodford (1991, 1992, 1993)) can imply a temporary increase in market power
lollowing an energy tax increase, though the effect is transitory even in the case of a permanent tax increase.

We also show that this effect is even stronger if one allows fun uncertainty about the permanence of the tax

change.
   We also show that allowing for imperfect competition has important consequences for evaluation of the
relative merits of alternatively structured energy taxes. In particular, we show that gradual phase-in of an
energy tax mitigates the rontraetionary effects in the short run, to an even greater extent than revenues are

reduced over that same period; and this effect is even more pronounced when imperfect competition is taken

into account.
   Our method is to numerically solve a calibrated general equilihrinrn simulation model, under alternative

iissuniptions shout product market structure. Our model decomposes energy into energy purchased directly
liy households and energy bought indirectly via the pssrrhlase ni-other produced goods. This allows us to
ooalyue chic difference betseeen taxes on all energy use sod taxes on directly roosemed energy.


                                                       2
    This paper is related to Rotemherg and Woodibrd (1993), where we considered the ability of a similar

range of aLternative models to explain the Large declines in U.S. output that followed pre-1980 increases

in the price of oil. We showed that it was easiest to explain these contractions of output, as well as the

sirnullaneous declines in real wages, if one viewed finns as not only hawing market power but as implicitly

collusive. The numerical calibration of the "variable markup' model considered here matches that of the

model shown in the previous paper to best lit the observed effects of oil price shocks. This gives us some

reason to suppose that imperfectly competitive effects of the size assumed in our simulations may actually

be present in the U.S. economy.

    Section 1 sets the stage by describing the U.S. energy market. Section 2 discusses the behavior of the

firms that use this energy to produce final output. In this section, we also give an intuitive explanation for

the importance of imperfect competition in determining the output lmaes caused by energy taxes. Section

3 then describes the rest of our simulation model. Sections 4 and 5 then present the model'a numerical

predictions regarding, respectively, the long-run and short-run effects of an unexpected permanent increase

in energy taxes, In section 6 we take up the effect of predicted changes in energy taxes. We thus consider

both the effect of phased-in taxes as well as the effects of taxes that are expected to be repealed. Finally,

section 7 concludes.


1      The U.S. Ertcrgy Market
Four types of products account for the vast bulk of energy consumption. These include coal, natural gas,

petroleum prod acts and electricity. For our purposes, we wish to obtain an energy aggregate. One common

spprriacli is to add together the BTU's contained in all four sources of energy. This would make sense if

tIme products were perfect substitutes in the sense that a BTU from one source is as useful as a BTU from

mmiollmrr. However, in practice, the price per BTU is rather different for different sources of energy. In

particular, it is higher for oil than for coal. For that reason, our aggregate is obtained by adding together

I (mc cx1mrcmditura on these fuur products. This too is strictly appropriate ooly if the products are perfect

smmhsiitmmirs. Ilowever, it allows the IITU's from one source to be less useful than those from another.
    TIie maine model of oligopoli.Lic pnnn 1, ahnws in Rotember5 and Wosdford (1901) La be useful in captaining cyclical
,!iu.iniioia in real wages, and in Ftoinrnberg and Wuodlurd 1052) La be useful in nepIainin ike STeeL, of military purdease on
real wagon.




                                                              3
   The aggregation of these four energy sources is complicated by the fact that coal, gas and petroleum
products are used in the geoeration of electricity (though some electricity is also generated from other
sources). It would thus be incorrect to simply add together the values of coal natural gas, petroleum
products and electricity sales. What we do instead is to count only the coal, natural gsa and petroleum
products that are not sold to electric utilities.
   Table 1 presents data on the sales of these four products in 1981. Most of coal is used for electric
generation. We valued the 100 million metric tons that are consumed in other sectocs at the average CIF

price paid by electric utilities, namely 930-43 per ton. To value both domestically produced sad imported
crude oil, we used the average import price of $10.54 per barrel. Electric utilities do not use crude oil
directly. Rather, they buy a combination of different petroleum products. Over half of these are made up
of residual fuels whose average price was $18.65 per barrel. We sssigned this price to the entice volume

of petroleum products purchased by electric utilities. Being higher than the price of crude oil, electric
utilities are effectively also purchasing some of the value added of the refining sector. This does not pose
any conceptual difficulties since we add the entice value added of the petroleum and coal products sector to

our aggregate.
    in the case of natural gas, we start with the revenues of the industry.        We then subtract the gas

purchased by electric utilities using the average price paid by them for natural gas.     Einally, we add the

total revenues by electric utilitiee to our aggregate. We conclude that energy consumption in 1989 was equal

to 305.4 Billion dollars, or about 6.6% of CDP. Of this, imported oil accounts for $62.3 billion, or .17 of the

total, and 1.1% of GDP.
    We have less accurate data for the breakdown of energy use between direct household use and non-energy

production. In the case of electricity revenue, we know that appcoximately 1/3 comes from residential sales.
In the case of the gas sector, we know that residential sales account for 825.4 billion in 1990, or 40% of

 the total revenues counted above, In 001cc of Technology Assessment (1990), total U.S. energy use in 1985

 is reported as 74.9 quads (quadrillion BTIJ's), of which 28 quads arc reported for direct household energy
 use. This is 37% of the total. Ilowever, government direct use is also reported its 3 qisads, so that uses in
 productiou (assuming that all energy use other than the two categories just mentioned should be counted
    rram the Survey ,,t Currant Buuh,,s
   SFmm rite lseiu Annual Enee Survey


                                                       4
as such) are only 59% of the total. Aseuming that £ of the costs calculated in the previous paragraph are

energy inputs into non-energy production, we obtain energy coats with a value of 4.0% of CDI'. Subtracting

out the 5.5% of CDI' representing value added by the domestic energy industry (6.6% minus 1.1% from

above), value added in the non-energy sector reprasents 94.5% of CDI', so that energy costs in thai sector

are 4.2% of value added. The energy sector is thus not an extremely large one. It is thus somewhat surprising

that taxes on the output of this sector have such large effects on aggregate activity.


2     Why Imperfect Competition Matters
\Vc show below that the effects of energy taxes on aggregate activity are much larger when account is taken

of imperfect competition among the firms that purchase energy. In this section we provide some intuition for

this result by considering a simplified modeL Suppose that output is produced with just two inputs, lahor

H and energy S. In particular, each firm has a Cobb-Douglas production function of the form

                                                                                                            (I)

where ? is the output of firm i in period 1, while H and 5 represent its labor and energy inputs respectively.

The parameter ft represents a fixed amount of 'overhead" labor needed to carry out any production at all.

-The assumption that there are fixed cents ensures that the production function exhibits increasing returns to

scale in the sense that average costs exceed marginal coats. Our model requires us to assume such increasing

returns to scale. Otherwise, it is impossible to reconcile the gap between price and marginal coat implied by

the ahsence of perfect competition with the apparent absence of pure profits In U.S. industry.
                                                                                                        —
    Gieen the production function in 1, the marginal product of energy is oY'/E or, equivalently, aA[(H

fi)1sfl1'°. Under perfect competition, this marginal product i5 set equal to the real price of energy, Z.e.,

to the price nf energy divided by the price of output. But, under imperfect rnmpetltLon, the price of output

is higher relative to marginal cost. In this case one instead obtains


                                                                                                            (2)

where p is the ratio of firm l's price to its marginal cost in period 1, and Pci is the real -price of energy

oh- I. Cqnation 2 has two implications, both of which make energy taxes more contrscttonary in the case

ni imperfect competition. First, a high t   implies a higher marginal prndurL of energy, given any observed
real energy price. The fact that the marginal product of energy is higher implies that any given reduction
in energy inputs lowers output by more under imperfect competition.
   To see this more formally, note that 1 implies that a one percent reduction in E lowers output by a
percent. The question is what value should be assigned to a. Under perfect competition, 2 implies that

it squats the energy share paiE4/Y,t, and this is the usual method of assigning a numerical value to this
parameter. Hut with a markup different from one, the energy share instead equals a/p. Thus a higher
markup implies a higher value for a, and thus a higher elasticity of output with respect to energy, given an
observed energy share (as calculated in the previous section).
    This still leaves the question of whether the energy input falla more under perfect or under imperfect
rompetitioo. A second implication of 2 is that, holding employment fixed, the energy input falls more
under imperfect competition. Holding employment fixed is reasonable if one expects labor to be supplied

ioelsstically in the long run. Then 2 implies that a one percent incresse in the price of energy will lead to a

l/(i — a) percent reduction in the deinaud foe energy. This fall is larger the larger is one's estimate of a,
and thus the larger is the departure from perfect competition.

    The intuition for this result is the following. Suppose that ooe observes that, with a given amount of
employment, an economy produces 7 units of output with 50 units of energy input. Figure 1 displays two
possible Cobb-Douglas production fuoctiona that could have led to this outcome. In the first a is equal to

0.5, while in the second a is equal to 0.7. They differ in that the marginal product of energy at the observed

level of output is different. The function with n equal to 0.5 might be inferred, given the observed real price

of energy, if one believed that firms are perfectly competitiee, while the function with a equal to 0.7 might
hr inferred under imperfect competition. An important difference between the two fuaetiona is that the one
with a equal to 0.7 is less bowed towards the origin, less concave. The smaller concavity of this function is

dictated by the fact that hoth curves go through the origin and through point A, while the one with a = 0.7

is steeper at. .4. The smaller concavity of the o = 0.7 function implies that a given percentage change in
its alope.r., in the marginal product of energy, must lead to a larger change in the energy input.                           Thus

imperfect competition implies a larger change in the energy inpul froru a given percentage tax on energy,
   0Tlu   tat that the curve with a eqsal to 0.7 has both a steeper slope at paint A puts! a ltaLtcr slope at law ealues of tie
energy iepeL implies tins! the slope ef thi. euree rises by lee. in percentage tenea as oar decreases tl,e energy input lion, point
A to a low ponittve value.



                                                                ft
given observed values foe output, the energy input, and the real price of energy at point A.

     Under imperfect competition, the increase in energy taxes also has the potential of raising the equilibrium

 markup ,4. it follows immediately from 2 that an increase in the markup will with constant employment,

 lead to a further contraction in energy inputs and thus in output. Our simulations below show that in

 the case of a model of oligopoliatic collusion, an increase in the energy Lair does cause an increase in the

 equilibrium markup. In this case, imperfect competition has an even greater effect on our results.


 3     A Simulation Model with Imperfectly Competitive Product
       Markets
 As was noted above, our simulation model is similar in structure to the one used in Roternberg and Woodford

 (1993) to analyze the effects of oil price shocks. Some modifications are required, however, for our prsent
 purpusse. in particular, our interest in permanent tax changes requires that we take account of the effects of

 entry and exit in the long run. We also distinguish here between the use of energy in production and direct

 household use of energy.

     The production function in our simulation model is murh more general than the one used in the previous

 section for illustrative purposes. Like Coulder (1992), we assume that each firm in the private non-energy'

 sector produces goods each period with a production function of the form


                                           = Q(V(K,zllfl,G(E,M))                                              (3)

 where K, and M represent, respectively, firm i's capital and materials inputs at time while z indicates
 en ercogenously given labor-augmenting technology factor. The sggregator Q for value added V and the

 intermediate input aggregate C is assumed to exhibit constant returns to scale, as is the aggregator C for

- die intermediate inputs £ and Al. In the competitive case, we also follow Goulder in assuming constant

 returns to scale for the value added production function V. However, in the case of imperfect competition,

 sed hence output prices higher than marginal cost in equilibrium, constant returns to scale would, again,

 imply the existence of pure profits. We do not wish to let such profits exist, at least not in the long-run

 stcsdv-siaLe growtlL path. Ileuce in the case of imperfect competition we assume an increasing returns

 technology, so that average reata in excess of marginal costs csn recoscile market Jioner with free entry, as

  ii Cliaii±erlis's celebrated model of monopolistic competition. As in Itotemberg and \Voodford (1992), we

                                                         7
rio this by assuming a value added production function of the form

                                                 V(K,H)=F(K,H)—'1                                                    (4)

where F is homogeneous of degree one, and              is a positive constanL (We may assume that 4 applies equally
in the competitive case, but with • = 0.) The constant t indicates the presence of axed costs (overhead),
while the homogeneity of F implies that marginal costs are independent of scale.

   We assume that z1 grows exogessously at a rate g > 0. The tax changes that we consider below will
all be analyzed in terms of perturbations of the equilibrium around a steady-state balanced growth path
that the economy would follow in the absence of the tax changes. Along this balanced-growth path, the

aggregate capital stock, energy inputs materials inputs, and non-energy output all grow at the same rate
g (the exogenous rate of technical progress), while aggregate hours worked remain constant (so that the
effective labor input zHi grows at the same rate as the other factors). ' In order icr fixed costs to remain a
constant fraction of total costa along this balanced growth path, it is necessary for us to assume (in the case of

imperfect competition) that the number of firms N1 grows at the same rate g, so that the scale of production

by each firm remains constant. We assume that entry 'a through the introduction of new differentiated
goods, so that the degree of market power of each firm remains the same (again, as in Chamberlin's model).

The details of the process of entry and the conditions needed to rnsure that our steady state with entry has
zero profits are considered in Appendix 1.

    We coneider only symmetric equilibria in which the production plane of all firms are identical, so that

   = Y1/N1,        = E1/N1, and so on, where the vsriables without i superscripts refer to aggregate quantities

for the private non-energy sector. The maximization of profits by these individual firms implies, as before,
that the marginal product of each factor is equal to the product of this factor's real price and the markup

of price over marginal cost. While there are four conditions of this type, tee will maisly be intereated in the
one that is analogous to 2. This condition relates to the marginal product of C and requires that

                                                                                                                     (5)

where Pot is a price index for the aggregate 0r, a' is the common markup of all firms in a symmetric
equilibrium. The price index PCI depends on the prices of energy and oateriale relative to the price of
   'In assrnrteg a balanced growth path in which (per capita) hours worked remain constant, or follow numerous pers in
il,e real b,,si,,em cyde literatwe; see, c.., ICise, Finesse and fte5,elo (lose). Sw sirs It,c root,iote or pm 10.
non-energy output. In a symmetric equilibrium the price of this output is the same for all firms, even in the
case of Lmperfect competition, Because each firm's materials are some other non-energy firm's output, the

price of materials inputs is identical      to the price of non-energy output. Energy inputs are assumed to be in
perfectly elastic supply at a fixed relative price pg (which we imagine to be fixed on a world market, and

Sn independent of changes in tax policy and production plans in the U.S.). Thus, Pot depends only on the

tax rate on energy, tj, whose effects we wish to analyze. Because we assume that pg is fixed in all of our

experiments below, there is no distinction between the case of an ad valerem tax and a specific tax such as

the BTU tax that was recently proposed.

   In our simulations we consider three different types of product market structure for the non-energy
producers. In the case of perfect competition, equations & holds with : = 1 at all times. In our second

model (the "constant markup" model), it holds with j4 = p, a constant greater than 1. at all times. This

corresponds to a model in which firms are monopolistic competitors, with the equilibrium markup bemg

determined by each firms elasticity of demand, which in turn follows from the elasticity of substitution

between the differentiated goods.

    Finally in our third and most complicated model (the "veriehle markup" model), we assume that firms

belong touligopolies that maintain high prices thmugh the threat of reversion to low prices if anyone deviata.

ftntemberg and Woodford (1992) show that this implies that the markup j4 for each firm in industry j will

h rcluted to the ratio of expected future profits to current sales. In particular, the markup will be given by


                                                        14=u(X/Y/)                                                               (6)

where p(X/Y) Isan increasing function, 17 denotes the common output of each firm in tire industry, and 2ff

dcnotes the expected present value of future profits gross of fixed costs for each firm in the industry assuming

I list collasion is maintained, Iligher expected future profits relative to correct sales raise the expected losses

1mm a breakdown of collusion relative to the potential gains from undercutting the other firms in one's

iiidustry ut the present time. The result is that collusion i5 easier to sustain. Tire formal definition of 2ff

cull he found in Rotcnrberg and Woodfomd (1991) where we explain bow X depends on the poeaibility that
  5Tfie ss,taiiptisn of a constant markup at au (into doto net actually requfre          so sssumptisrt that cli' 'mitieldual firni's
 Ii'zicuid (Lice las a constant-elasticity teem, us in ilis familiar model of Ijisit and StielJtc (1577). Given ihat we eon.ider only
[lie yroiccLris cqoilibrium, it sul5ees cuss tire utility esseiesd (rum iire differentisLed rends be a homoileetie funcuoa, an that
 he ekrsticitr of suhe1itution between different goods izlesp iCe aymeteiris—susaa[srliue iscreie ,rjies'iss putt is caintant. See
Ilstcr,*erg sod Wondfsrd tluul) roe further discuedon oF tIds medsl.
uligopolies will either be dissolved or renegotiate their collusive arrangements.

   We now describe the rest of our simulation model. To model the supply of labor and capital, we assume

the existence of a representative household that seeks to maximise


                                               E{t U(A(C,,E), Hfl}
where P is a constant positive discount           factor,   C1   denotea consumption purchases of non-energy output

(Lhat for simplicity we here treat as entirety non-durable), E denotes household direct use of energy, and

I/,' denotes total hours worked (both for the private sector and (or the government). The representative

household is assumed to he a price-taker in all markets, and to face the wage to2 for all hours supplied, and

the after—tax price of pg(l + 1i) for energy. (in some of our simulations below, we allow the tax on direct

household energy use to differ from the tax on energy inputs to production.) The household also accumulates

the capital stock (the purchase prke of which is the saute aa the price of consumption goods), and receives

the rental rate r1 on its capital holdings; and it owns all firma and receives the profits from both non-energy

and energy production. Capital holdings evolve according to


                                                   K14 = 1 + (1—

 there J are period I investment purchases of non-energy output, and 0 < S < 1 is a constant rate of
depreciation.
    In order to allow the existence of a balanced growth equilibrium in the case of a constant level of energy

tas, we require as well certain homogeneity assumptions on household prefcrences. Specifically, we assume

that the aggregator function A(C, E) for household expenditure is homogeneous degrei one. We also assume

that the utility function U(A, H) satisfiescertain homogeneity assumptions explained further in Appendix
II. These imply that if the household is faced with a real wage that grows at a rnnstant rate and a constant

rate of return on savings, it will choose to supply a constant number of hours, and to consume a quantity

that growa in proportion to the real wage.
   5TI,e aoatampLi000 axe standard is tIne real busiezes cycle literature. See, e.g., Kieg, ?toer and Robeto (1555). AparL frOm
 heir analytical convenience, in allnwrng     to analyze a stea.tr-atate balanced growth path deeptte the eanteece of Lerhnical
prugreso and endegeewue labor supply, they are roughly accurate no a dsoaztption ci pest-oar U.S. growth. The meat notable
coij,irical e,oborcassuseut csncenn act the growth of per capita private hours H,, haL per capita Itaura hired by the gcvecnsuent.
which e0hibito a positive trend oeer the post-war peeiod. costraxy to the assumption of ear o,adcl below. Needlene to say,
adequately dealing with the growth of the goeentseent eerter atarreed over this period, ii take,, to reprereet a genuine Ieng-rmt
 rc,Ld, wovild ho incompatible with the enistence of balanced growth.



                                                                 13
       As noted above, we assume that the supply of energy is infinitely elastic so that the relative price at

    which energy is supplied is fixed exogenously. This is probably not strictly correct. However, the view that

    the elasticity of supply is large is justified to some extent by the fact the price of oil is determined in a

    world market where the 11.5. consumes only a quarter of world output. 15 Thus, even assuming that Ibreign

    demand is inelastic, the elasticity of supply faced by the U.S. is four tienes the world elasticity of supply. las

    addition, the foreign elssticity of demand also renders the effective supply of energy to the U.S. more price

    elastic. Put differently, any reduction in price brought shout by a reduction in U.S. consumption would raise

    consumption elsewhere and thereby dampen the required fall in price. The result is that, even if the elasticity

    oF the world supply of oil is zero, the effective elasticity of supply for the U.S. would equal three times the

[   elasticity of demand of all the other nations. On the other hand, we abstract here from considerations of

    international trade by supposing that all U.S. energy usage (the sum E1 + Efl is supplied by 11mw that are

    owned by the same representative household referred to above.                  We also ignore for simplicity the use of

    factor inputs in energy production, and treat the revenues of the energy sector as pure rents (distributed as

    profits to the representative household).

       We do take account of the consumption of real resources by the government, although in our simulations,

    goeernment demand is assumed to simply grow deterrninistically with the rest of the economy. Specifically,

       sass me an exogenously given path for real government purchases of non-energy output (C,). In order to

    make possible a balanced growth path, we assume that C, grows at the rate g of labor-augmenting technic-si

    progress. lYe similarly assume an exogenously given path for government purchases of people's time. In

    order to make possible a balanced-growth path of the kind described above, we assume that the hours per

    capita purchased by the government arcs constant, ff5, at all times. We also assume that lump-sum taxes

    or tranniers make up for any discrepancy in a given period between the value of government expenditure

    C, + w1JI9 and the value of energy tax revenues r(E, + E'). This allows us to consider the effects of a
    change in the level of energy taxes while abstracting from the effects of changing other distorting taxes or

    ol changing govcrsnaent espenditure patterns. Market clearing in the non-energy sector then requires that
      °l,, 1950. the U.S. consumed 14.al ,nillion barrels of oils day while world production equaled ascIi million barrel, a day.
       'lIe ,lü assume in camputinç predicted c],an500 in CUP titan some of the e,wegy i, daissillod 5w 'foreign" output rue poepa
     1 tIe ,atinvol incon,e account,, bat this is treated a, 01' sccouoLin convention with no ecoitoilus significance. See equationS




                                                                  11
at each time

                                                                                                              (7)

while market clearing in the labor market requires that


                                                 111+Hf_—11'                                                  (8)


   In our numerical simulations, we consider     the comparative dynamics associated with deterministic per-

turbations of the expected time path of the energy tax {r1). In the case of perturbations that are small
enough, the effects are entislly linear in the percentage tax change. The magnitude of these linear effects

can he obtained from a log-linear approximation to the equilibrium conditions of the model. We carry out

this linearization around the long-run steady-state balanced growth path to which the economy eventually

con verge& This allows us to state our results in terms oF the percentage changes in non-energy output sod

so on per percent increase in the energy tar.   it   also means that the parameter values required in order to

obtain numerical results are simply elasticities of the various functions introduced above, and average values

of the various quantities. The parameter values used in our simutations are listed in Table I The sources of

these numerical values, as well as the interpretation of the parameters, are discussed further in Appendix II.

   In our basic simulation, we consider the effects of an permanent increase in the energy tax r, that is

announced (unexpectedly) at the same time that it takes effect. 'iVe assume that the economy had previously

converged to the steady-state halaoced growth path associated with tlje previous level of the energy tax (zero),

and consider the path by which it converges to a new long-run steady state following the change. We also

consider, for purposes of comparison, en experiment in which only the tax rate on direct household use of

energy is increased, with no change in the tax on uses of energy as an input to non-energy production. In

this case, the relative price of energy inputs in production continues to be pw, while the relative price of

energy for household use becomes pw(i + r). This comparison is of interest because the gasoline tax that

was eventually passed as part of the 1994 Budget is, effectively, a tax that falls disproportionately on the

energy purchased by households. It is thus of interest to compare the elfect of such a tax to those of a more

broad-based tax, such as the BTIJ tax originally proposed by President Clinton. An might be expected we

will show that imperfect competition increases the output losses associated with an energy tax snlp in the

case of a tax on tIre use of energy in production. The reason is that imperfect coiripetition aifeets the degree


                                                         12
to which output falls only by affecting the energy purchases               offirms.

4     Long-Run Effects of a Permanent Energy Tax
Table 3 summarizes the changes in the long-run levels of several variables for each of four cases. The two

types of tax changes considered are a shift from rero energy talc to a 1% tax on all energy use, (first two

columns) ' and a shift from no energy tax to a 1% tax on the direct use of energy by households (last two

columns), assuming no tax on industrial uses of energy. Each tax chssge is considered foe two alternative

assumptions about product market structure. In the "competitive" case (left column of each pair), we

assume perfect competition (i.e., p = 1). In the "market power" case (right column of each pair), we sssume

imperfectly competitive product markets, with the typical firm possessing market power sufficient to lead it

to set prices 20% higher than its marginal cost of production in the steady-state equilibrium (it, p = 1.2).

    As was noted above, our specification of a value for the steady-state markup p also determines our

specification of the degree of increasing returns in the production technology. In the "competitive" case,

we assume constant returns to scale ( = 0). In the "market power" case, we assume the existence of

increasing returns due to the presence of fixed costs (4'> 0), sad endogenous determination of the. number

of firnis (and hence varieties of differentiated goods). Thus in this case there exist increasing returns such

that average cost is 20% higher than marginal cost for the typical firm in the stesdy7state equilibrium. All

other parameters are calibrated in the same way is the two cases.

    One issue that arises at this point is whether a markup of 1.2 is reasonable. There are essentially two

sources of inlormation on this psremeter. The first sterns from the large literature which attempts to measure

the elasticity of demand facing individual products produced by particular firms. This literature is relevant

because it is never profit maximising for a firm to set its markup lower than one over one plus the inverse of

the elasticity of demand for its product. Them are many estimates of the elasticity of dumsud for particular

products is the marketing literature. Tellis (1988) surveys this literature, and reports that the median

iircas'irrd price elasticity is just under 2. Thus the markup would equal at least 2 if this sample of firms is

rcprcseststive. In prattice, elasticities of demand undoubtedly differ across products and the elasticity of

dt'iiiuiid of those products studied in the marketing literature is probably atypically low, lids is because the
     2Altlissgh we a"sa.me here as isitial steady staLe siLt nu ansrgy Las, rIse result, would he ,'nsit",' in the case of • 5% masses
ii, il,c val,,s otli + "1. stsrsin5 From a positive miLLs] Las.



                                                                 ta
marketing literature focuses on the demand for branded consumer products which are more differentiated

 lien unbrasded products so that their demand is probably less price sensitive. Thus, the typical product in
the ecorionw probably baa a price elasticity of demand that exceeds 2.

   A second approach is to analyze what happens to revenue and costs in response to an exogenous change

in aggregate demand. A particularly simple version of this approach has been proposed by Hall (1988, 1990).

lIe studies the degree to which the increase in GDP generated by increases in exogenous variables aurh as
changes in military purchases is acrompanied by an increase in costs. Insofar GDP increases by more than
costs, the markup is greater than one. His estimates indicate that the markup p is between 1.4 and 1.6. '

   There is also a related literature which tries to obtain econometric estimates of marginal cost and, in some

cases, combine theni with econometric estimates of the elasticity of demand. The aim of this approach is to
obtain simultaneous, independent estimates of the markup and of the degree of increasing returns. Morrison

(1990), for example, estimates a flexible functional form cost function, using data on gross industry output
and materials inputs. Her estimates of that markup p range between 1.2 and 1.4 for 18 ont of ber 18
industries. One notable feature of these estimates is that her industry estimates of the ratio of average
to marginal cost closely resemble her estimates of the markup itself. Thus the relation between these two
parameters that we imposed through our zero profit condition appears to be validated.
   Because a's are considering only long-run effects, the reeults do not depend on whether the tax increase is

immediate or phased in over a period of time; only the eventual permanent inccen-se in the tax rate mat tees.

Similarly the results do sot hinge on whether the long-run substitutability of factors of production exceeds

their sliorL-run substitutability; only the long-run substitution possibilities matter here.

   Furthermore, the "market power" ease reported in Table 3 refers equally to the mosopolistically corn-
petitive model and to the ohigopolietic collusion model. The reason is that is neither ease does the energy
tax change have any effect on the markup of prices over marginal cost in the long-run steady stats. In
the case of monopolistic competition, the markup is predicted to be a. constant, determined solely by the
elasticity 0f substitution between alternative differentiated goode. In the oligopolistir model, by contrast,

the markup depends opon the ratio X/)', and so can vary is response to policy changes. However, in a
  3111. epnrted epsimaja fur snarhaps are actually even higher. The erases is Lilat he sstimates 'vulue-addeS' markups as
opposed Is the asses standard markups of prier ever Lotci n,sr5n,al reaL. For a disoucsia,, of the relation between the twa, see
           and Waudfued (asso).




                                                              14
steady-state equilibrium, the present discounted value of profits X is proportional toY. Moreover1 while the

steady state value of X also depends on the steady-state real rate of interest, r, this real rate of interest is

solely deterrniiied by preference parameters and the exogenous rate of growth (see Appendix II). Hence the

steady-state r is unaffected by the energy tax, as a result of which steady-state s is also unaffected. Thus

the Long-run effects are the same in either type of imperfectly competitive model; all that matters is the abe

of the steady-state markup z.

   We now turn to the numerical results reported in Table 3. In each row1 the figure reported represents the

percenlege change in the long-run value of that variable resulting from a 1% energy tax. (In our log-linear

approximation to the equilibrium, the effects of a k% energy tax are obtained by multiplying each of these

tiumbers by L) The variables, of course, grow over Lime in the steady-state equilibrium; but the steady-state

growth rate is unaffected by the energy tax (as it is determined solely by the exogenous rate of technical

progress). Thus the figure -071 for non-energy output means that output is -.071 percent lower at all times

than it otherwise would have been, in the new long-run steady-state growth path. "Non-energy output"

refers to the grras output Y, of the energy-using (but not energy-producing) sector. The change is "GDP"

is computed as

                                    AZ    —
                                              AFJ, — pzAEr      + 0"'"p5(AE, + AE)                                  (9)

where <1 indicates the difference (net percentage difference) in value of the equilibria between the perturbed

aiid unperturbed equilibria, and 0°"' dcnotes the share of energy used in the U.S. that is domestically

produced. 4 Thus the (JDP measure aggregates value added in the non-energy sectnr and the domestic

energy-prorineirlg seclor, where for simplicity the total revenues of the latter sector are counted as value

added. :llo5m seorked denotes total hours worked H1; because government hours are assumed to follow an

exogenous path unaffected by the energy tax, the reported decline in hours is only 83% of the aice of the

decline iii hours in the private non-energy sector. The "product wage" refers to the wage deflated by the

price of sue-energy input (i.e.,. the quantity or, in equation (3a)), while the "consumption wage" refers to
Ilic wage deflated instead Es the price index PAC of the household consumption basket,

                                                     — C,+pe(1+rdE'
                                                 PA,=                                                              (10)
                                                              A(C,,E)
 ' hnpliriLle, ae sssuxse I,e,, LILOL U.S. eswg3r pnsdLletion eerie, in the san,e proportion so U.S. energy use.
"Energy use in production", "capital stock' and "number of firms" refer to the variables E1, K1, and N1
introduced in the previous section; all refer solely to the private non-energy sector. The number of firms is

indeterminate in the competitive model,
   A striking feature of the results in Table 3 i5 that a tax that is levied only on direct household purchases

of energy has no effect sslnstsseveron equilibrium activity in the private non-energy sector. Household energy

use falls, and the consumption wage falls because the price index PA rises. However, the household does not
change its supply of labor or demand (or non-energy goods, nor does the equilibrium product wage in the
iLon-energy sector change. GDP falls only because of the reduction in domestic energy production due to

red uced household use of energy. is
    Two features of our model account for this result. The first is that we made assumptions that ensured the

existence of a steady state where the economy grows but hours worked do not. Since output, consumption.
energy psrchnses and wages all grow at the same rate in such a steady state, we require that eqrsipcoportional

increases in wages and the aggregate i = A(C1,E) be consistent with an unchanged quantity of labnr

supplied.       A permanent increase in the tax on household energy raises PE(1                   + r1) and thus raises the
consumption deflator pAl while it lowers the consumption wage. As long as A1 falls in exact proportion to
the increase in p.. while the product wage is unaffected, the (all in the real wage and in consumption are

equiproportional so the quantity of labor supplied does not change.
    The second important source of this result is our assumption that the household's claaticity of suhstitution

 hetween non-energy consumption and direct energy use is equal to 1. We hese this on the unit elasticity of

 demand estimates of Houthakker, Verleger, and Sheehan (1974). This rneasa that the shares of household
 oxpenditure on energy and non-energy outpst will remain constant in the face ofa change in the relative price

 of these tiro kinds of goods. But supposing that the path of p51A1 is unchanged under the ciccunwtances

pist described, It fellows that the paths of C1 and of vs(1 + r1)E are unchanged. Thus household energy
 rise falls iii inverse proportion to the tax increase, while non-energy consumption demand and labor supply
 ore irticlisuged. TIns means that, if the product wage and the real rate of rrurn are unaffected, consumption
 demand and labor supply are unchanged so that output in the non-energy secLor can remain constant as
   '"Gc,iilder 19mb, alsu reporLa rnaller losses in ClIP fir Lane LhaL atTest only houselield's in 01 eeeru.
   '6To ohmic LL,h rcrulL se asasme that the Friast, sensu.spLis'O dressed ruroc and LIre Eriasli labor '°nnty mccc eaLtefy reetaiu
 1.u.uogeneity prepertice captained is Appendis II.




                                                                16
well. TLiis iu turn implies that the previous paths of the product wage s-nd Lhe real rate of interest continue

to describe an equilibrium. This argument applies whether there is perfect competition or not since the two

iriodels differ only in the way non-energy firms react to changes in their environment. But, as we just saw a

Lax on household use of energy does not sHeet this environment.

   Since Llie tax on household direct use of energy has no effect on non-energy output, the effects on output

of a tax on all energy are due to the tax on the industrial use of energy. The effects would have been just

as large if osip the energy used in production were taxed. it is true that the result of exactly zero effect of

Lhe tar on direct household use depends upon particular psrsmeter chokes that might well he challenged.

however, for any values near ours, the result will still be approximately true — the effects of a tax on household

energy use will be much smaller than the effects of a tax on industrial uses, and indeed the eRects of a tax

ciii household energy use could as easily be expansionary as contractionary. Thns the shift from a "BTU

tax" to s gasoline tax in the budget that was eventually psssed by the U.S. Congress probably resulted in

a Lax that places less of a burden on the economy, per dollar of revenue raised. Another implication is that

iii designing s tax intended to reduce carbon dioxide emissions, a tax aimed more at household energy use

is likely to contract economic activity lass, for any given reduction in emissions that is achieved, than one

hosed simply on the 'carbon content" of various foels.

   Now consider the effects of s tax on all types of energy use. Private non-energy production contracts, as

do hours work-ed, the energy used in production, the capital stock and the real wage deflated by the price of

sos-energy output. The contraction in hours stands in contrast to the case of a tax on energy consumption

ools It conies about because a Lax on all energy lowers the consumption wage by more than it towers A1.

The lahie-shows that CUP falls by slightly more than does non-energy output in this ease. The reason is

 hat the contraction of the energy sector in even more severe, in percentage terms, than the contraction of

 hr prftsce non-energy sector. In the imperfectly competitive case, there is also a reduction in the long-run

number ni lirnis, dse to exit in response to profits no longer large enough to cover the fixed costs.

          iii the competitive case, the ouLput losi as a result of the energy tax is rather significant. Since the

uliore oF lotal energy expenditure its GDP is 0-066, a one percent tax increase raises government revenues

lv oiili .flffli percest of GD!'. On the other hand, CUP is itself reduced (in the long roll) by 1171 percent.




                                                         17
   The ratio of output loas to revenue raised is even more severe if one considers the case of a pure tax on

industrial uses of energy. In this case, a one perrent energy tax raises government revenues by only .040
percent of GD?, while GD? is reduced by .050 percent.

    lInt the contractionary effects of an energy tax are even greater when one allows for imperfect competition.

In the case of market power, the long-run decline in non-energy output is .091 percent and the long-run
decline in GD? is .098 percent. Thus even a relatively modest degree of market power (prites 20% above

marginal cost) eignillcantly increases the predicted effect of the energy tax; the long-run non-energy output
decline ie increased by a factor of nearly 1.4+

    The reason for this can be understood by analyzing equationS in the same way that we analyzed equation

2 in section 2. It follows from 5 that a value p > 1 implies a higher estimate of the elasticity of the aggregator

Q with respect to C. Using the shares reported in Table 2, the implied value of this elasticity is increased

from +52 to .624 (a factor of 1.2) by raising p to 1.2. The elasticity of
                                                                       with
                                                                          Q respect to V similarly falls
from .48 to +316+ Furthermore, as in section 2 the higher value of p implies that the fall in                        is larger in
response to a change in the price Pa It turns out that, for fixed V, the fall in C is inversely proportional to

the elasticity of Q with respect to V, and thus is larger by a factor of 1+28 when p = 1.2. Thus, auppcaing

that the index of primary inputs V were not affected by the energy tax, C would have to fall by 1.28 times
as much, and so output would fall by 1.53 (               1.2   x 1+28) times as much, in the case of market power. In
[art, the difference between the output declines in the two cases is not so extreme in our simulations. This

is because V actually falls more in the long run in the competitive case. Nonetheless, the contraction is
significantly larger in the presenre of market power.

    The energy tax also has significantly greater adverse rffects in the case of market power in several other
respects as well. For example, the real product wage falls by more than 1.5 times as much in percentage
   t7TIiio ratio of the output lose to the reeenue raiced is comparable to what is implied by the results of sUrer authors. For
rsameple, Goulder (1992) estimatse that a $25 (in 1990 prices) per ton tao on carbon esntset will reduce real GNP in 2020 by an
awnnnL that caries between it percent and 1+14 percent, depending upon the strusture of the tax (see his Table 7). Using Lbs
figures ia his Table I we the percentage tax that this corresponds to for different types er fuel, one find, that this sercaspnnds
us cc sceroge tan rate se energy ow of 14.1%, as that the recesses raised should be only apprsxinentely .96 percent aCGN?,
       i505,155 the red,ustinna in the cost share  ef energy that should fallow from tush a sorer, Las, Cloulder (lssab), on the
.,Ll,er hand, reports smaller 0741° losses. lie considers a tao sf41 rants per ndllien BTU'a whir], corresposda roughly to a 27%
 as no energy and tomputea a reduction in CNP si ardy a tl,i,sl of nne percent. By roetrast our estimates would imply thai a
22% ma would lead    to GDP lsaa of 1.5 percont.
   'tNoe-suusrgy coutpst still falls hr .971 percent in this case, hut he eeergy sector contracts to a Inns1, amaller eateet. Total
"Ilergy soles arc affected mere by a too on lssosrlmld energy ma tliae by a tax en industrial uses, hecanse our calibration impliaa
I rat energy is more substitutable fur other goads icr benasl,elde sIms for urn,,.




                                                                 18
terms. This indicates a more significant contraction of labor demand; the only reason that hours worked do

not fall itore is that households     ace   willing to accept the lower real wage because of their lower wealth in
this case.


5 Short-Run Effects of Changes in Tax Policy
lii this section we begin the more complex analysis of the short-run effects of changes in policy. We focus

here   on the transition to a new long-run steady state consistent with a new permanent tax rate. During this

transition the effects of tax rate changes differ depending on whether markups are constant or not. We thus
consider separately our two models of imperfect competition.

    We consider here an unexpected permanent increase in the energy tax rate r from zero to .01 that takes
effect immediately. Since the tax change is not anticipated in advance we suppone the economy starts out
in the steady-state balanced growth path associated with zero energy taxation. We imagine that the tax
applies to all uses of energy, although as explained in the previous section, the effects of the tax on the
ton-energy sector follow solely from the taxation of energy used as an input to non-energy production. iS

    Figure 2 displays the transitional effects on non-energy output, under the three alternative specifications
of product market structure. The vertical axis indicates percentage deviations from the previous steady-state

growth psth;—lO i l0 means a reduction of .10 percent. The horieontal axis indicates the year; year 0
is the year is which the tax change is announced and takes effect. In the competitive case, the tax lowers
eon-energy output by .011 percent in the long-run as we showed in Table 3. We now see the short-run effects

as well. In the first year, non-energy output is already reduced by .058 percent. In subsequent years, output
continues to lall further below the previous trend path, as the capital stock is eroded; hut a large part of the

ecentusl output decline occurs immediately. in the case of the constant markup model, the general pictore
is similar. But, as the elasticity of output seith respect to energy inputs is larger in this case, the decline in
outpnt is larger both in the short run and in the long eon.

    In like cs-se of the variable markup model, tie long con effects are the sante as for tie constant markup
ITlodcl. As explained in the previous section, both models predict a long-run reduction of non-energy output

           al-earnest made abort chews that in the case elan immediate, permanent las en direct haneehald energy use eaiy, the
"m-Ql,an   will isancdia(elyj',wp as erw steady-staLe balanced erawtl. psalm dacribed ii, Tables. TIaa tL,eee is no effect upon
miomi-emmeegy carat, consumption, amid so as. in either the short run or the lane run.
by .097 percent. However, the short run effects are quite different. During the first year of the energy tax
the cnnstant markup model predicts a reducUon by .083 percent, while the variable markup model predicts

a reduction by .123 percent. The predicted short run effect is almost one and one-half times as large (and
thus is more than twice the sise of the effect in the cnmpetitive model). This is because the variable msrkup

model predicts that the markup incresses when the energy tax is increased, and then gradually returns to
its original level over time. The markup increases because the ratio X/Y increases. This occurs, in the
first instance, because of a decline in real interest rates that results from the reduced returns to capital
(which eventually return to normal as the capital stock is reduced). Lower real interest rates mean that the

expected future profits from collusion are discounted to a lesser extent, making s greater degree of collusion
possible. higher markups then themselves contribute to a higher ratio of profits to sales each period, making

X/Y still higher and so helping to raise markups further. Higher markups also further reduce the returns to

existing capital goods. Thus lowers real rates of return further, thus further raising XJY and further raising

markups in a self-reinforcing process.
    In our simulation, the markup increases hy .011 percent during the first year of the Lax (i.e., om 1.2000

to 1.2001). Even this small increase in the inefficiency wedge due to firms' market power has a significant
effect on the predicted equilibrium allocation of resources. To understand this, it is helpful to suppose first

that labor supply is inelastic. Then, V1 is entirely As a result, S determines U as a function of (rt,,u1).

Then, using 3, Y1 depends only on (rip1). Now let us investigate for a given increase in ri, the quantitative

effect of a an increase in pt.        Because     energy coats are only about 4% of total intermediate inpuL coals,
a one percent increase in the alter-tax energy price raises the price index Pat by only .04 percent. Thus
a contemporaneous .011 percent increase in the markup means that the right hand side of 5 increases by
1.3 times as much (in percentage terms) as it wnuld in the ease of a cdnstant markup. In our log-linear
spprnximatinn to the solution, the percentage decline in }'              is   proportional to the percentage increase in the
right Load side of 5, and so it should be t.3 times as large in the variable markup case.

    In our simulation model, we also allow for endogenous lahor supply. rr Ia this ease, households reduce
Inhor supply rather than accept a real wsge cut of the sire that would be required to induce firms not to
  25Notr sites it it nat essestisi to cur ranriasiess here that this be i,sterpretrd as 'voluntary" variation in labor supply.
Q,,aI,tatit'ely ai,,iilar uaudoaiaas would In otaaiae,5 its thr race of aJy aaun,r oraliart-ra,, esal wage rigidity", due for example
Lu pre-euixLio wage   contrast. S to efiluiener   wage euneideraLiono.




                                                                 20
reduce the labor inputs that they use. Thus non-energy output falls even more than it would in the ease of

inelastic labor supply- This effect ra present regardless of product market structure. However, one can easily

see that the real wage decline required to induce firms not to reduce labor inputs is larger if the markup

rises. For it follows from 5 that if the markup rises, the value of C1 falls more, and hence that Qy(Vg,Qi)

for fixed labor and capital inputs lills more. On the other band; the same logic that leads to S implies that

the real wage must equal QVVH/IJ..     The fall in the real wage is thus nnsgnified both by the increase in p
and by the severity in the fall of Qv - It thus makes sense that in the cane of endogenous labor supply, the

effect of the markup increase on output is even greater. It is the fact that such small changes in the markup

can matter so much for the size of the predicted effects of the tax increase that leads us to insist upon the

importance of product market structure for tax analyses of this kind.


6     The Effect of Expected Changes in Energy Taxes
Up to this point we have considered the effect of unanticipated permanent increases in energy taxes. There
are several reasons, however, for energy taxes to be anticipated. First, there is a time gap between the

moment where tax policy is announced and when it takes effect. In particular, the Clinton proposal cslled

for a gradual phase-in of the BTU tax. Second, tax changes ste not necessarily permanent. Any particular
tsx, such as the energy tax has some probabiLity of being repealed in the future.

    \/e start by considering the case of gradual phase-in. We thus report simulations in which the energy

tax is increased by one-half of one percent in the year that it is announced while the full one percent tax

applies from the second year onward. The comparison with the case of an instantaneous increase in the tax

is iiiteresting in part because a gradual phsse-in was actually proposed. Moreover, as wewill show, the effect

nI this gradual phase-in depends even more crucially on product market structure than the eventual effect

ala permanent tax.

    The consequences for nan-energy output are ahown in FigureS, for each of the possible market structures.

As like iinglit expect, output falls by less in the first year than if the full tax were to take immediate effect.

lii lad, in none of the models is the contraction in the first year even half the sire indicated in Figure 1. In

 lie cnse of the competitive model, the first-year decline in non-energy output is only .016 percent; in the

rnsstant markup model, it is only .012 percent; and in the variabLe markup model, output does not decline



                                                        21
at all in the first year, but instead rises by .011 percent

    One reason for the first year effect to be so muted is that the wealth effect on labor supply, which tends

to increase equilibrium output, is nearly as large in these aimulations as in the previous onus. On the other

hand, the current increase in energy casts, which tends to reduce equilibrium output, is only half as large.

The other important factor, in the case of the variable markup model, is that expectations of future profits

are reduced nearly as much as in the previous simulations, while current sales are reduced by much luss tnis

meaue that the ratio XJY falls, so that the equilibrium markup istempocacily reduced in the oligopolistie

model. The path of the equilibrium markup in the oligopolistic model is shown its Figure 4, fur the cases of

the ittuncdiately effective tax and the phase-in over a one-year period. Is the case of the gradual phase-in,

the markup falls by about .004 percent ftc., , from 1.2 to 1.19995).

    After die first year, the path of output in these simulations is similar to the one we derived for an

immediate tax increase. The only difference is that the higher output in year 0 is associated with a higher

level of investment. Thus the capital stock in year 1 is higher. Iii fact the economy sow begins year 1 with a

slightly larger capital stock than in the original balanced-growth path in all cases. By contrast, the capital

stock was slightly lower in each of our previous simulations. In the case of the competitive model and the

constant markup model, the higher capital stock means that the output decline in year 1 and later is not

cjuite ss large as in the previous simulations. On the other hand, in the case of the variable markup model,

we find that a higher capital stock actually makes the output decline even more severe. The higher capital

stock implies that real interest rates are even lower. This implies that X/Y is even higher and thus leads to

even higher markups. Figure 4 shows that, indeed, the markups in year 1 and later are actually greater in

I lii' mae nf a plia-ced—irs tax.

    Finally, we report simulations in which the tsx increase is not expected to permanent. We now suppose

lint the csx is increased to 1% on all uses of energy, but that it is anticipated that each year there is a 20%

probahihity that the tax rate will be permanently restored to its original value. In our dynamic equilibrium

eiodel,tlte effects of a tax increase cannot he analyzed independently of expectations about future policy,

and it is important to realize that economic agents need not expect that a tax change is permanent simply

          I lie bill that is enacted does not specify a future date at sehich it becomes invalid. here too we

find that the effects of as expectation of future policy reversal depend greatly upon our assumptione about


                                                      22
product market structure.

     Figure 5 presents the time path of non-energy output in the case of the three pcesible market structures.

Here what is plotted for each year is the level of non-energy ouLput in thaI year relative to the previous

rind growth path assuming that there has been no reversal of the tax up until that time. to the case of

both the competitive model and the constant markup model, the contraction of non-energy output is greater

than it would have been were the tax expected to continue forever. This is due to the wealth effect on labor

supply; optimism about reversal of the tax makes households expect higher future incomes end thus makes

them less willing to work in the present. This demonstrates that the coutnactionary effects of energy taxes
                                                                                             25
nay, in practice, be considerably greater than those indicated in Figure

     in the case of the variable markup model, things are more complex. It is again true that the expectation

cii a poasilile reversal lowers first period output beeastae of the wealth effect on labor supply. ilowever, the

posaihility of a policy reversal also raises the eqnilibrium real rate nf return, because higher rental rates on

capital are expected in the event of repeal of the tax. This higher rate of return lowers the present discounted

value of future profits relative to current revenues. The resulting reduction in X/Y lowers equilibrium markup

in the oligopolistic model. While the markup still rises following enactment of the tax, it does not rise as

iiiiicli irs iii tho simulation depicted in Figure 1. And, sssuming that the tax has not yet been repealed,

ilir equilibrium markup from yeas 3 onward in the oligopoilntie model is actually losven than that iu the

innnopolistically competitive model. This occurs because, once the capital stock has fallen sufficiently below

Is initial lcvel, the real rate of return remains consistently above the real rate associated with the initial

steady state. The consequence is that if. contrary to expectation, the tax continues for many yeare, output

    art nails Itigher in the oligopolistic model than in the monopolistically competitive model.


7      Conclusions
\\c li;icc found that alloseing for imperfect competition in product markets has an important quantitative
clicci on estimates of the effects of energy taxes on the level of economic activity. Allowing for even a modest

;uicri'gC markup ni prices over marginal cost increases the predicted decline in output which is caused by an
   21T1,r,re ace oilier r0000nc wlir uris rni& rapseL tire stirsurlus to labor supply from tue soysctaiiosr of lore future incomes
riot Lu lie or lai5e as is rise simulatiana depicted in Figure 1. Ear essnrple uric nrigtrL .irppe Lirat seine ropplisse of labor ass
'rr,vI'le La borrow sgsiost future income iii any event. In such a ease, the eentrsctiourary effects of an errer' tss an likely Ia
     Iorerr burr Liner iiolicared is those simulations.



                                                                 23
iiirie;ise ii tire after-tax relative price of energy inputs. And allowing for even a small increase in equilibrium

macimps, due to increased suatainahility of collusion among members of an oligopoly can greatly increase

tire predicted nuLput decline.

    We have paid particular attention to a specific model of oligopolistic collusion that we have elsewhere

argued helps to explain the responses of the U.S. economy to a variety of kinds of macroeconomic shocks. This
model implies that an increase in energy taxes may well temporarily raise equilibrium markups. aspecially

when it is both nuexpected and expected to be reversed soon with significant probability. In this case, the

'iluort-ririL coirtractionsry impact of air energy tax is especially large. This effect is, however, sensitive to the

precise dynamic specification of the proposed taxes. Markups in the oligopolistic model may fall rather than

risrng immediately following announcement of an energy tax increase if there is a delay io the implementation

of the tax.

    In general, our results suggest an even less favorable rdation between the revenues raised by an energy tax

raid tIre reduction of economic activity than earlier studies (assuming competitive markets) have indicated.

lor cxaiiiple, in tire case of immediate implementation of a 1% energy tax that is expected to be reversed

erich' year with a 20% probability1 the revenues raised in tire first year of the tax will be .066 percent of

GDP, while CDI' is itself reduced by .110 percent in the first year according to the constant markup model,

 aid Iw .112 percest according to the variable markup model. The CDI' reduction five years later is only

.008 percent in the variable markup model if, contrary to expectation, the ta.'c increase has riot yet been

reversed; but it is by that time .134 percent in the constant markup model. Although we do not here analyze

alternative revenue sources, nyc believe that su energy tax is relatively unattractive on this dimension.

   Our results also suggest ways in which an energy tax might be structured to minimize tire contractionaey

elfecls. Our roost important finding in this respect is that a tax solely on direct household use of energy

teed rot contract non-eneegy production at all. insofar as allowing for imperfect competition increases

Ike predicted ccsntraetionary effects of a Lax on industrial uses of energy, but does not affect the predicted

rnilecqucsces or a tax on direct hosseliold use, it makes the case for targeting household energy use even

stronger.

   Time short-run coritractionary impact of an energy tax is also reduced if the tax is phased in gradually,

nod our sintulationu indicate that the outpat gained in the transition period is macli largee than Lhe cevenue



                                                        24
Losses due to the gradual phase-in.   In the case that we analyze here, for example, gradual phase—in invcslv a
revenue loss el .023 percent of GDP in the fIrst year relative to the revenues from immediate implementation.

hut hr result is that GDP falls by .070 percent less in the case of constant markups equal to 1.2, and by

.109 percent less in the case of the variable markup model. In the case of the constant markup model, the

output loss is eiso somewhat mitigated in later years although it is made slightly worse in the case of the

variable marksp model.




                                                       25
8 References

Diamond, Peter A. and James A. Mirrlees, "Optimal Taxation and Public Production I: Production Efficiency
         and LI: Tax Rules", American Economic Review, Cl, 1971, 8-27 and 261-78.

  Dixit, Avinaals, and Jepli E. Stiglita, "Monopolistic Competition and Optimum                  Product   Diversity,"
             American Economic Review, 67, 1977, 297-308.

  Corildec, Lawrence II., "Carbon Tax Design and U.S. Industry Performance," 'Thy Policy arid the Econ-
         omy, 1092, 59-104.

                 "Effects   of Carbon Taxes in an Economy with prinr Tax     Distnrtions: An Intertemporal General
             Equilibrium Analysis," mimeo, 199Th.

  —-"Energy Taxes: Taditional Efficiency Effects and Environmental Implications," Tax Policy and
             she Economi', this issus. Oilier Taxes ace Accounted for?" NBER Working Paper no. 4O6J, May
             1 992b.


   hail,   Robert E.:"The Relation Between Price and Marginal Cost in           U.S Industry,"     Journal of PoEt ical
            Economy, 96 October 1988, 921-48.

  —:"lnaarience Properties olSolow's Productivity Residual," in Peter A.. Diamond ed.Growth, Produc-
        tivity sad Unensplovmeot, Esaays to Celebrate Bob Solow's Birthday, Cambridge: MIT Prees,
             1900.


   Ilostirakier, 11.0.,         Philip K. Vealeger, ,Tc, and Dennis Sheehsn,"Dynamic Demand Analyses for Gasoline
             arid Residential Electricity," American Journal 0f       Aricultural Economics, May   1974, 412-18.


  Jorgenson, Dale W., aod Peter J.            Wilcoxeo, "Reducing U.S. Carbon Emissions: An Econometric General
             Equilibrium        Assessment," Resource and Loergy Economics, IS, March 1993, 7-25.


  .1   'intl. Kenneth   L, ,   'Tire Optimal Tax on Capital Income is Negative," nrirereo, 1913.

  King, Robert C., Charles h.P!osaer, sod Sergio l1.ebeln,"Produciioo, Growth and Business Cycles: I. The
         Basic Neocisasiral Model," Journal of Monetary Economics, 21, Starch 1988, 195-232,

   hiurrison. Catherine J.:"Marhcet Power, Economic Profitability and Productivity Growth Measurement:
             A" integrated Structural Approach," NEED Working             Paper 3355, May 1900.

  015cc of Technology Assessment, Coogress of tire United States,           Energy Use and the U.S. Economy, U.S.
             Coverorneet        Printing Office, J r:oc 11110,



  l'iirrdyrhr.   Robert S.,      and Julio J. Rotcmberg, "Dyeao:ic Factor Demands and   thin Effects of   Energy Price



                                                                 26
       Shocks," American Economic Review, 73, 1983, 1066-1079.

Ilnleinbrrg, Julio, and Michael Woodlord, "Markups and the tlusincns Cycle, fIBER Macroeconomics
       Annual, 1991, 63-129.

—--——--,"Oligopolistãc Pricing andthe Effects of Aggregate Demand on Economic Activity," Journal of
       Political Economy, 100, 1092, 1153-1207.

—-,"lmperfect Competition and the Effects of Energy Tax Increases on Economic Activity," snimeo,
       April 1963.


Tetlis, Cerald J.:"The Price Elasticity of Selective Demand: A Meta-Analynis of Econometric Models of
        Sales," Journal of IlIazketing Research, 25, November 1988, 331-41.




                                               27
                                                        Appendix I
                                        Entry and the Elimination of Profits

   We have stated above that in the long run, entry and exit are assumed to maintain pare profits at zero.
It is straightforward to show that the first order conditions for profit maximization imply that pure profits

are zero in a symmetric equilibrium if and oniy if

                                        (Pr —   i))' = Qv(l'r,G(Er,MiDNr'i                                      (ii)
w Liere ji, denotes   the common markup of all ñrms. Equation ii would thus determine the equilibrium number
of firms each period in the case of instantaneoue entry and exit. This equation refers only to the case of
imperfect competition and increasing returns where p exceeds one and '          is   strictly positive. Otherwise, as
ssual with constant ietuens, the number of firms is indeterminate.
   We do not, however, suppose that entry and exit occur so quickly. Because entry and exit are peripheral

to our main interests here (and because, as long as they are slow, the exact dynamics do not matter much
for our results) we adopt a simple ad hoc specification rather than explicitly modeling the entry and exit
decisions. Let us define

                                  lima(i + g)E1 { Qv(%+:,C(a,A+a)) }                                            (12)

Tliss N1 denotes the number of firms needed at date t ii a constant rate of growth g of the number of
irms ever alter is to result in zero profits in the long run. We then assume that the number of firms grows

'xogcnoiisly ul. the rate p. except for a slow tendency to correct any discrepancy between the current number

          iiiil .,. SpeciicaIl, we assume dynamics for the number of firms giveu by

                                           N1=pN1-l-(i—p)(l+y)N1_1                                               (la)

where 0 c p 5    1    is a consiant partial-adjustment rate. This specification introduces an additional predeter-
mined state variable, in addition to the aggregate capital stock K1, aad that is the previous number of firms

        ficie Lust once there ceases to he new information about future policy, N1 grows at the constant rate

  so that 13 implies thai the percentage discrepancy betweea Is'1 and N1 is eliminated at an exponential rate.

Substitution of 12 aud comparison with 11 indicates then that the share of pure profits in total revenues

''Lest asvinp I otictslly approach zero, irs desired.

                                                            28
                                                Appendix II

                                Parameter Values Used in Simulations

   here we explain the numerical values reported in Table 1. The steady-state balanced growth path of
the economy is described by a set of growth rates and shares, that we calibrate using the 15.5. national
income accounts According to our model, the exogenous rate g of labor-augmenting technical proggess is
also the steady-state rate of growth of real GD?, which is why we assign the value .03/year. The parsmeter
  represents the real rate of return in the steady-state equilibrium. This is not a primitive of the model,
but the model predicts that it should equal Ø(1 + g)°, so that calibration of r is equivalent to calibration
of the rate of time preference of the representative household. Following King, Plosser and Rebelo (1988),

we calibrate r to match the average real return on the U.S. stock market. The parameter 6 represents the
exogenous rate of depreciation of the capital stock of the private non-energy sector. The model implies that
in a steady-state equilibrium, the share of investment in final uses and the share of capital in total costs

most be linked, through the relation
                                             5:_             'K
                                                  — (r+ 6)(1 — 5sf)
Hence the values assumed for g and r, and the share parameters discussed below, imply a value for 6, which

is the one given. These parameters imply a steady-state capital-output ratio in the private non-energy sector
of 7.5 ejuarLers, which is reasonably consistent with the national income accounts as well.

    The parameters 5c, aj, u represent the steady-state shares of private consumption expenditure, private
iiivestllsenL expenditure, and government purchases of private lion-energy output, respectively, in total final
        — 24   of privaLe non-energy output. We calibrate these shares to equal the a4erage shares of these
three kinds of expenditure in U.S. private value added (GDF minus value added by the federal, state and

local governments). The parameters 1E , 5M, a15, 5K represent the steady-state shares of energy, materials,
 alior sod capital coals, respectively, in the total costs of the private non-energy sector.
    Au 'cv' cxphaincd ho section 1, energy costs is the non-energy sector are '1.2% of value added. Hence we

 must have
                                                    5             .O'12
                                               I—   ag —

 \V,. ;,vcliIiie. somewhat arhitrarily, a share of mstcriahs coats of .5. This is somewhat smaller than the average

                                                        20
materials share indicated in the Commerce Department data for U-S. manufacturing sectors, but we suppose

that materials are a smaller fraction of coats outside of manufacturing. The above equation then implies

       = .112. This leaves .48 of total costs for labor and capital coats. Insofar as wages account for shout 75%
nsf value added in the national income accounts, we set aw = .36, 5K           .12.

       As is explained in the text, we aume thai in the long run, the number of firms is such that equation 11
is satisfied. This implies that in the steady state, a, the share of fixed rests in total costa, must equal
                                                              N p-i
                                            (1 sE —5M) F(K,zH) =

Ilecire our calibration of this parameter follows from our choice of pm, discussed below. (Note that a. does

not refer to coats in addiLion to the four rategnries previously listed. The fixed coats are a subset of the coats
already counted once as labor and capital costs.)

       The calculations just explained imply that the abste Ø0i of total energy uae that is domestically produced

is .83. They also explain why we set i$, the ehare of total energy use that is direct household use, equal to
.4. The parameter          indicating the steady-state value of H'/H', is set equal to .17, the average ratio of
government employment (summing employment by federal, state and local governments) to total employment
over the postwar period.
       I'lus completes our specification of the parameters deacribimmg balanced growth. We turn next to the

remaining parameters of the production technology of the private non-energy sector. As the functions

17, F, P7   are all assumed to be homogeneous of degree one, the only parameters that occur in the log-linear

approximation to our equilibrium conditions are, in the case of each function, the elasticity of the function

with respect to each factor (only one free parameter per function as they must sum to 1) and the elasticity of
substitution between the two factora. The elasticities of subetitution enter the log-linear approximations to

thoec equilibrium conditions involving marginal products. All of these elasticities are evaluated at the factor
mix that uccura in the steady-state equilibrism. The elasticities with respect to the individual factors are

implied hr time steady-state share parameters already discussed; for example, the elasticity of P7 with respect

Lu F roust equal SE/(SE ÷ as;), and the elasticity of 17 with respect to V must equal 1 — is(sE + sac). (It will

be obsereed that for both of time valuse of p that we uas, each of these elasticities is positive.) it thus remains

only Lu epenicy tlmr. elasticities of substitution. Time values given in Table 1 for roe and enem are based upon

ii ,   ,omuoimi,Cric csmimmmmcs reported   in time Appendix of Rotemh'rrg end \Voodfor,I (1093). 'lime value of 1 for

                                                            30
r5n (which would follow from a Cobb—Douglas production function for value added) is standard in the real
biiuiics.s cycle literature and in a great many other computational general equilibrium studies.

   We next consider the parameters of household preferences. As noted above, the rate of Lime preference is

implicitly determined by our specification of r. It is useful to discuss the utility function U(A, H) in terms

of the Friacli demand functions AJ(wA,A).Hh(ws,A) that it implies, where w't denotes the "consistnption

wage" defined in section 2, end A denotes the representative household's marginal utility of wealth (with

wealth in units of the composite good A).          In order for a steady-state balanced growth path to be possible,

it is necessary to make a homogeneity ssnumption on the Frisch demands.                   Specifically, we nunse that

there exists a e > 0 such that H'(w5,       A)   is homogeneons of degree nero in (ur,A/c), while A4(w-'4,A) is

homogeneous of degree one in (sA, A.U]. (This is the homogeneity assumption referred to in sections 1 and

2, that is important for the seauk that a tame on direct household use of energy has no effect on non-energy

output.) In our numerical work we furthermore specify the value of 2 for s. As is noted in Table 1, this

value implies that the elasticity of consumption growth (specifically, growth in consumption of tIme aggregate

A) between two periods, with respect to the real rate of return between those periods (also measured in

terms of the composite good A), holding hours worked constani, is equal to 5. This value (which follows
ftotesuherg and Woodford (1993)) is within the range of values consistent with a variety of studies of the

relatiomm between intertempocal substitution in consumption and asset prices. (A value of 1 is common in

the real business cycle literature.)

   The only features of the Friach demands that matter for the log-linear approximation to the equilibrium

conditions are the elasticities of the functions with respect to their two arguments, again evaluated at the

sceadystate equilibrium. Flowerer, the homogeneity assumption stated above implies that all four elasticities

arc uniquely Jeternined once we specify values for u and any one of the eloaticities. We choose to calibrate

lime modcl iii terms ofaspccifmed value for           the elasticity of the Frisch labor supply fuoctioss with respect

to the consumptiou wage, because this particular elasticity (sometimes called the "intertemporal elasticity of

labor supply") is both faomiliar and the subject of a large number of econometric studies. Time value that we
  m2yur domonotramian of hew she equilibrium conditions ean conveniently he wotLen n tenon of tue Frnob demand functions,
    liomrrolier and W'oodford lissa). The discussion below of (lie manrn.meteriuation of the Friseh demand functions follows
flnmemi,bcrg nod Woodfoed 159921.
   Ti1i0 is eqoivaleot in w bomnenoriiy assumption on the funetios U. Foe further discussion of (ho class of functions U
ssi.isfying ibis coud,t,au, see Kine, Flower and fteheio (ieaa) or Roterimher sod Wsodfnrd 1i952).




                                                            .31
assume (again following Elotemberg end Woodford (1903)) is at the high end nfthe range olvaluss obtained

front panel data studies, though it is considerably smalLer than the values mest often assumed in the real

business cycle literature (of Len 4 or more).

     The remaining feature of household preferences to specify is the sggregatnc function A(C,       Es). Again,
because we assume that the function is homogeneous degree one, the only parameters for which numerical

values are needed see the elasticities of A with respect to its two arguments, and the elasticity of substitution

between the two arguments, again evaluated at the steady-state equilibrium consumption bundle. The

elasticities with respect to the arguments are again implied by the share parameters specified above. For

example the elasticity of A with respect to C is given by
                                           C      —       sc(1 — SM)
                                                      ec(15sr)+r5a
'Ibis it remains only to specify Cop. Our value is taken from the econometric study by tlouthakker, Verleger
and Sheehan (1074).

     'aVe finally describe the parameters that specify the product market structure. As noted in the text all of

the models that we considee amount to different specifications of the markup function p(X/Y) in equation

6.   The features of this function that matter for the log-linear approximation to the equilibrium cossditious
are its vs lue p in the steady-state equilibrium arid the elasticity of this function with respect to U.s argument

X/Y, also evaluated at the steady-state value uf that argument. In the csae of the competitive model, we

specify p = t and c1, = I. In the case of the monopolistirally eompetitiee (or "constant markup") model,

we specify p      1.2 and ç 0. In the case of the oligopulLstie (or "variable markup") model, we specify

p = 1.2 and = .15. As we discuss further in Rotemherg and Woodfurd (1992), the amount of market

power assumed in the steady slate in the case of the imperfectly competitive specifications (prices 20% in

•xccas of marginal cost) is seithiu the rauge of estimates obtained by a number of studies of U.S. industries.

lu that same paper we show that time implicit collusion model implies theoretical bounds upon the value of

     namely, that 0 .c r5 < p — 1. The value that we assume here satisfies time theoretical bound. These

parsirieter values for the implicit cnlhssiun model also coincide with those that srs shown in Rotemberg and

\Voodford I 1011) to predict rlfects of oil price shocks dial are similar to those observed during the period

 I 917-1080.

      mm L lie vase of die oligopolistic mondel, it is also necessary to specify a value for the parauteter a which
appears in the deFinition of X provided in Rotemberg and %Voodford (k992). This pararneteT indicates 11w

expected   rate of growth of a given oligopoly's share in total expenditure. We assume o =     .9,   because,   as   is

discussed in the Appendht of Rutemberg and Woodford (1992), this value is consistenL with the existence of an

equilibrium with imperfect collusion (a binding incentive compatibility constraint) in the case of oligopolies

with no more than ten firms.

   Finally in the case of either of the imperfectly competitive models, we must specify the parameter p in

equation 13. We set this arbtharily at .2. This parameter does not seem to have an important qualitative

eFfect on our results as long as it is relatively small (adjustment of numher of firms is not too fast).




                                                       33
                                   Table 1
                       Energy Use in the U.S. Economy

                            Quantity          Price                Value
                                                                (billions)
Coal
Production           1000   short tons
Exports               100   short tons
For Electricity      800    short tons
Other uses            100   short tons          30    /tou              3
Petroleum
Production           2707   Million Barrels   16.54   /barrel       44.77
Imports              2223   Million Barrels   16.54   /hacrel       36.77
For electricity       196   Million Barrels   18.65   /barrel        3.70
Petroleum and Coal
   processing
Value added                                                         36.70
Natural Gas
Total Revenues                                                      69.07
For Electricity      2.78   Trillion Cu.Ft.   2200    /Co.Ft,        6.10
Other uses                                                          62.93
Electric Utilities
Total revenues                                                    184.90
Total Purchases                                                   365.41




                                         31
                                            Table 2
                                 The Calibrated Parameters

Parameter Values Description

g             .03 Rate of technical progress (per year)

              .00 Steady state real rate of return (per year)

6            073 Rate of depreciation of capital stock (per year)
             .697 Share of private consumption in final uses

             .136   Share of private investment in final uses

             .117   Share of government purchases in final uses

              .02 Share of energy costs in total coats

               .5 Share of materials costs in total costs
              .36 Share of labor costs in total costs
              .12 Share of capital costs in total coats
       •   0, .167 Shsreofflxedcoatsintotalcosts
              .83 Share of domestically produced energy in total energy use
               .4 Share of direct household use in total energy use

              .17 Share of hours hired by the government
              .69 Elasticity of substitution hetween value added and intermediate inputs

casr          .13 Elasticity of substitution between energy and materials

cEll            I Elasticity of substitution between capital and hours

I/is           .5   Elasticity of intertemporal substitution of household expenditure

              1.3 Intertemporal elasticity of labor supply

p           1, 1.2 Steady state markup (ratio of price to marginal cost)
            0. .15 Elasticity of the markup with respect tu )/Y
cc             .9 Expected rate of growth of individual oligopolys expenditure share

p              .2 Rate of partial adjustment of number of linus




                                                33
                                        Table 3
                           Long-Run Effects of an Energy Tax


                      TAX ON ALL ENERGY USE)       (HOUSEHOLD USE ONLYI
                      Competitive Market Power    Competitive       Market Power


Non-Energy Output          -.071         -.097                  I            0

CDI'                       -.072         -.098             -.022         -.022

Hours Worked               -.024         -.021                  0            0

Product Wage               -.058         -.085                  0            0

Consumption Wage           -.092         -.122             -.057         -.037

Energy Use in Prod.        -.271         -.297                  0            0

household Energy          —1.052        -1.082            -1.000         1.000

Cspit.al Stock             -.084         -.110                  0            0

Number of Firms              —           -.033                  —            0




                                            30
               Figure 1
     Estimated Production Functions
.3



ii
10

 9




 7

 6

 5



 3

 2




          23      '0            60   80   1 00

                 Cn.rgy Input
                           igUt2 2
          -A
                t1eCt ot             tax




a
U


a
C
0
0C
 a
45
a--i
a
a

               //


     -4
                                           mU --
                  Figure 3

       Energy tax increase: gradual implementation




I-
0
C)
C!,



C
C
a
C
0
a-
0
Cl,
0,
a
C



                            10                15         20
      Competitive: -; constant mu: --; variable mu: -.
                Figure 4

     Dynamics of markup in variable mu model



0)
a)


a)
0)
V]
E
0
a
a)
a)

0




                                                       20
           tax increase: -; gradual tax increase: --
                              Figure 5


       10-Tax increase with 20 percent chance of reversal each period




              / 'S
         //

-1.5


                       5               10               15
                 Competitive: -: constant mu: -- variable mu:
