                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               THE DYNAMICS OF HIGH
                                     INFLATION




                                       Laurence Ball




                                 Working Paper No. 4578




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 December, 1993



I am grateful for research assistance from Rami Amir and for suggestions from Susanto Basu,
Ben Bernanke, Marco Bonomo, Avinash Dixit, Louis Maccini, N. Gregory Mankiw, David
Romer, and seminar participants at the IMF and the NBER. The NSF and the Sloan Foundation
provided financial support. This paper is part of NBER's research programs in Economic
Fluctuations and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                    NBER Working Paper #4578
                                                                              December 1993


                                  THE DYNAMICS OF HIGH
                                        INFLATION


                                          ABSTRACT

       This paper presents a model of a high-inflation economy. The model includes the
government budget constraint and money demand equation of Cagan's 1956 model; an
accelerationist Phillips curve that captures inflation inertia; and an aggregate-spending equation
that accounts for the effects of the inflation tax. The paper derives the dynamic effects of fiscal
policy, incomes policies, and supply shocks, and uses the results to interpret high-inflation
episodes of the 1970s and 1980s.



Laurence Ball
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218-2685
and NBER
       I.   INTRODUCTION

       In the 1980s, fourteen countries experienced annual inflation rates above

100%. A large literature discusses the sources of inflation in these countries

and the many stabilization programs (for example, the papers in Bruno et al.

 1988] and Bruno et al. [1991)). This literature addresses a dizzying array of

phenomena: budget deficits, supply shocks, external debt, exchange rate crises,

the effects of inflation on tax revenue, incomes policies, the choice of nominal

anchors, the frequency of price adjustment and inflation inertia, real wage

behavior, real interest rates and bankruptcies, distributional conflicts....

Different authors focus on different subsets of these phenomena, and so

discussions of high-inflation experiences often bear little relation to each

other. Some discussions, for example, focus on shifts in fiscal policy, whereas

others emphasize supply shocks and inflation inertia.           Exchange rates and

external debt are central to some discussions, whereas others ignore open-economy

issues.

      What phenomena are essential for understanding high-inflation economies?

Is there a unified explanation for various high-inflation episodes? The answers

to these questions are unclear, because discussions of high inflation are not

based on a common theoretical framework. The closest thing to a consensus theory

--   the one that textbooks present --   is   Cagan's 1956 model. This model is too

limited, however, to capture central issues in applied discussions. It cannot

explain the real effects of inflation and stabilization, because it assumes

constant output and real interest rates, and it has no role for incomes policies

or supply shocks. This paper presents a model that is similar to Cagan's in

style and complexity but captures more of the high-inflation experience. I focus


                                          1
on episodes in which annual inflation peaks at three or four digits, as in Israel

and many South American countries during the 1980s.      (The relevance to even

higher inflation is discussed at the end.)'

     Sections II and III present the model and derive its basic dynamics. The

model consists of four equations. Two are taken from Cagan: a government budget

constraint that ties seignorage to the deficit, and a money demand equation. The

third equation is borrowed from moderate-inflation macro: a Phillips curve that

relates the change in Inflation to the level of output. Similar equations are

suggested for high-inflation countries by Bruno and Fischer (1986) and Cardoso

(1991). The equation captures the inertia frequently ascribed to high inflation:

inflation remains constant as long as output is at its natural level.          In

combining this assumption with Cagan's equations, the model synthesizes the

"inertia" and "fiscal" approaches to inflation that are sometimes presented as

alternatives (e.g. Kiguel and Liviatan, 1991).

     The model's final assumption is an equation for aggregate output. It is

similar to a textbook IS curve, except that it accounts for the inflation tax.

The inflation tax reduces private spending in the same way as an income tax in

the usual IS equation. This assumption introduces a new channel through which

inflation affects the economy. For example, incomes policies reduce the output

loss from stabilization because lower government spending is offset by a lower

inflation tax.

      Sections IV-VII derive the effects of macroeconomic shocks on output,

inflation, interest rates, and real money balances. Throughout, I compare the

results to actual experiences in high-inflation countries. Section IV considers


      'Cagan intended his model to apply to hyperinflation, defined as monthly
 inflation rates above 50%. Since Cagan wrote, however, the model has been used
 routinely to interpret three-digit annual inflation.

                                         2
the two basic shocks in the model: shifts in government spending, and exogenous

jumps in inflation. As detailed below, the latter can be interpreted as incomes

policies or supply shocks.          I use the results to interpret orthodox

stabilizations (such as Chile 1975-77) and incomes policies without deficit

reduction (such as Brazil 1986). One result concerning stabilization is that,

as inflation falls, real balances initially fall before rising to a higher

steady-state level. This result fits the facts, which the Cagan model cannot

explain (Dornbusch et al., 1990).

     Section V considers a heterodox stabilization -   -a   combination of a fiscal

contraction and incomes policies that directly shift inflation. The results for

this case fit many features of the 1985 Israeli stabilization. Section VI then

turns to increases in inflation. I consider three sources of high inflation:

fiscal expansions (as in Chile in the 1970s), cutoffs of foreign loans (as in

Brazil in the 1980s), and monetary accomodation of supply shocks (as in Brazil

and Israel in the 1970s).

     As a final application of the model, Section VII considers the relationships

among deficits, seignorage, and inflation. The failure of these variables to

move together over time is often cited as a puzzle (e.g. Blarichard and Fischer,

1989, Ch. 10).    My model can generate a variety of comovements among these

variables, including opposite movements of seignorage and inflation. My theory

of inflation and deficits is an alternative to those of Drazen and Helpman (1990)

and Eckstein and Leiderman (1992).

     Section VIII compares my model to other models of high inflation.            I

emphasize the Cagan model and Cardoso's 1991 model.         The latter is closely

related to mine, as it also synthesizes the inertia and fiscal approaches to

inflation. However, Cardoso's assumptions about aggregate spending differ from


                                        3
mine (she does not account for the inflation tax), and there are important

differences in results.

       Section IX concludes the paper. As suggested by the first paragraph of this

introduction, there are many possible extensions of the model.



       II. THE MODEL
       This section presents the four equations of the basic model, and a

generalization in which the government raises revenue through foreign borrowing

as well as seignorage.

       A. The Government Budget Constraint

       The. first equation is taken from the Cagan model (Blanchard and Fischer,

1989, Ch. 4). A flow of real government spending C is financed with seignorage -

- by   printing money.    Seignorage equals the flow of money, 1(, divided by the

price level P. This ratio equals the growth rate of money, l/M, times     the real

money stock M/P. Thus


       (1)    G = am,

where a—t/M and m—M/P.       In the applications below, G is usually treated as

exogenous. Shifts in C are one of the driving forces of the model.

       B. Money Demand

       The model's second equation is similar to Cagan's money demand function.

 Demand for real balances depends inversely on the nominal interest rate:


       (2)        =   h(r + r)   ,   h'<O

where r is the real interest rate and r is inflation. I assume that the function

 rh(r+ir) (which equals seignorage in steady state) is a Laffer curve in :       it


 first rises and then falls as w increases, and it approaches zero as r-s. These


                                            4
assumptions hold, for example, for the constant-semi-elasticity form of h(.) that

Cagan uses.2

     In principle, money demand should depend on output as well as the nominal

interest rate, because output varies in my model. In high-inflation economies,

however, shifts in output are a minor source of money-demand movements relative

to shifts in interest rates. Thus (2) is a good approximation to reality.

     C. Inflation

     I assume that inflation is inertial: it remains constant if output is at its

natural level. Inflation rises in booms and falls in recessions; specifically,


    (3)        *   = ay   ,   a>O

where y is the percentage deviation of output from its natural level. Equation

(3) is a continuous-time version of an accelerationist Phillips curve. Appendix

A to this paper derives (3) from a microeconomic model of price setting; the key

assumptions are that prices are adjusted at discrete intervals, and that expected

inflation equals current inflation.     The parameter a is increasing in the

frequency of price adjustment.

     Equation (3) is a major departure from the Cagan model. In Cagan, inflation

is determined by money demand: given nominal money growth, prices adjust
passively to ensure that real balances equal the desired level. Money demand

influences inflation in my model, but only indirectly. As in textbook macro,

money demand affects interest rates: since     is inertial, r adjusts to equate

money supply and money demand. Interest rates influence aggregate spending (as



     2Note that money demand depends on the current level of inflation.      As
discussed below, Cagan assumes that money demand depends on expected inflation,
which adjusts over time towards actual inflation.      My specification is the
limiting case of Cagan's in which the adjustment of expectations is
instantaneous.

                                        5
described below), and spending influences inflation by (3). My model makes this

transmission mechanism explicit, and does not assume that the process occurs

Instantly. In particular, since (3) is based on niicroeconomic assumptions about

price adjustment, it reflects the reality that "prices are ,         rather   than

determined by an invisible money market-clearing hand" (Dornbusch et al., 1990,

p. 8).

     Although inflation is usually determined by (3), I allow occasional

exogenous jumps in inflation. These jumps and shifts in C are the two basic

shocks in the model. An inflation jump can be interpreted as any shock that

breaks inflation inertia, such as an incomes policy or a supply shock. Appendix

A describes how these interpretations of Inflation jumps can be formalized.

     D. Agregate SDending

     My only novel assumption concerns aggregate output, which is determined by

aggregate demand. As in the textbook IS equation, demand depends on government

spending, taxes, and investment, which is a function of the real interest rate.

The departure from the usual IS equation is that taxes are inflation taxes. Thus


    (4)     y =   G   —   irm +   ICr)   ,       1/<0

where I is the deviation of investment from its long-run level (which, as shown

below, is a constant). irm is the inflation tax: the instantaneous decline in the

value of money balances. By making output a function of C-itm, I ignore the

balanced budget multiplier. (This is justified exactly if C is interpreted as

subsidies rather than government purchases.) The assumptions that C-inn and 1(r)

have coefficients of one are normalizations.

     Recall from equation (1) that C equals seignorage, am. Aggregate spending

therefore depends on the gap between seignorage and the inflation tax. This gap

is zero in steady state, but generally non-zero out of steady state.

                                             6
     It appears theoretically correct to include the inflation tax in the IS

curve. An inflation tax reduces disposable income just as much as an income tax:

it does not matter whether real income is withheld from paychecks or vanishes in

the process of spending money.        Thus the inflation tax reduces private

consumption. The tax can safely be ignored in moderate-inflation countries,

where it is small, but not in high-inflation countries. Most discussions of high

inflation do, however, ignore the effect of the inflation tax on spending. One

exception is Blanchard et al. (1991), who account for this effect in arguing that

stabilization need not reduce output:3

        All that is required (for stabilization) is a change in
        the structure of taxation and spending, typically the
        elimination of the inflation tax balanced by a decrease
        in subsidies. We do not ordinarily think of changes in
        taxation as major contractionary factors.... If the
        decrease in subsidies and the inflation tax are of equal
        magnitudes to start with, real [disposable) income - - that
        is, income including losses on money balances --   willbe
        unchanged [pp. 9-10].

     E. An Extension: Foreign Loans

     A simple extension of the model allows us to interpret it more broadly.

Assume that the government finances its spending through foreign loans as well

as seignorage. These loans are the only international capital flows. In this

case, the government budget constraint is


    (l)'     G =   am   +   B,
where B is foreign borrowing (net of interest and repayments). The aggregate-



     3Foundations for equation (4) might be developed by combining a simple
consumption function with a Bawuol-Tobin model of money demand. Suppose, for
example, that consumers receive a constant flow of real income and desire a
constant flow of consumption.     Income flows to bank accounts, where it is
protected from inflation, and consumers withdraw cash at discrete intervals to
finance consumption. In this case, the real value of consumer spending decreases
one-for-one with the inflation tax on cash.

                                         7
spending equation also changes, because there are net exports of -B.          The

equation becomes an open-economy IS equation:


    (4)'    y =     C   -    rm    +   1(r)   -       B

Equations (1)' and (4)' are the same as (1) and (4), except that C is replaced

by C-B. Thus either higher spending or lower borrowing produces the effects of

higher spending in the basic model.

     Note that B cannot be interpreted as internal borrowing.         Foreign and

domestic loans have the same effect on the government budget constraint, but not

on aggregate spending: domestic borrowing does not reduce net exports.        The

implications of internal debt are left for future research.



     III. STEADY STATES AND DYNAMICS

     A. Steady States

     The model has two state variables, ir and m. Differentiating m, the ratio

of money to prices, yields th—(c-t)m. Combining this result with the government

budget constraint yields


    (5)          = G    -    rm

Real balances rise when government spending (and hence seignorage) exceeds the

inflation tax.

     To determine the dynamics of , note that the money demand equation (2)

defines r as a function of in and w. Substituting this function into ICr), we can

write investment as I(,m), I,>O, Im>O. Combining this result with (3) and (4)

yields


     (6)    * = a[G         - irni +


Inflation rises   when aggregate spending, given by the expression in brackets, is

                                                  8
high.

        A steady state is defined by ft—0 and fr—0. Together, these conditions imply

1—0.         Thus the steady-state real interest rate i is defined by I(i)—0.

Substituting this fact and equation (2) into lii—0 yields


       (7)       G = irh(?-flr)
This condition defines steady-state inflation.

       Equation (7) is the same as Cagan's condition for steady-state inflation

(assuming that          equals Cagan's fixed interest rate). As assumed above, the

right side of (7) first increases and then decreases as           rises. If C is less

than the maximum value of this expression, there are two steady states; if C

exceeds this value, there is none. I focus on the case of two steady states.

        B. Stability and Dynamics

        When   there   are two steady states, the one with higher inflation is unstable

(see Appendix B).          I therefore focus on dynamics around the lower-inflation

steady state. The flh—0 equation defines an inverse relation between and m. A—0

defines a relation with slope



        8
                 dir        -   ___

Both the numerator and denominator of this expression have ambiguous signs. To
determine the dynamics of the model, one must put restrictions on these

expressions.

        I assume that the denominator of (8), I-m, is negative at the lower-

inflation steady state.          To interpret this assumption, note that I,,-m equals

3y/3ir, the effect of inflation on aggregate spending for given real balances.

The effect is ambiguous because higher inflation raises the inflation tax, which


                                              9
is contractionary, but also raises investment, which is expansionary. We can

calibrate the net effect by examining episodes of incomes policies, which cause

downward jumps in inflation without immediately shifting real balances. As

described below, the effect of incomes policies in actual experience is to raise

output (or reduce the output loss from an accompanying fiscal contraction). Thus

it appears realistic to assume a negative effect of inflation on output.

     The numerator of (8) equals -ay/am, the effect of real balances on output.

It is ambiguous because a higher m, like a higher ,r, raises the inflation tax but

also raises investment. In this case it is difficult to measure the net effect,

because there is no analogue to incomes policies: we do not observe discrete

shifts in in.   i therefore allow dy/am to be either positive or negative. (The
assumption that dy/dic is negative does not determine the sign of dy/din).

     For the two possible cases, Figure 1 shows the dynamics of      and in   around
the lower-inflation steady state. When lr-Im is positive, both th—O and *—O slope

down. *—O cuts Ei—O from below (see Appendix B). When r-Im is negative, *••'O

slopes up. The arrows in the Figure indicate the behavior of r and in         out   of

steady state. The steady state is stable in both cases: it is a stable node if

*—O slopes down, and either a stable node or a stable spiral if k—O slopes up.



     IV. FISCAL AND INFLATION SHOCKS

     The next four sections derive the dynamic effects of macroeconomic shocks.

This section considers a cut in government spending and a downward jump in

inflation.

     A. A Decrease in C

     A downward shift in C can be interpreted as an orthodox stabilization: a

fiscal contraction without direct controls on inflation. Equation (7) and my


                                        10
restrictions on h(s) imply that the decrease in C reduces inflation in the stable

steady state.      The steady-state in is higher, and y and r are unchanged. In

graphical terms, the decrease in C shifts both the th-'O and *—O curves down. As

shown in Figure 2, the shifts can have offsetting effects but the net effect is

to raise in and lower ir.

     Figure 3 shows the transition from the old to the new steady state. The

results are similar when *—O slopes down and when it slopes up, except possibly

at the end of the transition: when *—O slopes up, convergence may occur through

a spiral. For simplicity, I focus on the cases without a spiral in Panels A and

B of the Figure. (When *—O slopes up, a spiral is ruled out if a is sufficiently

small, i.e. if there is sufficient inflation inertia.)'

     In the no-spiral cases, inflation falls smoothly from the old to the new

steady state.      Real balances first decrease and then increase.    The initial

decrease occurs because money growth jumps down when C is cut, whereas inflation

falls gradually. The result that inflation falls during the transition means

that output is below the natural level: stabilization causes a recession.

Finally, since both in and     fall initially, the real interest rate exceeds its

long-run level.5

     The transitional recession has both fiscal and monetary causes. Initially,

output jumps down because government spending is cut.         However, after the

transition path crosses the Ib—O line, C-inn is positive: the decrease in the

inflation tax more than offsets the cut in spending.        In this part of the


     'Another possibility when *—O slopes up is that the transition path
overshoots the steady-state in a single time. This case is intermediate between
the ones in Panels B and C. See Appendix B for details.

     r exceeds    even during the later part of the transition, when m rises.
During this period C-,nn is positive and y is negative. Thus, by (4), 1(r) must
be negative and r must exceed .

                                        11
transition, output is depressed by a monetary crunch: the lower m and lower

raise the real interest rate and reduce investment.

     These results fit the facts.          The cleanest example of an orthodox

stabilization from three-digit inflation -      -a   genuine fiscal consolidation with

no incomes policies --    is   the Chilean stabilization of 1974-77 (Bruno, 1991).

As predicted by the model, inflation fell steadily over this period (CPI

inflation was 498Z in 1974, 235X in 1976, and 5O in 1978).                The fall in

inflation was accompanied by a deep recession, and real interest rates rose above

50% (Corbo and Solimano, 1991, Table 3.1). Finally, M2 fell from 12% of GDP in

1973 to 7% in 1974 and 1975, and then rose for the rest of the 1970s (Harberger,

1982, Table 3).

     B. A Downward Jump   in   Inflation

     As discussed in Appendix A, a downward jump in inflation can be interpreted

as an incomes policy: a direct intervention in price setting that breaks

inflation inertia. After the one-time jump, inflation is again determined by

equation (3). Here, I consider an incomes policy with government spending held

constant -   -a   "heterodox" stabilization without the orthodox component of a

fiscal contraction.       Such a policy is a good description of many failed

stabilizations. In the 1986 Brazilian episode, for example, wage-price controls

reduced annual inflation from 420% to 9% over two quarters, and the government

deficit stayed almost constant (Vegh, 1992, Table 12).

     Figure 4 shows the dynamic effects of an inflation jump. Since the shock

does not affect the fundamentals of the model, the economy returns to its initial

steady state. Once again, the cases in the Figure are similar, except that one

includes a spiral at the end of the transition.              In the no-spiral cases,

inflation rises steadily back to its steady-state level. Real balances rise


                                           12
temporarily, because inflation drops below money growth.             Output exceeds its

long-run level throughout the transition, because of the temporary reduction in

the inflation tax. Finally, the real interest rate follows a complex path: it

j unips up when ir jumps down, falls as in and   ir   rise,   eventually drops below its

long-run level, and then rises again.6

     These predictions fit the 1986 Brazilian stabilization. Inflation fell and

then rose again over 1986-87. The money stock as a percent of GNP doubled in

1986 and returned to roughly its initial level in 1987. The economy boomed, with

annual growth of 13% in the two quarters of falling inflation. Finally, the real

interest rate on savings jumped to 213% in 1986:1 and then fell to -51% in 1986:4

(Vegh, 1992, Table 12; Kiguel and Liviatan, 1991, Table 6.6).

     Although incomes policies are not a long-term cure for inflation, my model

suggests that they are benign.      In Figures 4A and 4B, incomes policies just

reduce inflation temporarily and raise output.                 Thus my model provides

counterexamples to Cardoso's (1991) argument that incomes policies produce a

period of higher than steady-state inflation after an initial decline.               (In

actual experience, including Brazil's, inflation often overshoots its initial

level after a failed stabilization. However, this can be explained by an upward

drift in steady-state inflation due to worsening fiscal fundament.ds.)



     V. HETERODOX STABILIZATION

     A. Basic Results

     This section considers a heterodox stabilization: a combination of a

decrease in C and a downward jump in it caused by incomes policies. A leading



     6r lies below its long-run level while in is falling. During this period,
G-,rni<O and y>O, so investment must exceed its long-run level.

                                         13
example is the 1985 Israeli stabilization, in which wage-price controls quickly

reduced inflation from 400% to 20% and the government eliminated a deficit of ten

percent of GNP.

     The change in steady states is the same for a heterodox stabilization as for

an orthodox one, but the transition begins with a downward jump in inflation.

There are a number of possible transition paths, depending on parameters and on

the relative sizes of the inflation jump and the fiscal contraction. Figure 5

presents several of the possibilities.

        As shown in the Figure, inflation can either rise or fall after its initial

jump, depending on whether it jumps below the A—0 line.           Rising inflation

indicates a boom, and falling inflation indicates a recession. For the cases in

the Figure, real balances rise monotonically (rather than falling initially as

in an orthodox stabilization). Finally, the real interest rate jumps up when

inflation jumps down and remains above its steady-state level throughout the

transition.

        In the first two years of the Israeli stabilization, output was at or

perhaps above its natural level. (Output grew 6% in 1986 and 7% in 1987.) Thus

we can interpret this episode as one in which inflation jumps down to or below

the *—O line. As predicted by the model, real balances rose substantially after

the stabilization. The real interest rate jumped to 100% in 1985 and remained

over 30% in 1986-87 (Cukierman, 1988, Table 2.1; Bruno and Meridor, 1991, Table

7.1).

        B. Boom-Recession Cycles?

        Although the model explains many aspects of the Israeli experience, it

probably does not capture all the dynamics.         The Israeli stabilization was

initially accompanied by strong growth, but a recession began in 1987. Such a


                                          14
"boom-recession cycle" is observed in many heterodox stabilizations (Kiguel and

Liviatan, 1992), and authors such as Calvo and Vegh (1993) develop models to

explain it. Can the current model generate such a cycle?

     In principle, the answer is yes. Stabilization causes a boom and then a

recession (indicated by rising and falling inflation) in Figure 5B.           This

result, however, is not robust: it cannot arise if *—O slopes up. In addition,

the mechanism behind the lagged recession does not fit the Israeli experience.

In the model, output falls after its initial increase because real balances rise,

raising the inflation tax. The rising real balances imply that investment rises

as the recession begins (although not enough to offset the higher inflation tax).

In reality, the 1987 recession was driven by a ll       in   investment, which was

apparently caused by the high interest rates of 1985-87 (Bruno and Meridor,

1991).

     A sequel to this paper (Ball, 1993) modifies the current model to produce

a better theory of boom-recession cycles. The crucial new assumption is that

investment adjusts slowly to changes in interest rates; this sluggishness arises

from costs of adjusting investment and from balance-sheet effects of high rates,

which build over time. In the modified model, a heterodox stabilization produces

a consumption-led boom followed by an investment-led recession.

     C. The Role of Incomes Policies

     In both this paper and Ball (1993), incomes policies raise output relative

to the path it would follow without them. This result is conventional, but the

mechanism is not. Proponents of incomes policies during disinflation usually

argue that, by speeding the fall in inflation, these policies prevent a drop in

real balances as money growth falls. Since real balances are higher with incomes

policies, real interest rates are lower and investment is higher. In my model,


                                       15
incomes policies do raise real balances, but the effect on interest rates is more

than offset, at least initially, by the direct effect of lower inflation. That

is, in contrast to the usual story, incomes policies raise real interest rates

and reduce investment. Incomes policies are expansionary overall because they

reduce the inflation tax, which raises consumption. This effect of inflation on

consumption is ignored in the conventional story.

     My theory of incomes policies fits the Israeli experience. As noted above,

real interest rates were very high between 1985 and 1987, and government spending

was cut sharply.    Output grew strongly despite these contractionary forces

because lower inflation produced a consumption boom: consumption grew 14% in 1986

and 8% in 1987 (Bruno and Meridor, Table 7.1).

     Although my model focuses on the inflation tax, economists have suggested

a number of other channels through which lower inflation might stimulate

consumption (see Decregorio, Guidotti, and Vegh, 1993).             For example,

stabilization may increase consumer confidence or cause the consumer loan market

to reopen.   Future research could add such effects to the model: they would

strengthen the consumption effects of incomes policies that I emphasize.



      VI. INCREASES IN INFlATION

     So far I have focused on episodes in which inflation falls temporarily or

permanently. Can the model also explain why Inflation rises in the first place?

     A. An Increase in Government Spending

     One source of a rise in inflation is an increase in C. The dynamics are the

reverse of those for a decrease in C, shown in Figure 3.     As inflation rises,

output is high, the real interest rate is low, and real balances first rise and

then fall.


                                        16
     It is difficult to test these predictions, because few actual increases in

inflation follow purely from increases in G; most involve complications such as

supply shocks or devaluations (see below). One episode that might be interpreted

as a pure fiscal expansion is Chile under Allende, who increased the government

deficit from 7% of CD? in 1970 to 31% in 1973 (Corbo and Solimano, 1991, Table

3.1). CPI inflation rose from 33% to 488% over this interval. As predicted by

the model, the fiscal expansion caused a boom, with 9% real growth in 1971 and

falling unemployment through 1972. Finally, the money stock as a proportion of

GDP rose in 1971 and 1972 and then fell in 1973 (Harberger, 1982, Table 3)7

     B. A Cutoff of Foreign Loans

     Many increases in inflation arise not from higher government spending, but

from shifts in deficit finance from debt to money.       In particular, the debt

crisis of the early 1980s forced countries such as Brazil and Argentina to rely

more heavily on seignorage.     The decrease in foreign borrowing required a

decrease in the trade deficit, which was accomplished through sharp devaluations.

I now investigate the effects of such a shock, using the open-economy model of

Section lIE.

     By itself, a decrease in borrowing has the same effect as an increase in

government spending, since only the difference C-B enters the open-economy model.

However, the accompanying devaluation complicates the matter: as described in

Appendix A, a devaluation causes an upward jump in inflation. The combination

of an increase in C-B and an upward inflation jump is the opposite of a heterodox

stabilization. Thus, reversing the results from Section V, the shift in finance

produces low real interest rates and monotonically decreasing real balances, and

it reduces output if the inflation jump is large enough.


     7Data on real interest rates during this period are not readily available.

                                        17
    These results fit the increase in Brazilian inflation before the 1986

stabilization (see Cardoso [1991) for a similar argument).       During the debt

crisis of 1982-83, a sharp devaluation created a large trade surplus. Output

fell in 1983, inflation jumped from 6% per month to 10%, the real interest rate

was near zero, and real balances fell (Modiano, 1988, Table 5A.l; Cardoso, Figure

5.9, Table 5.Al; Kiguel and Liviatan, 1991, Table 6.6).

     C. Supply Shocks and Accomodatin Policy

     In moderate-inflation countries, increases in inflation are commonly blamed

on supply shocks and accomodating government policies.        The same mechanism

accounts for some high-inflation experiences. In Brazil, for example, monthly

inflation jumped from l.5Z to 3% after OPEC I, and from 3% to 6% after OPEC II.

Similarly, inflation jumped in Israel after the two oil shocks; Bruno and Fischer

(1986) describe the Israeli "inflationary process" as "shocks and accomodation."

This view of inflation is sometimes presented as art alternative to Cagan's fiscal

theory (e.g. Bole and Gaspari, 1991). It can, however, be captured easily in my

model, despite Cagan's government budget constraint.

     Like a devaluation, a supply shock can be interpreted as an upward jump in

inflation (see Appendix A). To capture accomodating policy, I assume that the

government adjusts G (or C-B in the open-economy model) to keep output at its

natural level. Thus C becomes endogenous. Since output is constant, inflation

is constant except when it jumps exogenously. The only endogenous state variable

is real balances m. Equations (4) and (5) and the assumption that y—O imply th—-

I(s,m)

     In this version of the model, an upward jump in      causes an upward jump in

C to keep output constant. C can then either rise or fall, but remains above its

initial level. One can show that m declines monotonically to a lower steady-


                                        18
state level. r jumps down when inflation jumps up, and then returns to its long-

run level.

     This scenario fits the Israeli experience around the 1979 oil shock. An

increase in the government deficit prevented a recession: despite the supply

shock, output grew 5 percent in 1979 (Bruno and Fischer, 1986). Annual inflation

rose from 40% before the shock to 130% in the early 1980s, and real balances fell

rapidly throughout the period (Liviatan and Piterman, 1986, Figure 16.1, Table

16.4).



     VII. DEFICITS, SEIGNORAGE AND INFLATION

     Most theoretical models place the ultimate blame for high inflation on

government budget deficits. In practice, however, deficits and inflation often

do not move together over time.     This fact is explained partly by shifts in

deficit finance between borrowing and seignorage, which determines inflation.

This is not the whole explanation, however, because seignorage and inflation

often do not move together (see, for example, Liviatan and Piterman's [1986)

discussion of Israel). This fact is commonly viewed as a puzzle, and authors

such as Drazen and Helpman (1990) and Eckstein and Leiderman (1992) develop

theories to explain it.

     My model can easily explain the lack of comovement between seignorage and

inflation.   There is a tight relationship between these variables in steady

state, but their short-run movements depend on the nature of shocks. An orthodox

stabilization, for example, produces a downward jump in seignorage; then

inflation falls slowly while seignorage remains constant. A pure incomes policy

produces falling and then rising inflation with no change in seignorage. Various

sequences of policies and inflation shocks can generate virtually any pattern of


                                        19
inflation and seignorage. (Bruno and Fischer [1986] make a similar point.)

     In one empirically relevant case, inflation and seignorage move in opposite

directions. Suppose that incomes policies are introduced and money growth is

held constant. This experiment differs from the basic incomes-policy case in

Section IV in that monetary rather than fiscal policy is held constant. With

constant money growth and reduced inflation, real balances rise, and so

seignorage rises. The higher seignorage implies higher government spending or

less borrowing. This scenario fits the rise in seignorage and fall in inflation

in Israel in 1985 and in Brazil in 1986 (Cukierman, 1988; Kiguel and Liviatan,

1991).   (In the Israeli case, the deficit and inflation were cut in 1985, but

money growth remained in three digits through 1986.)



     VIII. COMPARISON TO PREVIOUS WORK

     A. The Caan Model

     The classic Cagan model assumes that output and the real interest rate are

constant. It includes the government budget constraint and money demand equation

of my model, and one additional assumption: expected inflation (which enters

money demand) adjusts slowly towards actual inflation.

     As discussed in Section III, my model and Cagan's have the same steady

states. The stability results and dynamics are quite different, however. In my

model, the lower-inflation steady state is stable under my assumption that

äy/r<O. The higher-inflation steady state is unstable. In Cagan, the lower-

inflation steady state is stable only if the adjustment speed of expectations is

sufficiently slow. If expectations adjust quickly, the higher-inflation steady

state is the stable one. This steady state has perverse properties; for example,




                                       20
inflation is decreasing in government spending.8

    My model goes beyond Cagan's in explaining movements in y and r.          In

addition, it makes more realistic predictions about the dynamics of m and , even

if we focus on Cagan's lower-inflation steady state. My model predicts that a

decrease in C causes a smooth fall in inflation and an initial decrease in real

balances, which fit Chile's orthodox stabilization.     In Cagan, by contrast, a

decrease in C causes a downward jump in inflation and a monotonic increase in

real balances. Similarly, Cagan incorrectly predicts that an increase in C, as

in Chile before 1973, produces a monotonic fall in m.    (This point is stressed

by Dornbusch et al., 1990). Cagan's results follow from his assumption that

money demand determines inflation.    Inflation must jump when C falls because

money growth jumps and real money demand has not yet changed; then real balances

must rise because lower inflation raises money demand. My model makes more

realistic predictions because it introduces inflation inertia. Real balances

initially fall when C is reduced because inflation lags behind falling money

growth.

     B, Forward-Looking Models

     Since Cagan, a number of authors have developed models of high-inflation

dynamics.   Starting with Sargent and Wallace (1981), most of this work has

emphasized expectations of future policy shifts as a driving force behind

inflation. One example is Drazen and Helpman (1990), who explain variation in

inflation through changing expectations about government deficits, which shift

money demand. Another is Calvo and Vegh (1993), who explain booms at the start


     8My model does not nest Cagan's. One can generate Cagan's assumption that
y is constant by assuming a-' (no inflation inertia), but r is still variable in
this case. A constant r would require I' (r)-. (a flat IS curve), which violates
the restriction that 8y/3r<O. If a- and I' (r)-, my model has no stable steady
state.

                                       21
of stabilization through expectations that an exchange-rate peg will be

abandoned. This expectation implies a future increase in the inflation tax,

which induces interternporal substitution towards current consumption. (See also

the related work surveyed by Vegh [1992)).

     In my view, expected policy shifts have been somewhat overemphasized in

recent work relative to direct shocks to inflation such as incomes policies and

supply shocks. In any case, my model attempts to explain as much as possible of

inflation dynamics without invoking forward-looking behavior. Future research

could integrate my approach with previous ones. For example, my model and Calvo-

Vegh provide complementary explanations for the consumption booms that accompany

sharp disinflations: a lower inflation tax can raise consumption both by raising

disposable income and by inducing intertemporal substitution.9

     C. Cardoso (1991)

     The closest model to mine is Cardoso (1991) (see also Cardoso [1988)). Like

my model, Cardoso's borrows the government budget constraint (1) and money demand

equation (2) from Cagan. Instead of my (3) and (4), Cardoso assumes that the

change in inflation depends on the gap between the real interest rate and the

"full-employment" interest rate, which is a function of C. One can show that

these assumptions are equivalent to mine, with one modification: the inflation

tax term -irm is omitted from the output equation. That is, Cardoso ignores the

direct effect of inflation on aggregate spending.

     Cardoso's model is apparently the first to combine Cagan's equations with

a * equation capturing inflation inertia. Part of my contribution is to develop


     91n both the Calvo-Vegh model and mine, inflation dynamics are derived from
underlying models of staggered price adjustment. However, the two models produce
very different reduced forms for inflation: * is increasing in output in my model
but decreasinz in output in Calvo-Vegh. This difference arises because Calvo-
Vegh assume forward-looking expectations.

                                       22
additional implications of Cardoso's approach. There are, however, important

differences between my results and Cardoso's arising from the -m term in (3).

Without this term, 3y/3 is positive: the only effect of inflation on output is

the positive effect through investment. Consequently, incomes policies initially

reduce output in Cardoso's model. In addition, with ay/a7r>O, the lower-inflation

steady state can be unstable, because * is increasing in .               (The steady state

is stable if a is sufficiently small.) Finally, if the steady state is stable,

convergence always occurs through a spiral. This fact is the source of Cardoso's

result that incomes policies produce a period of above-steady-state inflation.



     IX. CONCLUSION

     This paper presents a model of high inflation and uses it to interpret

inflationary episodes of the 1970s and 1980s. The model is sufficiently simple

and flexible to use in a variety of applied discussions. The paradigm that I

seek to imitate is the ISLM / AD-AS model that economists use to interpret events

in moderate-inflation countries. Like the ISUt model, my model makes heavy use

of "shortcuts" (Blanchard and Fischer, 1989): reduced-form equations for money

demand, aggregate spending, and so on that are not derived explicitly from

optimization. Future work could attempt to provide microeconomic foundations for

my assumptions. (Appendix A takes a step in this direction.)

      The model could be extended to include many additional aspects of the high-

inflation experience (recall the list of phenomena in the first paragraph of the

paper).     For example, one could introduce the Tanzi effect by making the

government deficit a function of inflation. One could add explicit labor and

foreign exchange markets that determine real wages and exchange rates.                Such

extended models would generate testable predictions about additional variables,


                                              23
and could address policy issues such as the choice between money- and exchange-

rate-based stabilization.

     One open question is the relevance of the model to hyperinflation. Can the

model explain three-digit monthly inflation in Bolivia as well as three-digit

annual inflation in Israel? Hyperinflation presumably eliminates inflation

inertia, and thus might be interpreted as a special case in which       However,

hyperinflation is an unstable situation that is not well-modelled by shifts

between steady states. Does hyperinflation arise when a shock pushes the economy

into the unstable (irrn) region of the model? Or does it occur when no steady

state exists, because C is too high?        Or do we need a different model for

hyperinflation?




                                       24
    APPENDIX A: THE BEHAVIOR OF INFLATION

     Assumptions: To derive the equation for *, assume the economy contains a

continuum of monopolistically competitive firms with isoelastic cost and demand

functions. As shown by Blanchard and Kiyotaki (1987), a firm's profit-maximizing

relative price is


    (Al)      p -p    =   vy
where p is the log of the profit-maximizing nominal price and p is the log of

the aggregate price level. Intuitively, an increase in aggregate spending raises

a firm's desired price by shifting out the demand curve that it faces.          The

parameter v depends on the slopes of marginal cost and demand.

     As in Calvo (1983), firms set actual prices at intervals of random length.

There is a hazard y that a given firm adjusts at each instant. As in Fischer

(1977), a firm chooses a path of prices until the next adjustment rather than a

single fixed price. (This assumption is natural under high inflation, because

desired nominal prices change rapidly between adjustments.)         I assume that a

firm's price path must have a simple form: the price grows at a steady rate ,

starting   from its level before the adjustment.

     A firm chooses its rate of price growth j     to   minimize the average squared

deviations between its actual and desired prices. When the firm sets i,          its
expectations of output and inflation are static; it assumes that these variables

will remain constant at their current levels.

     The two key features of the model are that firms adjust only at discrete

 intervals, and that expectations are not forward-looking.           That is, as in

 traditional macro models, the Phillips curve is derived from nominal price

 stickiness and less-than-rational expectations.         The other features of the



                                        25
specification are chosen for convenience.10

     Derivation of (3): Consider a firm that sets p at time t, and let the firm's

current price be q(t). If the firm does not adjust again by t+s, s>O, its price

at t+s is q(t)+ps.    The firm's expectation of its desired price at t+s is

p(t)+vy(t)+lr(t)s, from (Al) and the assumption of static expectations. The firm

minimizes the squared deviations between actual and desired prices for all s,

weighted by exp[-ys), the probability that it has not adjusted again by t+s. The

¶irst order condition for this problem is



    (A2)                                                =    0


     Let U(t) be the average of p across all firms that adjust at t.         This

variable is defined by (A2) with p replaced by 13(t) and q(t) replaced by p(t).

(q(t) averages to the price level p(t) because adjusters are chosen randomly from

all firms.) Integrating and solving for 13(t) yields


    (A3)     U(t) =
                       Vy(t) + ir(t)
     The inflation rate (t) is the average of U() for all r<t, weighted by the

proportion of adjusters at r that have not adjusted again:



    (A4)     (t) =
                       SyeYt)U(r)dr
Differentiating with respect to t yields




     '°It is not clear whether non-rational expectations are essential, or
whether sticky prices can generate inflation inertia even with rational
expectations. Forward-looking expectations eliminate inertia in some sticky-
price models, but research has not yet determined the robustness of this result.
See Ball (1991) and Roberts (1993).

                                       26
    (A5)     *(t) =    y[y(t) +               -

                    = !fy(t)
where the first line uses (A3) and the second line uses (A4). This equation is
text equation(3) with a—vy2/2. Note that a increases with 'y,    the   frequency of

price adjustment.
     Inflation Jumts: In the text, I interpret a number of shocks as one-time

jumps in inflation.       I now sketch an approach to formalizing these

interpretations.

     Consider first the simple case of an incomes policy. At some instant, the

government dictates that all firms adjust p to a particular value. The inflation

rate jumps to this value. After that instant, firms again make adjustments at

stochastic intervals, and (3) again holds: inflation becomes inertial at its new

level. Intuitively, the one-time policy has persistent effects because expected

inflation jumps down with actual inflation.

     To capture supply shocks, modify equation (Al) by adding a term 8 that

varies across sectors of the economy. An increase in a sector's 0 is an increase

in its profit-maximizing relative price. Following Ball and Mankiw (1992), I

interpret a supply shock as an unusually large increase in 0 for some sector

(such as energy). When the shock occurs, firms can make special adjustments of

p by paying an extra adjustment cost. If the shock is large enough to induce

special adjustments, and if the affected sector contains a positive fraction of

all firms, then aggregate inflation jumps.        After the jump, the dynamics of

inflation are again given by (3).

     Finally, a devaluation is just a special case of a supply shock. A major




                                       27
devaluation implies large increases in the profit-maximizing relative prices of

imported goods. This shock triggers special adjustments of actual prices in the

import sector.



     APPENDIX B: STABILITY AND DYNAMICS

     Stability: As discussed in Section III, the model has two steady states for

C sufficiently low. To determine whether the steady states are stable, I first

linearize the equations for ñ and *, (5) and (6).            Letting z—[m,J' , the

linearized system is k—Az, where A is a matrix with elements a11—-i, a12—-m,

a21—a(Im-lr), and a22-.a(Iff-m), and all variables are evaluated at the steady state.

Necessary and sufficient conditions for stability are trace(A)<O and IAI>0.

Given my assumption that I-m<O, these conditions hold if and only if mI-1rI>O.

     The money demand equation (2) and the investment function 1(r) imply

1m4/'' and    In—-I'.    Using these facts, the condition for stability can be

written as m-+-h',r>O.    Note that m+h',r is the derivative of steady-state

seignorage, irh(i+ir), with respect to .       By   the Laffer-curve properties of

rh(+ir), this derivative is positive at the lower-inflation steady state and

negative at the higher-inflation steady state. Thus the former is stable and the

latter is unstable.

     —O and *—O: When Im-lr<O, both —O and —O slope down. Section III claims

that *—O cuts (h—O from below. To establish this, note that the slope of i—O (-

a11/a12) is greater in absolute value than the slope of *—O (-a21/a22) if m+h',r>O.

As discussed above, this condition is satisfied at the stable steady state.

     Nodes or Spirals?: The lower-inflation steady state is a stable node if the

eigenvalues of A are real and a stable spiral otherwise. Aigebra establishes

that the eigenvalues are real if and only if (aI-am+ir)2 > 4rna(Im-).            This


                                         28
condition holds if I-ir<O (that is, if *—O slopes down).         If I-ir>O, the

condition may or may not hold. It must hold for a sufficiently small.

     Transition Paths: In the experiments in the text, the transition path is

usually clear from the above results. An exception is the behavior of ir when —O

slopes up and the steady state is a stable node. In this case, a fall in C can

produce either a monotonic decline in w (as in Figure 3B) or a path that

overshoots the steady state a single time (as discussed in footnote 4).      The

first case is guaranteed if a is sufficiently small. To see this point, consider

the limiting case as a-O. In this case, the transition path moves horizontally

to the ft—O curve and then converges to the steady state along this curve. r

falls monotonically in this case.




                                        29
                                       REFERENCES

Ball, Laurence, "The Genesis of Inflation and the Costs of Disinflation,"
      Journal of Money. Credit, and Banking 23 (August 1991, Part 2): 439-
       52.


________   "Inflation Stabilization and the Boom-Recession Cycle," in
      progress, 1993.

________ and N. Gregory Mankiw, "Relative-Price Changes as Aggregate
       Supply Shocks," NBER Working Paper ,'4l68 (September 1992).

Blanchard, Olivier, Rudiger Dornbusch, Paul Krugman, Richard Layard, and
      Lawrence Summers, Reform in Eastern Europe, MIT Press, 1991.

             and Stanley Fischer, Lectures on Macroeconomics, MIT Press, 1989.

________ and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, "Monopolistic Competition and the Effects
      of Aggregate Demand," American Economic Review 77 (September 1987):
       647-66.

Bole, Velimir, and Mitja Gaspari, "The Yugoslav Path to High Inflation,"
      in Bruno et al. (1991).

Bruno, Michael, "Introduction and Overview," in Bruno et al. (1991).

_______ Guido Di Tella, Rudiger Dornbusch, and Stanley Fischer (eds.),
       Inflation Stabilization: The Experience of Israel. Argentina,
       Brazil. Bolivia. and Mexico, MIT Press, 1988.

________  and Stanley Fischer, "The Inflationary Process: Shocks and
       Accomodation," in Yoram Ben-Porath (ed.), The Israeli Economy:
       Maturing throuzh Crises, Harvard University Press, 1986.

_______    _______ Elhanan Helpman, and Nissan Liviatan (eds.), Lessons
       of Economic Stabilization and Its Aftermath, MIT Press, 1991.

________ and Leora (Rubin) Meridor, "The Costly Transition from
      Stabilization to Sustainable Growth: Israel's Case," in Bruno et al.
       (1991).

Cagan, Phillip, "The Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinflation," in Milton
       Friedman (ed.), Studies in the Quantity Theory of Money, University
       of Chicago Press, 1956.

Calvo, Cuillermo A., "Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,"
      Journal of Monetary Economics 12 (September 1983): 383-98.

________ and Carlos A, Vegh, "Exchange Rate-Based Stabilisation under
       Imperfect Credibility," in Helmut Frisch and Andreas Worgotter
       (eds.), Open-Economy Macroeconomics, MacMillan Press, 1993.


                                           30
Cardoso, Eliana, "Comment," in Bruno et al. (1988).

________     "From Inertia to Megainflation: Brazil in the 1980s," in Bruno
         et al. (1991).

Corbo,      Vittorio and Andres Solimano,       "Chile's   Experience with
         Stabilization Revisited," in Bruno et al. (1991).

Cukierman, Alex, "The End of High Israeli Inflation: An Experiment in
         Heterodox Stabilization," in Bruno et al. (1988).

De Gregorio, Jose, Pablo E. Guidotti, and Carlos Vegh, "Inflation
         Stabilization and the Consumption of Durable Goods," International
         Monetary Fund, 1993.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, Federico Sturzenegger, and Holger Wolf, "Extreme
         Inflation: Dynamics and Stabilization," Brookings Papers on Economic
         Activity 1990:2: 1-64.

Drazen, Allan, and Elhanan Helpman, "Inflationary Consequences of
         Anticipated Macroeconomic Policies," Review of Economic Studies 57
         (January 1990): 147-64.

Eckstein, Zvi, and Leonardo Leiderinan, "Seignorage and the Welfare Cost of
         Inflation: Evidence from an Intertemporal Model of Money and
         Consumption," Journal of Monetary Economics 29 (June 1992): 389-410.

Fischer, Stanley, "Long-Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the
         Optimal Money Supply Rule," Journal of Political Economy 85
         (February 1977): 163-90.

Harberger, Arnold C., "The Chilean Economy in the 1970s: Crisis,
         Stabilization, Liberalization, Reform," in Karl Brunner and Allan H.
         Meltzer, Economic Policy in a World of Change, Carnegie-Rochester
         Conference Series on Public Policy 17 (1982).

Kiguel, Miguel A., and Nissan Liviatan, "The Inflation-Stabilization
         Cycles in Argentina and Brazil," in Bruno et al. (1991).

________ and ________ , "The Business Cycle Associated with Exchange Rate-
      Based Stabilizations," World Bank Economic Review 6 (May, 1992):
         279-305.

Liviatan, Nissan, and Sylvia Piterinan, "Accelerating Inflation and
      Balance-of-Payments Crises, 1973-1984," in Yoram Ben-Porath, Ih
         Israeli    Economy: Maturing throuEh Crises, Harvard University Press,
         1986.

Modiano, Eduardo M., "The Cruzado First Attempt: The Brazilian
         Stabilization Program of February 1986," in Bruno et al. (1988).



                                             31
Roberts, John, "Why Is Inflation Costly to Reduce?," Board of Covernors of
      the Federal Reserve System, 1993.

Sargent,  Thomas,   and Neil Wallace,      "Some Unpleasant Monetarist
      Arithmetic," Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 5
      (1981): 1-17.

Vegh, Carlos A., "Stopping High Inflation: An Analytical Overview," fl
      Staff Papers 39 (September 1992): 626-95.




                                       32
                              the    steadY State
              Dt8j1tCS
                                                it — 1


it                              it
                                                            0




                         Ut



                               a
                    tUeCtS
      1t—,0
 it



                                                                   /   /
                                                                //
                                                           / //
                                                         //
                                                         Figure 3

                                          Transition Path Following a Decrease in C




               —         >                           Case B   (IT
                                                                           <   0)                 Case   C   (IT   - I     <   0)
Case A   (iT       I         0)                                     - Im                                               m

                                                                                              *

                       Old Stesdy Stitt




                                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                                                    a=O
                                                                                    m=O



                                           m                                              m                                             is
                                                                figure

                                          Transition Path Following a Downward Jump in Inflation




                    —                                                  -        <                  Case   C   (ii
                                                                                                                    - I        <   0)
     Case A   (11       I        >   0)                    Case B (n       Im       0)                                    rn
                            In




'C                                                  'C




                                               m                                         m                                              m
                                        Figure 5

                  Heterodox Stabilization:     Several Possibilities



   CaseA    (IT    —I   "   0)                                CaseB ( — i_,   >   0)



• Old St*ady Stk




                                   m                                                 m



           CaseC (IT        —    < 0)                       CaseD (-   —




                                                        S                     ;t=o




                                  m                                                      m
