NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ENERGY TAXES: TRADmONAL
EFFICIENCY EFFECTS AND
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPLICATIONS

Lawrence H. Goulder

Working Paper No. 4582

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December, 1993
This paper was prepared for the NBER Conference, "Tax Policy and the Economy", Washington,

D.C., November 16, 1993. I am grateful to Laos Bovenberg and Jim Poterba for very helpful

suggestions, to Jim Lockhart and Anne Forrest of the Environmental Law Institute for
considerable help in obtaining and organizing pollution emissions data, and to Jesse David,
Patrick Siegman, and Steven Weinberg for excellent research assistance. Financial support from
the National Science Foundation (Grant SBR-93 10362) is gratefully acknowledged. This paper
is part of NBER's research program in Public Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of
the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #4582
December 1993

ENERGY TAXES: TRADITIONAL
EFFICIENCY EFFECT'S AND
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPLICATIONS

ABSTRACT

This paper examines 'traditional' (non-environmental) efficiency consequences and
environmental effects of two energy tax policies: a tax on fossil and synthetic fuels based on Btu

(or energy) content and a tax on consumer purchases of gasoline. It uses a model that uniquely
combines attention to details of the U.S. tax system with a consolidated treatment of U.S. energy

use and pollution emissions.
On traditional efficiency grounds, each of the energy taxes emerges as more costly to the
economy than increases in personal or corporate income taxes of equal revenue yield. Simulation
experiments indicate that the excess costs of energy taxes are due partly to their relatively narrow

tax base. The Btu tax's application to gross output (as compared with net output under an

income tax) serves to expand its excess costs; in contrast, the gasoline tax's focus on
consumption (as opposed to income) tends to mitigate its excess costs. On the environmental
side, we find that for each of eight major air pollutants considered, energy taxes induce emissions
reductions that are at least nine times larger than the reductions under the income tax alternatives.

Overall, this study indicates that the Btu and gasoline taxes considered are inferior to the

alternatives on narrow efficiency grounds but superior on environmental grounds. Whether the

environmental attractions of energy taxes are large enough to offset their relatively high nonenvironmental costs remains an open question.

Lawrence H. Goulder
Department of Economics
Encina Hall
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER

I. Introduction

There is rencwcd interest in energy taxes as sources of public revenue. In February of this year

the Clinton Administration proposed a Btu tax as a key component of its deficit-reduction package.
Although this particular component was eventually removed from the budget package. the legislation
passed by Congress several months later introduced in its place another (albeit smaller) energy tax -- a
tax on gasoline arid other transportation fuels. Other energy taxes (such as carbon taxes) continue to be

examined closely by policymakers.
There are many reasons for the intensified focus on energy taxes. Some are purely political. To
many policymakers. certain types of energy taxes seem more acceptable to the voting public than typical
tax increases such as increments to personal or corporate income tax rates. Environmental considerations

also are relevant here. Many have argued that the use of energy contributes disproportionately (in
comparison with other activities) to major forms of pollution, and that taxing energy is a sensible way to
discourage environmentally damaging activities. Efficiency concerns also apply. Some consider energy

taxes to be relatively efficient instruments for obtaining government revenue in companson with other
plausible taxes.'
Despite the extensive debate on the attractions and drawbacks of energy taxes, there has been

relatively little quantttauve analysis of the gross efficiency costs2 (the efficiency costs before netting out

On the other hand, some analysts contend that energy taxes have larger efficiency costs than ordinary income
taxes, and some would go so far as to maintain that any possible advantages of energy taxes in the environmental
domain would be more than offset by the disadvantages in traditional cost dimensions.

2 Ii is important to make clear what is meant by "efficiency costs" here. Among economists, the nouon of
efficiency customarily refers to the aggregate net benefit or cost to the economy from a policy change. as measured

by adding up the dollar value of welfare impacts to each person. In its broadest sense. "efficiency" should
encompass both environment-related as well as other welfare effects stemming from a given policy change. For
convenience, in this paper we separate the environmental considerations from other efficiency considerations.
tJnless indicated otherwise, "efficiency costs" will mean the gross welfare costs -- before netting out the benefits

environmental benefits) and the environmental effects of these taxes in comparison with plausible
alternatives such as increases in income ta,xes. This paper provides a quantitative assessment.
We concentrate on two main types of energy taxes: a general tax on energy (a Btu tax) and a ta.c

on consumer purchases of gasoline. For these taxes, we ask the following questions:

1. What are the (gross) efficiency costs of these energy taxes, and how do they compare with the
efficiency costs of more traditional sources of revenue such as increases in income taxes? How can the
different efficiency costs among energy taxes and between these and other taxes be explained?

1 How do these energy taxes differ from each other and from equal-revenue income taxes in terms of
the impacts on emissions of important air pollutants? Vihat are the sources of these differences?
It should be noted that these questions focus on the aggregate economic and environmental impacts. Here

we do not consider important distributional issues -- how these policies differ in the distribution of their

impacts across household income groups, across geographical regions, or across nations (impacts on
international competitiveness).

To address the above questions, we First offer some theoretical considerations relevant to the
choice between energy and income taxes. We then investigate these issues numerically using a simulation

model of energy-economy-environment interactions in the U.S. The numerical model projects paths of
economic variables and pollution emissions under alternative tax regimes.

The simulation model adopts a dynamic general equilibrium framework. This framework is
especially useful for examining energy tax options for at least two reasons. First, the general equilibrium
structure addresses inleractions across various sectors and industnes. In contrast with partial equilibrium
models, which consider a particular sector or industry in isolation, a general equilibrium model treats the
different sectors and industries as part of a single interactive system. Thus, one can examine, for example.

how the impacts of an energy tax are transmitted from energy markets to other markets, and how

stemming from environmental changes.
Studies by Goulder (1993) and Jorgenson and Wilcoxen (1993) have examined the overall costs of policies
in which a carbon tax ia combined in revenue-neutral fashion with cuts in income taxes. These overall costs of
such policies implicitly indicate the relative coats of the carbon tax and the changes to income taxes. This paper
differs from the earlier studies by concentrating on Btu and gasoline taxes. In addition, in contra.st to Jorgenson
and Wilcoxen (1993) ii examines closely the mechanisms that account for the differences in costs between energy
taxes and the income tax alternatives.

responses in other markets feed back' on energy markets. Second, a dynamic general equilibrium
framework pays close attention to effects on saving and investment and other inlertemporal adjustment

issues. The taxes under consideration here can be expected to influence rates of return in different
industries, thereby affecting incentives to invest and economic growth. A dynamic general equilibrium
model is geared to address these effects.
Beyond the basic attractions of the general equilibrium framework, the particular model employed

in this paper has features that make it especially well suited to the task at hand. First, the model uniquely
combines a detailed treatment of the U.S. tax system with a close attention to sources and uses of energy

in the U.S. In contrast with other general equilibrium tax models, this model isolates important energy
industries, takes account of substitution possibilities among energy fuels, incorporates the non-renewable

nature of oil and gas resources, and accounts for the transition from conventional fuels to "backstop"

resources. And in contrast with other energy models (general equilibrium or otherwise), this model
contains a detailed treatment of U.S. taxes. Building on earlier tax policy work4, it incorporates specific

tax instruments and addresses tax incentive effects along a number of important dimensions, including
firms' investment incentives, equity values, and profits5, and household consumption, saving, and labor

supply decisions. The appeal of accounting for existing taxes is not simply that of comprehensiveness.
A well-known principle of public finance is that the economic distortion or cost of a new tax depends

fundamentally on what taxes already exist in the system: taxes interact, It is simply impossible to
calculate the effects of new tax initiatives without accounting for pre-existing taxes.

Another distinguishing feature6 of the model is its consideration of environmental impacts.

See, for example. Goulder and Summers (1989), Goulder (1989). or Goulder and Thalmann (1993).
Here the model applies the asset price approach to investment developed in Summers (1981).
6

Perhaps the closest cousin to the current model is the inlertemporal general equilibrium model of Jorgenson
and Wilcoxen (1990. 1993). However, the two models differ in some significant ways. The Jorgenson-Wilcoxen
model stands out in having a stronger econometric foundation and in capturing price-responsive technological
change within industries. The present model, on the other hand, contains considably more detail on U.S. taxes.
explicitly addresses the transition from exhaustible conventional fuels to backstop technologies, and captures effects
of policies on emissions of a range of air pollutants.

3

Previous applications of the model have concentrated on the economic costs of a number of energy or

environmental ta.x policies.7 Recentiy. this model was extended to capture the impacts of tax policies on

emissions of eight major air pollutants. This permits us to examine numerically a key dimension of the

debate about energy taxes -. the extent to which such taxes might yield environmental gains relative to
other tax options. It should be recognized that attention to emissions represents only a first step along the
environmental dimension. Ultimately, one would like to be able to assess the environment-related welfare

impacts of vanous tax policies. This would require one to capture all the links from (1) changes in
emissions to (2) changes in concentrations to (3) changes in environmental impacts (such as human health)

to (4) changes in welfare (evaluated in dollars). No economic model has yet consolidated all of these
links for the nation as a whole for several major pollutants. The model applied in this paper takes a first
step in this direction by connecting tax policy initiatives to changes in emissions for various pollutants.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses some theoretical issues relevant
to the choice between energy and income taxes, Section II! provides an overview of the simulation model

employed to assess these options numerically. The fourth section presents and interprets resulLs from
simulations of energy and income tax policies, and the final section offers conclusions.7

H. Efficiency Effects of Energy and Traditional Taxes: Theoretical Considerations

This section examines, from a theoretical vantage point, the attractions and disadvantages of

energy taxes in terms of their efficiency impacts. In its broadest sense, the notion of "efficiency"
encompasses all of the aggregate welfare impacts of policy changes, including those that arise from policy-

induced environmental changes. However, it is convenient to separate out the environmental and nonenvironmental impacts of policies. In this section we will start with non-environmental considerations and

then turn to environmental issues,

See, for example, Goulder (l992a, 1993).

4

One important qualification deserves attention at the outset. Here we are comparing 'pure' tax

policies. Real-world taxes usually are not pure. The U.S. income tax, for example. is actually a mix of
a pure income tax and a pure consumption tax. Similarly, energy taxes often apply at different rates to
different forms of energy, and may have very specific exemptions and other special provisions. This
section abstracts from such complications.

A. Traditional (Non-Environmental)Considerations
1. Distortions in Labor, Capital, Intermediate Input and Commodity Markets

To gauge thc non-environmental efficiency impacts of energy and income taxes, It is necessary

to consider the different dimensions along which these taxes generate economic distortions and excess

burdens. We identify four main margins in which the principal distortions occur: the labor-leisure
margin, the intertemporal margin, the margin of intermediate good choice and the margin of consumer
good choice. These margins are associated with labor, capital, intermediate good, and consumer good
markets. The labor market is the domain in which the choice between working and enjoying leisure is

made. The capital market is the domain for intertemporal choice, that is, the choice of how much to
consume tomorrow (by saving and investing today) rather than consume today. input and consumer good

markets determine the allocation of producers' expenditures on inputs and of households' expenditures
on consumer goods at given points in time.
Energy and income taxes have different effects along these margins, and these differences help
explain their relative efficiency impacts. As is well known, the personal income tax -- in particular. the
component that applies to individual wage income -- distorts the labor-leisure margin by driving a wedge

between the marginal social value of labor (as indicated by the before-tax real wage) and the marginal
private value of labor (as expressed by the after-tax real wage).i In addition, it distorts the intertemporal
margin (capital market) through the tax on the return to capital: it dnvcs a wedge between the marginal
social value of a urut of capital (the pre-tax return to capital) and the marginal private value (the after-tax

On this issue see, for example, Bradford (1984) and Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987).

5

return). The corporate income tax likewise can introduce an intertemporal distortion.9 Since the corporate

tax does not apply to labor income, it has no direct impact on the labor-leisure margin.
These notions are summarized in Table 1. The X's in the table indicate the markets where a given

tax directly distorts resource allocation. For the income taxes, there are no X's in the input and consumer
good market,s: these taxes do not directly affect input choice or the choice across consumer goods.

For the energy taxes, in contrast, there are direct impacts on input choice and consumer good
choice. The Btu tax raises the cost of energy inputs (fuels) relative to other inputs, and in so doing affects

firms' input choices. As shown by Diamond and Mirrlecs (1971) and Stiglitz and Da,sgupta (1971). the
distortion of input choice corresponds to a (gross) efficiency loss. Similarly, a consumer-level gasoline
tax alters the relative prices of gasoline and other consumer goods. Under fairly plausible assumptions.
uniform taxation of consumer goods is optimal.° When these conditions apply, the gasoline tax distorts
the choice among consumer goods to the extent that it makes taxation of these goods less uniform.

This might lead one to suppose that energy and income taxes introduce direct distortions in
different markets -- that energy taxes distort product (intermediate input and consumer good) markets
while income taxes distort factor (labor and capital) markets. A closer look indicates that this is not the
case. Even though energy taxes are not imposed directly on labor, they still distort labor-leisure choice:
such taxes are implicit taxes on labor. To the extent that a Btu tax raises the costs of producing consumer

goods, it raises the overall cost of commodities and thereby lowers the real after-tax wage. It therefore
creates a labor market distortion by widening the gap between the marginal social value of labor (the real

wage before taxes) and the private return to labor (the real wage after taxes). Correspondingly, a
consumer-level gasoline tax raises the overall cost of the consumer's basket of commodities by raising the

Stiglitz (1976) points out that for certain combinations of interest deductibility and depreciation allowances,
the tax rate on the marginal investment will be zero, and the corporate tax will function as a (nondistortionary
pure profits tax.

Sufficient conditions are homotheticity of the utility function and weak separability between leisure and
overall consumption. See Auerbach (1985).

6

price of one commodity -- gasoline. Thus it also serves to reduce the after-tax real wage.°
Moreover, energy taxes can directly distort the intertemporal margin as well. Although energy

taxes may not appear to be taxes on the return to capital, they function as capital taxes and affect the
intertemporal margin insofar as they raise the costs of producing capital goods. Energy is an important

input into the production of capital goods. and thus a tax imposed on the use of energy inputs into
production (that is, a tax on fuels) will raise these costs.'2 The Btu tax is such a tax. Other things equal,
this tax will reduce the rate of return to investment, because the acquisition prices of capital goods will

rise (without a compensating increase in the after-tax value of the returns to the services from these

goods). Thus, insofar as energy inputs are important to the production of capital goods, a Btu tax
functions as a tax on investment, or a negative investment tax credit.'3 Not all energy taxes affect the
intertemporal margin, however. Consider a tax on consumer purchases of gasoline. This tax does not
directly affect the cost of producing capital goods or directly alter the returns from investments in such

goods. Hence it does not introduce a distortion on this margin." In this respect, a consumption-level
gasoline tax shares the attraction of a more general consumption tax of avoiding intertemporal distortions.

These considerations indicate that energy taxes may have very different (non.environmental) efficiency

impacts depending on whether they are imposed at the production stage or at the level of household
consumption. We investigate this issue numerically later in this paper.

The labor market distortion depends on the extent to which the after-tax real wage differs from its value
in a no-tax situation. The after tax real wage is the (1) the after-tax nominal wage divided by (2) the gross of tax
price of consumption. Income taxes directly affect the after-tax real wage by reducing (I). while energy taxes
directly influence this wage by raising (2). For a further analysis of this and related labor market issues, see
Bovenberg and de Mooij (1993) and Poterba (1993).
Policy simulations indicate, however, that tire effects on capital goods prices are relatively small. The Btu
tax considered later in this paper ultimately raises oil and gas prices by about 14 percent and refined product pnces
by about 8 percent, but leads to real increases in capital goods prices of less than 0.4 percent.

° There is a difference between a Bni tax and personal income tax in their effects on "new" and "old" capital.
While the income tax reduces the return to all capital -- whether previously installed (old) or just acquired (new) - a Btu tax reduces the return only on new capital, that is, capital purchased since cite introduction of the tax.
" A consumer-level gasoline tax can have indirect, general equilibrium effects on the return to capital, despite
the fact that it is not directly imposed on capital goods production or on capital income. In comparing the
efficiency impacts of the different taxes, one can regard such indirect effects as second-order.

7

out, however, that it is difficult to make the case that energy is more lightly taxed than other commodities.

Favorable tax rules had apptied to depreciation and resource depletion in the oil and gas extraction
industries, but these rules were eliminated under the Tax Reform Act of 1986. Moreover, specific forms

of energy (such as gasoline) face Federal and state excise taxes that do not apply to most other
commodities. There is little basis for expecting that differences in pre-existing tax rates would cause the

intercommodity effect to contribute to rather than detract from the appeal of a new energy tax.
Is the SupiDly of Energy Relatively Inelastic? The other consideration is whether energy supply

and demand are relatively inelastic in comparison with other commodities. A basic principle of public
finance is that, other things equal, for a given tax rate the excess burden (or efficiency cost) is smaller the

more inelastic the supply or demand of the good upon which the tax is applied.1'
This principle can be related to the inter-commodity efficiency effect. If energy is supplied more
inelasticaily than other commodities, then a given tax rate can potentially lead to a smaller efficiency cost

when applied to energy than when applied to other commodities. Under these circumstances a tax on
energy can improve efficiency on the inter-commodity margin.n
Some analysts claim that the supply of energy is relatively inelastic. A common argument is that.

to a large extent, stocks of fossil fuels are essentially fixed, so that the long-run supply of such fuels is

highly inelastic. This argument ignores an important distinction between the natural supply of
unrecovered reserves and the quantity of economically recoverable (and thus extractable) reserves. While

the supply of unrecovered reserves may be fixed, the quantity of economically recoverable reserves may

of an incremental increase in other commodity taxes.
7
This principle is consistent with the well-known Ramsey Rule of optimal commodity taxation (from Ramsey
[1927]) that endorses taxes on commodities in inverse relation to the elasticities of demand. The "inverse elasticity
rule" is often misleading, however, because it ignores cross-price elasticities of demand and adding-up restnctions
that apply to consumer demand systems. Indeed. l)eaton (1979) and Auerbach (1985) have shown that optimal
commodity taxation involves uniform tax rates when utility functions are homothetic and leisure and consumption
are weakly separable. (See also Atkinson and Stiglitz [1980, chapter 12].) For comprehensiveness, we include

here a discussion of the relative inelasticity of energy supply, but it should be recognized that under certain
conditions this issue has no bearing on whether higher laxes are justified on efficiency grounds.
a For further discussion. see Bovenberg and de Mooij (1993).
10

nonetheless be very elastic.

Consider in panicular the case of crude oil. There is considerable

heterogeneity across producers in terms of the Costs of extracting given amounts of fuel. This reflects the

differences in geological characteristics of different fields (oil depth, types of subsurface minerals, etc.)
When producers have different production costs, the "rents" on produced oil will differ as well. Producers

with especially tow production costs will earn large rents, while others, with high extraction costs, will

earn small ones. For some, marginal, producers. taxes on oil can reduce the rent just enough to make
what was marginally profitable production uneconomic. This means that the supply of oil will be sensitive

to taxes on oil, even in the very long run. In other words, the commercial supply of nonrenewable
resources is not completely inelastic.

Thus, it remains an open question whcther supplies of energy are more or less elastic than other

commodities in general. The answer depends, in each fossil fuel industry, on the distribution of
production costs across producers, now and in the future. The empirical verification of this notion has
not yet been accomplished.0
In sum, while it is possible that energy taxes could improve efficiency Ofl the inter-commodity

margin, the conditions that would allow this result to hold either do not apply or require a degree of
empirical verification that has yet to be established.

Overall, the theoretical considerations from this subsection do not produce a clear winner on (non-

environmental) efficiency grounds. There are many dimensions along which energy taxes can be expected
to be more costly than increased income taxes. But there are at least some dimensions where energy taxes

might be less costly. To gauge how these different efficiency impacts add up, we need to adopt an
empirical analysis. We perform such an analysis in Section IV.

'

Jones and Bremmer (1990). considering supply effects for Texas wells over the period 1973.83. report
elasticities ranging from .13 to .38. Walls (1991) uses information on the price responsiveness of exploration and
dnlling activity to project a supply elasticity of.l5. tnterpreting these elasticities is inherently problematic because
it is difficult to discern whether the observed changes in supply represent "permanent" increments to the total
amount to be extracted from given reserves or "temporary" increases that, because of rising extraction costs, will
eventually be offset by future reductions in supply (so that there is no increase in the total amount ultimately
extracted). The supply elasticities relevant to the efficiency discussion should measure permanent increments.

II

B. Environmental Considerations
1. Connections between Pollution Intensity and Environmental Improvement
Environmental considerations might seem to favor energy taxes. The argument is simple. If

energy use is generally more damaging to the environment than other activities, then an energy tax may
be superior to the other taxes considered here because it targets the source of the damage.
Later in this paper (Table 9 below) we provide evidence that supports the conventional wisdom

that energy use contributes disproportionately to economy-wide emissions of important air pollutants.
However, environmental regulations complicate the connection between energy taxes and changes in
energy use. To the extent that pre-existing regulations constrain emissions of certain pollutants, higher
energy taxes need not always lead to further reductions in these pollutants below the levels mandated by

regulations. Consider, for example, the sulphur dioxide emissions from coal-fired electric power plants.
Such emissions are regulated through provisions of the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments. To the extent
that an energy tax reduces demands for electricity, power plants whose output levels fall can comply with

the limits on total sulphur dioxide with higher rauos of sulphur dioxide per unit of output. Such plants

need not 'ratchet down' their emissions-output ratios as far as would be the case if no tax were
implemented. We return to this issue in the next section.

2. Do We Know That "Small' Energy Taxes Are Superior to the Alternatives?
The

previous discussion suggested that energy taxes are likely to

be

more costly than the

alternatives in the non-environmental dimensions. Thus, even if energy taxes are more environmentally

beneficial than the alternatives, the question remains as to whether they are most efficient overall. One
line of reasoning would suggest that they must be. provided that the tax rate is not "too high.' Figure 1

is a typical diagram indicating the costs and benefits from an environmental tax. The supply (S) and
demand (D) curves can be interpreted as the marginal private cost and marginal benefit from energy use.

The marginal external (or environmental) cost from energy use is represented by MEC. Adding this
marginal cost to private marginal cost yields the social marginal cost curve. MSC. The shaded area in
the diagram indicates the efficiency loss from excessive use of energy when purchasers of energy do not

12

face the external costs. Here, introducing a small energy tax (for example. t1 in diagram) helps reduce
the differential between marginal social cost and marginal private cost and shrinks the efficiency loss.
So long as t1 does not greatly exceed the marginal external cost, the tax will lead to benefits in excess
of costs. This suggests that so long as the energy tax rate is conservative -- falls short of (or at least does
not vastly exceed) the marginal environmental cost -- then the energy tax will pay for itself. An energy

tax will not only be more attractive than the alternatives -- it will be efficiency-improving!
This argument, while appealing, is not entirely valid. If no other taxes are present in the economy.

then the case can be made that a 'small' energy tax pays for itself. But in an economy with pre-exisling
taxes -- whether in the energy markets or in other markets -- there is no guarantee that small energy taxes
will generate environmental gains larger than the non-environmental efficiency costs. The issue here is
reminiscent of the notion, presented in subsection A above, that energy taxes can generate large efficiency

costs because they not only affect energy markets but also introduce distortions in labor markets (the

dimension of labor-leisure choice) and capital markets (the incertemporal dimension). In general
equilibrium, even small environmentally-motivated taxes can generate large efficiency costs through the

distortions they introduce in other markets. This notion receives support from analytical work by
Bovenberg and de Mooij (1993) and simulation work by Goulder (1993).
The upshot is that the existence of a net efficiency gain from an energy tax -- even a small one - cannot be established on a priori grounds. Determining whether the tax yields net benefits and

ascertaining the magnitude of the net benefit or cost relative to the net benefits or costs of alternative
policies requires empirical investigation.

3. National Security Benefits
A potential benefit from energy taxes is increased national security associated with reduced

reliance on oil imports. Under a broad definition of "environmental." this might be considered an
environmental benefit because the benefits are arguably external to those involved in oil purchase and
supply decisions.

The argument for national security benefits turns on the idea that reduced importation of oil
13

implies smaller economic costs in the event of a supply disruption. This benefit is extremely difficult to

quantify, in part because of the difficulty of calculating the probability and magnitude of oil supply
disruptions. En the spirit of comprehensiveness. we mention this potential benefit here, but we do not
attempt to quantify this benefit in this paper.

C. Summary
All in all, the theoretical issues from this section paint a mixed picture regarding the attractiveness

of energy taxes in comparison with income taxes. On the one hand, theory points out several ways in

which energy taxes might be more costly than the alternatives on non-environmental (traditional
macroeconomic) grounds. On the other hand, energy taxes appear likely to have the advantage in the
environmental domain. The overall efficiency impact cannot be determined from theory alone. In Section

IV we use a general equilibrium model to explore the magnitudes of the traditional non-environmental
impacts and evaluate some of the environmental consequences.

III. Basic Features of the Simulation Model

We assess the effects of energy and income taxes using a general equilibrium model of the United

States that incorporates international trade. Here we sketch Out some main features of the model. Some
details on the model's structure and parameters are offered in the appendix. A more complete description

is in Goulder (1992b).
The model generates paths of equilibrium prices, outputs, and incomes for the U.S. economy under

specified policy scenarios. All variables are calculated at yearly intervals beginning in the 1990
benchmark year and usually extending to the year 2070.

The model is unique in combining (1) a detailed treatment of the U.S. tax system, (2) a close
trealaneni of energy production and demand, and (3) attention to stationary-source and mobile-source
emissions of major air pollutants. The representation of taxes incorporates very specific tax instruments

14

and addresses effects along a number of important dimensions. These include effects on firms' investment
incentives, equity values, and profits,2° and impacts on household consumption, saving and labor supply

decisions. The specification of energy supply includes an attention to the nonrenewable nature of crude

petroleum and nawral gas and a treatment of the transitions from conventional to synthetic fuels. The
treatment of emissions is based on historical relationships between emissions and fuel used, processes
employed, and levels of output.

A. Industry and Consumer Good Disaggregation
The

model divides U.S. production into the 13 industries indicated in Table 2. The energy

industries Consist of coal mining, crude petroleum and natural gas extraction, synthetic fuels production.

petroleum refining. electnc utilities, and gas utilities. The model also distinguishes the 17 consumer
goods irs Table 2.

B. Producer Behavior
1. General Specifications
In each industry, a nested production structure accounts for potential substitutions between
different forms of energy as well as between energy and other inputs. Each industry produces a distinct
output (K). which is a function of inputs of labor (L). capital (K), an energy composite (E) and a materials
composite (M). as well as the current level of investment (I'):

X f[g(L,K),h(E.M)1 - i(1/K) 'I

(I)

The energy composite is made up of the outputs of the six energy industries, while the materials composite

is made up of the outputs of the other industries:
(2)

E = E(.

(3)

M

where

°

x7)

= M(.

is a composite of domestically produced and foreign made input i. Industry indices correspond

Here the model applies the asset price approach to investment developed in Summers (1981).

15

to those provided in Table 2.21
Managers of firms are assumed to serve stockholders in aiming to maximize the value of the firm:

this objective guides the choices of input quantities and investment levels in each period of time. The
model incorporates capital adjustment dynamics. In equation (I), (IIK)' I represents capital adjustmcrn
(or installation) costs; these are an increasing function of the rate of investment.22

2. Special Features of the Oil-Gas and Synfuels Industries
The production structure in the oil and gas industry is somewhat more complex than in other

industries to account for the nonrenewable nature of oil and gas stocks. The production specification is:
(4)

X = y(Z) 'ffg(L,K).h(E,M)j - i(I/K)

'I

where y is a decreasing function of Z. the amount of cumulative extraction (or output) of oil and gas up

to the beginning of the current period. This captures the fact that as Z rises (or. equivalently, as reserves
are depleted), it becomes increasingly difficult to extract oil and gas resources, so that greater quantities
of K, L, E, and M are required to achieve any given level of extraction (output). Increasing production

costs ultimately induce oil and gas producers to remove their capital from this industry.13
The model incorporates a synthetic fuel -- shale oil -- as a backstop resource, a perfecl substitute

..

21The functions!, g, and h, and the aggregation functions for the composites E, M, and are CES in form.
Consumer goods are produced by combining outputs from the 13 industries in given proportions.

The cost function. . represents adjustment costs per unit of investment. This function is convex in I/K (see
appendix) and expresses the notion that installing new capital necessitates a loss of current output, as existing
inputs (K. L. E and M) that otherwise would be used to produce output are diverted to install the new capital.
Here adjustment costs are intemal to the firm. For a discussion of this and other adjustment cost specifications.
see Mussa (1978). In choosing the optimal rate of investment, producers must balance the marginal costs of
current investment (both the acquisition costs and installation costs of new capital) with the marginal benefits (the
stream of increased dividends made possible by a higher future capital stock).
The attention to resource stock effects distinguishes this model from several other general equilibrium
energy-environmental models, Many equilibrium models treat the domestic oil&gas industry as a constant-returns-

to scale production, disregarding resource stock effects or fixed factors. (See, for example. Jorgenson and
Wilcoxen [1990. 1993].) In their global energy-environment model, Manne and Richels (1992) impose stock limits
on resources such as oil and gas, but these limits have no effect on production costs prior to the point where the
resource is exhausted.
16

for oil and gas!4 As in other industries, in the synfuels industry producers choose input arid investment

levels to maximize the equity value of the firm. There is one difference, however. The technology for

producing synthetic fuels on a commercial scale is assumed to become known only in the year 2010.
Thus, capital formation in the synfuels industry cannot begin until the year 2010.

All domestic prices in the model are cndogenous, except for the domestic price of oil and gas.

The latter is given by the exogenous world price of oil and gas plus whatever oil tariff may apply.
Following the baseline assumptions of the Stanford Energy Modeling Forum25, this world price is
specified as $24 per barrel in 1990 and rising in real terms by $6.50 per decade. At any given point in
time, the supply of imported oil and gas is taken to be perfectly elastic at the given world price. So long
as impons are the marginal source of supply to the domestic economy, domestic producers of oil and gas

receive the world price (adjusted for tariffs or taxes) for their own output. However, rising oil and gas
prices stimulate investment in synfuels. Eventually, synfuels production plus domestic oil and gas supply

together satisfy all of domestic demand. Synfuels then become the marginal source of supply, and the
cost of synfuels production rather than the world oil price dictates the domestic price of fuels!6

C. Household Behavior
Consumption. labor supply. and saving result from the decisions of a representative household
maximizing its intertemporal utility. The household maximizes utility subject to the intertemporal budget

constraint requiring that the present value of the consumption stream not exceed potential total wealth

(current nonhuman wealth plus the present value of potential labor income and net transfers). In each

period, overall consumption of goods and services is allocated across the 17 specific consumption
categories of Table 2. Each of the 17 consumption goods is a composite of a domestically and foreignproduced consumption good of that type. Households substitute between domestic and foreign goods to

2' Thus, inputs 3 (oit&gas) and 4 (synfuels) enter additively in the energy aggregation funcuon shown in
equation (2).
See Weyant (1993).

26 For details, see Goulder (1993).
17

mirumize the cost of obtaining a given composite good.

D. The Government Sector
The government collects taxes, distnbutes transfers, and purchases goods and services (outpuLs of

the 13 industries).
The model incorporates a wide array of tax instruments. These include energy laxes. output taxes.

the corporate income tax, property taxes. sales taxes, and taxes on individual labor and capital income.

In the benchmark year, 1990, there is a government deficit equal to approximately two percent
of GNP. In the reference case (or statu,t quo) simulation, the deficit-GNP ratio is approximately constant.

In the policy experiments in this paper, we require that real government spending and the real deficit
follow the same path as in the reference case. This implies that, to meet the cash flow requirement, the

real tax revenues collected under the various policies must be the same as in the reference case.
Ordinarily, the policies considered in this paper -- new energy taxes or increases to income taxes -- would

lead to an increase in tax revenue (relative to the reference case) in the absence of some other tax
adjustment, To make these policies revenue-neutral, we accompany the rate increases that define the
various policies with reductions in other taxes, either on a lump-sum basis or through reductions in other
tax rates.

E. Foreign Trade
Except for oil and gas imports, which are perfect substitutes for domestically produced oil and ga.s.

imported intermediate and consumer goods are imperfect substitutes for their domestic counterparts.27
As indicated above, demands for foreign intermediate inputs stem from cost-minimizing producer behavior,

while demands for foreign consumer goods derive from household utility maximization. Import prices
are exogenous in foreign currency, but the domestic-currency price changes with changes in the exchange
rate,

Thus, we adopt the assumption of Annington (1969).

18

Export demands are modeled as functions of the foreign price of U.S. exports and the level of

foreign income (in foreign currency). The foreign price is the price in U.S. dollars plus tariffs or
subsidies, converted to foreign currency through the exchange rate. We impose the assumption of zero
trade balance at each period of time. The exchange rate variable adjusts to achieve trade balance, that is.

to reconcile the value of US, import demands with the value of foreign export demands.

F. Modeling Pollution Emissions
Recent extensions of the model enable it project emissions of important pollutants under different

policy circumstances. The model considers eight major pollutants: total suspended particles (TSP).
sulphur oxides (SOX), nitric oxides (NOX), volatile organic compounds (VOC's), carbon monoxide (CO).

lead (Pb), particulate matter (PMIO), and carbon dioxide (C01).
The extension of the model to project emissions was accomplished through close collaborations

with persormel at the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the Environmental Law Institute. We
have made use of detailed, highly disaggregated data on emissions rates for specific industrial processes
and fuels.28

The key parameters used to project emissions levels (under baseline assumptions or in response

to a change of policy) are emissions factors. The model includes three types of emissions factors: fuel-

based factors, output-based factors, and mobile-source-based factors. The fuel-based emissions factor

e_f represents the rate of emissions of pollutant i per unit of input of fuel j used in industry k.29 Fuel-

u These data come from a wide variety of sources. mcluding the Annual Survey of Manufacturers from the
U.S. Department of Census, the Quarterly Coal Report and Petroleum Supply Report from the U.S. Department
of Energy, and the Minerals Yearbook. Personnel at the Environmental Law Institute (ELI) organized the detailed
emissions data and aggregated these data to conform to the 13-industry and 17-consumer good aggregalion of this
model.
29 In each industry, we take the ratio of the fuel-associated emissions to the quantity of fuel used in a given
industry to obtain the fuel-based emissions factor for each potlutant from that industry. We calculate this ratio
in 1990. based on ELI data on fuel-associated emissions and the general equilibrium model's data on fuel use.
Thus, for example, the emissions factor defining the rate of emissions of TSP per unit of coal input in the electric
utilities industry was calculated by taking the ratio of observed 1990 TSP emissions from coal used in electric
utilities to the quantity of coal used by electric utilities in 1990.
19

based emissions factors do not account for all of the emissions of a given pollutant from a given industry.

Industrial emissions over and above those that can be attributed to given fuels are deemed output-based.

The output-based emissions factor e_o denotes the ratio of output-related emissions of pollutant i to the

quantity of gross output from industry k.3° The mobile-source emissions factors e_m are express the
ratio of emissions i from a given mobile source to the level of use of that source (vehicle).3'

By applying the emissions factors to the levels of fuels used and levels of outputs produced in

each industry, we generate the predicted levels of emissions of each pollutant from each industry.
Changes in emissions sternniing from a policy change reflect the policy-induced changes in fuel use and

output levels.3

G. Equilibrium and Growth
The solution of the model is a general equilibrium in which supplies and demands balance in alt

We calculate the output-based emissions factors by taking the ratio of the residual emissions to the level
of indusuy output. As with the fuel-based emissions factors, the ratio is calculated based on 1990 data on
emissions from ELI and on industry outputs from the general equilibrium model's data set.
° We aggregated data on emissions from very specific sources to obtain total emissions for each pollutant

from the following mobile-source categories: (I) passenger vehicles. (2) other highway vehicles. (3) farm
equipment, (4) construction equipment, and (5) other mobile sources, Because the model does not measure vehicle
use directly, we use proxies for vehicle use to determine mobile-source emissions, Gasoline consumption is the
proxy for the quantity of passenger car and other highway vehicle use. Agriculture output, construction industry
output, and services industry output are proxies for the level of use of farm equipment, construction equipment,
and other mobile sources, respectively.

This approach is not perfect. One loses potentially important information when detailed industrial processes
are aggregated to the level in the model, Even though the model has considerable industry and consumer good

disaggregation. it masks some important detail that is highly relevant to emissions levels, Many important
contributions to emissions stem from industries or industrial processes that are more detailed than can be captured
in this 13-industry, 17-consumer good model, In addition, we assume that emissions factors do not change over
time; hence the model does not aptly capture industry-specific technological change that may alter these factors

over time.
Moreover, this approach, which assumes that emissions are proportional to fuel uses and industry outputs,

does not directly address ways that environmental regulations might affect emissions rates. We make one
adjustment in this approach to confront this issue: we assume that aggregate emissions of sulphur dioxide from
coal-fired electric power plants are constrained by the provisions of the 1990 Clean Air Act. Thus, ta-s policies
cannot reduce this particular emission from this particular source. To the extent that taxes reduce demands for
electricity from these plants, the reduced electricity output does not lead to a reduction in SO3 emissions. The
reduced output instead enables electric power producers to meet the aggregate emissions constraint somewhat more
easily.

20

markets at each period of time. Thus the solution requires that supply equal demand for labor inputs and

for all produced goods33, that firms' demands for loanable funds equal the aggregate supply by
households, and that the governments tax revenues equal its spending less the current deficit. These
conditions are met through adjustments in output pnces. in the market interest rate, and in lump-sum taxes

or lax rates.3

Economic growth reflects the growth of capital stocks and of potential labor resources. The
growth of capital stocks stems from endogcnous saving and investment behavior. Potential labor resources
are specified as increasing at a constant rate. In each period, potential labor divides between hours worked

arid leisure time in accordance with utility-maximizing household decisions.

H. Data and Parameters
Complete data documentation for model is provided in Cruz and Goulder (1992). In the present
subsection we indicate the sources for some important data and parameters.
The data stem from several sources. Industry input and output flows (used to establish production

function share parameters) were obtained from 1986 input-output tables published in the February 1991
Surve'i of Current Business. These tables were also the source for consumption, investment, government

spending, import and export values by industry. 1990 is the initial period for the simulations of this paper.

To obtain 1990 values, we scaled up the 1986 data using information for major industry groups in the

1991 Economic Report of the President. For the oil and gas. coal, and petroleum refining industries.
further adjustments were made to make the relative 1990 values correspond closely to relative values

projected for 1988 by the OECD (see OECD/IEA. 1990).
Elasticities of substitution for industry production functions were obtained by transforming translog

"Since oil and gas arid synfuels are perfect substitutes, they generate a single supply-demand condition.

When oil/gas imports are the marginal source of supply for the domestic economy, the quanwy of these
imports is an equilibrating variable. and the oil/gas price is exogenous. Once synfuels become the marginal source
of supply (that is. once synfuels drive oil/gas imports to zero), the synfuels price becomes an equilibrating variable.
Since agents are forward-looking, equilibrium in each period depends not only on current prices and taxes
but on future magnitudes as well.
21

production function parameters estimated by Dale Jorgenson and Peter Wilcoxen.

Elasticities of

substitution between domestic and foreign goods were obtained by aggregating estimates from Shiells.

Stem, and Deardorff (l9S6).
The appendix to this paper indicates functional forms and lists parameter values for the produ.uori

and household sectors.

IV. Simulation Experiments and Results

In this section we describe simulation experiments performed to compare effects of energy and
other taxes. In addition, we report and interpret the simulation results.

A. Policies Considered
To assess the impacts of policy changes, we compare results under each simulation of a policy
change with results from a baseline or reference case simulation (which assumesno change in tax policy).

In the baseline simulation, all tax rates remain constant through time.
We simulate the following four policies:

I. A Btu tax. This is a tax on imposed on oil, natural gas, and coal in proportion to the 8w
content of these fuels." The same tax rates apply to imported fuels as to the domestically

"

The model treats crude petroleum and natural gas together as a single industry. It was still possible.

however, to capture the different tax rates applying to these fuels, because nearly all crude petroleum is devoted
as an input into the petroleum refining industry. Thus the indusuy 3 (crude petroleum and natural gas industry)
inputs into industries other than petroleum refining faced a Lax equal to the tax rate on natural gas, in keeping with

the fact that very little crude oil (except for some feedsrocks) is used outside of the petroleum industry. In
contrast. industry 3 inputs in to the petroleum refining industry faced a sax reflecting the share of natural gas and
crude oil as inputs into petroleum refining.

produced counterparts. Exports are exempt from the tax.36

2. A gasoline tax. This is a specific, or per-unit tax on the purchases of gasoline by consumers.
'Gasoline and other fuels" is one of the 17 consumer goods distinguished in the model. The
gasoline tax is applied to household purchases of this good.

3. An increase in marginal rates of the personal income tax. The model includes marginal tax
rates on individual wage income, dividend income. interest income, and capital gains income.
These are the average marginal rates that apply in the benchmark year. 1994. Under the policy
of an increase in personal income taxes, each of these marginal rates is increased in the same
proportion.

4, An increase in the corporate income tax rate. This is an increase in the rate of lax on
corporate profits.

Table 3 indicates the tax rates employed under the baseline and policy change scenarios. The rates

shown for the policy changes are after the policy in question is fully phased in. All policies are phased
in over a three-year period, beginning in 1994.
Each of these policies is introduced in a revenue-neutral fashion: the path of tax revenues under

each policy is made identical to the revenue path in the baseline. In the absence of compensating tax

reductions, new energy taxes or higher income tax rates generally would lead to a higher overall
government revenues. To assure revenue neutrality, we accompany the rate increases with compensating

tax reductions either through lump-sum reductions in personal income taxes or by way of reductions in
the marginal tax rates on individual income.

For comparability, the policies are scaled to imply the same gross revenue impact -- the same
revenue yield, abstracting from the revenue-preserving reductions in other taxes. The gross revenue impact

of these policies, over the infinite time horizon, is $1155 billion in present value. Over the first five years,

these taxes yield gross revenues ranging from 61 to 76 billion 1990 dollars.

36
This avoids putting U.S-produced fuels at a cost disadvantage relative to imported fuels in the domestic
market, and avoids putting exported U.S. fuels at a cost disadvantage relative to foreign-produced fuels in the
international market,

23

B. Simulation Results: "Traditional" Effects
1. Differences in Aggregate Economic Impacts

Figures 2a-2c show the effects of the alternative policies on real GNP. consumption, and
investment. These results are from experiments with lump-sum replacement of revenues. The figures
indicate the percentage change in these variables relative to a reference case involving no policy change.

The first year corresponds to 1994.
Figure 2a compares the GNP effects. Within the first 12 years following implementation, the Btu

and gasoline taxes imply larger reductions in GNP than the income tax alternatives. For example, in the

year 2000 (six years after implementation), the Btu and gas taxes imply GNP reductions (relative to
baseline) of about .22 and .18 percent. as compared with .14 and .07 percent under the personal and

corporate tax increases. The GNP costs of the BLu tax remain larger than those of the income tax
alternatives. In contrast, the ONP cost of the gasoline tax eventually becomes smaller than that of the
personal tax increase. The relatively benign long-term GNP impact of the gasoline tax reflects its more
favorable impact on investment, as discussed below.

The impacts on consumption are compared in Figure 2b. As with the GNP losses, the losses in
consumption are greatest for the energy tax policies. However, in contrast with the GNP results, the losses

here are greater for the gasoline tax than the Btu tax. While the 8W tax raises the costs of production for

intermediate, capital, and consumer goods, the gasoline tax is targeted to consumption. Thus, in
comparison with the Btu tax, under the gasoline tax the GNP reductions come more in the form of reduced

consumption rather than investment.

Figure 2c contrasts the investment impacts. The investment losses of the gasoline Lax are less

severe than those of any of the other policies. Hence the path of the capital stock is higher under the
gasoline tax than under the other policies. This helps explain why,over time, the ONE' path under the
gasoline tax improves relative to the paths under the other policies.

There are various ways to discern economic well-being from the above figures. One way is to
apply the equivalent variation measure. This measure translates changes in consumption from a given

24

policy into a dollar equivalent.37 The welfare costs of the different policies arc given in Table 4. To

give a perspective on the magnitude of these numbers: the welfare cost of the Btu tax with lump-sum

income tax replacement is shown as -0.394. This means that this tax is roughly equivalent to a permanent

reduction in consumption of about .39 percent.
The numbers in Table 4 indicate that the energy taxes have larger welfare costs than the income
tax alternatives. The Btu tax implies the largest welfare cost. The rankings of welfare costs correspond

to the differences in consumption paths from Figure 2b.3 It should be kept in mind that these welfare
measures abstract from the possible welfare benefits associated with policy-induced improvements in the
environment (or avoided environmental damages).

2. Explaining the Differences in Aggregate Impacts
The above results indicate that the Btu and gasoline taxes tend to impose larger costs in terms of

consumption, welfare, and GNP than the two income tax alternatives. It is important to ascertain how

these cost differences arise. Here we harken back to the issues raised in Section II. How significant is

it that energy taxes apply to a relatively narrow set of industries? How important is the fact that, in
contrast with income taxes, a Btu tax applies to intermediate inputs? And how much difference does it

make whether an energy tax applies to consumer goods as opposed to all final goods?

It is possible to address these questions by performing some additional simulations designed to
isolate the different dimensions along which energy and other taxes differ.

Significance

of the Breadth of the Tax Base. One important feature of energy taxes, in

comparison with income taxes, is that their tax bases are relatively narrow. The Btu tax applies only to

" The equivalent variation measure used here is the amount that a dynastic or infinitely-lived household would
require under the status quo to be made as well off as under the policy change. It is a single number that
consolidates the welfare impacts from changes in current and future consumption. As applied here, this measure
does not address equity issues as reflected in changes in the distribution of well-being across household income
groups or between current and future generations.

Welfare depends on the household's enjoyment of both consumer goods and leisure. To the extent that
leisure changes are imperfecdy correlated with the changes in consumption from Figure 2b, the values in the figure
will not be perfect indicators of welfare changes.

25

a few industrial outputs -- the outputs of the oil, natural gas, coal, and synthetic fuels industries. These

industries account for less than three percent of the value of the nation's gross output. Similarly.
consumer purchases of gasoline account for a very small share of household expenditure on goods and
services.

To consider the importance of the breadth of base, we perform two new simulations. First, we

simulate a uniform, broad-based tax on gross oUtput with the same gross revenue impact as the taxes
already considered. Since the Btu tax is also a tax on gross output (of oil, natural gas, and coal), the main

structural difference between the broad-based tax and the Btu tax is the breadth of the base. Second. we

simulate a uniform general consumption tax -- applying to all consumer goods, not just consumer

purchases of gasoline. This isolates the significance of the breadth of the tax base at the level of
household consumption.
Table 5 compares the GNP and welfare impacts of these new policies with those under the policies

already considered. The excess cost of the Btu tax over the personal tax increase is .233; in contrast, the
excess cost of the broad output tax over the personal tax increase is .086. Thus, about two thirds ([.233-

.086]/.233) of the Btu tax's excess cost can be attributed to its relatively narrow industrial base.39 For
the consumer-level gasoline tax, the breadth of base is important as well. This is clear from a comparison

of rows 3 and 4 of Table 5. While the gasoline tax leads to a welfare cost about twice as large as that
under the income tax, the general consumption tax produces a smaller welfare loss than under the income

tax increase -- the "excess cost" is negative. This suggests that financing a general consumption tax with

The broad-based output tax is imposed as a specific, or per-unit tax, where units are defined as that quantity
of output worth one dollar in 1990. A subtle difference between the broad-based output tax arid the Btu tax is
that the latter tax is not unifonn with respect to quantity units (or 1990 dollars' worth of output): instead, it was
specified as uniform with respect to energy content. In further simulation experiments, we compare the effects
of the Bui tax already considered with those of a "strictly uniform Bui tax -- a tax with the same rates per unit
of output. The differences in welfare effects are small. The strictly unifoiin Bni tax generated a welfare toss
of 0.375. as opposed to 0.394 under the original But tax, and .246 under the broad-based gross output tax. With
this information, a small fraction of the excess cost now attributed to the narrowness of the base can be attributed
to the lack of strict uniformity. Recall that the excess cost of the ordinary Bus tax is .233. The results from the
"strictly uniform" Bus tax imply that the lack of strict uniformity accounts for about 8 percent ([.394-.375]/.233)
of the excess cost, and that the narrowness of the base accounts for about 55 percent ([.375-2463/233) of this cost.

26

cuts in the personal income tax would yield a net welfare gain.40
Significance of Taxing Gross, Rather Than Net, Output. The overall difference between a Btu tax

and the personal income tax can be decomposed into:
(1)

the difference between a tax on particular industry outputs (fuels) and a tax on all industry gross
outputs. and

(2)

the difference between a tax on all gross outputs and a tax on all final goods (the income tax).

The welfare importance of the first of these differences was seen by comparing the results in rows I and
2 of Table 5. as discussed in the previous paragraph. The significance of the second of these differences

is indicated from a comparison of the results in rows 2 and 5 of the table. These results indicate that
about a third (.086/.233) of the difference in GNP and welfare costs between the Btu and personal income

tax is attributable to this second dimension.
Significance of Taxing Consumption Goods Rather Than All Final Goods. Table 5 affords another

useful comparison. The overall difference between a gasoline Lax and the personal income tax can be
decomposed into:

(I)

the difference between a tax on a particular consumer good (gasoline) and a tax on all consumer
goods, and

(2)

the difference between a tax on all consumer goods and a tax on all final goods (the income tax).

The first of these differences was already observed by comparing rows 3 and 4 of Table 5. It is clear that

the first difference has a negalive impact relative to the personal income tax. The second of these
differences is seen by comparing rows 4 and 5. From the table it is clear that the narrow consumption

base of the gasoline tax exerts a strong negative welfare impact. In fact, the narrowness of the base is
important enough to undo the positive welfare impact (relative to an income tax) of taxing consumption
in general.

Table 6 consolidates these findings. It shows the contributions of each of the above dimensions
to the differences in overall welfare impacts between the energy taxes and the personal income tax. For

Subsequent simulation experiments confirm this suggestion.

27

both the Btu tax and gasoline tax, the relatively narrow base of the tax accounts for the greatest share of
its excess cost over a personal income tax increase. The other key feature of the gasoline tax -- its focus
on consumption goods -- narrows the excess cost of this policy; in contrast, the other key feature of the

Btu tax -- its focus on intermediate goods rather than final goods -- enlarges ils excess cost over an
income tax. This general pattern of results is sustained through further simulation expcrimenls.4' These

results are qualitatively similar to those obtained by Rotemberg and Woodford (1993) in a more
aggregated model that addresses issues of imperfect competition. These authors find that the costs of
energy taxes are considerably lower when the taxes are applied at the household level only, as compared

with the case where the taxes are applied on all energy use.
Two important qualifications are in order. First, it is important to keep in mind that these results
ignore environmental effects; we consider such effects later in this section. In addition, strictly speaking

these results only indicate the relative impacts of "marginal" reforms -- lax changes which are
superimposed on the existing tax structure. They do not directly compare the effects of pure tax systems

in which the tax base is exclusively of one form (energy, gasoline use, or income).

3. Further Sensitivity Analysis
Table 7 shows the sensitivity of results to key parameters. We concentrate on parameters that
govern the relative significance of the various "margim" discussed in the theoretical section of the paper.

The intertemporal elasticity of substitution in consumption regulates the responsiveness of
household savings to changes in interest rates. The higher the value of this elasticity, the greater the

" For example, we find that this pattern is the same regardless of the scale of the tax policies. We have
performed experiments in which the scale (or gross revenue yield) of the policies is 0.5. 2.. and 4 times that
considered in the main experiments. The rankings of the policies, as well as the relative significance of the various
smsctural features, remain the same as in the original experiments.

En addition, we have examined the effects of a tax imposed on industrial users of gasoline. 'I'his latter
tax represents a narrowly-based gross output tax. This tax (scaled to imply the same gross revenue yield as the
consumer-level tax) produces a welfare change of -0.442. l'his is consistent with the results from tables 5 and 6.
As under the Btu tax, the welfare cost is larger than the cost of a broad-based gross output tax of equal revenue
yield.

28

potential for efficiency or welfare losses under policies that distort the capital market, or intertemporal

allocation of resources. Higher values for this elasticity imply larger welfare costs per dollar for the
energy tax policies and for the personal income tax increase. As this elasticity increases, welfare costs
rise less for the consumer-level gasoline tax than for the income tax; hence the excess cost declines with

an increase in this elasticity. This is in keeping with the fact that the income Lax is inferior to this
gasoline tax on the intenemporal margin, and the higher elasticity raises the significance of this margin.
Higher intertemporal elasticity increases somewhat the excess costs of the Btu tax, although the effect is
not strong.

A higher elasticity of labor supply raises the potential magnitude of efficiency losses along the
labor-leisure margin. Higher values for this elasticity raise the welfare costa per dollar of all three taxes
shown here. The excess costs of both energy taxes decline with increases in this elasticity, indicating that

income taxes tend to distort the labor-leisure margin more than the energy taxes.
Higher energy demand elasticities imply a greater potential for efficiency losses along the margin

of producer choice between energy inputs and the margin of consumer choice between energy products

(such as gasoline) and other consumer goods. Since energy taxes distort this margin more than income
taxes (subject to the qualifications of Section II). it is no surprise that the excess costs of the energy taxes
rise with increases in energy demand elasticities.
Interestingly, although certain parameter values significantly reduced the excess costs of the energy

taxes, there were no cases where the excess costs were eliminated. AppaienUy. the narrowness of the
economic base of these taxes (and, in the case of the Btu tax, the focus on intermediate production) is
enough to generate excess costs along a wide range of parameter values.42

4. Effects on Particular Industries
The focus of this paper is on economy-wide impacts. However, as will be seen below, there are

•2 Further sensitivity analysis is performed in Bovenberg and Goulder (1993) for quite similar policies. That
analysis examines the sensitivity of excess costs to the rates of pre.existing taxes on labor and capital. Under the
range of lax rates considered, energy Ia.xes remain more costly than income taxes.

29

significant differences in the pollution impacts of the policy alternatives, and such differences are
explained by different patterns of industry impacts. Thus we present, in Table 8. the effects of the energy
and income taxes on the gross outputs of each industry. These results stem from the experiments in which

revenue-neutrality is accomplished through lump-sum reductions in personal taxes.
The distribution of impacts across industries is quite different across policies. As one might have
expected, under the two energy taxes, the effects on gross output are much more concentrated. Under the
gasoline tax, the industrial effects are the most concentrated, with the petroleum refining industry (whose

activities include the processing of gasoline) experiencing the greatest Impact by far. Under the Blu tax.
effects are concentrated among the fossil fuels industries, petroleum refining industry, and the electric and

gas utilities industries. li contrast, under the two income tax policies the effects are much more evenly
dispersed.

C. Emissions Impacts
1. Comparison of Results across Policies

An ideal comparison of efficiency effects of energy and income

taxes

would incorporate value

measures of the economic benefits from reduced pollution. The traditional efficiency costs from a given
policy would be subtracted from the value of the environmental benefits, producing the net efficiency gain

or loss. However, the values of the environmental benefits are largely unknown. Although valuing the
environmental impacts is a worthwhile ultimate goal, at present it seems most sensible to take a first step

toward that goal: namely, assessing the different emissions impacts of the different policies. To our
knowledge, no other general equilibrium study has linked the economy-wide impacts of these or other tax
reforms to the emissions impacts.43

The different distributions of output effects shown in Table 8 will translate into differences in
emissions impacts to the extent that industries vary in their "pollution intensities," that is. in pollution

'

Argonne National Laboratories is currently developing a model that explores the economy-wide emissions
impacts of alternative energy policies. The model has considerable detail on energy technologies. The model does
not have a general equilibrium structure, although it attends to some important market mteractions.

30

emissions per unit of output. Table 9 provides information on pollution intensities.

It shows the

relative contributiort to emissions of the eight pollutants from the different industries of the model in the

baseline or reference case. These intensities are not exogenous inputs to the model; rather, they are

functions of the underlying emissions factors, input choices, and output levels for each industry and
household activity. Results n the table are for the year 2000 in the baseline. For SOX, NOX. and C02.
energy industries account for the lion's share of emissions. For this reason one might expect the energy
taxes -- which havesignificant impacts on these industries -- to induce much larger emissions reductions
than

income taxes of equal revenue yield.
This expectation is borne Out by the policy impacts shown in tables lOa and lOb. These tables

show the emissions reductions stemming from the four policies in the years 2000 (Table lOa) and 2020

(Table lOb). The differences in emissions impacts between the energy tax and income tax policies are

striking. For every pollutant, the emissions reduction under the Btu or gasoline tax is at least nine times
larger than under either of the income tax policies. Under the energy taxes, the reductions in emissions
are much larger in percentage terms than the reductions in overall economic output (GNP). and reflect
substitutions of cleaner activities and fuels for those involving more pollution.

In percentage terms, the emissions reductions from the Btu lax are largest for CO2 and NOX
compounds. While the Btu tax induces significant reductions from both stationary and mobile sources.
the gasoline tax (as expected) promotes reductions mainly from mobile sources. The gasoline tax leads

to 'substantial' reductions itt mobile-source emissions of all pollutants except particulate matter (PM 10)

and carbon dioxide (C02).
Overall, these results offer evidence that Btu and gasoline taxes afford significant environmental
benefits relative to increases in income taxes. This complicates the ranking of energy and income taxes

in terms of overallefficiency: as yet, we do not have enough information to determine whether the larger
emissions reductions from energy taxes are important enough to offset the disadvantages of these taxes

"

To gauge the emissions impacts of different policies, it does not suffice to observe the changes in industrial
output and the status quo pollution intensities. This is the case because pollution intensities will also change in
response to policy initiatives. As discussed in Section III. the simulation model attempts to account for such
changes.

31

on narrower efficiency grounds.

2. A Partial Benefit-Cost Analysis
Despite the information limitations, some useful comparisons arc possible. Table II offers partial

benefit-cost information. The first row show the average annual emissions reductions from the two energy

tax policies.45 To give an idea of the levels (tons) of emissions reductions implied by these percentages.

we apply the average reductions to projected 1994 (baseline) emissions. These implied reductions are
presented in the second row of the table. As in previous tables, the units in row 2 are thousands of metric

tons for all pollutants except lead (which is in metric tons) and C02 (which is in millions of metric tons
of carbon).
In the second portion of this table, we make suggestive benefit-cost comparisons. Row 3 presents

the annualized excess cost of the two energy tax policies. This cost index translates the overall excess
cost (a stock concept) into an annual cost flow that grows at the long-run growth rate of the economy.46
In row 4, we make a tentative foray into the benefits dimension. Several Caveats are in order here.

First, we only consider C02-related benefits. Obviously this understates the overall environmental
benefits. Our purpose here is simply to consider what portion of the GNP costs might be offset by C02related benefits, and to allow readers to ponder whether the remaining GNP costs might be offset by the
reductions in other pollutants.
The benefit-cost numbers are limited in another sense. The true benefits from reductions of CO2
(or other pollutants) are the result of complex links from benefits to concentrations to ultimate health and

'

More precisely, these are averages of the excess reductions in C02 emissions over and above the
(negligible) reductions that would occur from a personal income tax increase. The averages are computed by
taking the present value of the changes in emissions over an infinite horizon, using the long-run after-tax interest
rate (4.8 percent) as the discount rate. An alternative approach is simply to treat the percentage reduction in
cumulative emissions (at some future point in time) as the average emissions reduction. In an economy where
output and emissions tend to increase through time, this latter approach tends to assign more weight to future
emissions reductions than does the approach we have taken.

The annualized excess cost is equal to EV * (r-g)/( l+r). where EV is the excess cost of the policy change
(as measured by the equivalent variation), r is the long-run or steady-state after-Isa interest rate, and g is the longrun growth rate of the economy. The values for r and g in the model are 4.8 percent and 2.0 percent, respectively.

32

welfare impacts. Given the complexity of these connections, it is likely that for each pollutant the benefits

per unit of emission reduction will vary geographically and through time. We have disregarded these
important complications. Instead, we assume, in the case of C02. fixed ratios of benefits per unit of
emission reduction. It is hoped that, despite these limitations, the figures in Table 11 are illuminating

rather than misleading.
First steps toward assessing C02-related benefits were taken by Nordhaus (1991). who postulated

marginal environmental benefits from C02 emissions reduction as ranging from approximately $1.80 to
sixty-six dollars per ton. Row 4 of the table shows the annualized benefits from the C02 reductions under

two cases for each policy.4' The low C02 damages" scenario imputes the $1.80/ton value; the "high
C02 damages" case imputes the $66.00/ton value.45

The results in the table indicate that the residual GNP losses -- annualized excess costs minus
annualized C02-related benefits --

are

highly sensitive to assumptions about the C02 damages. In the

case with high C02 damages, the C02-related environmental benefits from a Btu tax offset over 75
percent of the excess cost; in the case with low C02 damages, about three percent of the excess cost is
offset. The residual GNP losses are smaller for the gasoline tax than for the Btu tax; the reverse is true
in the high C02 damage scenario. This reflects the significant differences in the induced C02 reductions
of the two policies.39

'

We annualize the environmental benefits in the same way excess costs are annualized. The annualized
benefit equal to EB * (r-g)/(l+r), where EB is the present value of the environmental benefits. r is the long-nm
real after-tax interest rate, and g is the long-nm real growth rate.

These figures are based on assessments of the potential global-warming-related damages from C02. Direct

health effects of C02 are not considered. For this reason they may understate overall benefits from C02

reducuons. On the other hand, it should be noted that the Nordhaus estimates are of worldwide damages from
C02 emissions (or worldwide benefits from C02 emissions reductions). Benefits to the U.S. from C02 reductions
would be only a fraction of the worldwide benefits.

"

It may seem surprising that when C02 damages of $66 are assumed, the Btu tax still fails to create
positive net benefits (or a negative residual ON? loss). Basic Pigovian tax principles would indicate that, so long
as an environmental tax rate is below (or not far above) the value of marginal environmental damages, then the
tax will be efficiency-improving. Under the Btu tax, the implied rate of tax per ton of carbon is $12.80 on coal.
$17.90 on natural gas, and S32.50 on crude oil. These rates are less than the assumed marginal damages from
carbon emissions, which would suggest that the Btu tax should be efficiency-improving. The positive residual
GNP loss thus seems to defy the Pigovian prediction.
33

Table II does not answer the question whether either of the energy taxes is efficiency-improving
overall. Answering this question requires more information on the environmental benefits associated with
reductions in the other pollutants (as well as reduced uncertainty about C02-related benefits). Economics

and environmental science may one day be able to provide this information.

V. Conclusions
This paper has employed a dynamic simulation model of the U.S.

to assess traditional' uson-

environmental) efficiency consequences and environmental effects of two U.S. energy tax policies: a tax

on fossil and synthetic fuels based on Btu (or energy) content and a tax on consumer purchases of
gasoline. The model uniquely combines attention to details of the U.S. tax system with a consolidated
treatment of U.S. energy use and pollution emissions.
On traditional efficiency grounds, each of the energy taxes emerges as more costly to the economy

than equal-revenue increases in personal or corporate income taxes: the time profiles of GNP and
consumption are significantly tower under the energy taxes than under the alternatives. Likewise, the
welfare costs of the energy taxes are more than twice as large (Table 4) as the costs of equal-revenue
increments to personal or corporate income taxes. This result that energy taxes involve higher gross costs

is sustained over a fairly wide range of values for key behavioral parameters.
An important structural difference between the Btu tax and the consumer-level gasoline tax is that
the former applies to a form of gross output while the latter applies to a particular final consumption good.

This difference underlies the contrasting investment and consumption profiles of the two energy tax
options.

The Pigovian prediction falls because ii does not account for pre-existing taxes. Specifically, it neglects
the ways that energy taxes compound the gross distortions that other taxes generate in other markets. When other
taxes are present, the welfare (and GNP) costs of "small" environmental taxes can be quite large. The fact that
tax rates are below the marginal environmental damages does not assure a welfare improvement. This issue is
analyzed in detail in flovenberg and Goulder (1993).

34

We perform a number of simulation experiments designed to which features of these taxes account

for their excess costs -- the non-environmental welfare cost over and above that of an equal-revenue

increase in the personal income tax. For both energy taxes, the relative narrowness of the tax base
accounts for most of the excess cost. For the Btu tax, the type of tax base -- its focus on gross output (as

opposed to net output under the personal income tax) -- also contributes to a significant share of the
excess cost. For the consumer-level gasoline tax, the fact that this tax applies to consumption rather than

income has a mitigating effect, serving to reduce the excess cost.
On the environmental side, we find that for each of the eight major air pollutants considered, the
energy taxes induce emissions reductions that are at least nine times larger than the reductions under the
income tax alternatives. The differences in emissions impacts reflect the close connections between energy

use and pollution generation. For the Btu tax, the largest emissions reductions (in percentage terms) are

for C02 and NOX compounds. For the gasoline tax, the emissions reductions are spread fairly evenly
across six of the eight pollutants considered.

Overall, this study indicates that the Btu and gasoline taxes considered are infenor to the
alternatives on narrow efficiency grounds but superior on environmental grounds. It remains an open
question whether the environmental attractions of these taxes are large enough to offset their relatively
high non-environmental costs. To settle this issue, analysts need to be able quantify more accurately the

link from emission reductions to environment-related improvements in human welfare. Further research

along these lines will help important environmental considerations gain a firm footing in the general
domain of tax policy analysis.

35

References

Armington. P.S., 1969. "A Theory of Demand for Products Distingutshed by Place of Production," I.M.F.

Staff Papers. pp. 159-76.

Atkinson. Anthony B.. and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1980. Lectures on Public Economics. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Auerbach, Alan J.. 1985. "The Theory of Excess Burden and Optimal Taxation. In A.J. Auerbach and
M.S. Feldstein, eds., Handbook of Public Economics, Vol. 1. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Auerbach, Alan J.. and Laurence J. Kotlikoff. 1987. Dynamic Fiscal Policy. Cambridge. United
Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.

Bovenberg. A. Lans. and Lawrence H. Goulder, 1993. Integrating Environmental and Distortionary
Taxes: General Equilibrium Analyses," Working paper Stanford University, November.

Bovenberg, A. Laos, and Ruud A. de Mooij, 1993.

Environmental Taxation and Labor Market
Distortions." Working paper, Ministry of Economic Affairs, The Hague, April.
Bradford, David F.: 1984. Blueprints for Basic Tax Reform. Arlington, Va.: Tax Analysts.

Cruz. Miguel and Lawrence H. Goulder, 1992. "An Intertemporal General Equilibrium Model for
Analyzing U.S. Energy and Environmental Policies". Data Documentation." Unpublished manuscript,
Stanford University.

Dasgupta, Partha S. anl Geoffrey M. Heal, 1979. Economic Theory and Exhaustible Resources,
Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.

Deaton, Angus, 1979. "l'he Distance Function in Consumer Behaviour with Applications to Index
Numbers and Optimal Taxation," Review of Economic Studies.
Diamond, Peter, and J. Mirrlees, 1971. "Optimal Taxation and Public Production I: Production Efficiency
and II: Tax Rules," American Economic Review 61.

Goulder, Lawrence H., 1989. "Tax Policy. Housing Prices, and Housing Investment." Regional Science
and Urban Economics 19(2).
_______ and Lawrence H. Summers, 1989. "Tax Policy, Asset Prices, and Growth: A General
Equilibrium Analysis." Journal of Public Economics 38, 265-96.

_______ 1992a. "Carbon Taxes and U.S. Industry Performance." In James M. Poterba, ed., Tax Policy
and the Economy 6 (Cambridge. Mass.: MItT Press).
_______ 1992b. "An Intertemporal General Equilibrium Model for Analyzing U.S. Energy and
Environmental Policies: Model Structure." Unpublished manuscript, Stanford University, November.
_______ 1993. "Effects of Carbon Taxes in an Economy with Prior Tax Distortions: An Intertemporal
General Equilibrium Analysis." Working Paper. Stanford University, January.

36

_______ and Philippe Thaimann, 1993. Approaches to Efficient Capital Taxation: Leveling the Playing
Field vs. Living by the Golden Rule." Journal of Public Economics. February.

Jones, Clifton T. and Dale S. Bremmer, 1990. Regional Impacts of Petroleum Price Regulation: The
Case of Texas. 1973-83. The Energvfourrial II, pp. 135-154.
Environmental Regulation and U.S. Economic
Jorgenson. Dale W. and Peter J. Wilcoxen. 1990.
Growth. The Rand Journal of Economics 21 (2), 314-340.
_______ and _______. 1993. "Reducing U.S. Carbon Emissions: An Econometric General Equilibrium
Assessment.' hi Darius Gaskins and John Weyant (eds.), Reducing Carbon Emissions from the Energy
Sector: Cost and Policy Options. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, forthcoming.
Manne, Alan S.. and Richard G. Richels, 1992. Buying Greenhouse Insurance: The Economic Costs of
CO. Emissions Limits. Cambridge. Mass.: MIT Press.

Masters. Charles D., et al., 1987. 'World Resources of Crude OIl, Natural Gas, Natural Bitumen, and
Shale Oil." In Proceedings of the 12th World Petroleum Congress 5. pp. 3-27.

Nordliaus. William. 1991. "To Slow or Not To Slow: The Economics of the Greenhouse Effect," The
Economic Journal 101 (July), pp. 920-37.

Poterba, James M.. 1993. "Global Warming: A Public Finance Perspective." Journal of Economic
Perspectives, forthcoming.
_______ and Lawrence H. Summers, 1985. "The Economic Effects of Dividend Taxation." In Edward
I. Altman and Marti G. Subramanyam. eds.. Recent Advances in Corporate Finance (Irwin, Homewood.
IL).

Ramsey. Frank P., 1927. "A Contribution to the Theory of Taxation." Economic Journal 37.
Rotemberg, Julio J.. and Michael Woodford, 1993. "Energy Taxes and Aggregate Economic Activity."
This volume.

Stiglitz, Joseph E., and Partha Dasgupta. 1971. "Differential Taxation. Public Goods, and Economic
Efficiency." Reviee. of Economic Studies 38(2). April,
Suglitz. Joseph E., 1976. "The Corporation Tax." Journal of Public Economics 5. pp. 303-311.
Summers, Lawrence H.. 1981. "Taxation and Corporate Investment: A q-Theory Approach." Brookings
Papers on Economic Activire, January, 67-127.

Walls. Margaret A., 1991. "Regional Deadweight Losses from an Oil Import Fee," Southern Economic
Journal 56, pp. 772-788.
Weyant. John. 1993. EMFI2: Economic Costs of Greenhouse Gas Emission Control Strategies, Stanford
University Press, forthcoming.

37

APPENDIX: Model Structure and Parameters'

I. Structure
A. Production

1. Technology
a. General Features

Table Al indicates the nested production structure. In each industry i gross
output X is produced using inputs of labor (L) .capital (K,) . an energy composite (E)
and a materials composite (M,). The production function has the following form:

g2(,M)] -

=

1)

The functions f,

g1,. and g,, are CES. Hence the function f can be written as:

f (g, g2)

2)

p.

= L1

g1

+ (1

-

p

the industry subscript has been suppressed and where y, a1 and Pj are
parameters. The parameter p is related to c the elasticity of substitution between
. Analogous expressions apply for the functions g7 and g2.
g1 and g,: p = (o where

The second term in equation (1) represents the loss of output associated with

installing new capital (or dismantling existing capital). Per-unit adjustment costs, 4 . are

given by:

A more comprehensive description of the structure of the model is in Goulder
(1992b). Detailed documentation of the data and parameters for the model is provided
in Cruz and Goulder (1992).
38

Table Al: Nested Production Structure

X
g2

E
M
E

M

=
=
=
=

=
=
=

f(g1, g2) - 4(1/K)1

g1(
gjE. M)

E(E,,..., E5)
M(M,,..., M7)

E(ED, EF,)
M,(MD, MF,)

i=I5
i=I7

All functions arc CES in form except for (I/K), which
is quadratic in I/K.

Note:

Table A2: Nested Utility Structure
Functional Form:

Function:

U (C, C

Ce....)

C(C,t)

constant intertemporal elasticity of substitution
CES

C(C C C7 )

Cobb-Douglas

C(CD,CF,)

CES

Key:

U,

= intcrlcmporal utility evaluated from pcriod

C,

= full consumption in period s

C,

= overall goods consumption in period s

= leisure in pcnod s

C,

= consumption of composite consumer good i in period s

CD,

= consumption of domestically produced consumer good i in period s

CF

= consumption of foreign produced consumcr good i in pcnod s

39

(/2) (f/K

3)

—

i/K

where I represents gross investment (purchases of new capital goods) and

and ö

denotes the rate of economic depreciation of the capital

are parameters. The parameter
stock.

The energy composite (E,) in equation (1) is a CES function of the specific
energy products of the different energy industries:
4a)

E = E(E1, E2 ,...,

4b)

=

=

where

I

E5)

EJ

The subscripts to E in equations (4a) and (4b) correspond to

energy industries as follows:
Energy Industry

Subscript

Coal mining
Oil&gas extraction and synthetic

1

2

fuels
Petroleum refining
Electricity
Processed natural gas

3

4
5

Oil&gas and synthetic fuels combine as one input in the energy composite. reflecting the

fact that these fuels are treated as perfect substitutes in production.2

2 E2 denotes the total quantity (in energy-equivalent units) of oil&gas plus synfuels:

E2 =

E

+

E,
40

Similarly, the materials composite (M) in equation (I) is a CES function of
the specific materials products of the 7 non-energy industries:
5a)

M

5b)

=

=

where

I

= M(M, M,

jl a

M7)

MJ"

The subscripts to M in equations (5a) and (5b) correspond to

materials (non-energy) industries as follows:
Subscript

Materials Industry

Agriculture and mining (except
coal mining)

2
3
4

Construction
Metals and machinery
Motor vehicles
Miscellaneous manufacturing

5

6
7

Services (except housing services)

Housing services

The elements E (j = I

5) and

M (j = I

7)

in the E

and M. functions

are themselves CES composites of domestically produced and foreign made inputs:

6)
7)

E1

= '(EJ [a EDJ' + (I

M. = '(MJ [UM, MD1' + (1

—

—

cLEJ)EF) I

aMI) MFJ']

'

=I

,j=I

5

7

where ED1 and EF denote domestic and foreign energy inputs of type I, and MD1

and MF denote domestic and foreign materials inputs of type j.

41

b. Endogerieitv of y in the Oil&Gas Production Function

In industries other than oil&gas. the element y in the production function is
parametric. In the oil&gas industry, 'I'!

a decreasing function of cumulative oil&gas

is

extraction:
Yf, =

8)

where e1 and C2

are

beginning of period t,

[i

- (Z,/Z)]

parameters, Z represents cumulative extraction as of the
arid

Z is the original estimated total stock of recoverable

reserves of oil&gas (as estimated from the benchmark year). The following equation of

motion specifies the evolution of Z,:

Z,,1 =Z +X,

9)

Equation (8) implies that the production function for oil and gas shifts downward as

cumulative oil&gas extraction increases. This addresses the fact that as reserves are
depleted. remaining reserves become more difficult to extract and require more inputs per

unit of extraction.

2. Behavior of Firms
In each industry, managers of firms are assumed to serve stockholders in aiming

to maximize the value of the firm. The objective of flim-value maximization determines

firms' choices of input quantities and investment levels in each period of time.

The value of the firm can be expressed in terms of dividends and new share
issues, which in turn depend on profits in each period. The firm's profits during a given
period are given by:
10)

42

it = (1 - t) [pX

- w( I

+ tL)L - EMCOST

-

IDEBT

-

TPROP]

+

t,(DEPL

+

DEPR)

where -ç is the tax rate on profits. p is the output price net of output taxes. w is the
wage rate net of indirect labor taxes, tL is rate of the indirect tax on labor, EMCOST
is the cost to the firm of energy and materials inputs, i is the gross-of-tax interest rate

paid by the firm, DEBT is the firm's current debt. TPRQP is property tax payments,

DEPL is the current gross depletion allowance, and DEPR is the current gross
depreciation allowance. TPROP equals tpPK,,j K,,
PK

is

where t

is the property tax rate,

the purchase price of a unit of new capital, and s is the time period. Current

depletion allowances, DEPL ,

are

a constant fraction

of the value of current

extraction: DEPL = 3pX. Current depreciation allowances, DEPR , can be expressed
as &KT, where KT is the depreciable capital stock basis and & is the depreciation rate
applied for tax purposes.3

In equation (10) , EMCOST is given by:
EMCOST =

(I

+

tE.) (PEDJED,

+

PEFJEFI)

11)

+

(1 + c,,,) (pMDJMDJ + PMF,JMFJ)

where the subscripts for energy and materials correspond to industries as indicated above;

and where 'CE and

'CM

denote

the tax rates applying to the firm's use of intermediate

inputs, and PEDJ and PEFj (pMo and PMF) are the pre-tax prices of domestic and

For convenience, we assume that the accelerated depreciation schedule can be
approximated by a schedule involving constant exponential tax depreciation.

43

foreign energy (materials) inputs of type 1
The following accounting or cash-flow identity links the firm's sources and uses

of revenues:

it+BN+VN=DJV÷IEXP

12)

The left-hand side is the firm's source of revenues: profits, new debt issue (BN) and
new share issues (VN) .

The uses of revenues on the right-hand side are investment
Negative share issues are

expenditure (1EXP) and dividend payments (D!V) .

equivalent to share repurchases. and represent a use rather than source of revenue.

Firms pay dividends equal to a constant fraction, a of profits net of economic
depreciation, and maintain debt equal to a constant fraction, 1, , of the value of the
existing capital stock. Thus:
13)
14)

Dlv, =

a

[it, + (PK, — PK.,I)K,

—

BN, DEBT1 - DEBT, = b(pK,K,,l

-

Investment expenditure is expressed by:

15)
where

1EXP, = (1 —

t is the investment tax credit rate. Of the elements in equation (12) , new

share issues, VN, are the residual, making up the difference between it + BN and DIV

To simplify the exposition, we have not included in equations (10) and (11)

subscripts identifying the given industry for which profits or input costs are calculated.
It may be noted that the intermediate good taxes, tEj and tMJ may differ across
industries using a particular good as well as across intermediate goods.
In equation (11) , for j = 2 the expression PE1 (1 + 'tEl) E,, is short-hand for

(I + 't) E0g + p, (1 + t,) E,1 , where "og' refers to oil and gas and 'sf' refers to

synfuels. Since oil&gas and synfuels are perfect substitutes, it As always the case that
= p,1 (1
gross-of-tax costs of these fuels to the firm are the same: that is, Pog (1 +
+
. However, when 'tog
t,, the net-of-tax prices Pog and p,1 will differ.

44

+ IEXP

.
Arbitrage possibilities compel the firm to offer its stockholders a rate of return

comparable to the rate of interest on alternative assets.6

(1t)DIV,+(l—t)(V,.t—V,—VN,)=(I—rb)i,V,

16)

The parameters

, and t6 are the personal tax rates on dividend income (equity).

capital gains, and interest income (bonds), respectively. The return to stockholders

consists of the current after-tax dividend plus the after-tax capital gain (accrued or
realized) on the equity value (V) of the firm net of the value of new share issues. This
return must be comparable to the after-tax return from an investment of the same value

at the market rate of interest, I

The firm's decision problem is completed by the equation of motion for the
capital stock:
K

17)

, = (I — )K, + I,

Capital is augmented by net investment. Cumulative extraction is augmented by the level

of current output (or extraction). In the oil&gas industry, the equation of motion (9)
also applies.

B. Household Behavior
Consumption, labor supply, and saving result from the decisions of an infinitely-

lived representative household maximizing its intertemporal utility with perfect foresight.

The nested structure of the household's utility function is indicated in Table A2. In year

the household chooses a path of "full consumption' C to maximize

For a discussion of alternative specifications, see Poterba and Summers (1985),

This abstracts from uncertainty and, therefore, risk. It is possible to modify the
arbitrage equation to account for risk differentials across assets. See Goulder (1989).
45

U, =

18)

j (1

-'

+

a

i

C,

where co is the subjective rate of time preference and a is the intertemporal elasticity
of substitution in full consumption. C is a CES composite of consumption of goods and

services C and leisure I

I-- -—l
,' j
u-I

C, = [C,

19)

"

I

u-Il

+ cç

is the elasticity of substitution between goods and leisure; ci is an intensity
parameter for leisure.

The variable C in (25) is a Cobb-Douglas aggregate of 17 composite consumer
goods:
17

C, =

20)

where the (j =1

fl C,
i=1

17) are parameteis. The 17 types of consumer goods identifled

in the model are shown in Table 2 of the main text.

Consumer goods are produced domestically and abroad.

consumer good C, i = I

17,

Each composite

is a CES aggregate of a domestic and foreign

consumer good of a given type:
21)

C=y

[CDP + (1 -

In the above equation. CD and CF denote the household's consumption of
domestically produced and foreign made consumer good of a given type at a given point

in time. For simplicity, we have omitted subscripts designating the type of consumer

46

good and the time period.

The household maximizes utility subject to the intertemporal budget constraint
given by the following condition governing the change in financial wealth, WK
22)

WK, - WK =

+ YL,

+

GT,

- p,C,

In the above equation, 7 is the average after-tax return on the household's portfolio of

financial capital, YL is after-tax labor income, GT is transfer income, and j5 is the
price index representing the cost to the household of a unit of the consumption composite,

C.
C. Government Behavior
A single government sector approximates government activities at all levels -federal, state, and local. The main activities of the government sector arc purchasing

goods and services (both non-durable and durable), to transfemng incomes, and to raising

revenue through taxes or bond issue.

1. Components of Government Expenditure
Government expenditure, G , divides into nominal purchases of nondurable goods

and services (GP) , nominal government investment (Gfl , and nominal transfers (Gfl:
23)

G,=GP,+Gl,+GT,
In the reference case, the paths of real GP , Gi, and GT all are specified as

growing at the steady-state real growth rate, g . In simulating policy changes we fix the

paths of GP , CI , and GT so that the paths of real government purchases, investment

47

and transfers are the same as in corresponding years of the reference case. Thus, the
expenditure side of the government ledger is largely kept unchanged across simulaUons.

This procedure is expressed by:

I p,

=

GP/

p,

=

GII p'o,

(24a)

GP

(24b)

GI' I

(24c)

GT I Pi.1 = GTI PT.I

The superscripts P and R denote policy change arid reference case magnitudes, while
PGP ' Pai'

and PGT are price indices for GP , GI , and GT . The price index for

government investment, PGI' is the purchase price of the representative capital good. The

price index for transfers, PGT' is the consumer price index. The index for government

purchases, p,

is defined below.

2. Allocation of Government Purchases
GP divides into purchases of particular outputs of the 13 domestic industries
according to fixed expenditure shares:
25)

tiQP =

i= /

GPXp1

/3

GPX, and p are the quantity demanded and price of output from industry i .

and ti0,

is the corresponding expenditure share. The ideal price index for government purchases.

pQ, is given by:
26)

pQ =

48

II. Parameter Values7
A. Elasticities of Substitution in Production
CJ

;'

g1-g

1. Agric. & Non-coal
Mining

ag2

E

0M

L-K

E-M

E cornponents

M cornponents

dom-foreign
inputs

0.7

0.68

0.7

1.45

0.6

2.31

2. Coal Mining

0.7

0.80

0.7

1.08

0.6

1.14

3. Oil & Gas Extraction

0.7

0.82

0.7

1.04

0.6

(infinite)

4. Synthetic Fuels

0.7

0.82

0.7

1.04

0.6

(not traded)

5. Petroleum Refining

0.7

0.74

0.7

1.04

0.6

2.21

6. Electric Utilities

0.7

0.81

0.7

0.97

0.6

1.0

7. Gas Utilities

0.7

0.96

0.7

1.04

0.6

1.0

8. Construction

0.7

0.95

0.7

1.04

0.6

1.0

9. Metals & Machinery

0.7

0.91

0.7

1.21

0.6

2.74

10. Motor Vehicles

0.7

0.80

0.7

1.04

0.6

1.14

11. Misc. Manufacturing

0.7

0.94

0.7

1.08

0.6

2.74

12. Services (except
housing)

0.7

0.98

0.7

1.07

0.6

1.0

13. Housing Services

0.7

0.80

0.7

1.81

0.6

(not traded)

Parameter:

Substitution
margin:

Producing Industry

B. Parameters of Stock Effect Function in Oil and Gas Industry
Parameter:

Z0

z

Complete data documentation is provided in Cruz and Goulder (1992).
49

Value:

0

450

1.27

2.0

Note: The stock effect function is 2arameterized so that y1 approaches 0 as Z approaches Z
(see equation (8)). The value of Z is 450 billion barrels (about_IOU times the 1990 production

of oil and gas, where gas is measured in barrel-equivalents.) Z is based on estimates from
Masters el at. (1987). Investment in new oil and gas capital ceases to be profitable before reserves
are depleted: the values of e1 and e, imply that, in the baseline scenario, oil and gas investment
becomes zero in the year 2031

C. Utility Function Parameters
v

Parameter:
Value:

0.007

0.5

50

0.69

0.84

Table 1

Sites of Distortions Directly Generated by Energy and Income Taxes

Personal

Corporate

Income Tax Income Tax
Increase

Increase

Btu

Tax

Consumer
Gasoline
Tax
Increase

FACTOR MARKETS
Labor-Leisure
Choice

X

Intertemporal
Choice

X

X
X

X

X

PRODUCT MARKETS
Intermediate
Input Choice

Consumer
Good Choice

X

x

Figure 1

Are "Small" Energy Taxes Guaranteed To Confer Efficiency Gains?

'disc
f

D
Q0

c?cAoMtIt

Table 2

Industry and Consumer Good Categories

Industries

1.

Agriculture and Non-Coal Mining

2.

Coal Mining
Crude Petroleum and Natural Gas
Synthetic Fuels

3.

4.
5.

6.
7.
8.

9.
10.
11.
12.

13.

Petroleum Refining
Electric Utilities
Gas Utilities
Construction
Metals and Machinery
Motor Vehicles
Miscellaneous Manufacturing
Services (except housing)
I-lousing Services

Consumer Goods

1.

Food

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Alcohol

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

Motor Vehicles

15.
16.
17.

Tobacco

Utilities
Housing Services
Furnishings
Appliances
Clothing and Jewelry
Transportation

Services (except financial)
Financial Services
Recreation. Reading. & Misc.
Nondurable, Non-Food Household
Expenditure
Gasoline and Other Fuels
Education
Health

Table 3

Tax Rates under Energy and Income Tax Policies

Reference
Case

Blu
Tax

Gasoline
Tax
Increase

Personal
Income

Tax
Increase

Corporate
Tax
Increase

Tax Rate per Million
Bros of Fuels

0

.4500

0

0

0

Tax Rate per Gallon
of Gasoline

2875

.2875

.6925

.2875

.2875

Marginal Rate on
Labor Income

.23(X)

.23(X)

.23CX)

.2388

.23(X)

Marginal Rate on
Dividend and
Interest Income

.2290

.2290

.2290

.2328

.229))

Marginal Rate on
Capital Gains Income

.0572

.0572

.0572

.0582

.0572

Marginal Rate on
Corporate Profits

.3850

.3850

.3850

.3850

.3946

Note:

Policies are scaled to imply the same gross revenue impact. Income tax rates represent nominal
dollars collected per dollar of nominal income. Energy tax rates express real (1990) dollars collected
per energy or physical unit (Btu's, gallons).

Figure 2

Aggregate Effects of Energy and Income Tax Policies
(percentage cha1lges from reference case)

400
.01

—

o

(a)
ReaJ

GNP

.02

— aT

.025

03
.035

a

02

0l

47

(b)

a

9
a

a

99

:-

_

42

ReaJ

Consumption

43
44

S.-.—.—

45

4'

4?

(c)
Real
Private
Fixed
Investment

00

43

44
40

4.0

.07

-

00

a

•

9
a

a

a
a

a

Table 4

Welfare Impacts

Tax Replacement Method

Reduction in

Lump-Sum Reduction
In Personal Taxes

Marginal Rates of
Personal Income Tax

Policy:

Btu Tax

-.394

Gasoline Tax Increase

-.334

Raised Personal Income
Tax Rates

-.161

Raised Corporate Tax
Rates

-.156

-.176

.006

Note: The welfare effect is expressed as the equivalent variaon as a percentage of lifetime
resources (present value of capital and labor income) under the status quo. These welfare
assessments disregard welfare benefits from reduced environmental damages.

Tablc 5

Significance of Alternative Tax Bases

9 Change GNP

2020

2000
(year 7)

(year 27)

Welfare
Change*

Policy:

1.

Bru Tax

-0.215

-0.35 1

-0.394

2.

Broad Output Tax

-0.200

-0.3 14

-0.247

3.

Gasoline Tax Increase

-0.177

-0.194

-0.334

4.

Broad Consumption Tax

-0.138

-0.177

-0.084

5.

Personal Income Tax
Increase

-0.138

-0.265

-0.161

* The measure of welfare change is the equivalent variation as a percentage of lifetime income.

Table 6

The "Excess" Costs of Energy Taxes: A Decomposition

Contribution
To Overall
Excess Cost

1.

Btu Tax

-0.233

a. intermediate goods base rather
than final goods base

-0.086

377c

-0.147

63SF

b.

2.

Excess Cost

narrow rather than broad
intermediate goods base

Gasoline Tax Encrease

-0.173

a. consumption goods base rather
than final goods base

+0.077

-449k

b. narrow rather than broad
consumption goods base

-0.250

l449

ote:
The overall excess cost (lines 1 and 2) is the difference in the welfare impacl of the energy tax in question
and a personal tax increase of equal revenue yield.

The decomposition of overall excess cost is based on the following comparisons:

Line Ia: Difference in welfare cost of broad-based output tax and the income tax increase.
Line ib: Difference between excess costs of line 1 and line la.
Line 2a: Difference in welfare cost of broad-based consumption lax and the income tax increase.
Line 21,: Difference between excess costs of line 2 and line 2a.

Notes:

4.

3.

2.

0.375
0.497

0.454
0.475

0.412
0.479

0.457

0.383
0.408

0.385
1)428

0.382
0.403

0.395

0.181
0.191

0.162
0.231

0.167
0.204

0.185

Cons-Level Pera. Income
Tax Increase

Gasoline Tax

0.194
0.306

0.292
0.244

0.202
0.217

0.223
0.197

0.215
0.199

0.210

0.272

0.245
0.275

Cons.-Level
Gasoline Tax

Btu Tax

Excess Cost per Dollar of Revenue

Figures in columns 1-3 are the equivalent variation divided by the present value of gross tax revenues from the policy
change. Figures in the last two columns arc the difference in results for the energy tax in question (from column I or 2)
and the personal income tax increase (column 3). Central case values for intenemporal elasticitity of substitution and
labor-leisure substitution elasticity are 0.5 and 0.69, respectively. The value of 0.69 for the labor-leisure substitution
parameter implies a compensated elasticity of labor supply of 0.5 a! initial baseline prices.

Energy Demand Elasticities
a. low (.75 x central case values)
b. high (1.5 x central case values)

a. low (.66

x central case value)
h. high (1.33 x central case value)

Elasticity

Labor-leisure Substitution

Intertemporal Elasticity of Substitution
in Consumption
a. low (.5 x central case value)
h. high (1.5 x central case value)

Central Case

I3tu Tax

Welfare Cost per Dollar of Revenue

Table7
SensitivityAnalysis

-0.43

-0.09
-0.32

Metals and Machinery

9.

*

Housing

13.

The

Services

-0.56 -0.62

-0.25
-0.27
-0.28
-0.27

-0.19
-0.18
-0.15
-0.15
0.00

-0.28
0.37

-0.08

-0.01

not

0.06

-0.12

-0.25

-0.13

-0.17

-0.38

-0.10 -0.22

0.03

-0.04

-0.11

-0.07

-0.13

-0.14

-0.11

-0.15

-2.20

0.06

-0.63

2020

significant prior to 2020.

-0.15 -0.30

-0.07

-0.32

-0.42

-0.33

-0.31

-0.09

-0.24 -0.26

0.09

-0.24

-0.05

-0.08

-0.01

-0.33

-0.11

-0.02

-0.29

-0.10

-0.06

0.03

-0.07

-0.35

-0.03

-0.18

2000

-0.14

-0.25

-1.55

-0.17

0.20

-0.41

-0.16

2020

-0.12

2000

Corporate
Tax Increase

-6.76

-0.99

—0.30

-0.12

2020

Personal
Tax Increase

is not included here becausesynfuels production is

(except housing)

synfuels industry

Total

Services

12.

11. Misc. Manufacturing

0.00

-0.30

-0.38

-0.43

0.06

-0.48

-0.37

Construction

8.

0.04

-0.25

-0.41

-2.65

Gas Utilities

7.

-0.32

0.02

-2.71

Electric Utilities

6.

Vehicles

0.08

-3.31

—2.47

Petroleum Refining

5.

10. Motor

-6.15

-6.09

-8.25

-0.11

-3.98

-3.22

Gas

Crude Petr. &

3.

Nat.

Coal Mining

2.

-0.33

Agriculture

-0.05

2000

-0.26

2020

Tax Increase

Gasoline

-10.21 -11.49

-0.09

2000

Output*

changes from reference case)

Btu Tax

(percentage

1.

Industry:

Table 8

Effects on Industry

=

suspended particles;
= carbon monoxide;

CO

total

compounds;

TSP

NOX

41.81

58.19

0.02
0.04
0.82
9.80
37.93
2.60
0.12
0.83
0.07
3.09
2.86
0.01

55.29

44.71

0.00

2.76

28.45

1.02

0.37

4.26

0.94
0.00
2.83
3.73
0.28
0.06

21564.7

VOC

W

90.57

9.43

0.00
0.00
0.04
0.99
0.60
0.11
0.07
2.75
0.00
4.74
0.14
0.00

68495.2

Co
PMIO

64.52

35.48

0.02
0.00
28.15
0.00
3.38
0.20
0.00

0.91

0.08

0.01

2.72
0.00

66.73

33.27

15.08
3.77
0.02
0.41
1.78
0.07
0.00
3.08
0.00
8.84
0.21
0.00

7731.2 10475.2

Pb

SOX = sulphur oxides; NOT = nitrous oxides;
= volatile organic
Pb = lead; P1410 = particulate matter; C02 carbon dioxide

6.06

93.94

0.00

9.11
5.91

0.03
0.08
0.17
4.65
67.75
0.51
0.04
5.58
0.10

25247.1 22327.4

SOX

0.00

100.00'

0.07
0.09
3.72
39.46
29.17
11.77
0.53
0.97
0.19
4.37
5.89
0.02

1671.7

C02

Notes:
I.
Units are metric tons for lead, millions of metric tons for cabon dioxide, and thousands of metric tons for other
pollutants.
2.
The synfuels industry is not shown because synfuels production does not begin until 2015.
3.
C'02 emissions were allocated based on the emissions content of
fossil fuel inputs.
Hence, no emissions are
attributed to residential and transportation uses of derivative (refined) fuels.

Key:

54.21

45.79

all

industries

18.23
4.48
0.05
0.72
5.65
0.15
0.01
4.49
0.02
10.93
1.07
0.00

Agriculture
Coal Mining
Crude Petr. and Nat. Gas
Petroleum Refining
Electric Utilities
Gas Utilities
Construction
Metals and Machinery
Motor Vehicles
Misc. Manufacturing
Services
Housing Services

Percentage Contributions from Other
Sources (residential, mobile):

—-

8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

6.
7.

2.
3.
5.

1.

Percentage Contributions from Industrial
and Commercial Stationary Sources2:

8851.4

TSP

9: Industry Contributions to Bas.lin. flnissions
(results for year 2000 in the reference case)

Total Emissions from All Sources'

TaM.

Key:

-.03

-.08

-.05
-.04
-.05

-.12

-.12
-.12

-1.35

-15.71
-6.69

-11.64
-3.17
-8.49

NOX

—.08

-.10
-.02

-.11
-.11
-.11

-7.85

-3.08

-17.11

-1.41
-3.43
-2.10

VOC

-.03
-.02
-.03

-.04
-.11
-.08

-.34

-17.19
-10.93

-2.42

-3.44

-.67

CO

-.07

-.04

-.05

-.10
.00

-.14
-.12

—.10

-3.02

-.15
—6.68

-1.38
-1.51
-1.44

PMIO

-.08

-.10
-.09
-.10

-.17

-20.47
-6.37

-4.06
-1.55

-.44

Pb

Year 2000

.00

-.07

.00

-.07

-.13
.00
-.13

—2.62

-2.62

-8.77

.00

-8.77

C02

TSP = total suspended particles; SOX = sulphur oxides; NOX = nitrous oxides; VOC = volatile
organic compounds; CO = carbon monoxide; Pb = lead; PM1O = particulate matter; C02 = carbon
dioxide

Total:

-.03
-.04

Corporate Income Tax Increase
-.09
Stationary Sources:
Mobile Sources:
-.02

-.34
-13.26
-.90

-2.52
-2.72
-2.53

-.05
-.12
-.05

-3.65

-.18
-17.80

-3.56
-2.37

-2.08

SOX

changes from baseline)

Table IOa
and Income Tax Policies --

-.09
-.11
-.10

Personal Income Tax Increase
Stationary Sources:
Mobile Sources:
Total:

Gasoline Tax Increase
Stationary Sources:
Mobile Sources:
Total:

Btu Tax
Stationary Sources:
Mobile Sources:
Total:

TSP

(percentage

Emissions Effects of Energy

Key:

-.23

-.06
-.23
-.07

.31

-.18
-.27

- .21

-

-.30
-.33

-.09

-1.15
-13.60
-5.64

-12.05
-3.00
-8.79

NOX

-.08
-.32

—.76

-.32
-11.29

-2.26
-2.27

-2.56

SOX

- .27

-.29
-.23

-.31

-.32

-.30

-2.65
-6.71

—14.97

-1.26
-3.27
-1.92

VOC

-.18

.24

- 07
-.25

-

-.33

-.08

-.33
-9.69

-i5.05

-.66
-3.28
-2.33

Co

-.15

-.23

- 12

-.14
-.32
-.19

-.18
-18.38
-5.25

-.50
-3.93
-1.45

Pb

Year 2020

- .21

-.17

-.25

-.25

-.30

-.21

--.17

-5.47
-2.52

-1.62
-1.44
-1.54

PMJ0

-.24
.00
-.24

-.33

-.33
.00

-2.38
.00
-2.38

-8.08
.00
-8.08

C02

dioxide

TSP = total suspended particles; SOX = sulphur oxides; NOX = nitrous oxides; VOC = volatile
organic compounds; CO = carbon monoxide; Pb = lead; PMIO = particulate matter; C02 = carbon

Total:

-.25

- .23

- .23

-.33

-.20

--3.10

-2.40
-3.40
-2.59

TSP

-.19
-15.65

Corporate Income Tax Increase
Stationary Sources:
Mobile Sources:

Personal Income Tax Increase
Stationary Sources:
Mobile Sources:
Total:

Total:

Gasoline Tax Increase
Stationary Sources:
Mobile Sources:

Total:

Stationary Sources:
Mobile Sources:

Btu Tax

Table lOb

Emissions Effects of Energy and Income Tax Policies
(percentage changes from baseline)

5.

4.

3.

B.

1328.8
123.7

-5.91
—0.55

See

text for explanation

of figures.

'Residua1 GNP Loss f(4)-(3)1
of trend GNP
value in 1994 ($ billion)

Annualized Denefit from C02 Reduction
of trend GNP
value in 1994 (3 billion)

-7.52
-5.38

NOX

Btu

0.211

0.20 7
12.65

0.24

0. 004

12.89

0.053

4.15

0.158
8.74

0.211
12.89

37.1
218.5

-0.39
-2.30

PMI 0

0.178
10.85

007

0.001

0.179

1092

Low
C02 Damages

116.5
35.6

-7.36
-2.25

C02

0.138
8.40

0.041

2.52

0.179
10.92

C02 Damages

High

Gasoline Tax

353.0

21. 0

-5.04

232.8
1868.7

-0.30

-9.47

Pb

-1.18

CO

Taxes*

C02 Damages

High

Tax

153.9
1276.7

-0.78
-6.47

VOC

from Energy

CO2 Damages

Low

1540.8
1102.3

-

Benefits

SOX

of Costs and (Some) Benefits

235.0

115.0

-2.90

-1.44

TSP

Costs and

Annualized Excess Cost
% of trend GNP
value in 1994 ($ billion)

Comparisons

1994 Emissions Reductions
Implied by (1)
-- Btu Tax
-- Gasoline Tax

2.

Changes

Average Percentage
Reductions in Emissions
-- Btu Tax
-- Gasoline Tax

Overall Emissions

1.

A.

Table 11:

