                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            SHOULD UABJL1TY BE BASED
                           ON THE HARM TO THE VICTIM
                           OR THE GAIN TO THE INJURER?




                                   A. Mitchell Polinsky
                                      Steven Shavdll




                                 Working Paper No. 4586




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 December, 1993


Polinsky's research was supported by the John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics at
Stanford Law School and by the Program in Law and Economics at Harvard Law School (where
he was a visitor during the 1992-93 academic year). Shavell's research was supported by the
National Science Foundation (grant no. SES-911-1947). We are grateful for comments from
Richard Gruner, Louis Kaplow, and Donald Wittman, and for research assistance from Todd
Cleary, Sham Sao, and Eric Talley. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Law and
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4586
                                                                                 December 1993


                              SHOULD LIABILITY BE BASED
                             ON THE HARM TO THE VICTIM
                             OR THE GAIN TO THE INJURER?


                                          ABSTRACT

       Should the level of liability imposed on an injurer be based on the harm he caused or
instead on the gain he obtained from engaging in the harmful act? The main point of this article
is that there is a strong reason to favor liability based on harm rather than gain when account is
taken of the possibility of legal error. Notably, even a small underestimate of gain can lead an
injurer to commit a harmful act when the harm greatly exceeds his gain, causing a large social
loss. In contrast, a comparable error in the estimate of harm will not lead an injurer to engage
in the harmful act when the harm significantly exceeds his gain. The general superiority of
harm-based liability is shown to hold under the rules of negligence and strict liability and
regardless of whether potential injurers know the error that will be made.



A. Mitchell Polinsky                                       Steven Shavell
Stanford Law School                                        Harvard Law School
Stanford, CA 94305                                         Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                                   and NBER
1. Introdtction

      Should the level of liability imposed on an injurer be based on the harm

he caused or instead on the gain he obtained from his misconduct? For

example, if a person's failure to take a precaution that costs $1,000 results

in a harm of $10,000, should he be liable for the $10,000 harm or the $1,000

that he saved? If a firm violates a regulatory requirement and thereby

increases its profit, should the firm's liability equal the harm caused by the

violation or its additional profit?

      The answer provided by the law to such questions is not uniform in

character. In tort and contract disputes, liability generally is based on the

victim's harm,1 although sometimes the injurer's gain is taken into account

(for example, in determining punitive damages in tort law and restitutionary

damages in contract law2). In criminal law and other governmental

enforcement contexts, liability often depends on harm, but also frequently on

gain (such as for noncompliance with certain environmental and financial

regulations) .


       See, for example, American Jurisprudence (1988, p. 35) ("Generally, a
person who, tortiously or in breach of a contractual obligation, does an act
which has injurious consequences is liable for the damage caused by such
wrongful act." footnote omitted).

     2
       Regarding punitive damages, see, for example, Pacific Mutual Life
Insurance Co. v. Haslip, 499 U.S. 1, 21-22 (1991) (in which the U.S. Supreme
Court endorsed a list of seven factors considered relevant to the size of a
punitive damage award, one of which was "the profitability to the defendant of
the wrongful conduct and the desirability of removing that profit and of
having the defendant also sustain a loss"). Regarding restitutionary damages,
see, for example, Farnsworth (1990, pp. 150-151) ("[T)he object of restitution
is ... the prevention of unjust enrichment. The focus is on the party in
breach rather than on the injured party         The party in breach is required
to disgorge what that party has received in money or services ....").

       Under guidelines promulgated by the United States Sentencing Commission
for individual defendants in criminal cases, courts are required to consider
in determining the amount of a fine "the need for the ... sentei.ce to reflect

                                      -1-
      In this article we evaluate the efficacy of harm-based liability   and

gain-based liability as means of deterring socially undesirable acts -
                                                                         - acts

for which an injurer's gain is less than the victim's harm.4 Either measure

of liability will deter such acts in a legal system in which harm and gain are

correctly assessed. Harm-based liability accomplishes deterrence because the

harm from a socially undesirable act, and therefore the level of liability,

will exceed the injurer's gain. Gain-based liability achieves the same result

by making the injurer disgorge his gain (or a little more).

      We will emphasize, however, that the two approaches differ greatly when

account is taken of errors that the legal system may make in calculating gain

and harm. In particular, gain-based liability will be shown to be seriously

flawed in the presence of legal error because it fails to deter many socially

undesirable acts. Harm-based liability, however, is not as susceptible to

this criticism and therefore generally is superior.

      The problem with gain-based liability is that any underestimation of the

gain will in principle lead an individual to commit an undesirable act, no

matter how great the resulting harm may be. Suppose, for example, that an act


the seriousness of the offense (including the harm or loss to the victim and
the gain to the defendant), . . . See United States Sentencing Commission
(1987, p. 5.15). Sentences for organizational defendants also take both harm
and gain into account. Under the RICO (Racketeering Influenced and Corrupt
Organizations) Act, N... a defendant who derives profits or other proceeds
from an offense may be fined not more than twice the gross profits or other
proceeds.N See United States Code, Title 18, Section l963(a)(3). See also
United States Code, Title 42, Section 7420(d)(2) (providing for environmental
noncompliance penalties at least equal to Nthe economic value which a delay in
compliance ... may have for the owner of the source of pollution) and
Securities and Exchange Commission v. Paul A. Bilzerian, et al. • 814 F.Supp.
116. 121 (1993) (an action by the SEC successfully seeking the disgorgement of
profits obtained by defendant Bilzerian through certain securities
transactions).

       We also briefly consider compensation issues in comment (e) in Section
5 below.

                                      -2-
would produce a gain of $1,000 for an individual and that the gain is slightly

underestimated, say it is thought to be $950. Then the individual will be led

to commit the act      -   he would profit by $50 -   - regardless   of the harm, whether

it is $2,000, $20,000, or $200,000. In contrast, under harm-based liability,

the individual is not likely to commit the act when the harm greatly exceeds

his gain of $1,000, because his liability is likely to exceed $1,000 even if

the measurement of harm is subject to substantial error.

      We will show that harm-based liability is superior to gain-based

liability under quite general assumptions about the probability distribution

of legal error and regardless of whether individuals know the magnitude of the

error before deciding whether to engage in the harmful act. Section 2

describes the basic framework of the analysis. Section 3 presents the results

under the negligence rule and Section 4 briefly considers the strict liability

rule. Section 5 contains concluding remarks.5



2. Basic Framework

      Each individual in a population of risk-neutral individuals decides

whether to engage in an act that will result in a harm and a gain with

certainty. Both the harm and the gain vary among individuals. Let

      g —   gain   to an individual if he engages in the act, g > 0;

      h — harm caused if the individuaj. engages in the act, h > 0;


       Wittman (1984, 1985) considers liability based on harm and liability
based on gain, but does not make the point that we emphasize here. His focus
is on which party - - the injurer or the victim - - should decide how much care
the injurer exercises. Parker (1989, pp. 554-563) and Gri.iner (1992, pp. 234-
263) informally discuss harm-based and gain-based liability in the context of
criminal sentencing policy for organizations. In addition, a number of
authors have studied the effects of legal errors on individual behavior under
liability rules, but take for granted that the level of liability is based on
harm. See, for example, Craswell and Calfee (1986).

                                           -3-
                                                           and h is positive for all
and assume that the joint probability density over g

positive g and h. Individuals know their own g and h.

      If the social authority responsible for setting the level of liability
                                                           the values it observes are
makes errors in observing the gain and/or the harm,

assumed to take the forms g +        and h +   rj, where

      -y —   error   in observing the gain;

        —    error   in observing the harm.

These errors have mean zero and are independent of one another.

      An individual will engage in the harmful act if and only if his gain

exceeds his expected liability.6 The latter depends (in ways         described in

Sections 3 and 4 below) on the applicable liability rule and on whether he

knows before he commits the act the errors that the social authority will make

in observing his gain and harm.

      Social welfare is taken to be the sum of the gains less the harms

associated with the subset of individuals who commit harmful acts. In the

first-best outcome, every individual whose gain exceeds harm will engage in

the act, and every individual for whom the reverse is true will refrain from

the act.




3. Analysis Under the Negligence Rule

      Under the negligence rule, an individual is liable if and only if he is

negligent. An individual will be found negligent when his act is judged

 socially undesirable, that is, when his observed gain, g + y, is less than the




      6 We assume for simp].icity that he will not engage in the act if hi? gain
 equals his expected liability.

                                              -4-
observed harm,    h+
         We will consider two alternative measures of liability under the


negligence rule: gain-based liability --        equal to the observed value of the
injurer's gain, g +       -.   and harm-based liability -. equal to the observed

value of the victim's harm, h +      r.   These measures will be compared first when

there are no errors in estimation (when y and i       are identically zero), then
when there are errors and their values are known by individuals before they

decide whether to engage in the harmful act, and finally when there are errors

but their values are not known      by individuals in advance.
         3.1. No Errors

         In this case, an individual will be found negligent if and only if

g < h; liability then will be g under gain-based liability and h under harm-

based    liability.

         Under gain-based liability, an individual will be deterred from engaging

in the act whenever g <    h, for if   he engages in it he will have to surrender

his gain.8 Similarly, under harm-based liability, an individual will be

deterred from engaging in the act whenever g <       h, for if   he engages in it he

will have to pay the harm, which exceeds his gain. Under both measures an

individual will engage in the act whenever g        h since he will not be found

negligent. Thus, if there are no errors in observing gain or harm,          the   two

measures   of liability are equivalent. Moreover, the first-best outcome is



       Although acts that are socially undesirable are described here as
negligent, the reader also could interpret them as criminal or as violations
of regulatory standards.
     8
       Recall that we have assumed for simplicity that an individual will not
engage in the act when he is indifferent. This assumption can be interpreted
as capturing the fact that 11 ability slightly in excess of gain would make the
injurer strictly prefer not to engage in the act.

                                          -5-
achieved.

          3.2. Errors AnticiDated

          We now assume that the social authority makes errors and that

individuals know what the errors are before deciding whether to engage in the

harmful act.

          Suppose first that only the gain is observed with error.9 Then if

g +   i     h, negligence will not be found and the measure of liability will be

irrelevant. Assume, therefore, that g +       y < h,   so negligence will be found.

          Then under harm-based liability, since liability is h, an individual

will engage in the act if and only if g >      h.   Under gain-based liability, an

individual will, engage in the act whenever the gain is underestimated -        - that
is, whenever 'y     < 0.   Relative to the outcome under harm-based liability, this

results in a social loss of h -       g if g < h, and is equivalent to the outcome
under harm-based liability if g        h. If the gain is overestimated, an

individual will be deterred under gain-based liability, as well as under harm-

based liability; the latter result follows because -'       >0   and g +   <h   (the

maintained assumption that negligence will be found) imply that g <        h.
          The preceding discussion shows that when gain alone is observed with

error and     the   error is anticipated, harm-based liability is superior to gain-

based liability. In particular, if gain is underestimated, the gain-based

measure will lead an individual to enage in the harmful act even when his

gain is less than the harm (possibly much less than the harm); but under

harm-based liability, an individual never engages in the act when his gain is

less than the harm.


       Because our principal interest is in errors in estimating the gain, we
will not consider in the text th situation when harm alone is subject to
error. However, this case is discussed in notes 11, 14, 15, and 16 below.

                                           -6-
        Now suppose that both gain and harm are observed with error, when g +                       'y

 h + j, negligence will not be found and the measure of liability will be

irrelevant, so again assume that negligence is found --              that      g + -y <   h +
        If g   g + 'y, an individual will be deterred under both measures of

liability (since g       g +    -y   < h +   ). Conversely,    if g > h +      r,   an individual

will engage in the act under both measures. Only when g +                 'y   < g h + r will
the two measures of liability differ in their effect -             - an   individual will

engage in the act under gain-based liability but not under harm-based

liability.

        The extra inducement to engage in the act under the gain-based measure

may in principle be undesirable or desirable. It will be undesirable if g <

h. This clearly is possible since g +              < g < h < h + rj can occur if            < 0

and>O; andg+<g<h+<hcanoccur if7<0andg-h<<O.
The added incentive to engage in the act will be desirable if g > h. This

also is possible because g +            < h < g < h + q can occur if < h - g < 0 and
        -
            h>0; andh<g+i<g<h+canoccurifh - g<7<Oandfl>
g -   h > 0. Thus, without further assumptions, it is not possible to say which

measure of liability is preferable.

        Notwithstanding      that the two measures       cannot be ranked unambiguously

when both    gain   and harm are observed with error and the errors are

anticipated, there      is   an important     sense in   which harm-based      liability is
superior to    gain-based    liability: Let 'iN be the maximum error that can occur

in observing gain and tlM      be the maximum error that can occur in observing
harm. It can be shown that, for any 'ia, harm-based liability is superior to




                                               -7-
gain-based liability when 'lu is sufficiently low.10 However, the converse is

not true; gain-based liability may be inferior to harm-based liability no

matter how small -    is   (as long as it is positive)." These results are

demonstrated in the appendix.

      The explanation is in essence that even a small error in estimating gain

can cause a large social loss because such an error can lead an individual to

commit a harmful act when his gain is much less than the harm. In contrast, a

small error in estimating harm can cause only a small social loss because an

individual will commit the act only if his gain exceeds the estimate of the

harm, which (by hypothesis) is relatively close to the harm.

      The advantage of harm-based liability can be illustrated by the

following numerical example. Suppose that there are one million individuals

in the population; that the gain from engaging in the harmful act varies

uniformly among them from $1 to $100 (by increments of a dollar); and that the

resulting harm also varies uniformly and independently from $1 to $100 (by

increments of a dollar). Then the level of social welfare in the first-best

outcome - -   equivalently,   the outcome when there are no errors in observing

gain or harm --    can be calculated to be $l6.665 million. Suppose the errors,

both positive and negative, in observing gain and harm are uniformly

distributed (by increments of a dollar) from zero to some upper bound - -




       Note that this result implies that harm-based liability is superior to
gain-based liability when the gain alone is subject to error, for then 'j — 0.

        In the special case in which only the estimation of harm is subject to
error, gain-based liability and harm-based liability are equivalent: both
result in deterrence whenever negligence is found (for g < h + , implies that
an individual will not engage in the act regardless of whether he pays g or
h + ,). This   does not contradict the result stated in the text, since when
                                    — 0.
harm alone is subject to error,

                                         -8-
for gain and y          for   harm.12 If y1 —         $1. so that both gain and harm are

observed with only a small error, social welfare falls 32% under gain-based

liability, to $ll.270 million, but less than 1% under harm-based liability, to

$l&.658 million. Holding -y,, (the maximum error in observing gain) at $1 but

raising r (the maximum error in observing harm) to $25 does not significantly

affect this result; social welfare then is $lO.795 million under gain-based

liability (a 35% reduction from the first-best level) and $15.948 million

under harm-based liability (a 4% reduction). In other words, even when the

errors with respect to harm are large and the errors with respect to gain are

small, harm-based liability is strongly preferred to gain-based liability.

      3.3. Errors Not Anticirated

      In this case, we assume that individuals do not know what the social

authority's errors will be when deciding whether to engage in the harmful act;

they only know the distributions of the error terms.

      With this information, an individual can compute the probability that he

will be found negligent if he engages in the act --             that   is, the probability

that g + -y   <   h +     given his g and h. Let p(g, h) represent this probability.

If p(g, h) is zero, the measure of liability is irrelevant, so we will

consider only g and h such that p(g, h) is positive.

      An individual also can calculate the probability distribution of the

level of liability if there is a finding of negligence, tat Eg(g, h) denote

the expected value of the individual's liability under the gain-based measure,

conditional on negligence being found; and let Eh(g, h) be the corresponding




     12 We assume that the maximum possible error is reduced whenever, given
the true value of the injurer's gain and the victim's harm, the observed
values of gain or harm otherwise would be less than $1 or greater than $100.

                                                -9-
expected value under the harm-based measure)3

         Since g + -y < h +      whenever negligence is found, it follows that

Eg(g, h) < Eh(g, h), so that p(g, h)Eg(g, h) < p(g, h)Eh(g, h). In other

words, the individual's expected liability is lower under the gain-based

measure. Consequently, if g < p(g, h)Eg(g, h), the individual will be

deterred from engaging in the harmful act under both measures of liability;

and if g > p(g, h)Eh(g, h), he will engage in the act under both. The

measures differ only if p(g, h)Eg(g, h) < g < p(g, h)Eh(g, h)
                                                                        -   in which   case

an individual will engage in the act under gain-based liability but not under

harm-based liability. But then, engaging in the harmful act lowers social

welfare since g < p(g, h)Eh(g, h)         h; the latter inequality follows from the

fact that if an individual were always found liable, his expected liability

under the harm-based measure would be the unconditional expected value of

h + i,    which    is h.

         We conclude, therefore, that when both gain and harm are observed with

error and the errors are not anticipated, harm-based liability issuperior to

gain-based liability)4 Note that the present argument favoring harm-based

liability is stronger, since it is unambiguous,         than   the argument when errors

are anticipated. In both cases, the problem with gain-based liability is that

it provides an added inducement to engage in the harmful act when an

individual's gain is less than the ham.




          In other words, Eg(g, h) equals the expected value of g + y
conditional    on g + -i < h + i; and Eh(g, h) equals the expected value of h + r
conditional       on g + -y   < h + .
     14 This result implies that in the special cases in which gain alone or

harm alone is estimated with error, harm-based liability is superior to gain-
based liability.
                                           -   10   -
4. AnalYsis Under the Strict Liability Rule

     Under the rule of strict liability, an individual is liable whenever he

causes harm (regardless of whether he is negligent). We will now compare the

gain-based measure of liability to the harm-based measure under this rule in

the three cases discussed in Section 3.

      4.1. No Errors

      In this case, if liability is set equal to h, an individual will engage

in the harmful act if and only if g >      h, and the first-best outcome will be
achieved. If liability is set equal to g, an individual will be deterred from

engaging in the act regardless of g and h. This outcome is undesirable

whenever g >   h.   Thus, if there are no errors in observing gain or harm, harm-

based liability is superior to gain-based liability.

      4.2. Errors Anticjpated

         Suppose first that only the gain is observed with error. Then under

harm-based liability, individuals will engage in the harmful act if and only

if g >   h, again resulting in the first-best outcome. Under gain-based
liability, if gain is underestimated, an individual will engage in the harmful

act regardless of h. This results in a social loss of h -            g if g <   h.
Alternatively, if gain is overestimated, the individual will be deterred

regardless of h, resulting in a social loss •of g -     h   if g >   h.   Thus, when

only gain is observed with error and the error is anticipated, harm-based

liability is superior to gain-based liability.

         Although this is the same conclusion that was reached under the

negligence rule when gain alone is observed incorrectly, the explanation

differs somewhat. There the Inefficiency of gain-based liability was that it

le many individuals to engage in the harmful act then their gain was less


                                       -   11   -
than harm. That problem remains under strict liability. In addition, gain-

bas.d liability now deters many individuals whose gain exceeds harm.

      Next suppose that both gain and harm are observed with error. Under the

harm-based measure, some individuals whose gain is less than harm                  will    engage

in the act --   those for whom h +   v   < g < h        --   and some individuals whose gain

exceeds harm will not engage in the act --              those for whom h < g < h +

Likewise,   under the gain-based measure, some individuals whose gain is less

than harm will engage in the act --       those for whom g +            y < g < h -_   and some

individuals whose gain exceeds harm will not engage in the act - -                those    for

whom h < g < g + -y.   Hence, as was the case under the negligence rule, either

harm-based or gain-based liability could in principle be superior.

      But again, although the two measures cannot be ranked unambiguously when

both gain and   harm are   observed with error and            the   errors are anticipated,

harm-based liability is superior to gain-based liability in the previously

described sense. Specifically, harm-based liability is preferable when the

maximum error with respect to harm,       t, is         below a threshold, but gain-based

liability is not necessarily superior to harm-based liability even if the

maximum error with respect to gain, 1u,            is   small.15

      4.3. Errors Not Anticipated

      In this case, an individual's expected liability under the harm-based

measure is h, since the error, ,, has mean zero. Therefore, an individual

will engage in the harmful act if and only if g >               h,    and the first-best

outcome will be achieved. Under the gain-based measure, the individual's

expected liability is g since the error, y, has mean zero, and so he will be


       In the special case in which only the estimation of harm is subject to
error, it is readily shown that harm-based liability is superior to gain-based
liability if rj   is
                   sufficiently low.

                                          -   12    -
deterred from engaging in the act regardless of g and h. This outcome is

undesirable whenever g > h. Thus, when errors are not anticipated, harm-based

liability is superior to gain-based liability.16



5.   Concluding Remarks
       (a)   As we noted in the introduction, in practice liability sometimes

depends on gains. This might be because an injurer's gain is easier to

calculate than the victim's harm. For example, the amount of money saved by

not installing pollution control equipment may be more readily ascertainable

than the harm suffered by victims of pollution. But it could be a mistake

nonetheless to base liability on the injurer's gain. For as we have seen, if

the gain is underestimated - -   the   cost of controlling pollution might be

greater than the enforcement authority calculates -     - substantial harm   can

occur. As a general policy, it may be better to base liability on a victim's

harm even though the harts can only be approximated, because if the harm is

great in relation to the gain, the harmful act is likely to be deterred.

       (b) Although our focus has been on comparing measures of liability

under the negligence rule, it is worth repeating here why the gain-based

measure is inferior to the harm-based measure under the strict liability rule:

the gain-based measure not only would lead many individuals to engage in the

harmful act when their gains are far less than harm, it also would deter many

individuals whose gains far exceed harm. In other words, under the strict

liability rule, the gain-based measure also would result in a chilling effect

on socially desirable behavior. It therefore is not surprising that          the gain-




     16 This result also holds in the special cases in which gain alone or
harm alone is estimated with error.
                                         -   13   -
based measure does not appear to be used under that rule.

       (c) In our model we assumed that harm occurs with certainty if an

individual engages in an act. In many contexts, however, harm occurs oniy

with a probability. Then harm-based liability is superior to gain-based

liability even in the absence of errors in observing harm and gain: Under

gain-based liability, an individual will not be deterred from engaging in a

socially undesirable act because he will have to disgorge his gain only with a

probability (when harm occurs). Under harm-based liability, however, he will

be deterred. For example, suppose that an act results in a gain of $100 and

creates a fifty percent chance of a harm of $500. Since the expected harm is

$250, the act is socially undesirable. Under gain-based liability, the

individual's expected liability is fifty percent of $100, or $50 -- which will

not deter him - -    whereas under harm-based liability, his expected liability is

$250 - -   which   will deter him.

       (d) We did not consider victims' incentives to avoid harm in our

analysis. Under the negligence rule, this factor favors gain-based liability

because, whenever negligence is found, the resulting level of liability will

be lower than under harm-based liability, which will induce victims to take

more care because they will have more to lose. Under the strict liability

rule, the implication of this factor is ambiguous because the gain-based

measure may be greater than or less than the harm-based measure. In any case,

the importance of this issue is limited by the fact that the law generally

circumscribes victims' ability to collect damages when they have not made

reasonable efforts to avoid harm.

      (e) Another factor omitted from the analysis is risk aversion and

compensation. This consideration favors harm-based liability if victims are


                                        -   14   -
more risk-averse than injurers (because harm-based liability, by definition,

attempts to make victims whole) and gain-based liability in the reverse

case (because, by removing an injurer's gain, gain-based liability keeps the

injurer's utility stable). However, the relevance of risk aversion is

attenuated by the general ability of parties to purchase insurance.

      (f) Finally, we did not take into account the costs of imposing monetary

sanctions. Such costs often are substantial. For example, in non-auto tort

litigation, nearly a dollar of legal fees and related expenses is incurred for

every dollar of liability borne by the defendant.17 The existence of such

costs makes lower levels of liability more appealing, other things being

equal. This suggests that a modified form of gain-based liability might be

superior to harm-based liability under the negligence rule. Specifically,

suppose that the level of liability is set equal to the injurer's gain plus an

additional amount to ensure that, even if the gain is underestimated,

deterrence will occur with a high probability. By design, this variation of

gain-based liability will not suffer significantly from the problem of

underdeterrence that characterizes the gain-based measure we analyzed.

Moreover, presuming that the resulting level of liability is less than harm,

this alternative will generate lower administrative costs than harm-based

liability.




     17
          See   Hensler, Vaiana, Kakalik, and Peterson (1987, pp. 25-29).

                                           15 -
Avtendlx

      The appendix proves the results stated in subsection 3.2 regarding the

sense in which harm-based liability is superior to gain-based liability when

both gain and harm are observed with error and the errors are anticipated.

      Recall that          is   the maximum error that can occur in observing gain and

   is the maximum error that can occur in observing harm.

      It was shown in subsection 3.2 that when only gain is observed with

error --    in   which case M       —   -- harm-based liability is superior to gain-

based liability. It is obvious that as                       -.
                                                                  0, the outcome under harm-based
liability approaches the outcome when t — 0.                        It follows that if i         is
positive but sufficiently small, harm-based liability also dominates gain-

based liability.

      To explain why gain-based liability does not necessarily become superior

to harm-based liability even as             -,       0,   assume that, for all positive -y.,            the
probability that the error regarding gain is negative is at least k for some

positive k. (This is a weak assumption and would be satisfied, for instance,

by any symmetric distribution of error, in which case k —                             .5.)   Then, no

matter how small          is   (provided     is       positive), under gain-based liability

the likelihood of the party engaging in the act is at least k for all g, and

in particular, for g <         h.    It follows that under gain-based liability, the

social loss - -    the   deviation in social welfare from the first-best

outcome -   - is   bounded away from zero when aggregated over the situations in

which negligence is found)' Thus, even if                          is   very small, the social loss


        There also is a social loss in situations in which negligence is not
found. But because the measure of liability is immaterial when negligence is
not found, this social loss is the same under both measures. Hence, only the
social loss in situations in which negligence is found is relevant to the
comparison of the wo measures.

                                                 -    16 -
                                              social loss under hans-based
under gainbased liability may exceed the

liability.

      The analysis under the strict liability rule is essentially the same as

under the negligence rule.




                                     -   17
References

American Jurisprudence. Damazes, Volume 22 (Rochester, New York: The Lawyers

      Co-operative Publishing Co., 2nd Edition, 1988).

Craswell, Richard, and John E. Calfee, "Deterrence and Uncertain Legal

      Standards," Journal of Law. Economics. and Organization, Vol. 2, No. 2

      (Fall 1986), pp. 279-303.

Farnsworth, E. Allan, Farnsworth on Contracts, Volume III (Boston: Little,

      Brown and Company, 1990).

Gruner, Richard S., "Just Punishment and Adequate Deterrence for

      Organizational Misconduct: Scaling Economic Penalties Under the New

      Corporate Sentencing Guidelines," Southern California Law Review, Vol.

      66, No. 1 (November 1992), pp. 225-288.

Hensler, Deborah R.,   Mary E. Vaiana,   James S. Kakalik, and Mark A. Peterson,

      "Trends in Tort Litigation: The Story Behind the Statistics," R-3583-

      ICJ, The Institute for Civil Justice, The Rand Corporation, 1987.

Parker, Jeffrey S., "Criminal Sentencing Policy for Organizations: The

      Unifying Approach of Optimal Penalties," American Criminal Law Review,

      Vol. 26, No. 3 (Winter 1989), pp. 513-604.

United States Sentencing Commission, Sentencing Guidelines and Policy

      Statements, Aoril 13. 1987 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing

      Office, 1987)

Wittaan, Donald, "Liability for Harm or Restitution for Benefit?," Journal of

      Leza). Studies, Vol. 13, No. 1 (January         1984),   pp. 57-80.

Wittman, Donald, "Should Compensation be Based on Costs or Benefits?,"

      International Review of Law and Economics, Vol. 5, No. 2 (December

      1985), pp. 173-185.


                                         -   18   -
</ref_section>
