                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         CONTINENTAL TRADING BLOCS: ARE
                        THEY NATURAL, OR SUPER-NATURAL?




                                       Jeffrey Frankel
                                        Ernesto Stein
                                        Shang-jin Wei




                                  Working Paper No. 4588



                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 December, 1993



This paper draws on an earlier paper written forthe Sixth Inter American Seminar in Economics,
organized by Sebastian Edwards and Gustavo Marquez, sponsored by the National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA, and held in Caracas, Venezuela, May 28-29, 1993. The
authors would like to thank Benjamin Chiu and Xiong Bai Fan for research assistance, and
Warwick McKibbin, Gary Saxonhouse and Alan Winters, for supplying data. They would also
like to thank for support the Center for International and Development Economics Research,
funded at U.C. Berkeley by the Ford Foundation, and the Japan-United States Friendship
Commission, a U.S. government agency. This paper is part of NBER's research program in
International Trade and Investment. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                    NBER Working Paper #4588
                                                                              December 1993


                          CONTINENTAL TRADING BLOCS: ARE
                         THEY NATURAL, OR SUPER-NATURAL?


                                          ABSTRACT

       Using the gravity model, we find evidence of three continental trading blocs: the
Americas, Europe and Pacific Asia. Intra-regional trade exceeds what can be explained by the
proximity of a pair of countries, their sizes and GNP/capitas, and whether they share a common
border or language. We then turn from the econometrics to the economic welfare implications.
Krugman has supplied an argument against a three-bloc world, assuming no transport costs, and
another argument in favor, assuming prohibitively high transportation costs between continents.
We complete the model for the realistic case where intercontinental transport costs are neither
prohibitive nor zero. If transport costs are low, continental Free Trade Areas can reduce welfare.
We call such blocs super-natural. Partial liberalization is better than full liberalization within
regional Preferential Trading Arrangements, despite the GATT's Article 24. The super-natural
zone occurs when the regionalization of trade policy exceeds what is justified by natural factors.
Estimates suggest that trading blocs like the current EC are super-natural.




Jeffrey Fraakel                  Ernesto Stein                      Shang-jin Wei
Department of Economics          Department of Economics            Kennedy School of Government
787 Evans Hall                   787 Evans Hall                     Harvard University
University of California         University of California           79 JFK Street
Berkeley, CA 94720               Berkeley, CA 94720                 Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                                            and NBER
                                                1

              Continental Trading Blocs: Are They Natural, or Super-Natural?


       In the 1980s, the world saw an upsurge of movements toward Free Trade Areas and

other special regional trading arrangements, from the European Community (EC), to the

Association of SouthEast Asian Nations (ASEAN), to the Canadian-U.S. Free Trade

Agreement.'

       In the 1990s, the talk has moved to expansion of the regional Free Trade Agreements

within their respective continents. The North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)

was negotiated between the U.S., Mexican and Canadian governments in 1992. It is

scheduled to go into effect January 1, 1994, provided it is ratified by the three countries.

There are provisions to add other Western Hemisphere countries, which is consistent with the

Enterprise for the Americas Initiative proposed by the U.S. government in June 1990. In

Europe, the talk is of enlarging the EC to a European Economic Space that would include

members of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), and eventually countries from

Central and Eastern Europe. Some are concerned that the world is dividing into three

continental trading blocs, one in the Americas centered on the U.S., one in Europe centered

on the EC, and one in Pacific Asia, centered on Japan.2



1. Introduction

       Table 1 presents statistics on the intra-regional share of trade undertaken by members



          De la Tone and Kelly (1992) and Fieleke (1992) survey the post-war history of
regional trading arrangements.
       2 For example, Thurow (1922, pp.16,65).
                                                2

of these groupings. Intra-regional shares increased during the 1980s in each of the three
major parts of the world: from 23 per cent to 29 per cent in East Asia, from 27 per cent to

29 per cent in the Western Hemisphere, and from 54 per cent to 60 per cent in Europe.

       This paper seeks to examine the question: Is this apparent movement toward

regionalization of the world trading system good or bad? Let us begin by reminding

ourselves that such a question is an exercise in the "second best.' (The first-best, world-

wide free trade, is assumed not possible politically.)

       Since its founding, the GATT has been predicated on the assumption that second-best

is a regime where each member accords others the status of Most-Favored Nation (MFN),

i.e., treats its trading partners equally. The MFN system was seen as an antidote to the

disaster of the l930s, when the world was divided up into trading blocs: a Sterling bloc,

GoldlFranc bloc, Central European bloc, dollar bloc, etc. The GAU incorporated an

important exception to the MFN principle in its Article 24: a subset of members could form

a Free Trade Area (FTA), provided certain conditions were met, including that barriers

within the PTA were removed completely, rather than only partially, and that barriers against

non-members not be raised.

        Arguments for the merits of the MFN-cum-Article 24 system could take either of two

possible tacks. (See Bhagwati, 1992.) First one might try to argue, in a static economic

sense, that the formation of FTA5 under the conditions specified in Article 24 is likely to




         Bhagwati (1992), Deardorff and Stern (1992), and de Melo, Panagariya, and
Rodrik (1993) review the literature.
                                                3

raise economic welfare, and that other deviations from the MEN principle are not.4 Second

one could argue, in a dynamic political economy sense, that FTAs can act as stepping stones,

which help build the political support necessary to negotiate freer trade worldwide.3 In this

paper we examine critically the first of these propositions.

       Paul Krugman has helped to focus the recent debate on whether a global trend toward

the formation of trading blocs would be a good thing or a bad thing. He has, however,

supplied equally clever arguments on both sides. In his first contribution (Krugman, 199la),

he focused on the idea that when individual countries form larger groupings, they are liable

to become more protectionist, and thus to move further from the ideal of world free trade.

The reasoning was that as a group they would set higher tariff levels vis-a-vis the rest of the

world, since they would have more monopoly power to exploit. Groupings were assumed to

set tariffs at a self-maximizing optimal level.6 He showed that world welfare is lower with a

few trading blocs than with the extremes of one or many blocs, and that for specific plausible

parameter values, three turned out to be the worst possible number to have!

       His second contribution, Krugman (l99lb), included a very simple argument that

leads to the conclusion that trading blocs are good, the diametrically opposite conclusion

from the first paper. It is observed that even without the formation of regional free trade



        'Jackson (1993, p.123), for example, has suggested that the goal of the Article 24
exception to the MFN principle is that FTAs would be trade-creating rather than trade-
diverting.
         A good argument for the NAFTA, for example, is that it reinforces politically the
trend within Mexico toward liberalization.
       6
       A later contribution, Krugman (1992), dropped the assumption of optimal or
endogenous tariffs. The conclusions were similar.
                                                4

areas or preferential trading arrangements of any sort, countries trade more with their

neighbors than with countries from which they are far removed, presumably because of

transportation costs. Imagine, in the limit, that transoceanic transportation costs were so high

that all trade took place within continents. Then it must follow from standard trade theory

that removal of trade barriers within each continent, that is, the formation of regional free

trade areas, would be a good thing: this move within each area would represent the first-best

solution of free trade within its own relevant world. Krugman's conclusion is that, to the

extent that trade follows the "natural" lines dictated by proximity, the formation of regional

trading blocs is good. Such natural blocs are contrasted with "unnatural blocs', free trade

agreements between individual countries in different continents, which are less likely to be

welfare-improving.7

        Each of these two arguments is, of course, valid within its own assumptions. One way

to characterize them is as the limiting polar cases of zero inter-continental transportation

costs and infinite inter-continental transportation costs, respectively. The analysis, to be

complete, cries out for a more general model that can handle the intermediate realistic case

where transportation costs between continents are less than infinite, while greater than zero

(and greater than transportation costs within continents).




         In what the Economist called "the shootout at Jackson Hole," Summers (1991)
agreed with Krugman that natural blocs were likely to be beneficial, while Bergsten (1991)
was on the other side. It should be noted that the idea of proximity as a desiderata for
successful FTAs, on the grounds that it would minimize the amount of trade diversion, was
not entirely new with Krugman. (See Balassa 1987, p.44, and Wonnacott and Lutz 1989).
The leading opponent is Bhagwati (1992), whose reaction to reports from Jackson Hole was:
"The prescription is sufficiently strange and hard to defend for me to wonder whether these
distinguished economists truly expressed these views" (footnote 8).
                                                5

       Several questions regarding the desirable rules for preferential trading arrangements

(PTAs) arise. First, is there an economic justification for encouraging or allowing any sort

of exception to the MFN principal? Second, should FTAs be restricted to natural trading

partners, as Krugman (1991b) suggests? This would mean that FTAs could only be formed

among countries that are located in the same part of the world (e.g., the Western

Hemisphere) or perhaps only among neighbors located in the same sub-region (e.g., North

America, which would exclude even an agreement between NAFTA and Chile). Third, is

the rule sensible that technically requires 100 per cent liberalization within a grouping, i.e.,

that allows only FTAs? Or should partial liberalization be allowed, as de facto prevails in

most PTAs? Is there an optimal degree of regionalization that should be encouraged?



       We shall attempt to do several things in this paper. First, we shall measure the extent

to which regionalization is actually taking place, by looking at the magnitude of bilateral

trade flows after one adjusts. by means of the Eravitv model, for such natural determinants of

bilateral trade as GNPs and proximity. In this paper, we draw the boundaries at the level of

large continental blocs (our continents are The Americas, vs. Europe, vs. Pacific Asia, and

perhaps AfricalMideast as a fourth). An alternative place to draw the boundaries, at the

level of sub-continental FTAs consisting of a few members each (e.g., NAFTA,

MERCOSUR, and the Andean Pact), is considered in a companion paper.'

       That the share of intra-regional trade is increasing within a given grouping, as in

Table 1, does not necessarily mean that the members of this grouping are undertaking



         Frankel, Stein and Wei (1993). [The conclusions are similar.]
                                                 6

explicit discriminatory trade policy measures to bring this about. Rapid growth in intra-

regional trade could be the result of natural factors, i.e., rapid growth in per capita GNPs.

Indeed we find that this is the case for East Asia. In Europe and the Americas, on the other

hand, there appears to be a statistically significant role for regional trade policies, even after

correcting for natural determinants.

        Second, we address welfare implications of different possible rules for the formation

of preferential trade groupings. At a theoretical level, we shall attempt to complete the

Krugman model of the welfare implications of trading blocs for the realistic case where

transportation costs between continents are neither so high as to be prohibitive nor so low as

to be the same as costs among neighbors. We consider two applications of the model in

turn.

        We start with continental FTAs. We shall see that it is not only unnatural FITAs that

can leave everyone worse off than under MFN, but that under certain conditions FTAs that

are formed along natural intra-continental lines can do so as well. We call such welfare-

reducing blocs super-natural.° We shall see in simulations that this possibility may obtain,

in particular, when intercontinental transportation costs, while not necessarily as low as

intracontinental costs, are as low as 10 or 20 per cent.

        Next we apply the model to the issue of partial preferential treatment within regional

trade groupings. We find that partial liberalization within a regional trade grouping is better

than 100 per cent liberalization, in contrast to the Article 24 provision. The super-natural

zone, where the regional trading arrangement reduces welfare, occurs for combinations of



         The term was introduced in Frankel (1993).
                                                7

low intercontinental transport costs l high intra-bloc preferences.

       In the final part of the paper, we attempt to get a better idea of which of the

theoretical welfare possibilities is actually most likely in practice by adopting estimates of the

parameters from the 1980-1990 data on bilateral trade that are used in the first part of the

paper. A tentative estimate of the inter-continental parameter, based on the gravity model,

is 20 per cent. Such an estimate, combined with our other simulation parameter values,

would imply that negative returns to regionalization begin to set in as early as the point when

regional preferences reach about 10 per cent.

       Most of our conclusions regarding economic welfare presume worldwide symmetry.

In other words, we look at the consequences of a worldwide regime that allows continental

blocs or regional FTAs to form; the consequences of the unilateral formation of a single bloc

or FTA in one part of the world is not addressed in this paper. It should be noted from the

outset that many of the conclusions are tentative, and that many possible considerations are

omitted from the analysis. For example, we focus only on the static economic effects.



2. Are Continental Trade Blocs Formine?

       Frankel (1993) applied to the trading bloc question the natural framework for studying

bilateral trade, the gravity model. The gravity model says that trade between two countries

is proportionate to the product of their GNPs and inversely related to the distance between

them, by analogy to the formula for gravitational attraction between two bodies. It has a

fairly long history and fits the data remarkably well empirically, though its theoretical
                                                 8


foundations have hitherto been considered limited)°

       Frankel (1993) and Frankel and Wei (1994), looking at the period 1980-1990, found

that: (1) there are indeed intra-regional trade biases in the EC and the Western Hemisphere,

and perhaps in East Asia; but (2) the greatest intra-regional bias was in none of these three,

but in the APEC grouping, which includes the U.S. and Canada with the Pacific countries;

and (3) the bias in the East Asia and Pacific groupings did not increase in the 1980s,

contrary to the impression that many have drawn from intra-regional trade statistics such as

are reported in Table 1.

       Frankel and Wei (1993a, 1993b) extend those results in a number of directions. The

papers consider various econometric extensions of the original gravity model estimation: the

inclusion of pairs of countries that are reported as undertaking zero trade, and a correction

for heteroscedasticity based on the size of the countries. The papers also considered some

economic extensions, such as including factor endowment terms. The results turn out to be

robust to these extensions.

       The earlier results were incapable of distinguishing between regional biases reflecting

discriminatory trade policies, and those that might derive from historical, political, cultural

and linguistic ties. Here we include terms representing pairs of countries that speak a

common language or have other historical ties.




           The results of one extensive early project along these lines were reported in
Tinbergen (1962, Appendix VI, pp.262-293) and Linneman (1967). Three recent empirical
studies are Wang and Winters (1991), Hamilton and Winters (1992), and Havrylyshyn and
Pritchett (1991). Foundations for the gravity model are offered in papers surveyed by
Deardorff (1984, pp.503-06), such as Anderson (1979).
                                                9

2.1 The Gravity Model of Bilateral Trade

        One cannot meaningfully investigate the extent to which regional policy initiatives are

influencing trade patterns without holding constant for natural economic determinants. The

gravity model offers a systematic framework for measuring what patterns of bilateral trade

are normal around the world. A dummy variable can then be added to represent when both

countries in a given pair belong to the same regional grouping. The goal, again, is to see

how much of the high level of trade within each region can be explained by simple economic

factors common to bilateral trade throughout the world, and how much is left over to be

attributed to a special regional effect.

        The dependent variable is trade (exports plus imports), in log form, between pairs of

countries in a given year. We have 63 countries in our data set, so that there are 1,953 data

points (=63x6212) for a given year)1
        The two most important factors in explaining bilateral trade flows are the

geographical distance between the two countries, and their economic size.

        A large part of the apparent bias toward intra-regional trade is certainly due to simple

geographical proximity. Krugman (l991b) suggests that            of it may be due to proximity,

so that the three trading blocs are welfare-improving natural" groupings. Despite the

obvious importance of distance and transportation costs in determining the volume of trade,

empirical studies surprisingly often neglect to measure this factor. Our measure is the log of

distance between the two major cities (usually the capital) of the respective countries. We

also add a dummy "Adjacent' variable to indicate when two countries share a common land


        " The list of countries, and regional groupings, is given in an Appendix.
                                                 10
border.

         Entering GNIPs in product form is empirically well-established in bilateral trade

regressions. It can be justified by the modern theory of trade under imperfect

competition)2 In addition there is reason to believe that GNIP per capita has a positive

effect on trade, for a given size: as countries become more developed, they tend to specialize

more and to trade more.         The equation to be estimated, in its most basic form, is:


(1)
                1og(T1)

+31og (DIST1) + (ADJACENT1) I3 (LANG1) +y (EC) +y (WH) +y3 (E) +Uj

The last five explanatory factors are dummy variables. EC, WH, and EA are three of the

dummy variables we use when testing the effects of membership in a common regional

grouping, standing for European Community, Western Hemisphere, and Fast Asia,

respectively.

          Table 2 reports results that extend from 1965 to 1990. All five standard variables are

highly significant statistically (> 99% level). The results are typical of others we have

found.

          The coefficient on the log of distance is about -.5 or -.6, when the adjacency variable

(which is also highly significant statistically) is included at the same time. This means that



        12 The specification implies that trade between two equal-sized countries (say, of size
.5) will be greater than trade between a large and small country (say, of size .9 and .1).
This property of models with imperfect competition is not a property of the classical
Heckscher-Ohlin theory of comparative advantage. Helpman (1987) and Helpman and
Krugman (1985, section 1.5). We shall see that this is also a property of our theoretical
model in Section 3.
                                                 11
 when the distance between two non-adjacent countries is higher by 1 per cent, the trade

between them falis by about .6 per cent.'3 We checked for possible non-linearity in the

log-distance term, as it could conceivably be the cause of any apparent bias toward intra-

regional trade that is left after controlling linearly for distance, but this did not seem to be an

issue.'4 [We have also tried distance measures that take into account the greater distances

involved in sea voyages around obstacles like the Cape of Good Hope and Cape Horn,

generously supplied by Winters and Wang, with little effect on the results.]

          The coefficient on distance fluctuates some over the earlier observations, but with no

clear trend. Disaggregated results show higher distance effects for manufactures than for

agricultural products or other raw materials.'5 These findings suggest to us that physical

transport costs may not be the most important component of costs associated with distance.

          The estimated coefficient on GNP per capita varies in the .3-.4 range from 1965 to

1980, indicating that richer countries do trade more.'6 The estimated coefficient for the log

of the product of the two countries' GNPs holds steady at about .75, indicating that, though



      ' The estimate is .8 if one does not hold constant for adjacency at the same time
(Frankel, 1993). [Linnemann's estimate for 1959 is also .8 (1966, pp. 82-88).]

          ' The log of distance appears to be sufficient; the level and square of distance add
little.

          ' Reported in Frankel, Stein and Wei (1993).

        16 The coefficient on GDP/capita appears to fall sharply in during the 1980s. This
may be an artifact of the use of the standard measure of countries' GNPs, translated into
dollars at the current exchange rate. We have also tried an estimate for 1991 using PPP-
adjusted GNPs. The coefficient on GNP/capita returns to .35 (with little qualitative change in
the estimates otherwise). Perhaps the use of dollar GNPs, which tends to understate the
importance of poorer countries like China, only has a serious effect on the estimates after
1980.
                                               12

trade increases with size, it increases less-than-proportionately (holding GNP per capita

constant). This presumably reflects the widely-known pattern that small econorñies tend to

be more open to international trade than larger, more diversified, economies.

       Next, we added a dummy variable to represent when both countries of a pair spoke a

common language or had colonial links earlier in the century. We allowed for English,

Spanish, Chinese, Arabic, French, German, Japanese, Dutch, and Portuguese. Two

countries sharing linguistic/colonial links tend to trade roughly 65 per cent more than they

would otherwise [exp(.5)= 1.651. We tested whether some of the major languages were

more important than the others, and found little in the way of significant differences.



2.2 Estimation of trade-bloc effects

       If there were nothing to the notion of trading blocs, then these five basic variables

might soak up most of the explanatory power. There would be little left to attribute to a

dummy variable representing whether two trading partners are both located in the same

region. In this case the level and trend in intra-regional trade would be due solely to the

proximity of the countries, and to their rapid rate of overall economic growth.

       But we found that many of the dummy variables for intra-regional trade are

significant statistically.

        As in earlier results, the coefficient for the East Asian grouping [not including

Australia and New Zealand] is highly significant during the period 1965-1980, although it
                                               13

declines slightly thereafter.17 An estimate like 1.5 for 1990 implies that when two countries

are both located in East Asia, they trade more than four times as much [exp(1.5)—4.5] as

would two otherwise-similar countries.

       The Western Hemisphere bloc first becomes statistically significant in 1980, and

reaches its peak in 1990. The 1990 estimate suggests that when two countries are both in the

Americas, they trade twice as much as otherwise [exp(0.8)=

       As recently as the 1970s, the EC bloc effect was not statistically significant. It

becomes very high in significance and magnitude in 1985, and declines a bit thereafter.'9

The 1990 estimate suggests that if two countries are both located in the European

Community, their bilateral trade is 70 per cent higher than it would otherwise be

[exp(0.51)= 1.67]. EFTA is never significant.2°


        17 In other words, the rapid growth of East Asian economies is in itself sufficient to
explain the increase in the intra-regional trade share evident in Table 1. The finding that
intra-regional trade bias in Asia diminished in the 1980s, rather than increasing as often
assumed, confirms Frankel (1993) and Petri (1993).

       ' Tests on sub-regional blocs suggest that the Western Hemisphere regionalization in
1980 and 1990 is concentrated in the Andean Pact and MERCOSUR groupings. The
NAFTA grouping is not statistically significant (though this is what one would expect, given
the very small number of observations). These results are reported in Frankel, Stein and
Wei (1993).

        ' Why did the EC strengthen so in the early 1980s? One possibility is the accession
of Spain, Portugal and Greece during this period, and of the United Kingdom, Ireland and
Denmark not long before. (For ease of comparison across time, these countries are included
in the definition of the EC grouping throughout the sample.) Another possible contributing
factor, considered in Frankel and Wei (l993b), is the stabilization of exchange rates under
the European Monetary System.
       20 Results for 1991 show an apparent loss of significance for the East Asia and
Western Hemisphere blocs. The 1991 results may be suspect, due to the more limited nature
of the data available as of 1993. Along with various other extensions, we have also tried
including dummy variables that show when one country in a pair belongs to a particular
                                               14

       The gravity model results thus show that statistically significant regional trading

arrangements are indeed springing up in a number of places. The next question is whether

this trend constitutes an undesirable threat to the world trading system.



3. The Theory of Bilateral Trade with Imperfect Substitutes and Transportation Costs

       The remainder of the paper attempts to settle the Krugman vs. Krugman controversy

regarding the desirability of trading blocs, by constructing a more general model that can

handle the intermediate realistic case where transportation costs between continents are less

than infinite, while greater than zero. The ultimate goal is to match the theory up with the

preceding section's empirical estimates of the effects of transportation costs and regional

trading arrangements on the volume of bilateral trade, in order to evaluate the welfare

implications of regionaiization of the world economy. But the match-up attempted in the

final part of this paper can only be regarded as preliminary.



3.1 The Differentiated Products Model

        We work with a model of trade under monopolistic competition due to Krugman

(jggo).21 Our contribution is to extend this model to many countries (and many


grouping, to capture openness/diversion. This coefficient is significantly positive for East
Asia and EC members, indicating openness vis-a-vis the rest of the world. It is slightly
negative for Western Hemisphere countries in the early part of the sample period, indicating
closedness or trade diversion, but turns significantly positive in 1985 and 1990. The
presence of these variables reduces the three estimated bloc effects in most years just
slightly, and restores the Western Hemisphere bloc effect to statistical significance in 1991
[and 1975].
        21
          For the sake of comparability, both the notation and the description of the basic
 model closely follow Krugman (1980).
                                                15
continents), allowing for tariffs and transportation costs, both within continents and between

continents, and to apply it to study the welfare implications of the formation of continental

trading blocs. As often in this literature, the reference to "tariffs" is intended as

shorthand for all government-imposed trade barriers.

       The Krugman (1980) market structure has the property of ruling out strategic

interaction among firms. Goods enter symmetrically into the utility function

                                 U=      C10;        0   <8<1                               (2)


where c is the consumption of the ith variety. [There is a large number of goods being

produced (n), but this number is much smaller than the potential number of goods or

varieties.]

        This utility function results in preference for variety by consumers. The higher the

parameter 0, the lower the love for variety. In the limit of perfect substitutability, 0=1. In

the limit of complete love for variety, consumers care only about the number of varieties

consumed, and not at all about the quantity: 0=0!

        Labor is the only factor of production. The total national supply of labor is L.



          Krugman introduced transport costs into his (two country) model but applied it to a
       22

different purpose: to explore the "home market effect" on trade patterns (the idea that
countries tend to specialize in goods for which the home market is relatively large).

          Deardorff and Stern (1992, p.22-25) question the realism of this set-up. In their
view, the Krugman result that a few large blocks are worse than many small ones can be
attributed to excessive emphasis on the utility of consuming a large variety of goods that may
differ only in the location of production (i.e., brand name). They suggest that classical
theories of comparative advantage would imply that welfare is monotonically increasing in
the number of countries per bloc, and that FTAs among a few dissimilar countries may be
sufficient to attain most of the gains-from-trade to be had.
                                               16
Increasing returns are introduced by assuming a fixed cost and a constant marginal cost in

the production of each of the varieties. We assume that individual consumers maximize their

utility, individual firms maximize their profits, and free entry assures a zero-profit

eguilibrium. Under these simple assumptions, the scale of output of each variety does not

depend on the size of the economy. Rather, it is the number of varieties n that increases

when the size of the economy (L) increases:


                                            = L(1—e)                                         (3)
                                                 a




where a is a parameter representing the fixed costs of setting up production of a new

variety. Notice that in the extreme special case of zero substitutability (0 =0), the bare

minimum (one unit) of each of Lia varieties will be produced, since consumers care only

about the number of varieties available. (Details of this derivation, and of others below, are

given in Stein and Frankel, 1993.)

       To see the gains from international trade, which arise here from the opportunity to

consume a greater variety of goods, we assume that countries have similar tastes and

technologies. If we have two countries of equal size, allowing for unfettered trade will

double the number of available varieties in each country and thus raise utility.



3.2 Introduction of Transport Costs and Tariffs

       We will think of the world as being divided into a number of continents (C), each of

them equidistant from one another. Each of these continents is composed of a number of
                                               17

countries (N). The transportation system we assume within each continent is a hub-and-spoke

network. In each continent there is a hub, through which all trade involving that continent

must pass. Each hub has N spokes, all assumed of equal length, connecting it to the N

countries in the continent. Transport costs will be assumed, following Krugman (1980), to be

of Samuelson's iceberg type, which means that only a fraction of the good shipped arrives;

the rest is lost along the way.

       The cost of transport through two spokes will be represented as a, while that of

transport from hub to hub (across the ocean), is given by b, where 0a,b 1. Trade

involving two countries on the same continent will have to be transported from the exporting

country to the hub, and from the hub to the importing country. This involves two spokes,

and so the fraction of a good shipped that arrives to the market is 1-a. Similarly, the

fraction of a good that arrives in the case of trade between countries in different continents,

which involves two spokes and a hub-to-hub section, is (1-a)(1-b).

        When a consumer buys a foreign good, the government levies an ad-valorem tariff t.

We assume that the tariff is levied on the c.i.f. price rather than the f.o.b. price.n The

level of tariffs is exogenous, and assumed to be uniform across countries, representing the

MFN principle, until we are ready to examine preferential trading arrangements.



           The notion of transportation costs should be understood as transactions costs,
encompassing not just physical transportation of goods but also costs of communications and
the idea that countries tend to have a better understanding of their neighbors and their
institutions.
        25
           I.e., tariffs are a proportion of the value of the good that leaves the exporting
country, in terms of the iceberg model. The c.i.f. assumption is simpler, and probably more
realistic as well. Frankel, Stein and Wei (1993) considers the f.o.b. case, where the tariff is
levied as a percent of the value of the good that arrives in the importing country.
                                               18
       For simplicity, we will assume that each one of the countries is equal in size. The

symmetry of the model now assures that the producers' prices are the same in every country,

as well as the number of varieties and the quantity of each variety produced in every

country. Prices of home and foreign goods faced by home consumers are different due to

transportation costs and tariffs. If the producer prices in every country are p, then the price

the domestic consumer will have to pay for every unit of foreign good consumed would be:


                               p(1+t)                      =      p(1÷t)                     (4)
                      PC,t        1-a                            (1-a) (1—b)




where the subscript c refers to goods imported from within the continent, and nc otherwise

(across continents). Notice that import prices depend positively on tariffs and transportation

costs. In the absence of tariffs, the prices faced by the home consumers will be:

               p,,=p/(1-a) and p,,,=p/(1-a)(1-b).

       Since the home consumer pays different prices for the consumption of home and

foreign products, he or she consumes them in different quantities. The next step is to derive,

from the utility function, the consumption of each foreign variety (both from neighbor

countries and from countries in other continents) relative to the consumption of each home

variety. We begin by assuming that tariffs t are levied.

       For ease of exposition, we will index goods in such a way that the home country

produces varieties 1,... ,n; neighbors produce varieties n + 1      n + n; and countries across

the ocean produce varieties n+n'+l        n+n'+n' The home consumer maximizes
                                               19


                                        u=                                                 (6)


subject to the budget constraint



                      c1p
                      1-1
                               +              +
                                                  L,+a+1
                                                                   w+T                     (7)

where T is the lump-sum transfer received by each consumer, which they regard as being

fixed.

         From the maximization problem of the consumers it is possible to derive the elasticity

of demand for exports faced by the producers, which turns out to be e=l/(1-O), the same as

the elasticity of domestic demand. The equality of these elasticities guarantees that the price

resulting from the lu-rn's profit maximization is the same as in the case of the closed

economy. So are the quantity produced of each variety and the number of varieties n

produced in each country. Transport costs and tariffs, thus, introduce no changes in these

variables. But the key point is the effect on consumption patterns.

         The first order conditions for the consumer's problem yield

the relative consumption of each variety:


                                        Ei. = (_.E_)T                                      (8)
                                        c1b    P,

                                                                                           (9)
                                        cJ        Pnc,




where c1 and c1 are the domestic consumer's consumption of foreign varieties, from
                                              20

countries within the continent and across the ocean and ch is the domestic consumer's

consumption of the home varieties.



       Now we can derive the relative demand for varieties by the home consumer. The

"demand' for the foreign varieties as defined here (again, following Krugman), is larger than

the consumption of those varieties, since it includes what is lost through transportation. We

know that in order to consume one unit of a foreign variety, a home consumer will have to

demand 11(1-a) in the case of a neighbor country, lI(l-a)(l-b) otherwise. Introducing these

terms, as well as the prices given by (4) into equations (5 and 6), we obtain the demand for

each one of the foreign varieties relative to the demand for the domestic varieties. We can

see that the relative demand for all foreign varieties depends negatively on tariffs and

transportation costs, as expected.




                                 °c,t   =   (i-a)
                                            [li-tI
                                                                                           (10)

                                        = [(1-a) (1-b)]
                                              [li-ti -°


3.3 The bilateral volume of trade

       We now proceed to derive the bilateral volume of trade (BVT) in this model, for the
                                                21

case   of non-discriminatory trade policies. Since we are dealing with a symmetric

situation, the bilateral volume of trade between two countries i and] will be equal to twice

the volume of trade in one direction, which is equal to the share of countryj on country i's

demand, multiplied by wL (the product of the wage times the labor force being the total

demand). The bilateral volume of trade between two countries that belong to the same

continent, with uniform tariffs, will be:


                      BVT =    2                                        ) wL                  (11)
                                   C
                                       1 + a(N—1)      +


Likewise, the bilateral volume of trade between countries across the ocean will be:


                      BVT = 2 (
                                1 + a(N—1)
                                                     °"+
                                                                         )   wL               (12)

         It is important, at this point, to note that our monopolistic competition model is
consistent with the main implications of the gravity model of trade regarding the bilateral

volume of trade. The first of the implications visible in equation (1) is that bilateral trade

decreases as distance increases. It follows directly from equations (11) and (12), together

with (10), that BVT does indeed depend negatively on transportation costs a and b in our

model, which are in turn presumably a monotonic function of distance.

         The second implication of equation (1) is that bilateral trade depends positively on the

product of the countries' GNPs. To show that our theoretical model is consistent with this

property, it is necessary to depart momentarily from the assumption that all countries are


          In Stein and Frankel (1993), we also derive BVT for the case where FTAs are in
effect, and examine implications of FTAs for trade diversion and trade creation, which
contributes some intuition to the welfare results.
                                              22
similar in size. A larger country will now produce more varieties in proportion to its size.

For simplicity, we assume for the moment that transportation costs and tariffs are zero, so

the consumption of every variety is the same. The bilateral volume of trade between two

countries A and B will then be: BVT = 2(GNPA/GNP')*GNPB , where W stands for

world.V
       We can see that in our model, as in the gravity equation, BVT depends positively on

the product of the GNPs, and therefore, relative country size matters. Similar results hold

when transportation costs and tariffs are allowed to be non-zero. As Helpman (1986) shows,

relative country size helps explain BVT in monopolistic competition models, but does not

play a role in models of trade based on comparative advantage.28 Helpman suggests that the

monopolistic competition model provides theoretical foundations for the gravity model. By

including transportation costs, we have extended the correspondence between the two models.



       In order to explore the desirability of potential trading blocs, we now need to

introduce a measure of welfare.



3.4 Welfare implications of trade agreements

       Given that we are working with a symmetric model, the natural way to look at world


       27 See Stein and Frankel (1993) for the derivation of the BVT when non-zero tariffs
and transportation costs are assumed, including the effects of trading bloc formation on the
BVT.

       28 Deardorff (1984) suggests that the models of trade based on comparative advantage
are designed to determine what goods will countries trade, but not how much they will trade.
Specific assumptions about transportation costs (namely, that they should increase with
volume) are necessary to determine the volume of trade.
                                               23

welfare is to derive the utility of a representative individual in any country. To determine the

utility of the consumer, we need to know how much he or she consumes of each good, and

introduce these values into the utility function. Equation (8) above gives us the relative

consumption of each home and foreign variety, so we only need to determine the

consumption of each home variety, c,h. We do this by expressing the budget constraint in

terms of c,', and taking into account the redistribution of the tariff revenue to consumers.

       If we normalize n, p, and w to be 1, we can obtain, after some algebra


        Cjh =                                       1
                                       1                                     1               (13)
                1   +   (N—i) (—i—) 1-8 (p1—t) + (C—i)N(--—1-—)
                               PC, t                      pnC,
                                                                                  (p—t)
Once we have the consumption of domestic varieties, the consumption of foreign varieties

can be obtained from the relative consumption equations (B):



                        cf =   c(—-—)                      =   cj'(—-—)      1'              (14)
                                 PC, I                            PCC,   I

Replacing these into the utility function, we obtain the value of the utility of the

representative individual:


                u= cj" [1      + (N—i)     (—-—)'       + (C—i)N     (_L....)TJ              (15)


Given the values of the parameters a, b, t, 0, N and C, we can first obtain the value of c by

plugging the price equations (4) into (13), and then the value of the utility of the

representative individual, which is used as a measure of world welfare.

       Equation (15) is the expression for utility in the absence of free trade agreements. It
                                               24

is simple to calculate utility under other arrangements in the same manner. When trading

blocs are formed, we just introduce the new set of relative prices faced by the home

consumers into their maximization problem, and we can obtain new values for utility in a

similar way.



4. Three Welfare Imolications of Regional Trading Arrangements

       We have presented a model that allows us to analyze the desirability of different trade

arrangements from a world welfare perspective, as well as the changes associated with these

different arrangements in terms of the bilateral volume of trade between countries. We now

present some applications.

       The first one is a simulation showing that, in the absence of transport costs, a system

of three or so trading blocs is the worst of worlds, for plausible values of the parameters. In

other words, our model replicates Krugman's U-shaped welfare curve as a function of the

number of blocs. In the rest of the applications, we introduce transportation costs and study

the welfare implications of forming trading blocs.

       In application 2, we explore the desirability of forming natural and unnatural trading

blocs, as a function of transportation costs. In particular, in this application we look at free

trade areas (FTA5), where the intra-bloc tariffs are completely eliminated.

       Next, in application 3, we analyze the implications of what could be considered an

intermediate degree of regionalization, a partial movement toward the creation of (natural)

FTAs, and compare it to the outcome associated with a full movement in that direction. We

allow for the formation of Preferential Trade Agreements (PTAs) that differ from the FTAs
                                              25

in that the tariff level is reduced among partners, but not necessarily eliminated. Even though

it is technically prohibited by Article 24, many existing regional arrangements are in fact of

this partial kind. We will show that a partial movement towards regional integration, as in

the case of PTAs with preference below 100%, is usually superior to a complete one,

associated with natural FTAs. At the same time, this application illustrates the need for a

more complete characterization of trading blocs, one that goes beyond the naturaliunnatural

distinction.

       Throughout, we consider only exercises involving symmetric formation of equal-sized

blocs around the world. Deardorff and Stern (1992) and Srinivasan (1992) have taken

exception to the symmetric logic of Krugman's bloc question. We, like Krugman, do not

address here the a.symmetric partial equilibrium exercise of examining the effects of forming

a single bloc in one part of the world, particularly the effects on countries unfortunate

enough to be left out of any bloc. The motivation, as we see it, is to address the desirability

of the international regime with respect to blocs worldwide, i.e., Article 24. It is of course

true, however, that variation in GNPs across countries, if nothing else, renders the real

world an inherently asymmetric place.



4.1: The number of blocs and welfare in the absence of transportation costs

        The purpose of this exercise is to confirm that our model yields Krugman's U-shaped

welfare curve as a function of the number of blocs, in the absence of transportation costs.

We assume a world consisting of 60 countries, and study the welfare implications of dividing

the trading system equally into different numbers of blocs. Figure 1 shows the results of our
                                                26
simulations for a value of 0 = 0.75, and tariffs of ten, twenty and thirty percent. We can

see that welfare is minimized for a small number of blocs: three in the cases of twenty and

thirty percent tariffs, and two blocs in the case of a tariff rate of ten percent. Welfare

increases gradually beyond the minimum-welfare number of blocs.30

       In Krugman's model (l991a), there are two reasons for the increase in welfare as the

number of blocs becomes larger. One reason is that blocs set tariffs optimally, and become

less protectionist as the market power of each one declines. The other reason is that as the

number of blocs increases, a larger portion of their demand is satisfied from outside the bloc,

and tariffs become less distortionary. Tariffs introduce a wedge between the prices of bloc

varieties and those of non-bloc varieties, but not between two non-bloc varieties. The

greater the number of non-bloc varieties relative to those from within the bloc, the smaller

the distortionary effect of a given tariff level. In our model, where tariffs are assumed

exogenous, the shape of the curve is explained completely by this latter reason.3'

       On what does the minimum-welfare number of blocs depend? We have found that it

depends positively on the tariff rate t, other things being equal (an example of this can be

seen in figure 1). Additionally, we have found (in simulations not shown here) that the

minimum-welfare number of blocs increases with 0, other things being equal.




        ° Krugman (1991a) considers for his simulations three different values for the
elasticity of substitution: 2, 4 and 10. Since the elasticity of substitution is equal to 11(1-0),
the middle value of 4 is equivalent to our value of 8 =0.75.

        3° In Figure 1 the level of welfare is normalized to be 1 in the case of a single bloc.

        31 Krugman (1992) argues that the optimal tariff argument is not crucial, and shows
that the U-shape result goes through even when tariffs are set exogenously.
                                               27

4,2: Transoort costs and free trade aereernents' welfare effects

       In this application, we study how the effect of the formation of continental free trade

agreements on welfare depends on intercontinental transportation costs. Thus we are able to

fill in the realistic intermediate case between Krugman's polar cases of zero and infinite

intercontinental transportation costs. We start with the simple case where the world consists

of three continents comprising two countries each. [rransportation costs within continents,

a, are for simplicity assumed to be zero in the remainder of this paper.]

       Figure 2 shows the percentage change in welfare associated with the formation of

trading blocs, both of the natural and unnatural type, for 0=0.75 and t=O.3.32 We can see

that there is a critical level of intercontinental transportation costs b, which governs the

welfare effects. For the case of natural trading blocs, where each country forms a bloc with

its neighbor, the critical value of b is approximately O.l86. For higher values of b, the

formation of continental trading blocs will result in improvements in welfare. (Remember,

in the limit, Krugman's case where b=1 and natural blocs are necessarily good.) For lower

values of b, continental blocs would reduce welfare. (Remember the limit case where b=O.)

As noted in the introduction, we label such welfare-reducing arrangements "super-natural



        32
           For comparison, the unweighted average tariff rate among the sample of developing
countries examined in Pritchett and Sethi (1993, p.12) is .25. [There are two reasons why
the true level of protection may be higher than this: we want to include the effect of nontariff
barriers in addition to tariffs, and the composition of trade shifts endogenously away from
high-tariff goods. There are also two reasons why the true level of average worldwide
protection may be lower than this: industrialized countries have lower barriers than
developing countries, and statutory tariff rates are in practice subject to many exceptions.]
           When tariffs are assumed to be levied on f.o.b. instead of c.i.f. values, the critical
value of b is approximately 0.15 [Frankel, Stein and Wei (1993)].
                                               28

blocs", to indicate that intercontinental transportation costs are not high enough to justify the

formation of blocs even along the lines of geographical proximity.

       Unnatural trading blocs, where each country forms a bloc with one other country

outside the continent, result in distinctly lower welfare for small values of b (when b=O they

reduce welfare in precisely the same way as natural blocs). Unnatural blocs then have a

steadily smaller effect as b tends to 1 [as can be seen in the graph in Frankel, Stein and Wei

(1993), which includes the range up to l.O. The reason for this is intuitive: as b gets closer

to 1, the bilateral volume of trade between countries in different continents will tend to zero,

whether they belong to the same bloc or not. Therefore, the formation of unnatural trading

blocs has only negligible effect on welfare when intercontinental transport costs are very

high. The limit is the polar case of no intercontinental trade.

       Krugman's intuition that the benefits from regional free trade arrangements depends

positively on intercontinental transportation costs is confirmed by our results. So is his idea

that natural trade arrangements have a better chance of improving welfare than arrangements

between unnatural partners (Krugman, l991a).



4.3: Allowing for Preferential Trade Agreements

        In this application, we wifi have another look at trading blocs of the "natural kind

(among neighbors), but we will allow for the formation of PTAs, i.e., partial liberalization.

To do this, we need to modify our model slightly. The tariff level between partners, instead


        ' Stein and Frankel (1993) and Frankel, Stein and Wei (1993) perform some
sensitivity analysis with respect to t and 0. The benefit of forming trading blocs becomes
much larger as t and U increase.
                                              29

of zero, will now be (1-k)r, where           and k is the degree of preference for intra-bloc

trade or intra-bloc liberalization. The price of partner varieties faced by domestic consumers

now becomes:

                                          p[1+(1—k) t]
                                                1-a

       Until now we were only considering the special cases of k=O (absence of blocs) and

k=1 (Free Trade Areas). Now the blocs are allowed to set any level of intra-bloc preference.

We will begin, as in the previous application, with a world that consists of three continents,

each formed by two countries.

       What is the level of intra-bloc preference that will maximize welfare? Figure 3 shows

the welfare level as a function of k, for t=0.3, 8=0.75, a=0, and several values of b.35

This figure is closely related to figure 2 above. There, we were comparing the welfare levels

associated with the two extremes of k=0 and k= 1 for every possible level of inter-

continental transportation cost b. For b<0.186, figure 2 indicates that the formation of FTAs

along natural regional lines is welfare-reducing (super-natural). In figure 3, this translates

into a higher welfare level for the MFN or no-preference extreme (k=0) relative to the

opposite endpoint of full continental FTA5 (k=l) for b=0. 1.

        The important thing to notice in Figure 3 is that for every level of intercontinental

transport costs, the degree of intra-bloc preference associated with maximum welfare is in



          For each set of parameter values (transport cost and 0) welfare is normalized to be
 1 under free trade in the figure.
           When tariffs are assumed to be levied on f.o.b. values, the critical value of b is
 0.15 [Frankel, Stein and Wei (l993).
                                                30

between 0 and 1, which implies that, in general, PTAs with less than 100% preference are

superior to FTAs. This follows from the fact that the welfare functions are strictly concave

to the origin so, in general, the maximization problem will have an interior solution. The

result is not new in the literature, having been first suggested by Meade (1955). It is

noteworthy, however, if we contrast it with GATT's article 24, which allows for FTA5 and

Customs Unions as exceptions to the Most Favored Nation (MFN) clause, but not for PTAs

with less than 100% preference.

        Figure 3 suggests that starting from the absence of trading blocs, a small movement in

the direction of increased regionalization (by increasing intra-bloc preference) is always a

good thing. We can say that there are positive returns to regionalization up to the point of

maximum welfare, and negative returns to regionalization thereafter.

       Figure 4 provides another way of looking at this issue. For the set of parameters

chosen, it represents all possible combinations of intercontinental transport cost b and intra

bloc preference k. (As in the other graphs, we only show b up to .5 here, under the

reasoning that transport costs higher than 50 per cent are not plausible.) The solid line

represents the level of intra-bloc preference that maximizes welfare at each level of

transportation cost b. Below this line, there are positive returns to regionalization, i.e.,

increasing the degree of preference will result in higher welfare. Above this line, increases in

the preference are welfare-reducing. We call this the area of negative returns to

regionalization NIRR.

       Within the NRR area, the dotted line represents, for every level of intercontinental

transportation cost, the intra-bloc preference level that yields the same welfare as k=0 (i.e.,
                                                 31

the   absence of trading blocs). The trade arrangements that lie above this dotted boundary are

the ones we call super-natural trading blocs. The term "natural" does not seem appropriate

to describe trade arrangements which, even when formed along the lines of geographical

proximity, represent a movement so deep toward regionalization that welfare is reduced

compared to the no-bloc situation)

         In reality, the world of course consists of more than three continents of two countries

each. In Figure 4b we repeat the experiment for the more realistic, if still stylized, case

where the world consists of four continents of 16 countries each. This 64-country set-up has

the virtue of corresponding roughly to the data set in our gravity model. (We could get to

four continents either by counting North and South America separately, or adding the

MideastlAfrica.) We see that negative returns to regionalization set in sooner than before.

If inter-continental transport costs are .2, then the world reaches the welfare optimum when

intra-bloc preferences are as low as 10.4 per cent, and enters the super-natural zone when

they are 20.4 per cent.3 If inter-continental transport costs are only .1, then negative

returns to regionalization set in even sooner.

         We now look, in Figure 5, at the welfare effects of trade agreements, this time not



         n The "super-natural' bloc area does not always exist. For certain values of the
parameters — for example, (0=0.85, t=0.35) in the stylized world of three two-country
continents — welfare under Free Trade Areas is better than welfare under the MFN rule for
every value of transportation cost b. This eliminates the possibility of "super-natural" blocs.
[In general, the higher 0 and t, the less likely blocs will be "super-natural". In addition, the
higher 0 and t, the higher the optimal preference level k for every level of transportation cost
b, which translates into a smaller area corresponding to negative returns to regionalization.

          If tariffs are levied on the f.o.b. value, the welfare optimum when intra-bloc
preferences are as low as 27.0 per cent, and enters the super-natural zone when they are 51.5
per cent. [Frankel, Stein and Wei (1993).]
                                               32
only allowing for less than 100% preferences, but also assuming the world trade system

chooses the preference level optimally.39 We return (for the moment) to a hypothetical

world of three continents consisting of two countries each. These arrangements are welfare—

improving no matter what the intercontinental transport costs are.

       As b increases, the difference between welfare under optimal PTAs and under FTAs

diminishes. The reason for this is that, as can be observed in Figure 4, the optimal

preference level approaches 1.0 for high values of b, and therefore an PTA becomes closer

to being optimal. Recall once again the example of Krugman (1991b): in the limit, as

intercontinental transport costs become prohibitive, FTAs become the first best arrangement.

       This application, together with the second one, has provided some answers, within the

limitations imposed by the structure of our model, to what Bhagwati (1992) calls the static-

impact effect question regarding the creation of trading blocs. If intra-bloc preferences are set

at the optimal level, regionalism will have an immediate positive effect on world's welfare. If

countries are constrained to choose between no preferences and 100% preferences (as in

Article 24 in the GATT), the impact of regionalism on welfare will depend on the values of

parameters such as transportation costs and consumers' preference for variety. The larger the

intercontinental transportation costs, and the lower the preference for variety (or the higher

0), the more likely regionalism will have a positive immediate impact. Furthermore, the




          This 'optimal" level is not the result of a Nash non-cooperative equilibrium, where
each bloc chooses the optimal preference level given the preference level chosen by the rest
of the blocs (and given the tariff level t). It is just the preference level that maximizes
welfare in a symmetric world, and can be interpreted as the cooperative solution (again,
given the tariff level t).
                                               33
closer the trading blocs follow along the lines of geographical proximity, the more likely they

are to increase welfare, as Krugman has suggested.

       Does this mean that GATr should eliminate Article 24's requirement that FTA5

stipulate complete liberalization, and perhaps substitute a requirement that preferential

arrangements be allowed only among neighbors? From the purely static point of view of our

model, the answer to this question would be appear to be yes. Blocs with less than 100%

preference formed along the lines of geographical proximity provide the best possible

outcome in terms of immediate impact on welfare.            However, two (at least) important

caveats should be noted. First, the welfare effects appear to be small. In the simulation

results shown in Figure 5, welfare effects have the dimension of real (INP. To focus on the

case of b=.2 in a six-country world (three continents of two countries each), the welfare

benefit of moving from MFN to a system of optimally-calibrated PTAs is only about 0.5 12

per cent of real GNP. [The welfare gain from forming a system of continental FTAs is very

small (0.05 per cent). Thus, the difference between the two kinds of regional trading

arrangements is only half a per cent of GNP.] These numbers are small, in part, because

b= .2 is so close to the borderline case.

       Second, Bhagwati's 'dynamic time-path" question remalns. The ultimate goal is the

achievement of multilateral free trade among all countries. Limiting the formation of blocs

to geographically proximate countries might not be the best way to go, if it led to the

permanent fragmentation of the world's trade rather than to a process of continuous

integration. The answers are not clear once we include dynamic political economy
                                               34
considerations in the analysis.4°




5. Some Estimates of Intercontinental Costs to Evaluate the Extent of Reiona1Lzatipn

       It would be useful to obtain estimates of the parameters, especially the crucial

magnitude of intra-continental transportation costs, b, to get a better idea where the world

economic system lies in terms of the welfare spaces mapped out above. One cannot claim

any kind of precision to the estimates, but the exercise may be instructive.

       We can think of four ways of estimating b. First is direct data on bilateral shipping

costs. One disadvantage here is that the range of variation of actual shipping costs is

extremely wide across modes of transport and kinds of goods, especially as a percentage of

value, and it would be difficult to know how to aggregate different measures.

       Second is the ratio of the c.i.f. value of a country's trade to its f.o.b. value. One

disadvantage here is that the data are not available on a bilateral basis. Another disadvantage

of using aggregate c.i.f./f.o.b. numbers is that they depend on the composition of trade

(which is in turn influenced by the true transportation costs).

       The ratio of total worldwide import values, including insurance and freight, to export

values is about l.06.' We can infer a rough upper bound on b by assuming that 6 per cent

is a weighted average of intra-continental Costs and inter-continental costs:


       40
          Political economy considerations like those mentioned in the introduction -- a
country that joins an FTA may then experience an increase in political support for further
steps toward liberalization -- are modelled by Baldwin (1993), and also in a preliminary way
in Wei and Frankel (1993).

       411.066 in 1980 and 1.053 in 1989. Table 36 from Review of Maritime Transport
J, UNCTAD, U.N.: New York, 1991.
                                                   35

         .06 = ICS a + (l-ICS)(a+b-ab), or

b=     (.C6-ICSa)/[(l-ICS) (1—a)] - a/Il-a]     . £5/(l-1 CS).          (20)

We get our ICS estimate from Table 1. Considering only the set of 63 countries examined

statistically in the first part of the paper, the intra-continental trade share is about .4.

(Somewhat lower in East Asia and the Americas, higher in Europe. The simple average for

the three continents is .39 in 1990, up from .35 in 1980. The average of the three weighted

by shares in world trade is .44, up from .40 in 1980.) Thus (20) implies an upper bound on

b   of .061(l-.4) = .10.

         If 10 per cent is a realistic estimate of intra-continental transport costs, then we can

see from Figure 2, 3, or 4 that super-natural trading blocs are a real danger. For b= .10,

our base-case parameter values, and a world consisting of three continents of two countries

each, negative returns to regionalization set in when preferences are 49.5 per cent; any

greater degree of regional preference moves into the zone of negative returns to

regionalization (Figures 3 and 4). For this world, 87.6 per cent preferences put the economy

into the super-natural zone. For a world consisting of four 16—country continents, negative

returns set in even sooner. The optimum degree of continental preferences is 7.6 per cent,

and the super-natural zone begins at 14.8 per cent (Figure 4b).

         It is likely that the c.i.f.If.o.b. ratio substantially understates the costs of trade by

focusing solely on the cost of physical transport, and omitting for example costs associated

with personal contact between buyer and seller. Recent literature on spillovers and

geographic concentration suggests that the effects of proximity on stimulating production are

much greater than mere transportation costs. In the classic gravity model of world trade,
                                                 36

Linneman (1966) concluded that the effect of distance on trade consisted of three kinds of

effects rather than one: (i) transportation costs, (ii) the time element (involving concerns of

perishability, adaptability to market conditions, irregularities in supply, in addition to interest

costs), and (iii) "psychic" distance (which includes familiarity with laws, institutions and

habits).

           Within the confines of our theoretical model, the parameter b could be estimated in a

simple way from the data on intra-regional trade shares, if we were willing to assume that

the observed current tendency for countries to trade with neighbors was the result solely of

geographical proximity, and not of preferential trading policies.42 An estimate along these

lines is derived in Frankel, Stein and Wei: it works out to b = .383.

           Such an estimate of b is, however, likely to be overstated. We know from our

gravity estimation that statistically significant tendencies toward regional trade preferences

already exist, and thus explain part of the proclivity toward intra-regional trade that shows up

in Table 1. For this reason, our preferred estimate of b comes from the gravity estimates in

Part 2. They hold constant for the effects of regional trading arrangements already in

existence, as well as the effect of per capita GNPs, common languages, etc.

           Table 3 gives distance in kilometers between some major world capitals. Table 4

gives the average distance between all the pairs of countries in our sample, by continent.

Averaging over all countries in the sample, the mean distance between countries on the same

continent is 2896 kilometers, and on different continents is 11776 kilometers -- four times as



          Krugman (1991) and Summers (1991), for example, use simple calculations to infer
           42

roughly the importance of distance in determining trading patterns, without explicitly
distinguishing the effect of existing trade preferences.
                                               37

great. The gravity equations estimate the coefficient of the log-distance between a pair of

countries at about .56. It follows that trade between two countries on the same continent will

on average be twice as great as trade between countries on different continents, other things

equal [.56{log(1 1776/2896)) = .7855 and exp(.7855) =2. l9.

       In the algebra in Part 3 of the paper, the elasticity of demand, €= dlog(Trade)


is given by 11(1—0) .   If transport costs show up fully in the price facing the consumer, then

our desired estimate of b is        diog (          log(1 1776/2896)1(1-a) =
                               diog (Distance)

 dlog(Trade)/dlog(Distance) 1.403/(1-a) = [.56 (1—0) ]1.403/(1-a). Choosing


again our baseline value 0 = .75, and for the simple case where a=O, our sample calculation

suggests that the difference between inter-continental transportation costs and intra-continentai

costs is roughly on the order of 19.6 per cent.43

       If taken at face value, the .196 estimate together with Figure 4 suggests that the

optimal degree of preferences within a continental grouping is roughly 60 per cent in a

stylized six-country world. In other words, intra-regional trade barriers should be lowered to

40 per cent of the level of world-wide barriers. Only if regionalization proceeds past that

point, does it enter into the zone of negative returns to liberalization. For the more realistic

64-country world of Figure 4b, negative returns to regionalization set in as early as at 10.4




       This is in fact a lower bound for 1', that holds only when a=O. More generally
b—.196/[1-a]. Even for a as large as .2, however, b = .245 and our central qualitative
conclusions hold.
                                               38

per cent preferences and the super-natural zone at 20.4 per cent preferences.

       The last step is to try to extract from our gravity estimates of part 2 a measure of k,

the degree of preferences prevailing in existing regional trading blocs, in order to help

evaluate whether the world trading system has in fact entered the super-natural zone. Our

gravity estimates [in Table 2 and earlier work] suggest that the EC in 1990 operated to

increase trade among its members by roughly 50 per cent. Other parts of the world have

arrangements that are either weaker or stronger. Let us ask the hypothetical question what

would be the effect on world economic welfare if the trading system settled down to an array

of continental blocs that each had the same level of preferences as the EC.

       Let the percentage effect on trade of bloc formation be represented by y       Using

our model of part 4, a bit of algebra reveals that the formation of a bloc with preferences of

k lowers the prices of goods in intra-bloc trade by -tkJ(1 +t). The ratio of the change in

quantity to the change in price is equal to the elasticity of demand:


  tk/(1+t)
               =e =1/1-8
                   X




Solving for the parameter we wish to estimate,

k = y(1+t)(1-O)/t.

Taking y = 0.5 from the EC estimate, 0 = 0.75, and t =        .30, the implied estimate of k is

.54. In other words, EC preferences operate to reduce trade barriers by 54 per cent for

intra-bloc trade. This parameter value lies within our super-natural zone. It follows, within

the assumptions of our model, that if all continents followed the EC example, the



         This is actually -1 + exp (the coefficient in the gravity equation).
                                               39

regionalization of world trade would be excessive, in the sense that world economic welfare

would be reduced relative to the MFN norm.



                                           *    S*


       The tentative conclusion of this study is that some degree of preferences along natural

continental lines, such as an Enterprise for the Americas Initiative, or enlargement of the EC

into a European Economic Space, would be a good thing, but that the formation of Free

Tra1e Areas where the preferences approach 100 % would represent an excessive degree of

regionaiization of world trade. The overall conclusion is that the world trading system is

currently in danger of entering the zone of excessive regionalization.

       The optimal path to liberalization apparently features a sharp departure from Article

24. It entails reducing intra-regional barriers by only 10 per cent or so. The strategy of

concentrating on reducing trade barriers at the multilateral level fjg liberalizing

completely within any one continental trading arrangement appears to be preferable.
                                             40

                                        References


Anderson, James. 1979. "A Theoretical Foundation for the Gravity Equation," American
Economic Review 69, 1 (March): 106-116.

Anderson, Kym, and lIege Norheim. 1992. "History, Geography and Regional Economic
Integration," GAIT Secretariat Conference, Geneva, Oct.; forthcoming in Regionalism and
the Global Tradine System, K.Anderson and R.Blackhurst, eds., London: Harvester
Wheatsheaf, 1993.

Balassa, Bela. 1987. "Economic Integration" in The New Paigrave Dictionary of Economics,
MacMillan Press Reference Books, London: 43-47.

Baldwin, Richard. 1993. "A Domino Theory of Regionalism." NBER Working Paper No.
4465, September.

Bergsten, C.Fred. 1991. "Commentary: The Move Toward Free Trade Zones," in jjcy
Implications of Trade and Currency Zones, A Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, (August): 43-57.

Bhagwati, Jagdish. 1971. "Trade-Diverting Customs Unions and Welfare Improvement: A
Clarification," Economic Journal, 63.

Bhagwati, Jagdish. 1990. "Regional Accords Be-GAIT Trouble For Free Trade,"
Street Journal, Dec. 5.

Bhagwati, Jagdish. 1992. Regionalism and Multilateralism: An Overview. World Bank and
CEPR Conference on New Dimensions in Regional Integration, April, Washington, D.C.

Bhagwati, Jagdish, and T.N. Srinivasan. 1983. Lectures on International Trade, Cambridge:
MIT Press, Chapter 27.

Deardorff, Alan. 1984. "Testing Trade Theories and Predicting Trade Flows," in R.Jones
and P.Kenen, eds., Handbook of International Economics vol. I. Amsterdam, Elsevier
Science Publishers. Ch.lO: 467-517.

Deardorff, Alan, and Robert Stern. 1992. "Multilateral Trade Negotiations and Preferential
Trading Arrangements," RFIE Discussion Paper No. 307, University of Michigan, July.
Forthcoming in Deardorff and Stem, eds., Analytical and Negotiating Issues in the Global
Tradina System, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

de la Torre, Augusto, and Margaret Kelly, 1992, Regional Trading Arraneements,
Occasional Paper No. 93, Washington, D.C., International Monetary Fund (March).
                                            41

de Melo,  J., A. Panagariya, and D.Rodrik. 1993. Regional Integration: An Analytical and
Empirical Overview, in J. de Melo and A. Panagariya, New Dimensions in Regional
Integration (New York: Cambridge University Press).

Fieleke, Norman. 1992. "One Trading World, or Many: The Issue of Regional Trading
Blocs," New England Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, May/June, 3-20.

Finger, J.M. 1993. "GAIT's Influence on Regional Arrangements," in J. de Melo and A.
Panagariya, New Dimensions in Regional Integration (New York: Cambridge University
Press).

Foroutan, Faezeh and Lant Pritchett. 1992. "Intra-Sub-Saharan African Trade: Is It Too
Little?" World Bank, December. Forthcoming, Journal of African Studies.

Frankel, Jeffrey. 1991. "Is a Yen Bloc Forming in Pacific Asia?' in Finance and the
International Economy, The AMEX Bank Review Prize Essays, edited by R.O'Brien, Oxford
Univ. Press, UK, 1991.

Frankel, Jeffrey. 1993. "Is Japan Creating a Yen Bloc in East Asia and the Pacific?" NBER
working paper no. 4050. In Regionalism and Rivalry: Japan and the U.S. in Pacific Asia,
edited by Jeffrey Frankel and Miles Kahier, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Frankel, Jeffrey, Ernesto Stein, and Shang-Jin Wei. 1993. "Trading Blocs: The Natural, the
Unnatural, and the Super-Natural" written for the NBER's Swh Inter American Seminar in
Economics, organized by Sebastian Edwards, held in Caracas, Venezuela, May 28-29.

Frankel, Jeffrey, and Shang-Jin Wei. 1992. "Yen Bloc or Dollar Bloc: Exchange Rate
Policies of the East Asian Economies", in Macroeconomic Linkaes, Third Annual NBER -
East Asia Seminar on Economics, Takatoshi Ito and Anne Krueger, editors, Chicago,
University of Chicago Press, forthcoming 1994.

Frankel, Jeffrey, and Shang-Jin Wei. l993a. "Is There A Currency Bloc in the Pacific?" in
Exchange Rates. International Trade and Monetary Policy, edited by Adrian Blundell-
Wignall, Reserve Bank of Australia, Sydney.

Frankel, Jeffrey, and Shang-Jin Wei. 1993b. "Emerging Currency Blocs." International
Center for Monetarj and Banking Studies, Geneva, Sept. 2-4. [Revised version of NBER
Working Paper 4335.] Forthcoming, The Future of the International Monetary System and
Its Institutions, edited by Hans Genberg, 1994.

Hamilton, Carl, and L.Alan Winters. 1992. "Opening Up International Trade in Eastern
Europe," Economic Policy (April).

Havrylyshyn, Oleg, and Lant Pritchett. 1991. "European Trade Patterns After the
                                             42

Transition." Poliry, Research and External Affairs Working Paper Series No. 748, August,
World Bank.

Helpman, EThanan. 1987. "Imperfect Competition and International Trade: Evidence from
Fourteen Industrial Countries," Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 1: 62-
81.

Helpman, Elhanan and Paul Krugman. 1985. Market Structure and Fpreien Trade,
Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.

Irwin, Douglas. 1993. "The GATT's Contribution to Economic Recovery in Post War
Western Europe." International Finance Discussion Paper No. 442, Federal Reserve Board,
March. Jackson,
Jackson, John. 1993. "Regional Trade Blocs and the GATT." The World Economy 12 1-132.

Krugman, Paul. 1980. "Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade,"
American Economic Review 70, 950-959.

Krugman, Paul. 1991a. "Is Bilateralism Bad?" in E.Helpman and A.Razin, eds.,
International Trade and Trade Policy. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.

Krugman, Paul. 1991b. "The Move Toward Free Trade Zones," in Policy Implications of
Trade and Currency Zones, A Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, (August): 7-42.

Krugman, Paul. 1992. Regionalism vs. Multilateralism: Analytical Notes, World Bank and
CEPR Conference on New Dimensions in Regional Integration, April, Washington, D.C.

Lawrence, Robert. 1991. 'Emerging Regional Arrangements: Building Blocks or Stumbling
Blocks?" in Finance and the International Economy, The AMEX Bank Review Prize Essays,
edited by R.O'Brien. United Kingdom: Oxford University Press.

Linneman, Hans. 1966. An Econometric Study of International Trade Flows, North-Holland,
Amsterdam.

Meade, James. 1955. The Theory of Customs Unions. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Petri, Peter. 1993 "The East Asian Trading Bloc: An Analytical History," NIBER conference,
April 3-5, 1992, Del Mar, California. In Regionalism and Rivalry: Japan and the U.S. in
Pacific Asia, edited by Jeffrey Frankel and Miles Kahler, University of Chicago Press:
Chicago.

Pritchett, Lam, and Geeta Sethi, 1993, "Tariff Rates: What do we know? Why do we care?"
June [not to be cited].
                                             43

Saxonhouse, Gary. 1993. "Pricing Strategies and Trading Blocks in East Asia," NBER
working paper no. 4050. In Regionalism and Rivalry: Japan and the U.S. in Pacific Asia,
edited by Jeffrey Frankel and Miles Kahler, University of Chicago Press: Chicago.

Srinivasan, T.N., 1992, "'Regionalism vs. Multilateralism: Analytical Notes' Comment,"
World Bank and CEPR Conference on New Dimensions in Regional Integration, April,
Washington, D.C.

Stein, Ernesto, and Jeffrey Frankel, 1993, "Transport Costs and the Welfare Effects of Free
Trade Agreements," University of California, Berkeley, February.

Summers, Lawrence. 1991. "Regionalism and the World Trading System," in Jjjçy
Implications of Trade and Currency Zones, A Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, (August): 295-302.

Thurow, Lester. 1992. The Coming Economic Battle amona Japan. Europe and America,
New York: William Morrow.

Tinbergen, Jan, 1962, Shaping the World Economy, The Twentieth Century Fund: New
York.

Wang, Then Kun, and L.Alan Winters, 1991, "The Trading Potential of Eastern Europe,"
Centre for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper No. 610, November, London, UK.

Wonnacott, Paul, and Mark Lutz, 1989. "Is There a Case for Free Trade Areas?" Chapter 2
in Jeffrey Schott, ed., Free Trade Areas and U.S. Trade Policy, Washington, D.C.: Institute
for International Economics, 59-84.
                                 44

                 Table 1: Intraregional Trade Shares

                1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1987 1990

East Asia       .199   .198   .212 .229   .256 .263 .293
Western
Hemisphere .315 .311   .309   .272 .310 .279 .286
Europe.
                .502 .532 .524 .538 .548 .601          .602
                  Table 2: Implicit and Explicit Continental Trade Blocs
                                       (Total Trade, 1965-1990)


                    1965         1970         1975         1980         1985       1990

 GNP               O.64 0.64 0.731*                       0.76*1       0.561*     0.77*1
                  (0.02)       (0.02)       (0.02)       (0.02)       (0.02)     (0.02)

 GNP per           0.28*1       Q•37**       0.28*1       0.311*       0.081* O.11
 capita           (0.03)       (0.03)       (0.02)       (0.02)       (0.02)     (0.02)

 Distance         0.42** 0.50** -0.64' -O.51' 0.31** 0.51
                  (0.04)       (0.04)       (0.04)       (0.04)       (0.04)     (0.04)

 Adjacency         Q57** 0.64 0.53*1                      0.691*       0.76*1     0.811*
                  (0.16)       (0.15)       (0.15)       (0.16)       (0.18)     (0.16)

 WH2              0.36** -0.22#              0.07         0.29*        0.33#     0.79*1
                  (0.14)       (0.11)       (0.14)       (0.13)       (0.17)    (0.16)


 EAsia.2           1.971*       2.45*1       1.821*       2.21*1 1.10             1.901*
                  (0.18)       (0.20)       (0.16)       (0.15)       (0.17)    (0.14)


 EC2               0.28*        0.13        -0.03         0.25*        1.561*    0.511*
                  (0.12)       (0.11)       (0.10)       (0.10)       (0.14)    (0.10)


 Common            0.52*1       0.36*1       0.371*       0.62*1       0.67*1    0.46*1
 Links            (0.09)       (0.89)       (0.09)       (0.09)       (0.09)    (0.09)

 #observations      1194         1274         1453         1708         1343      1573

 SEE               1.05         1.08         1.18         1.21         1.28      1.08

 adj. R3           0.68         0.71         0.71         0.71         0.51      0.77

j: (1)
     (2)
             Heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors are in parentheses
             II denotes significant at 1 % level (t= >2.576)
             * denotes significant at 5% level (t= >1.96)
             # denotes significant at 10% level (t=> 1.645)
       (3)   All variables except the dummies are in logarithms
       (4)   'Common Links' — dummy for common linguistic or colonial links
                      (German, Japanese. Dutch. English, Spanish, Chinese. Arabic, French, and Portugese).
Tables Bilateral Distances for sone Major Cities, in kiloneters


               Tokyo Chicago Geneva Sydney SaoPaolo
   Tokyo
   Chicago   10142.4
   Geneva     9803.0 7056.8
   Sydney     7835.4 14891.3 16788.5
   Sao Paulo 18546.6- 8415.8  9406.3 13370.9
   Nairobi   11278.6 12894.0  6078.1 12162.7 9289.96




      Table4      Average Bilateral Distances, in kiloneters


                    Europe    Western Hemisphere Pacific Asia

   Europe            1491
   Western Hem.      9535           4163
   Pacific Asia     10995          15902               4293
Figure 1: Number of Blocs and Welfare
      (zero transport costs; theta = 0.75)




995




                     Number of B'ocs
             (into which 60 countries are grouped)

               —t=O.1 —'--t=O.2--t=O.3I
 Figure 2: Welfare effect of agreements
       (ThetaO.75; t=O.3; a0; N2; C=3)


 2 -----_
2.5


15      —--———-------—-—----—           -———--—-——----




              ntercontinental transport costs b



        [1ie nat          unnat — Super-Nati
                  Figure 3: Intra-bloc Preference
                            and Welfare
a)
-c                  (Theta=O.75; t=O.3;   aO; 0=3; N=2)
      0.984
a)
a)
      0.982
a)
-tJ
       0.98

2 0.978
E
      0.976
a)
      0.974
a)
              0    0.1   0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 06 0.7            0.8   0.9
                             Intra-bloc Preference level


                             b=0.1     b=0.2     b=0.31
            Figure 4: Returns to Regionalization
                   and Supernatural Blocs
                 (Theta=O.75; t=O.3; a0; N=2; 0=3)
       1 Super-NaturaI---
a
0
  0.8
C
£1)


.a) 0.6
3-
0
0
                                       Positive Returns
(0                                     to Regionalization
C     0.2

       0
            0      0.1            0.2          0.3         0.4   0.5
                         Intercontinental Transport Costs b
           Figure 4b: Returns to Regionalization
                   and Supernatura' B'ocs
                (Theta=O.75; t=O.3; a=O; N=16; 0=4)
     0.7

     0.6
0)
     0.5
                          Super-Natural                            -
                                     —----—-—-                   -Negave Ret.

8 0.3             ....-                     ---              .-------
                                                  ------—..—--
                                                                   to Regionaliz



     0.2

     0.1

       0
           0      0.1               0.2          0.3         0.4               0.5
                           Intercontinental Transport Costs b
              Figure 5: Welfare Effects of FTAs
                          and Optimal PTAs
                 (Theta=O.75; t=O.3; a=O; N=2; C=3)
a)


a)


a)
C)
C
Ct
C-)
a)
C)
C
a)
0
a)
a. -1.0
          0         0.1           0.2           0.3         0.4   0.5
                          Intercontinental transport costs b



                     RTAs                     Optimal PTAs
                    Appendix: List of Countries caed in the Gravity Eqtion
                            Showing regional grouPings, and Pain city
                    (The distance between countries was conputed as the Great
                      Circle distance between the relevant pair of oities.)
    )..c-arlC.aS (WE, J)
               Canada            Ottawa
               US                Chic-ago
               Argentina         Buenos Aires
               Er-soil           Sea Paulo
               Chile             Santiago
               Colcabia          Bogota
               Ecuador           Quito
               Mealon            MexicO City
               Peru              Lin.a
               Venezuela         Caracas
               Bolivia           La Paz
               aragtay           Asunion
               Uruguay           Montevideo
    E'orrtean Chruun!ty (BC, 11)
               W. Gernany         Eonn
           -   France            Paris
               Italy             Bone
                                 Lopdon
               Belgiur            Brussels
               Denna.rk           Copenhagen
               Netherlands       Ansterdan        Other countr-ies (21)
               Greece
               Ireland
                                 Athens
                                 Dublin
                                                        S.  jca
                                                        Turkey
                                                                          Pretoria
                                                                          Ankara
               Portugal          Lisbon                 Yugoslavia        Belgrade
               Scalp              Madrid                Israel
                                                        Algeria           Algiers
-   Icr-ocean Free Thade Area (EFTA, 6)                 Libya             Tripoll
               Austria            Vienna                Nigeria           Lagos
               Finland            Helsinki              Egypt             Cairo
               Ncrway             Oslo                  MoroccO           Casablanca
               Sweden             Stoc)tholm             Icri4sja         Tunis
          Switzerland      Geneva                        Suian            Tharto
          Iceland          ReykjaVik                     Ghana
                                                         Eec-Va           Nairobi
    East As i a (tAlC, 10)                               Ethiopia         AddiS Ababa
          Jacan            Tokyo                         Iran             lebran
          Indonesia        Jakarta                       Kuwait           Kuwait
          Taiwan           Taipei                        Saudi Arabia     Riyadh
               EongXong           EongKong               India            New Delhi
               S.Korea            Seoul                  Pa istan         arachi
               Malaysia           Buala Lunpur           Eung-s           udapest
               Philippines        Manila                 Poland           Warsaw
               Singapore          Singapore              Australia         Sydney
               Thailand           Bangkok                New Zealand      Weiin±cn
               China              Shanghai
     -
         Note: APEC     consists of East Asia, plus Australia, New Zealand,
                    Canada & the United States.
